Story_ID: 31672
Speaker 1: Alright. My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today with the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My name is Joseph Monroe, J-O-S-E-P-H, M-O-N-R-O-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  No middle name?
Speaker 2: No middle name.  See, there were nine children in my family.  They were afraid they might run out of names.  They didn't know how many would come.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)  Okay.  Sir, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date is May 18, 1936, in Rowland, North Carolina, R-O-W-L-A-N-D, N.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Well, right now my occupation is retired.  But I spent thirty years in the [U.S.] Air Force, and another twenty-three years in higher education at various places.
Speaker 1: And you are a computer scientist?
Speaker 2: Yes, by education and inclination.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.  And you were the chancellor of, I think your last position you were--
Speaker 2: No, I was Dean of the College of Engineering at North Carolina A and T [Agricultural and Technical] State University [Greensboro, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Dean of College Engineering, okay.
Speaker 2: And before that, I was Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs at Fayetteville State University [Fayetteville, North Carolina].  And before that, I was Associate Vice President for Academic Affairs at the UNC [University of North Carolina] General Administration in Chapel Hill [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, that's good.  And sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is May 7, 2013.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In my home here in Greensboro, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31673
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm-up.
Speaker 2: Okay, good.
Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: No, not a favorite.  I like an array of foods.  I kind of like, have an affinity for fish.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Brown.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summertime--spring or summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because that's in the throes of golf.
Speaker 1: I see.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, generally Colorado in the summertime.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 31674
Speaker 1: Now, we're going to talk about your family history.  And I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family, and your father's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you--but we'll keep them separate first--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and then we'll put them together.  So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Cilla, C-I-L-L-A, Jane, J-A-N-E, Monroe, M-O-N-R-O-E.
Speaker 1: And what was her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Baker, B-A-K-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your mother's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date and place is November 11, 1911, and that's Rowland, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: My grandfather worked at the [U.S.] Navy yard in Newport News, Virginia.  And my great-grandfather was a farmer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A sharecropper.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories on your mother's side of the family about Emancipation or Reconstruction, or do they go all the way back to slavery?
Speaker 2: No, I can't go back that far.  But even during the time when she lived--there's a story I think I'd like to share with you.  My mom went to six years of school, and at the time, Rowland did not have education for black youngsters, beyond the first six grades.  She would have had to go to Lumberton [North Carolina], the county seat [Robeson County], which was seventeen miles away, and she would have to live with someone over there.  And she thought hard about it, and decided against going.  But she always regretted that, because her very good friend went there and ultimately went up above Raleigh [North Carolina], to Kitrell two-year school [Kittrell College, a two-year historically black college in Kittrell, North Carolina].  And she became a public school teacher, and she came back in our community working with my mother with us in Sunday School at church.  My mother always regretted not going, because my mother was a brighter student than her friend.
Speaker 1: So, did your mother want to be a teacher?
Speaker 2: Yes, she always taught at Sunday School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Lumberton is--
Speaker 2: The county seat.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Robeson County.
Story_ID: 31675
Speaker 1: So, tell us a little bit about Rowland [North Carolina, where Monroe was born].
Speaker 2: Rowland is on the border between Lumberton [North Carolina] and Dillon, South Carolina.  It's right on the border.  And the most famous recreation area near there is South of the Border.  And Rowland is co-located with South of the Border, except Rowland is in North Carolina, and South of the Border is South Carolina.  And Rowland has one traffic light, and a population of roughly 500 people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, Lumberton is a town made famous by a director named David Lynch [filmmaker], I think.  He did a TV show that took place in Lumberton.  You know, he's kind of a weird director of movies.  Have you ever heard of--
Speaker 2: I have not heard of him.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  I just thought I'd throw that in there for whoever might be interested.
Speaker 2: Well, the thing about my county--it's famous because during the segregated era, we had three groups--three schools and three of everything.  Three water fountains, three everything.  We had the whites, the blacks, and the Native Americans.  And our county is the only county where the Native Americans were recognized.  If we went out of the county for anything, they had to either be white or black.  When we'd go, for example, to Fayetteville [North Carolina] taking tobacco, they were either--the ones who worked in the fields were counted as black.  The ones who stayed indoors were counted as white.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, there's a, this region is--now, I've read about this region before, about the Native Americans and the blacks and the whites being, you know, segregated--
Speaker 2: Segregated during the segregation era.
Speaker 1: --and yet, you know, everybody knows everybody.
Speaker 2: Everybody knows everybody because it's a small community, and it was made up of two groups--the wealthy landowners and the sharecroppers.  And they were white sharecroppers, black sharecroppers and Native American sharecroppers.  And they had to kind of work together, because they were all similarly situated and similarly treated.
Speaker 1: Right.  There have been novels written about that relationship--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and I can't think of the name of the one I read, but I did read a novel about that relationship.  And when Michael Jordan's [basketball player] father, I think, was shot--
Speaker 2: Yes, he was in there, and that's what made Lumberton, put Lumberton on the map.  He was right outside of Lumberton.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And the assailants were Native American--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --young men and a black.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's true.
Speaker 1: Working together.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, this is an interesting part of the country.  It's not as dull as you make it seem, with one traffic light.  But I mean, the dynamics.  I mean, to just think that there are--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --three water fountains and three-
Speaker 2: Three everything.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And surprisingly, we were--since we've been back in North Carolina--we came back here in 1988.  We drove from here to our home area.  And in the county, in Scotland County [North Carolina], we stopped.  There was a nice homemade ice cream shop along the way.  And we stopped, and needed to get some of that homemade ice cream and go to the bathroom.  They had just kind of blotted over the 'Colored Restroom' [sign], (laughter) but it was still recognizable.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, it was, was it like that when you grew up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Of course.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31676
Speaker 1: So your mother [Cilla Jane Baker Monroe] was able to finish to the sixth grade.  Now, what did she do for a living afterwards?  Was she--
Speaker 2: She was strictly a housewife to my father [Willie Birth Monroe], a farmer.
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother have any other talents, or anything, that she--
Speaker 2: Yes.  She had a very, very good talent for singing.  She always sang in the choir at church.  And her favorite song was "Amazing Grace."  We sang that at her funeral.
Story_ID: 31677
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to go on to your father's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name is Willie, W-I-L-L-I-E, Birth, B-I-R-T-H, Monroe.
Speaker 1: Now, there's got to be a story behind his middle name, Birth, right?
Speaker 2: I'm sure there is, but I don't know what--
Speaker 1: It's B-I-R-T-H?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Birth.
Speaker 2: Willie B. (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  But you never--nobody ever asked? You don't know anybody that found out what the story was?
Speaker 2: No.  It had something to do with the midwife who delivered him, but I don't remember what the story was.  I don't remember the story.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember very vaguely mentioning it--someone mentioning it, but I don't remember.
Speaker 1: So, Willie Birth Monroe.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His birth date was April 9, 1909, Rowland, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about the Monroe side of the family?  How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: They were all sharecroppers.  His father was a sharecropper and his grandfather was a sharecropper.  Consequently, he went into sharecropping.
Speaker 1: Now, do they have a history of having lived anywhere other than Rowland?
Speaker 2: South Carolina, North Carolina.  They, my father came out of South Carolina into North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But his parents came out of there.  But he was actually born in North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your dad's parents were from South Carolina.  And you say the border is really close?
Speaker 2: Yes, to Rowland.  It's--Rowland is the last little town in North Carolina.  And South of the Border is the first community in South Carolina.  They are co-located.
Story_ID: 31678
Speaker 1: South of the Border [South Carolina], you said it was a resort?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what kind of resort is South of the Border?
Speaker 2: Kind of a honeymoon vacation spot.  And they have gambling.  And what made it so famous was (unclear) County was dry, and it was wet.  That is, it means they sold beer.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  I wondered, you know, South of the Border.  I thought of Mexico when I heard that.
Speaker 2: Well, that has, and it has a Mexican theme.
Speaker 1: Well, go on.
Speaker 2: That's all I want to say.  I don't know a lot about it.  You know, when I was growing up, I didn't go there.  But I can go there now.  But I don't particularly like just going there drinking a little beer and sitting around eating some Mexican food.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, they do have Mexican food--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in South of the Border, South Carolina?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That name, South of the Border--because it's south of the North Carolina border?
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's the name.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 31679
Speaker 1: So your dad [Willie Birth Monroe] grew up in a family of sharecroppers?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did your father have a chance to go very far in school?
Speaker 2: Fourth grade.
Speaker 1: And what were your dad's talents and, you know--
Speaker 2: Hard worker.  He thought he could outwork any man.  That was his call to fame.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he played a little baseball around the community.  He was a catcher.
Speaker 1: Okay. He was a baseball catcher.  Now, was baseball big?
Speaker 2: Baseball was big.  Every community around had a baseball team.  And they would work all five and a half days--and six and--five and a--six and a half--no, five and a half days.  Because they'd work a half day on Saturday, and on Saturday afternoon they'd have a baseball game, starting now [spring/May] until the end of September.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was the recreation.  Every Saturday, there would be a baseball game.
Speaker 1: And did Rowland [North Carolina] have a team, you know?
Speaker 2: Rowland had a team, had three teams.  Had a white team, a black team and a Native American team.  And the Native Americans and the blacks played on Thursday night.  And on Saturday night the white team played in the baseball park.
Speaker 1: So, the baseball park was reserved for just the white people, or--?
Speaker 2: That's right.  But they would on Thursday night, allow the blacks and the Native Americans to have games.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  But now, did the whites ever play the blacks or the Native Americans?
Speaker 2: Yes, but they would slaughter them.  The blacks and Native Americans would slaughter them, so they didn't play them regularly.  They wouldn't schedule them.
Speaker 1: I see.  So, they played neighboring towns.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Every neighboring community had a team.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  What was the name of the team for Rowland?  I mean, the black team?
Speaker 2: Rowland Blackhawks.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  And what about the Native American team?
Speaker 2: They had some kind of Cardinal or Indian, or something.  I don't remember their names.  But they would usually combine the best talent off both teams.
Speaker 1: Oh the black and the Native American teams?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they would go together.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, the Blackhawks could be like Indian and black, you know?
Speaker 2: Yes.  But they had an all-black team called the Blackhawks.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That was an all black team?
Speaker 2: The Indians may have been called the Rowland Indians, I don't know.  I don't remember.  Now--Indians or Cardinals.  And out of that whole batch there, the Native Americans have a state-supported college there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Pembroke [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Pembroke?
Speaker 2: University of North Carolina at Pembroke.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Pembroke is about seven miles out of Rowland.
Speaker 1: Now, was that in existence when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It was for Native Americans.
Speaker 1: Now, what Native American nation?
Speaker 2: Cherokee.
Speaker 1: Cherokee, that's what I thought.
Story_ID: 31680
Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Willie Birth Monroe], did they sharecrop on a big plot, I mean--
Speaker 2: Yes, it was like a hundred acres, large plot.  And they allowed a sharecropper to have--they counted every hand that was available.  And they would give him a share crop that size.  And we exchanged, we exchanged labor.  They didn't have any money, so we bartered labor.  That is, once a hand was able to work, that one could go.  And I was like, at eight years old, traded off for an adult.  I could drive the thing that pulled the tobacco to the barn, and I could trade off with someone else and leave them there on the land.  My parents [Cilla Jane Baker Monroe and Willie Birth Monroe] did not own it, but they were sharecroppers, and we would share with the Native Americans.  And there was a Native American family, a black family and a white family.  We would share with all three of them.  We would trade the number of workers they could send to help us.  We'd help them.  And it was just a day, roughly.  We would work on their--we would send as many as they sent to help us, to help them.  And we would just go work until we got their tobacco harvested that day.  And they'd come with that number to our place.  So, that's why there were nine children in my family.  My father was considered a wealthy sharecropper.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, children meant wealth.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: They meant workers.
Speaker 2: Workers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They could be bartered for.
Story_ID: 31681
Speaker 1: Now, this may sound like a silly question considering how small Rowland [North Carolina] is, but is there a story about how your parents [Cilla Jane Baker Monroe and Willie Birth Monroe] met?
Speaker 2: They were near the same sharecropping on the same co-located land [Rowland, North Carolina], and the same church in a community called Cotton Valley.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that was the--
Speaker 2: You know why that name--it's a good cotton growing valley.
Speaker 1: And so, do you know the name of the church your parents--?
Speaker 2: Yes.  The name of the church was Cotton Valley.
Speaker 1: Cotton Valley Church.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Baptist, or--?
Speaker 2: United Methodist--no, African Methodist Episcopal, AME.
Speaker 1: AME, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Cotton Valley AME.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, your parents, they knew each other from the community?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, when did they get married?  Or was it--
Speaker 2: 1929.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31682
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' [Cilla Jane Baker Monroe and Willie Birth Monroe] personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, how they walk, talk and what their voice sounded like--who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I know--people tell me I look like my mom, probably talk like my father.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And you've got nine--well, eight siblings, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Nine of you altogether.  Can you name them, and put yourself in the order--
Speaker 2: Yes.  I'm number three in the pecking order.  We just lost our oldest brother this past year in February.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what was his name?  Can you name him?
Speaker 2: James Timothy Monroe.  And he was eighty years old when he passed this past year.  And my sister next to him is Lillie Mae.  And I'm Joseph.  The one following me is Gladys.  Following that is Geneva.  Following that is Alberta.  Following that is, wait a minute, I'm getting it mixed up.  Following Gladys is Geneva.  Following Geneva is Willa.  Following Willa is Alberta.  Following Alberta is Dallas.  And the baby is Lucilla.  And after my mom passed, my father re-married and there was one came after that, named Ronald.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you actually have nine--
Speaker 2: Ten, actually.
Speaker 1: Ten, okay.  Well, ten altogether, and nine--
Speaker 2: But I grew up with those nine, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31683
Speaker 1: Can you describe the place that you grew up?  Did you grow up in the same place, or did you move a couple times, or--
Speaker 2: No, same place [Rowland, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was a tenement.  I had a picture of it.
Speaker 1: Well, can you describe it?  Well, look at the picture and--
Speaker 2: A tenement is, you have like a front room.  Then you have a place--the front room is where--when guests come, they stay there and sit there.  And we had a dining room, kitchen like.  And we ate in the kitchen.  And my parents [Cilla Jane Baker Monroe and Willie Birth Monroe] had a bedroom, the girls had a bedroom, and the boys had a bedroom.  And that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well five rooms, that's--
Speaker 2: No indoor plumbing. (laughter)
Speaker 1: Okay.  No upstairs or anything?
Speaker 2: No, absolutely not.  I had a picture of that.  I might still have it upstairs.
Speaker 1: We'll see it.  We'll get it before we finish.
Speaker 2: I hope they have it.
Speaker 1: But, so okay.  And so no--you said no--
Speaker 2: No indoor plumbing.
Speaker 1: No plumbing?
Speaker 2: No plumbing.
Speaker 1: But you had electricity?
Speaker 2: No, well, not when I was growing up.  As I was close to leaving, the REA came through Rowland, the Rural Electrification Act.  That was after World War II got going.  We went through World War II without it.  When they had the blackouts right there south of Fort Bragg [large United States Army installation, North Carolina], we just had to turn the lamp down, turn the wick down.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 31684
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: The earliest I can remember is, we used to have to say speeches on Children's' Day at church.  And I could, I had an incredible memory.  I could memorize a long speech, for my age.  My mom [Cilla Jane Baker Monroe] and Mrs. Haskins, whom I mentioned earlier [off camera], were the people who orchestrated that.  And they would give us speeches based on our age and size.  And I can remember their talking about my being able to memorize very long speeches, for a little guy.  I remember that.  That's probably the earliest.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 31685
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: The sights were, the sights of Rowland [North Carolina] was going downtown to the movie.  That was the main attraction in Rowland, going to the movie on Saturday night.  And the smells were the smell of the horses.  People would drive their mules and their horses downtown.  Not a lot of people had autos [automobiles].  The horse droppings downtown was the smell.  Popcorn at the movie theater, another smell.  The sound was B.B. King [blues musician] and Muddy Waters [blues musician], all the blues singers and the gospel singers.  Mahalia Jackson [gospel singer].
Speaker 1: So, they were primarily on the radio, or--
Speaker 2: Radio, and we had a 78 RPM turntable.
Speaker 1: Is that the kind you had to wind?
Speaker 2: Wind it up. (laughter)
Story_ID: 31686
Speaker 1: Now we're in North Carolina now, you're back here now [in Greensboro, North Carolina].  But it's different from a lot of places.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But it's--, that area is really heavily forested, from what I understand.
Speaker 2: Yes, it is heavily forested, but it's primarily flat, and farming community.  Large, large fields, open fields for planting fifty acres of cotton, forty acres of tobacco.  Open fields and ditches running through there to drain for irrigation purposes.
Speaker 1: But it's still enough forest to--
Speaker 2: Enough forest for the sawmills to hang around there.  They had a veneer mill.  The only industry in Rowland [North Carolina] was a veneer mill, forever.  That was their biggest employer--probably employed thirty people, the veneer mill.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Made veneer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And Lumberton [North Carolina] is so named because of the lumber.
Speaker 2: Yeah, lumber industry, a lot of pines there.  Co-located near Southern Pines [North Carolina].  A lot of pine trees.
Story_ID: 31687
Speaker 1: Now, what did you like to do growing up?  Did you have any scientific interests as a young man?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I'd take everything apart and put it back together. (laughter)
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, we hear this a lot, that people in the sciences--
Speaker 2: Used to work on the washer.  My mom [Cilla Jane Baker Monroe] got--you know, she used to use a tub and scrub board.  But early on, she got a washer--had a little motor in it.  And when that thing--I could replace the motor in that thing--wire it up and get it going again, take it apart.
Speaker 1: How old were you when you were doing that?
Speaker 2: About nine.  About twelve years old, my father [Willie Birth Monroe] got a tractor.  I could work on that.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a mentor, in terms of doing that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: I just watched the older men around.  My father was big at working on things.
Speaker 1: Now, that's an era--now, correct me if you think I'm wrong.  But it seems like a lot of older guys knew how to fix a car or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The cars were rather simple in those days.  We never took our car to the shop, rarely.  I had an uncle or somebody come by.  We'd put it under the chinaberry tree, jack it up, hoist it up and pull that engine and put a new one in, and drive it away.  (laughter)
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, they were all--steering gears in the floor.  So, you could push it and get it started, and you needed to charge the battery up.
Speaker 1: Alright, alright.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 31688
Speaker 1: Now, what about--well, what was your first school?
Speaker 2: Rowland Southside.
Speaker 1: Okay, Rowland Southside.  Now, this was a black school, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, did the Indians [Native Americans] attend the black school, or did they--
Speaker 2: No, they had their own.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They went to Union Elementary.  The whites had their school.  We all had a bus that picked us up, different buses, three buses at the same stop.  We met at the same bus stop.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, the Indians had Union Elementary?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of the white school?
Speaker 2: Rowland.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the south side of town was Rowland Southside.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Over toward South of the Border [neighboring town in South Carolina] side.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were closer to South Carolina?
Speaker 2: Yes.  On the south side of Rowland [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: So, well, did you like school?  And what was--
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I did.  I loved school.  Early on, for the first three grades, teacher's pet.  I loved it very much.
Speaker 1: Now, you say for the first three grades?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Well, what happened in the fourth grade?
Speaker 2: Became old enough to work on the farm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then until the eleventh grade, I rarely went. I'd go in the fall and register, get started, and then it was time to get the crop in.  Get started good and catch up, and then it was time to start planning the next one, harvesting.  I didn't go to a lot of school, four through ten [grades].  And the reason I was able to go everyday in eleventh grade, I turned sixteen [years old].  And sixteen-year olds could drive the school bus.  I was picked as a school bus driver.  I had to go everyday.  That's when I caught fire again.
Story_ID: 31689
Speaker 1: Now, was this a--I don't know--but was this an awful time for you?
Speaker 2: No, it was just normal.  Most of the kids didn't go at all.  So, the reason I went, was my father [Willie Birth Monroe] was on the school board.  And when I turned sixteen, they knew that, and they said, "Your boy can drive, so he can drive the school bus."  But it was a blessing, I had to go to school everyday.  And I could, I caught up with everything.  I was--my mother [Cilla Jane Baker Monroe] tried her best to keep us up with everything.  We'd get our books and everything.  The girls would go regularly, but the boys didn't go very often.  And my mother would have us do something every night, with the big old lamp light, 'bout like this light here. (laughter)
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she would go over the math and the reading and so forth with my sister, and I could kind of follow what was going on.  She was two grades ahead, but I could follow what was going on.  And my father was very good at the math and the puzzle problems, so we were okay.  It was a good family gathering.  We didn't have TV to tie us up.  Didn't use the radio too much because it would run the battery down, and that was for listening to the news.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, the whole family would participate in learning.
Speaker 2: That's right.  That was a good family gathering.
Speaker 1: Alright.  So, you would have started school in, by 1942?
Speaker 2: 1942, yep, yep.
Story_ID: 31690
Speaker 1: This is during World War II?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lion's share of the guys were going off to the war.  See, we had a local draft board.  It was controlled locally.  And they would generally fill the quotas with the black boys who didn't want to work on the farm, and Native American boys.  And if a white boy made an Indian girl pregnant, or a black girl, he had to go to the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: The local board would take care of that.
Speaker 1: What would happen if a black boy made a white girl pregnant?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  He was lynched.  Now, I don't, I don't, remember any incidents of that.
Speaker 1: That's the kind of threat that lingered over--
Speaker 2: That lingered, that was looming.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The same for an Indian boy?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Indians and the black guys were treated the same.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They weren't in charge of anything, like the local board.
Speaker 1: So, what was it--we raised a question about the town.  Were there any black businesses in town?
Speaker 2: Yes, there was.  The dry cleaning was owned by a black man.  And there was a barber shop downtown there.
Speaker 1: Now, did whites get their hair cut at the black barber shop?
Speaker 2: Yes.  But the interesting thing, the blacks didn't get their hair cut there.  They got theirs cut by their moms, and house to house.  There were a couple of black men who went to the barber shop, but very few of us went to the barber shop.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was owned by a man by the name of Benton.
Speaker 1: B-E-N-T-O-N?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he cut white people's hair mostly?
Speaker 2: Mostly.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a doctor in town?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And how did that work out?  I mean, how--
Speaker 2: Well, he was kind of a, you know, we had a lot of moonshine around.  He was heavy into the moonshine.  But he did, when you got hurt he would stitch you up.  If you got in a cutting scrape on Saturday night, he'd stitch you up.  But he was about equivalent to a medic nowadays, or a physician's assistant maybe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this is a white guy, or?
Speaker 2: Yes, white.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And he was, you say he was into the moonshine.  Does that mean he was--
Speaker 2: Involved in drinking it.
Speaker 1: Personally involved?
Speaker 2: Personally involved.  He used the stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And most--and of course--did you see the movie, 'The Help'?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Most of the cooking was done by black people, for the white people.
Story_ID: 31691
Speaker 1: One of the big events when you were growing up were the fights of Joe Louis [American professional boxer].
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: And do you want to--
Speaker 2: We could listen to him on the radio.  And my grandfather, my mother's [Cilla Jane Baker Monroe] father, would always come over and listen to the fights.  He did not have a radio.  The battery would always go down.  He didn't get another battery.  He'd come listen to the fights, though.  He knew exactly when it was.  And he could follow it very closely.  And he was, he used to sit by me.  And I loved to sit by him, because he'd pull out a candy bar or something and give me.  But he would start, "Hit him, hit him."  Then he'd punch me, and knock me off the sofa.  My mom wouldn't let me sit by him, because he'd get too excited when Joe Louis--he could tell when the guy got him--when Joe Louis got him in the corner.  And I can remember vividly the Joe Louis and the Max Schmeling [German professional boxer] second fight [June, 1938].  He was over there, and he was over there early that day waiting for the fight that night.  Now he came about nine at night. (laughter)
Speaker 1: He was--well, tell us what happened in the first fight [June, 1936] with Max Schmeling.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't remember the first one.  But I remember very vividly the second one.
Speaker 1: Well, just for those who are watching this, Max Schmeling won the first one, right?  He beat Joe Louis.
Speaker 2: Yes, he had won, yeah.  I knew that.
Speaker 1: And so, that's what I was getting at.  And so, the second fight, everybody was prepared because this was an anomaly.
Speaker 2: It was an anomaly, a really, really big deal.
Speaker 1: But him being beaten at all was something strange, and so, you know, the second fight, Joe Louis--
Speaker 2: Beat him up, beat him badly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is a big deal for black people.
Speaker 2: Yes.  It was a big deal for the German people, too, a big deal.
Speaker 1: So, did you get any feedback from German people?
Speaker 2: No, if they did, I don't know.  I used to hear them talking, but I don't remember any feedback.  But, you know, as I became an adult I recognized the importance it had for them.
Speaker 1: Well, what was the significance to them of Joe Louis winning?
Speaker 2: Say again?
Speaker 1: What was the significance of Joe Louis winning that fight?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was very significant for the black people.
Speaker 1: I mean for the Germans, that you were referring to?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, the significance--I remember they really thought that--, you know, Hitler thought they were a superior race, a pure race.  And he wanted to exterminate the Jews because they weren't Germans.  And to have a black one come up and beat their star guy was just devastating to the Germans.
Speaker 1: And for black people, it--
Speaker 2: Was our hero.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31692
Speaker 1: Now, you were about twelve [years old], I guess when Jackie Robinson [American baseball player who became the first African American to play in Major League Baseball (MLB)], you know--
Speaker 2: When he broke into baseball, yes, uh huh.
Speaker 1: And what was the feeling about that?
Speaker 2: That was just an excellent feeling.  And another thing, too.  Lumberton [North Carolina]--there was a black, there was a black baseball league.  And they had a farm team in Lumberton, of the black players around Lumberton.  And they would come through there and talk about it, and all that.  But I can remember Jackie Robinson very, very much.  So, he broke into the major leagues, and that was the talk of everything.  Everybody wanted to get their boys going in baseball.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'll tell you who kept up the baseball, was the Native Americans.  Now, they have, they are really good baseball players.  Many of them are in the major leagues, more of them than blacks, in the major leagues.
Speaker 1: Nowadays?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: They still--their university, the University of North Carolina at Pembroke, has the best baseball team in this region.  They beat Clemson [University, Clemson, South Carolina] and all these teams around.  And we have a lot of Native Americans on the team here at [North Carolina] A and T [Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina].
Story_ID: 31693
Speaker 1: Now, [Rowland] Southside School [Rowland, North Carolina], you know, went to, went how far, in terms of--
Speaker 2: Twelve grades.
Speaker 1: Twelve?
Speaker 2: When I started it went to twelve.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were able to finish your senior year there?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One through twelve.
Speaker 1: So, well, tell us about the last two years of high school.  I mean, you know, you got a chance to drive--
Speaker 2: Go everyday, drive the bus.  And because I kept up with the math--and the principal had to double--he was the math teacher, but he had to sometimes go to meetings, and he would notice that I had done the work.  So, he would put me in charge of the math class, and gave me that yellow legal pad.  If anybody looked out the window--if I put their name on the legal pad, they were in trouble.  So, they paid more attention than you can imagine, to me.  And I would--that was a motivational thing, for me to be prepared.  I worked those problems out, worked every problem at the end of the chapter.  And he would sometimes call me to his office when he knew he had a meeting during the math class, and say "Are you ready today?"  I say, "Yes, I'm ready."  He would have me on the board in the office to do the toughest problem.  He'd say, "Okay, you're ready."  Sometimes he would come back before the math class ended.  He'd just take a seat in the back.
Speaker 1: Now, this is remarkable.  So, how far in math did you go?
Speaker 2: Algebra 2.
Speaker 1: Algebra 2, okay.
Speaker 2: That was it.
Speaker 1: That's, that's good, though.  I mean--
Speaker 2: It was good.
Story_ID: 31694
Speaker 1: How large was your school [Rowland Southside School, Rowland, North Carolina]?  I mean, I've, you know, did you have, like, science laboratories?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We had a science and chemistry lab.  And an ag [agriculture] place.  I didn't like the ag, I liked the chemistry.  My last year, they put in typing, and I didn't--. We had to take all the courses, and we had an option.  And there were two of us, two boys in the typing class.  We did not like ag, because of the farming.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, were you at that age determined not to be a farmer?
Speaker 2: I was absolutely determined.  I didn't know what I wanted to be.  I knew I didn't want to be a farmer.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, you took typing?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Envisioning yourself in an office, I guess? (laughter)
Speaker 2: Something other than farming.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: One of the--my senior year, I was in typing and I won the typing contest.  And the prize was a girl's scarf.  They expected a girl to win.
Speaker 1: Did you give it to your mother [Cilla Jane Baker Monroe] or something?
Speaker 2: One of my sisters got it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I had six sisters.
Story_ID: 31695
Speaker 1: So, when you were a senior [at Rowland Southside School, Rowland, North Carolina], what were your prospects for college?  Were you thinking about college?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was.  But the problem was--I could sense, I knew about our financial situation.  And it took money to be in college.  And I had a sister in college, at Fayetteville Teachers' College [Fayetteville, North Carolina] at that time.  And I can remember the struggle we had getting her twenty dollars a month.  They let us have a monthly plan, but that was a struggle, getting that to her.  So, the principal had said I could go to [North Carolina] A and T [Agricultural and Technical University, Greensboro, North Carolina] and come back and be the math teacher.  My father [Willie Birth Monroe] thought that was a great idea and my mother [Cilla Jane Baker Monroe] thought it was a great idea.  I didn't think it was such a good idea, because that would be hand going off to college and we had, my sister had two more years.  One of the young men in from our high school went to the [U.S.] Air Force.  And he came back in the school and talked about it, and I begged my parents to allow me to join the Air Force.  And about the time they were ready to capitulate, the neighbor's son was killed in the Korean conflict.  They said, no way.  But my mom found--one Sunday I didn't go to church.  I stayed back practicing my father's signature.  She found those notes.  She said, "That boy's determined to go, we'd better let him go."  So, they signed for me to go to the Air Force.  And I told, I promised her I would go to college and study math and become a teacher and come back.  And I had no intentions of doing that.  But I did go to the Air Force and got some good technical training.  And the principal's wife was the English teacher.  She thought I should go and study math and English and come back and teach that.  So--, but I didn't.  I went off to the Air Force.  And after four years in the Air Force my time was up, but I was overseas doing a good job, and the commanding officer said, "We're going to send you to college."  I told my mom, "The Air Force is going to send me to college.  I'm not getting out."
Speaker 1: Now, just, I want to go back a little bit, just to get the dates.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You graduated from high school in what?
Speaker 2: 1954.
Speaker 1: '54 [1954]. Okay.
Speaker 2: Graduated in May, and June 1, I was in Texas.
Speaker 1: In the United States Air Force.
Speaker 2: The United States Air Force.
Speaker 1: And you went to, where in Texas did you go?
Speaker 2: Lackland Air Force base in San Antonio [Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And that's where you had basic training, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Basic training.
Story_ID: 31696
Speaker 1: What was the [U.S.] Air Force like in those days [1950s]?  I mean, was it--
Speaker 2: Indoor plumbing, indoor showers, my own bed.  Great, a big step up, a big upgrade for me.  (laughter)
Speaker 1: So, that is something.  People don't really--you know, I think that people, when they hear stories, they don't really know what--
Speaker 2: What the significance is.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's why we do these stories.
Speaker 2: Well, I couldn't, I couldn't understand how guys would go to the [U.S.] Army from around there, and come back and get out, and then have to go to the outhouse.  I just couldn't--. But the Air Force was integrated by then.
Speaker 1: Right.  That's right.  Now, was there still any residual tension in the--
Speaker 2: Oh yes, there was.  But I didn't focus on the tension, you know.  I focused on the best I could do, because I had made that decision I wanted to make a success of it.  I had to be successful.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you ever think about Jackie Robinson [American baseball player who became the first African American to play in Major League Baseball (MLB)] integrating baseball when you were in the--
Speaker 2: No, I didn't think about that at all.
Speaker 1: I mean, how you should act in terms of when you--
Speaker 2: No.  But, you know, what happened is our little church was our community [Rowland, North Carolina].  The church prayed that everything would work out for me.  I remembered that I should represent them well.  See, my father [Willie Birth Monroe] said, "You know, you're a Monroe.  You know what that meant?"
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, there's a sense that you were representing your family--
Speaker 2: Representing the whole family--
Speaker 1: And your community.
Speaker 2: And the community, yes.
Speaker 1: Alright.  So, alright.  So, well, had you chosen a vocational field in the Air Force?
Speaker 2: I had no idea what the vocational fields were.  So, we had an aptitude test that we took.  It took about four hours there at Lackland [Air Force Base, San Antonio, Texas; Monroe went there for basic training].  And that was to see what we were qualified for.  When I got to the classification clerk, he said, "You're qualified for all the fields.  You can pick any one you want."  And I had no idea what to pick.  He said, (unclear).  And I said, (unclear) "Air Force."  He had, that was his third choice.  I said, (unclear) "Air Force."  So, I ended up in Language.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Which was a mistake, I thought.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they, in Language did they, were you to specialize in a certain language?
Speaker 2: Yes, Russian.
Speaker 1: Russian, okay.
Speaker 2: But you got to understand, Mr. [Larry] Crowe [interviewer for The HistoryMakers], I didn't know English.  And the entry to the Russian was, we're going to review English.  And they talked about things in English I had just heard about.  Subjunctive mood, and all these tenses.  I didn't know about all those things.  But I made it through the screening and went on to Russian Language School.  It was a whole year long course at Syracuse University [Syracuse, New York].  And then I went to Turkey for four years.  That's where I was when they made the decision that the Air Force would send me to college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you had already been, on some level--if you went to Syracuse University for Russian, then you had to--so, you were there for a year?
Speaker 2: For a year.
Speaker 1: With a full concentration on Russian?
Speaker 2: Just concentrating on Russian.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They had a specialized program they set up for the Air Force training.  That was one of the occupational specialists, specialties.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now what year were you at Syracuse?
Speaker 2: 1955, when Jim Brown [American professional football player] was running that football.
Speaker 1: That's what I thought.  I--
Speaker 2: I didn't go to a single game.  In the Russian Language Lab, kids were cheering out there.
Speaker 1: Did you ever meet Jim Brown?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He'd be standing around the Student Union.  Kids were following him around and so forth.  He was a big star.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Yeah, they made a movie about it.  Well, Ernie Davis [American football running back and the first African American athlete to win the Heisman Trophy for collegiate football], you know.
Speaker 2: Ernie Davis was later.  He was later on.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: His experience at Syracuse--
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Story_ID: 31697
Speaker 1: So they [U.S. Air Force] sent you, after a year of Russian language school [at Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York]--
Speaker 2: I went to Turkey.
Speaker 1: Went to Turkey.
Speaker 2: Turkey is on the Russian border, you know.  It has a huge common border with Russia.  So, I was all along the Black Sea and the Mediterranean Sea for three years.  And just before I went there, I studied, went to post graduate--Naval Postgraduate School, and studied Turkish.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you studied Turkish, too?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This was before you got to Turkey, or--
Speaker 2: Before I got there.
Speaker 1: Okay.   Did you spend as long a time--
Speaker 2: No, no.  That was just an intro to how to order food and so forth, because I was living on the Turkish economy.
Speaker 1: Conversational Turkish?
Speaker 2: Conversational Turkish, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But after getting through Russian, that was a cake-walk.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you're there between what, 19--
Speaker 2: '55 [1955], '56 [1956].  So, from '54 [1954], '56 [1956], '59 [1959], I was in Turkey.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were there until '59 [1959]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now are there any--this is intriguing, because I've never interviewed anyone that was a--
Speaker 2: Russian linguist?
Speaker 1: Well, no.  We interviewed one the other day that could speak fluent Russian, but--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the first and only one. (laughter)
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, we got two in one week.  But that was Dr. [Sekazi] Mtingwa [also a HistoryMaker].
Speaker 2: Mtingwa?
Speaker 1: Mtingwa.
Speaker 2: Sekazi?
Speaker 1: He speaks fluent Russian.
Speaker 2: Fluent Russian--
Speaker 1: And did it on camera, too.
Speaker 2: He did Russian Studies.
Speaker 1: Right, he sure did.
Speaker 2: I think he went to Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] for his studies, I think.  I don't remember, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, but--so what was your, what were your daily duties in--
Speaker 2: Well, I was with the U.S. Information Agency and worked with them, and listening--went to the different--have some security service sites.  One at Trabzon, Samsun and Sinop.  I would spend time there.  Then I'd take trips along the Russian border, and occasionally go to Russia.
Speaker 1: Is this with officers, or senior officers?
Speaker 2: Well, I had an officer with, travel with me, a lieutenant.  I was enlisted at the time.
Speaker 1: So, were you interpreting for other Air Force personnel, or--
Speaker 2: Yes.  I could do--we had an interpreter for a while.  But I could--see, the way that Russia works, if you get out in the country there, it changes.  The Turkish, for example.  The proper word for this is "boo."  But when you get out into the rural area where they're uneducated, it's "aboo."  Sometimes the interpreter, I would understand before he did.  So, pretty soon we started leaving the interpreter, because he was kind of a hindrance to what we wanted to do.  So, we'd just leave him and go on our own.  The lieutenant had gone through Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York, studying Russian language], but he only spent one year.  So, we got another one.  And I was--by the, by six months, I could really understand everything, including the cuss words.  I could go into the bar and cuss them out, whenever needed. (laughter)
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 31698
Speaker 1: So, now did you do anything math and science related in the [U.S.] Air Force?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I recognized that, you know, as a result of my experience in English--and I had all As in that in high school [Rowland Southside School]--but I had memorized--my memory was both a blessing and a curse.  I just memorized what a noun, pronoun, adjective, and all that.  I didn't really know the functionality, but I had to get with--I had to learn really what it meant, in order to do the Russian.  I used to quickly memorize, and once we got total Russian, see, my memory was so good, I could memorize the stuff.  Everything she said, I could--the teacher was--I could memorize it.  But I didn't really understand it until I finally got a handle on English.  Then I understood the various tenses and so forth.  Understood the endings, and understood when one was mispronouncing a word.  So, it was a revelation.  And I recognized I needed some more education.  My education was deficient.  That's one thing I recognized.  So, I had plenty of time available, so I would sign, go to the Education Office.  Maybe I would go to Istanbul [Turkey] to the Education Office and sign up.  And they were all by correspondence--sign up through the University of Maryland course.  And then I'd have to go back there when I finished and take the exam.  So, I took geometry and math analysis, analytic geometry, and Calculus 1, all by correspondence.  The lieutenant would help me with--when I got stuck.  He had graduated from the Naval Academy [United States Naval Academy, USNA, Annapolis, Maryland], the one that really helped.
Story_ID: 31699
Speaker 1: So, you're taking correspondence courses through the University of Maryland [while stationed in Turkey with the U.S. Air Force].
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: And you're taking math and science correspondence?
Speaker 2: I took math, I took plane geometry, math analysis, analytic geometry, and calculus 1, by correspondence.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And I took calculus.
Speaker 1: By correspondence, that's--
Speaker 2: By correspondence, calculus 1.  But I went through the whole book, but the course stopped midway.  And then I took composition, I took literature, I took American Lit [literature], and I took World Lit as well as European Literature, correspondence. Write the papers and send them in.  And the education offices would have exams that Maryland would send, and they'd send a representative out to give the exam.  But the reason I took all those, I really wanted to get a college degree and become an officer in the [U.S.] Air Force.  And I thought, I didn't know of programs and so forth.  But they had programs where they sent people back.  But I knew I was deficient, from my high school [Rowland Southside School, Rowland, North Carolina].  Just talking to people about what they'd had, I had missed a lot of different subjects.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is, so you're like girding yourself up with all this information.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you're getting college credit for it?
Speaker 2: College credit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, some of the math was high school, like the geometry, math analysis and analytic geometry.  Calculus 1 was college math.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the literature courses were all college level.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now they [U.S. Air Force] offered to pay, did they pay your tuition?
Speaker 2: They did.  So, if you made an A or a B, you got full tuition remission.  So, I struggled making A or B in every course.  Didn't have to pay a dime.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's why the Air Force is such an upgrade for me.  I was able to--and what would happen, you know, like now we know about tithing and so forth.  Well, the preacher would look at the size of the share crop and tell them what they're, what they needed to pay per year.  My parents [Cilla Jane Baker Monroe and Willie Birth Monroe] had to struggle to get that money.  So, when I got into the Air Force, see, I could send the money back for that, and my sister's money for college.  And they had--and send money that they could use.  So, that was a big blessing.
Story_ID: 31700
Speaker 1: The [U.S.] Air Force did a lot for--
Speaker 2: A big upgrade for me.  Mainly the indoor plumbing. (laughter)
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, it just--I guess it depends on the level of where you're at, where, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, the point of view, too.  My brother was in the [U.S.] Army before.  He did not like it.  So, it's just point of view and perspective.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He came back [Rowland, North Carolina], a sharecropper.  I couldn't stand it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, 1959--now, a lot is going on.  This is the Cold War.
Speaker 2: The Cold War.
Speaker 1: And you've got, like, a lot of things are going on.  The United--over here, we've got the Civil Rights Movement is starting to heat up--
Speaker 2: Heating up.
Speaker 1: Emmett Till [African American boy who was murdered in Mississippi] in 1955--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Then the Montgomery [Alabama] bus boycott.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that all happened in that timeframe.  Elvis [Presley] came on.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right.  Elvis Presley was a big star.  The USSR launches Sputnik [the first artificial Earth satellite].
Speaker 2: Sputnik was launched in 1957.  All that happened.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and with the launching of Sputnik, people in the United States began to feel that maybe the Russians are ahead of us, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  They thought they were in science and math.
Speaker 1: So there was an increased emphasis.  Now, when you were in the Air Force, did you, I mean did they talk about, you know, the need to upgrade or become more involved in science?
Speaker 2: Well, yes.  And I recognized my personal need for doing that.  Because my end game was to stay in the Air Force and get a college degree.  In 1959 the captain called me in and said, "We have a program, we'd like to send you for your college degree."  I wrote my mom [Cilla Jane Baker Monroe] and told her.  She was happy and I was happy.  And I did--the only place I could go in the Air Force where my specialty could be utilized at all, was the National Security Agency [NSA].  That's between Baltimore [Maryland] and [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia].  So, I came to "No Such Agency." (laughter)  And I looked at the University of Maryland because that's where all my credits was.
Story_ID: 31701
Speaker 1: But I came [back to the United States in 1959, to the National Security Agency, and to attend college at the University of Maryland] in, like, late November and the fall--I was too late for the fall term and too early for the spring term.  So, there was a lull in there.  So I came home [Rowland, North Carolina] on vacation.  My sister had graduated by this time, and I had another sister in college at that time.  But my sister said, "You've been away awhile.  You need to come with me to see some girls."  So, she knew my wife's [Sallie Monroe] sister, who was in her class.  And this one that I married was one class behind me in high school [Rowland Southside School].  She was in college.  So, she took me to see her.  And her mother really liked me.  Her mother said, "He's a fine young fellow."  She was dating other guys at the time.  Didn't want to pay much attention, but her mom talked to me a lot, and found out where I was headed.  "That's a good boy."  And she thought I was a good boy, (laughter), good for her daughter.  Anyway, she invited me to come back.  And she said, "I am sure she will be here when you come back.  You come." Gave me the date to come back.  I came back, and sure enough she was there.  We talked, we hit it off alright.  She was in college, and I was in college at the time here at [North Carolina] A and T [Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina].  She was down at Fayetteville State [University, Fayetteville, North Carolina].  And the mother kept it together, though.  Mom would cook those plain cakes and give me a slice of that when I came by, yeah.
Story_ID: 31702
Speaker 1: So, I graduated [from North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] in 1962, and that's why--you wonder why I got a [bachelor's] degree in math, English and French.  Well, a lot of the English stuff was already done, and the math was well advanced, and I had a, we had a solid math guy here, Dr. Wendell P. Jones.  And so, I studied math with him and went through.  And I had thirty-six months, and I finished in thirty months, really, getting three degrees.  But I took a full load, you know.  I knew I was motivated and all, and took a full load.  And so, I was commissioned in June of 1962.  I was just in the reserves of the [U.S.] Air Force then.  That time counted for pay purposes, and my rank continued, but by then I was commissioned a Second Lieutenant.  And I was still in the--and they put me in the Intelligence area and I went to the Intelligence Data Handling Systems [IDHS] Program course in Lowry Air Force Base in Denver [Colorado].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Had a tour of the Air Force Academy, which is near there.  I said, "I want to be assigned here.  What does it take?"  So, they said, "Well, you would qualify if you had a master's degree in math.  You'd qualify for math, but a lot of math teachers need a master's degree in French, if you want to teach that."  So, I went back to Lowry, where I was teaching the IDHS, the Intelligence Data Handling System.  And I enrolled immediately at the University of Colorado through the educational center again.  And I took two courses at a whack (ph.), and in two years I'd worked off the twenty-four graduate credit hours, and was looking at a thesis topic in crypto analysis.  I had a professor who knew cryptography, and I liked that.  So, the Air Force called me and said, "Hey, we'd like to send you for a master's.  We've got a program where we'd like to beef up our computer science faculty.  And we'd like to send you for a master's degree in computer science."  I told my advisor, "I won't be finishing my thesis.  I'm going off and study computer science."  I had had two basic courses, to teach the IDHS system there.  So, I went--they said, "We got three schools that offer master's degrees.  We got University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California] and Texas A and M [Agricultural and Mechanical University, College Station, Texas].  You put down the order in which you want to go."  I put down (laughter) Stanford, Michigan, Texas A and M.  Meantime, I wrote to Stanford and got a catalog.  And I missed it.  I got married to this young lady in 1962 when I graduated here.  I got married, went to the Armed Forces Intelligence Training Assistance Center in Denver [Colorado].  And so, I said, "We're going to Stanford, get ready."  That next year they sent me a application to Texas A and M.  I called the assignments people in Texas.  I said, "Hey, I put down Stanford, Michigan, and Texas A and M was my third choice."  Well, they said, "We had some officers at Stanford that they didn't like, because the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] building was under attack and the ROTC officer was no longer sending people there."  And Michigan had burned the ROTC building.
Speaker 2: So, this is during the Vietnam War.
Speaker 1: That was in the heat of, the heart of the Vietnam.  So, but Texas A and M had, I said, "Did you see, you got my folder there?  Is my picture in the front?"  They said, "Oh yeah, they're integrated."  I got there and there were me and the maids.
Story_ID: 31703
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to pause here a second and just kind of roll back to North Carolina A and T [Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: We went through that kind of fast--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But I know that North Carolina A and T--
Speaker 2: The sit-ins started in 1961.  I was right there--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --down here at Woolworth.  Three of those guys [Greensboro Four] were in classes with me.  Joe McNeil, Ezell Blair, and [Franklin] McCain were in classes with me.  I didn't know Richardson [reference to David Richmond] that well.  Of course, they were freshmen.  I was already past that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And you'd mentioned--so you participated in the sit-ins, or did you?
Speaker 2: I was just on the sideline watching.  I had back problems.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A big yellow streak in my back (laughter).  I thought it would interfere with my [U.S] Air Force opportunities.  I didn't want to blow that commission.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well, some people, you know--people do what they can, I guess when they--
Speaker 2: Yes.  You contribute in various ways.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  So, but you were sympathetic with what they were doing?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.  Very much, and wanted to get involved.  I talked to my mom [Cilla Jane Baker Monroe] about it.  She said "Son, you know what you're there for."  "Yes."  End of story.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you talked about Dr. Wendell P. Jones.
Speaker 2: Wendell P. Jones.
Speaker 1: Now, he was your, would you consider him like a mentor?
Speaker 2: He was my mentor and advisor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And as fate would have it, my youngest son who's now a colonel in the Air Force, came to A and T, and Dr. Jones was his advisor.
Story_ID: 31704
Speaker 1: Okay.  You were talking about Dr. Martini [dean of engineering] in the physics department [at North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Martini taught physics.  And he wasn't--so, we had the slide rule, which was our calculator.  He didn't worry about the answer.  He wanted to show the work, show the progression, and get the unit.  If you got the units straight, you got 90 percent of the problem right.  So, if I had not gotten started out in the engineering mathematics, I would have gone with physics, because I really enjoyed the physics.  So, I took extra physics courses with him.  And to get my degree lined up with everything, that's why I took the degree in math, because the courses--After I--I had the fundamentals for any course that was offered.  So, I could go right in.  Some of the engineering programs, they had sequential courses that I couldn't just fit directly into.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, some of the other--we talked about the students, the sit-in movement [in Greensboro, North Carolina] that went on at that time.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But I think one of the students behind you was Jesse Jackson [American civil rights activist and Baptist minister], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was 1964, two years behind me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he was a football player.
Speaker 2: Football player.  Came, transferred here from the University of Illinois, quarterback.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: In the registrar they had him, "If you rolled out left, he threw his left hand.  If you rolled right, he threw with his right hand."  I never had an opportunity to see him do that, but I'm sure he could.
Speaker 1: They said he was injured or something, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was always getting injured in spring ball.  Each spring he'd get injured, but he didn't lose his scholarship.
Speaker 1: Now, were you impressed with his personality at all?
Speaker 2: I was impressed with his yakking, his talking.  I was very impressed.
Speaker 1: So he was a good persuasive--
Speaker 2: Good orator.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Persuasive orator.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  So, A and T.  So, this is, so this is your first tour at [North Carolina] A and T?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so, you were there until 60--
Speaker 2: '59 [1959] to '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: To '62 [1962], okay.
Story_ID: 31705
Speaker 1: In 1962, you--because I backtracked, so I guess we're going forward now.  So, you were telling us that you, about how you got into Texas A and M [Agricultural and Mechanical University, College Station, Texas].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And how that was basically chosen for you, really.
Speaker 2: Yes.  The [U.S.] Air force selected that, selected that, and picked me to go to Texas A and M, and it was a blessing, really.  Because I went there--and the Air Force picked that school because they welcomed--that was one of the few schools that welcomed the Air Force officers on their campus during the Vietnam War.  And the professors were very nice and very cordial.  So, we had a great experience there.  My wife [Sallie Monroe] wanted to go to graduate school, but they didn't let women go to graduate school at that time.  Women could study bridge and bowling.  So, my wife studied bridge, and she took an interest in that, and majored in bridge the first tour.  And we bowled in the league.  Of course, there wasn't a lot to do in College Station other than go to school.  At the end of the semester, we'd go to the Houston [Texas] for the partying part of things.
Speaker 1: Now, you were saying earlier that the maids and you and your wife, I guess, were the only black folks on the campus.
Speaker 2: Well, when we got there.  But that same summer they sent in three other black Air Force officers.  So, I had company.  They followed me that fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Got there in the summer.
Speaker 1: But none of the regular students who weren't in the Air Force, the civilian students, were black, you say?
Speaker 2: No.  (Unclear) Maybe some undergrad, none in the grad programs that I saw.  You know, the school was so big--it was much larger than the school--like, it was like the size of Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York].  Like, we were a little corner over there.  The grad program was separated from the undergrad programs at Texas A and M.  The graduate school was very different.  We didn't associate with the core very much, other than the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] invited us to come use their facilities for study.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were there to study computer science?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Now this was, was this a new degree program?
Speaker 2: This was a new degree program for the Air Force and for Texas A and M.  And it was 1965 when I went.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And got my master's degree in 1967.
Story_ID: 31706
Speaker 1: It was in 1964 at Dartmouth University [College, Hanover, New Hampshire] that John Kemeny and Thomas Kurtz create the BASIC [Beginner's All-purpose Symbolic Instruction Code] programming language, right?
Speaker 2: BASIC, the BASIC language, BASIC.
Speaker 1: BASIC, yeah, BASIC language.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the basic.  That was the language for programming the computer math.
Speaker 1: I think Fortran was created, what, in '57' [1957]?
Speaker 2: Fifty-seven [1957] was Fortran, Formula Translation, Fortran.
Speaker 1: So, what language--I mean what were you really learning?  These were the days when a computer was--well, tell us about what--
Speaker 2: Fortran language and Cobalt.  Really, I started out on machine language.  That's the zeros and the ones, that machine really is.  And then I went from there to SOAL, Symbolic Optic Assembly Language.  And from there to Fortran 1 and 2, and Cobalt.  That was the language--they had a separate language for math and science, and a language for business.  I'd learned both, of course, getting a degree in computer science.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I did machine language, assembly language, and the higher order languages.
Speaker 1: Now, this is where I guess your typing skills really come into--
Speaker 2: It didn't hurt me, didn't hold me back.  I used the typing a lot for papers and so forth.  It didn't bother me at all.  I had a typewriter, Smith-Corona.
Speaker 1: Didn't you have to, like, type in these cards, to--
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: --you know--
Speaker 2: Keypunch was just--the keypunch keyboard was just like the typewriter.  So, it was easy for me to type in my programs.
Speaker 1: And that was a big part of trying to get the machine to--. Kind of explain how a big mainframe computer worked in 1962.
Speaker 2: Well, it had an operator and big tapes, and it took a lot of air conditioning for it to function, because it was all vacuum tubes.  And transistors hadn't gotten going yet.  It would take a room the size of this, to house a computer to do what your cell phone can do now--do less than that, actually.  And it had, and you had to have some way to get the information in, so that usually went in through either magnetic tapes on punch cards.  And then it had to have some way to output it.  You either output it on tape, mag tape, or through a printer.  And, of course, it had a large central processing unit [CPU], and that needs a lot of air conditioning.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what model computer were you using?  Can you remember?
Speaker 2: We were using the Model 650, the IBM 650.  And later on, we got a 7094.  That was a Fortran computer.  And we had an 1100 for the Cobalt.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, what sort of problems could a computer solve in those days?
Speaker 2: Well, we used it mainly for scientific problems.  But it could solve any kind of problem it can solve today.  We just didn't quite know how.  But it did a lot of business, data processing and database stuff--accumulating the military records and intelligence data.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And Fortran was primarily a problem solver?
Speaker 2: A problem solver for engineers and scientists.  Cobalt for the business--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and the database systems.
Story_ID: 31707
Speaker 1: Now, who were your memorable teachers or mentors when you were working on your master's [degree at Texas Agricultural and Mechanical University, College Station, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Dan Drew was a, he was my advisor and a main teacher.  Another one was A.R. Burgess.  Another was M.J. Fox.  Those three I remember from the computer science, representing me on my committee.  I had another professor from the math and one from the statistics department.
Speaker 1: Now, were you, were you determined to, you know--oh, well, before I ask that question, tell me about Epsilon Pi Epsilon.
Speaker 2: Okay.  In the--computer science was housed in the Engineering College and in the industrial engineering department.  But they had an honor society for engineering majors that they didn't want the computer science majors to enter.  So, we talked to Dan Drew.  And Dan Drew said, why don't you organize your own?  So, he got the paperwork, and we set up our own computer science honor society, called Epsilon Pi Epsilon.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this is, this is an honor society just for A and M?
Speaker 2: No, it was international.  It was created for computer science majors everywhere.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, for a long time after that I used to go to various campuses and help them install new chapters of Epsilon Pi Epsilon.
Speaker 1: So this was, okay, so this is--you all have taken the lead, in establishing this honor society--
Speaker 2: Honor society for computer scientists.  And there weren't a lot of universities that offered degrees, either undergrad or graduate degrees, in computer science.  A lot of them offered degrees in mathematics or electrical engineering, or some phase of engineering.  And the people could program, because that's how they would write their thesis or their dissertations.  They could program in Fortran.  They could even get jobs as computer programmers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 31708
Speaker 1: Now, in 1960--I think it was 1963 or '64 [1964] when I first noticed the pocket calculator.
Speaker 2: Yes, the hand held calculator.
Speaker 1: Right.  And they were made by a company called Texas Instruments.
Speaker 2: Texas Instruments--TI, up in Dallas [Texas].
Speaker 1: So, Texas is playing a role in--
Speaker 2: In the computing industry.  A lot of our grads [graduates of Texas Agricultural and Mechanical University, College Station, Texas] who were civilians went to TI.  Some went to, there was another place--okay, Collins Radio.  It was big--and a lot of them went to DOD, [U.S.] Department of Defense Institution, because the military and the Department of Defense was a big user of computers, and IBM [International Business Machines] was a big sponsor of computing.  So, that was a very good program for the [U.S.] Air Force, because a lot of the computers at the Pentagon were IBM computers.  So, whenever we finished at Texas A and M, we could go to any of installations and take over the computing activities, work hand in glove with the civilian workers around there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, after you earned your master's degree, what did you--
Speaker 2: Went to the [U.S.] Air Force Academy [Colorado Springs, Colorado] on the faculty.  And at that time, computer science was in the math program, part of the math program.  And the math people liked us because many of those who had some math skills could also--all the cadets had to take a course in computer science.  And they had to take three courses in mathematics.  So, they needed three times the number.  But a person who had a degree in math, could also teach computer science.  That was a valuable person.  So, I could teach that.  And finally, there was a big fight.  There was people coming in with the electrical engineering, and they could teach the computer science program.  There was one man who was a very, very bright man, a genius actually, who had gone to the military academy.  And they sent him to Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California] for his--no, no, he'd gone to the military academy and they sent him to Oxford [University, Oxford, London] as a Rhodes Scholar.  And he got his--they sent him to get a degree in economics.  He got a degree in astronautical engineering and economics.  When he came back they sent him to Stanford, and he got a Ph.D. in computer science.  And he came to the Air Force Academy a couple of years after I did.  And he was in the astronautics department.  And he wanted to bring the computer science program over there.  So he talked to the dean and we ended up moving to astronautical engineering.  And later on, as we wanted to offer--there were a number of us now teaching computer science.  All the cadets had to take a course in computer science.  And the cadets liked it so much, they wanted other courses.  So, we wanted to offer a major in computer science.  And Dr. Bate and I were the only ones with degrees in it.  So he said, "Joe, we'll form that up, and you'll be the head of it."  And we did.  And I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what year is this?
Speaker 2: Oh, this was in, let me think.  1980.
Story_ID: 31709
Speaker 1: 1967 was when I got back to the [U.S.] Air Force Academy [Colorado Springs, Colorado].  And that was an interesting story.  I taught for a couple of years, and I noticed something.  I noticed there were people who stayed on until they got twenty years in the [U.S.] Air Force.  And I said, they're tenured.  You got to have a Ph.D. to be tenured.  So, I applied for the doctoral program.  My boss at the time said, "Well, yes you're a candidate.  You qualify, you got good grades in your master's program, and so you qualify."  And there were, they had two slots from my division, where they could send people.  But there were four people eligible.  And of course, Roger Bate wanted to send me, because I had done work with him already.  And he was the main guy in computer science.  He said, "I want to send Joe."  And my boss said, "No that wouldn't be fair to these other guys."  So, he said, "Well, what do you do?  What are you going to do to make it fair?"  My boss said, "Well, they ought to take the GRE," Graduate Records Exam.  In the meantime, my wife [Sallie Monroe] who's majored in bridge in Texas A and M [Agricultural and Mechanical University, College Station, Texas], was in the Bridge Club in the officer's course.  She said, "Joe, I thought you told me they hadn't decided who was going for the program.  Connie Fratwell and Kepner said their husbands are going."  They were the two white guys.  The Jewish guy and the black guy had gotten ruled out by the GRE.  And sure enough, the next week or so, my boss came in and put his arms around me, "Hey Joe, you ought to plan for that intermediate course that they're going to offer next year, you know." I said, "You forgot, I applied for the Ph.D. program."  "So, yeah, but Joe--,"put his arm around me.  "--you know, blacks don't do well on that."  I pulled away and said, "You mean, you said it was unfair-Colonel Bate picked me--and you said it was unfair."  He said, "Yeah, Joe, you know Joe, I had to be fair."  I said, "But you just told me it wasn't fair because I wouldn't do well on the GRE."  So, Gordon Gershwin was the Jewish guy.  He said, "Joe, we need to cut out--" We used to go to the gym and play basketball two hours, you know.  "We should cut back on that and stay after work and come over here on Saturdays."  So we started--, we got the GRE prep book.  We went all the way through that, in the verbal and the math.  And I'd see him in the hallway, ask him a question, and he'd have the answer.  He'd ask me a question.  So we memorized all the root words and so forth.  And so, the next spring we took the GRE.  He scored 740 and I scored 760.  Fretwall goes, "I don't know what they scored, but Colonel Bate got the results back."  And he said, "Yeah, Joe's going.  He's the top guy on the GRE."  That kind of got my boss's goose a little bit.  So I headed on back.  But by this time, now, this is 1967.  We were--, that's when I went with my master's.  But this was 1968--'69 [1969].
Story_ID: 31710
Speaker 1: At the bridge game, Sallie [Monroe's wife] came home and said, "Connie and Carol said Harry and Bob are going for the Ph.D."  I said, "No, they haven't decided.  We've got to take the GRE [Graduate Record Examination], and Gordon [Gershwin]and I are studying for it."  So, we studied.  Everyday we'd go in there and study for an hour at lunchtime.  And then we'd go to the gym and work out quickly.  We'd stay an hour or so after work everyday and cover certain parts.  We'd go Saturday morning and do four hours worth, and I was ready.  I thought I'd answered every question.  I must have missed some somewhere along the way.  And I scored 760 out of 800, and he scored 740.
Speaker 2: That's pretty high.
Speaker 1: I did pretty well on the math, though.
Speaker 2: So, so you're in the graduate school--
Speaker 1: Went to Texas A and M [Agricultural and Mechanical University, College Station, Texas]-Ph.D.
Speaker 2: For your Ph.D.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  By this time--now, I didn't tell you.  Did I tell you when I went, there was no place to live for the master's [degree students]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I forgot that part.
Speaker 2: Well, go ahead, tell us.
Speaker 1: Well, when we went for the master's degree, we had too much furniture to fit in student housing.  And the realtors met, and College Station said, "Well, look, we'll build a house for them."  One smart aleck said, "Why don't they send some more?"  They said, "We can't just build houses."  But what they thought of, there was an air base co-located with the campus that had closed and had FHA [federal Housing Administration] housing.  And they could get around it by giving us quarters there.  So, for forty-five dollars a month--and I was getting paid $150 for housing allowance.  For forty-five of that, I got a house and a yard man.  So, it worked in my favor.
Speaker 2: Now, sometimes segregation works in your favor.
Speaker 1: It worked out very, very well in my favor.  So, we enjoyed that, and we had a yard man that took care of the yard.  Anyway--
Speaker 2: So, for the second time was it different?
Speaker 1: It was very different.  Integration had occurred at College Station, even.  So, there was a home.  There were many--any home I could afford, I could live in.  There was a home right across the interstate--not the interstate, but across a six-lane highway from the main entrance to the campus.  I could ride my bike over there.  I went over there, and a Jewish man owned it in Houston [Texas].  The realtor showed it to us.  We liked it, but the thing was about a hundred dollars over my housing allowance at the time.  But we liked it, so we took it.  And by this time, our oldest son was up and about playing.  And the younger one was going to be hatched there.  So, the son was, our oldest son was very active--.
Story_ID: 31711
Speaker 1: He [Monroe's older son] was born in 1964, by the way.  And we were still at the [U.S.] Air Force Academy [Colorado Springs, Colorado].  And so, he--no, we weren't there yet.  We hadn't even gone there.  We were in Lowry Intelligence Data Handling Systems [Lowry Air Force Base, Denver, Colorado] when he was born.  So we, when we--and that was, there was a little story associated with that.  These stories keep coming back.  We were on our way home.  We were going to grad school.  And I drove from Colorado Springs all the way to Jefferson, Missouri--Columbia, Missouri.  That's where the University of Missouri is.  And we had, I made arrangements in a Holiday Inn right there on the interstate.  And that was a long drive.  Our oldest son was still on the bottle, and he wanted his bottle.  My wife [Sallie Monroe] wanted me to get there.  I got there later that night, and there I walked in with my confirmation.  They said, "We don't have a place."  They said, "The law students are having a reunion, and they've taken over the whole, all the Holiday Inn facilities."  I went back to my car and got my heat.  My wife said, "No, it's not worth this."  And I pulled away and walked around toward my side.  As I walked around, I met this police officer.  He said, "I know your problem."  And so, we ended up--taking us to their home.  It was just go up here and turn and go right back up.  He was in, they were, he and his wife were in school.  They put us up for the night, and told us we could have the run of the place.  And the next morning they had to leave for school.  We got up, made sure we copied the address down and all, and got on the road and came on home.  We showed the baby off, and went back to grad school down at Texas A and M [Agricultural and Mechanical University, College Station, Texas], first time.  And that's when all the housing situation worked in our favor, after a while, you know, once they saw others were coming.  So, they put us all in those FHA [Federal Housing Administration] houses, forty-five dollars a month, and a yard man.  So, as a result of that, we went back then in 1970, and everything had really integrated.  You no longer could get in the FHA houses.  All the professors had tied those houses up.  And, but I live anywhere I could afford.  I found a place right off the campus for a hundred dollars over my housing allowance, a nice big home.  And it was actually located next door to the wealthiest man in College Station, Texas.  And our younger son was the same age as his grandson.  He had a huge castle back there, and the driveway did a half moon around the house.  And our son had a little trike, and his grandson had a trike.  They rode over there together.  And he sent the maid over to tell my wife that our son ought not to come over there, because he didn't want the liability of his getting injured.  Of course, my wife didn't kick up too much fuss about it.  But about the next week they sent us a letter, a letter saying they had a birthday party for the grandson, and he wanted our son to come.  Well, we had to go to the base that day.  But a little bit later, my wife was in the grocery store with our son shopping.  And he saw Mr. Culpepper.  He knew Mr--, he know--.  We didn't even know the man.  He ran over and grabbed Mr. Culpepper by the hand, and said, "I want you to meet my mom."  He came over (laughter).  That was an interesting thing, because the same thing--the Presbyterian minister--we had signed up for our utilities--came to our home and asked my wife a number of questions.  And she answered all the questions.  And finally, he said, "By the way, is the lady of the house here?"  She said, "I am the lady of the house."  He almost fainted.  This was the Presbyterian minister.  You know, he was getting ready to invite the lady of the house to come to this Presbyterian church.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he thought your wife was a maid or something?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he thought she was a maid.
Speaker 2: These are integration stories.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: 1970?
Speaker 1: 1970. In 1972, I got my degree.
Story_ID: 31712
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about--before you move on from that, tell us about what your dissertation was.
Speaker 2: My dissertation was on complexity theory.  And that was, with the computer I could solve problems that didn't have closed form solutions; that is, standard theoretical solutions.  If they had theoretical solutions, I could solve the complex problems.  A complex problem is one you can't solve mathematically.  With complexity theory, I could simulate and get a solution.  That was approximate.
Speaker 1: So, is this something that you--is it groundbreaking in the field of computer science?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.  It was at the time.  But complexity theory now is a whole course.  But it was groundbreaking at the time.  It was new and novel.
Speaker 1: So, was this the first time it had been--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Dissertations were original work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, during the time that you were--around the same period of time--I guess within five years of the time you got your Ph.D., the internet was created.
Speaker 2: Going strong.  We had times--I know when I came back [U.S. Naval Academy, Colorado Springs, Colorado] in 1972 with my doctorate in my hand they were, we were setting up for a time sharing system, the first of its kind.  There was one up in Potsdam, New York, right on the Canadian border.  That was the only one that an internet connection, all up there.  So, we set that up.  We were setting up as we were testing it out.  And I noticed my boss then came to me with all the young captains.  He came up to me and said, "Joe, you need to go down on the second floor and get some of the clerks to come help you test the system."  I said, "Well, about--?"  He said, "We got to go out to the golf course."  This was on a Tuesday.  "We got to go out and get ready for the intramural match on Thursday with the other department."  I said this golf is important stuff.  (laughter)  You got to test a multi-million dollar time sharing system using clerks.  And they got to go practice for the Thursday intramural match.  Golf's got to be important.  So, I took it up.  The next year, I had to go practice, too.  Made the sixth man--they took six.  I made six.  Before the end of that, I was up to number three on the team.  The third year I was number one or number two.
Speaker 1: Had you ever played golf before?
Speaker 2: No.  Rode by the golf course there, on my bike.
Speaker 1: I didn't think you were playing golf in North Carolina.
Speaker 2: No, no.  They still don't have a team over here.  They say if they have a team, they will have to have one for girls.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: But I ended up winning the course championship in 1978, Air Force Academy.  I got pictures of that with Bob Hope--came to supply the trophy.
Story_ID: 31713
Speaker 1: Okay, so your dissertation--
Speaker 2: Was on complexity theory simulation.
Speaker 1: Complexity theory--
Speaker 2: Digital simulation.
Speaker 1: Digital simulation.
Speaker 2: The discovery was, I discovered how to do a transformation on any probability density function.  If I could get the cumulative density function of it, I could then simulate that distribution.  That is, using an inverse--using something called Laplace transforms in math.  It's an inversion of that cumulative distribution and sampling with a normal distribution into it.  And that's still operative stuff.  I still do papers and do talks on that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Well, this is--now when you got your Ph.D. in '72 [1972]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I know we had discussed this when I came in.  I know it's been said that you were the first.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And the reason that was said--in 1974, my advisor and I had done some work on my dissertation, further extended some papers on my dissertation.  He comes and said, "Joe, they're about to claim that the first African American got his degree in 1974.  They're getting ready to celebrate it in New York.  If you come with me, we can block that, and you can be the celebratee."  So, I said, "I'll be happy to meet you in New York."  So they had a big thing over that, a tie and all that stuff.
Speaker 1: So, they were going to celebrate who they thought was the first African American--
Speaker 2: It was 1974.
Speaker 1: --the first African American to get a Ph.D. in computer science?
Speaker 2: In computer science, straight up computer science.  There were many who had--
Speaker 1: I just wanted to say that out, so--
Speaker 2: There was many who had degrees in engineering who could program, but no straight up computer science degree.  And so, I went.  And we celebrated that, and from that point forward I put down I was the first African American in North America to get a Ph.D. in computer science.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, I've been claiming that since, and you're the first to dispute it.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)  Well, it's in our outline that a fellow named Clarence (Skip) Ellis--
Speaker 2: Why didn't he come forward when they were celebrating me?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  He may not even still be with us.  I don't know.
Speaker 2: He was back then, in 1970.  He got it in what, '69 [1969]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, '69 [1969].
Speaker 2: From?
Speaker 1: The University of Illinois [Urbana-Champagne].
Speaker 2: You need to check and see if Illinois offered Ph.D.s in computer science in 1969.
Speaker 1: You're right.  And anybody watching this who, you know, wants to do research, they can--
Speaker 2: Check it out.
Speaker 1: --check it out.
Speaker 2: They should, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, you may well be the first.
Speaker 2: I may not be, but I may well be.
Speaker 1: Right.  So, now did you get much feedback from your dissertation?  Is your dissertation quoted?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's quoted by, was quoted regularly.  But now, there are courses in complexity theory, and I don't see it quoted as often.
Story_ID: 31714
Speaker 1: So, this is, so 19--, early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you know, computer science is galloping forward.
Speaker 2: It is, by leaps and bounds.  Every--programs was just sprouting up everywhere.  And by 1980, we had a full-fledged degree program in computer science at the [U.S.] Air Force Academy [Colorado Springs, Colorado], undergraduate degree.  And then an accreditation body, the Engineering Accrediting Board set up an accrediting program for computer science programs.  And I was the head of the computer science department the first time it was accredited by the ECBD.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is in 1980?
Speaker 2: Eighty--no, this was--
Speaker 1: '81 [1981]?
Speaker 2: In '80 [1980], we set the program up.  It was about like 1984.  The first batch graduated--you can't become accredited until you graduate a batch.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, this is, do you remember James Stith [also a HistoryMaker]?
Speaker 2: James who?
Speaker 1: Stith.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was from the [U.S.] Naval Academy [Annapolis, Maryland].  He was in computer science on the Naval Academy.  We used to meet all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: He knows me, too.  You've interviewed him?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Good.  Jim?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I saw him somewhere recently.  Oh, at the Black Engineer of the Year Program.  Do you ever go to that?
Speaker 1: I've never been.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's an annual thing.  They hold in the [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia], Baltimore [Maryland] area.  But I know Jim very well.
Story_ID: 31715
Speaker 1: I was Assistant Dean of the Faculty [U.S. Air Force Academy, Colorado Springs, Colorado].
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: I was--the Dean of the Faculty was a Brigadier General whom I reported to.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, you were the Assistant Dean of the Faculty.
Speaker 1: I was the Assistant Dean of the Faculty.
Speaker 2: In '78 [1978]?
Speaker 1: Yes.  And also I started out talking about tenure.  Once I got my Ph.D. [in computer science in 1974, from Texas A & M University, College Station, Texas], I went back [U.S. Air Force Academy, Colorado Springs, Colorado] and I got permanent tenure.  And later on, I got permanent professor.  And I was definitely the first black, first African American, to get a--to be tenured at any service academy.  That's the [U.S.] Army, [U.S.] Navy, [U.S.] Air Force, [U.S.] Coast Guard Academy.  They had some civilians teaching at the Naval Academy with Ph.D.s.  But I was the first at the Air Force, in any service academy--the first permanent professor.  But civilians weren't permanent there then.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And permanent professors were appointed only by the President of the United States.  And I was appointed by President [Jimmy] Carter with the consent of the Senate.  It was a presidential appointment.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And you get to serve until age sixty-four.  Instantaneously, you go to full colonel and serve until age sixty-four.  And they had some at the [U.S.] Naval Academy and some at the [U.S.] Military Academy [West Point, New York].  But I was the first African American at any service academy to get permanent professor.
Story_ID: 31716
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, in '85 [1985], after accreditation--
Speaker 2: Then I started going from place to place, helping others become accredited, and creating accreditable programs at campuses.  In 1988 when I came to Fayetteville State [University, Fayetteville, North Carolina], I created an accredited program there.  In the meantime, I went off to Egypt and helped them get their program accredited.  And I created an accredited program at Fayetteville State and one here at [North Carolina] A and T [Agricultural and Technical] State University [Greensboro, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, back at the [U.S.] Air Force Academy in Colorado, so did you like teaching at the Air Force Academy?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  That was really a pleasant place to teach.
Speaker 1: This is in Colorado Springs, or--
Speaker 2: It's just north of Colorado Springs, south of Denver [Colorado].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Much closer to Colorado Springs than to Denver.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, any stories about your students, or--
Speaker 2: There are a lot of stories I could tell that would be a whole--that would take the whole time.  The main one I'd like to tell you, though--is when Patricia Schroeder [former American politician who represented Colorado in the United States House of Representatives from 1973-1997] was campaigning against the Vietnam War and trying to get prayer out of the public schools, our cadets marched downtown from the Air Force Academy and said, "As long as those professors up on the hill are allowed to give exams, we will be praying."
Speaker 1: Okay.  Pat Schroeder was against--
Speaker 2: Vietnam War.
Speaker 1: Vietnam War?
Speaker 2: Against prayer in the schools, against a whole host of things.  But that cost Colorado dearly.  Colorado used to have the Finance Center.  They moved that, closed that and moved that to Kentucky and Cleveland, Ohio.  That employed about 9,000 people in high level, high paying jobs.  She cost them that.
Story_ID: 31717
Speaker 1: So, what's going on--in the late '80s [1980s], we find computers are changing form, you know.
Speaker 2: Going from micro to mini.  And that's the only thing that's getting less expensive.  The auto [automobile] is going up in price.  The computer is going down in price.
Speaker 1: Now, why is that?  Well--
Speaker 2: Silicon, they discovered--and the proliferation of them is one.  It's not a scarce thing anymore.  Everybody has one, now.  Every home has a computer and television now.  But the price of it is--you know, it's made out of silicon.  The chips are made from silicon.  That's sand, very inexpensive to make.  It takes a lot of knowledge and know-how.  One has to know digital design to make one, but it's inexpensive to make.  And because they're proliferating, they can mass produce them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The little pocket calculators at one time were two hundred dollars.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Now they're twenty dollars or less.
Speaker 1: Or less, huh?  I've bought them for four dollars.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they're a lot less now.  Those things are very, very inexpensive to make, especially when they can have them manufactured in China for a penny.  We can afford to sell them for four bucks here.
Speaker 1: So, the personal computer starts--the PC, the desktop, you know, starts roughly in the--
Speaker 2: In the '80s [1980s], in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Early '80s [1980s], yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Apple [Inc.] and--
Speaker 2: So, in 1986 we issued personal computers to every cadet entering the [U.S.] Air Force Academy [Colorado Springs, Colorado].
Speaker 1: In '86 [1986]?
Speaker 2: 1986.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  And was the Air Force using IBM [International Business Machines] technology, or--
Speaker 2: Yes, IBM was our primarily contractor.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was there a discussion about what format you'd rather--you know--IBM or Apple?
Speaker 2: Yes, there was a discussion about it.  But most of the people there in the computer science program had trained on the IBM machines.  And that's why IBM was clever enough to give them to the main producers of computer science because they knew then, when the people got out, they would be the spokesperson for purchasing computers.
Speaker 1: Now, what were the--so, the development of the silicon chip made it possible to make a smaller--
Speaker 2: Would make as small as you--make it down to nano device now.  Put one in the pacemaker now.  Put it in the hearing aide.
Story_ID: 31718
Speaker 1: You were at the [U.S.] Air Force Academy [Colorado Springs, Colorado] until?
Speaker 2: 1988
Speaker 1: Until 1988.
Speaker 2: December, 1988.
Speaker 1: And what happened, that you left? Well, I got a job offer.  I was on the board of trustees at the North Carolina School of Math and Science in Durham [North Carolina].  And I met the head of the UNC [University of North Carolina] systems, C.D. Spangler at that time.  And he said, "Joe, you're the kind of guy who graduated from [North Carolina] A and T [Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina].  You need to come back to North Carolina."  I said, "Of course, I'd like to."  But in the meantime when I was getting ready to close out my career at the Air Force I was, had already negotiated.  I'd been doing research with the guys at the University of Colorado and we had--in Colorado, people looked for a hill to get on.  We picked a five acre plot on top of a hill overlooking the Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs--bought us a five acre block.  We were ready to build our castle up there.  And Mr. Spangler--the Air Force is very big about giving publicity about people who have done well in the Air Force.  Since I'd made full colonel in under twenty years, they assumed my career was a success.  So, they wanted to publicize that fact.  And the newspapers here had it.  And he saw it, and he called me up at home and said, "Joe, you said you'd come back.  Now, it's time to come on back."  I said, "I was just kidding."  He said, "I wasn't."  (laughter)  I told my wife [Sallie Monroe].  She said, "We're not going back to North Carolina."  Well, I said, "It won't hurt me to go back and talk to him."  I came back, and we talked.  He knew I liked golf.  And he had the dean over at NC State [University, Raleigh, North Carolina] take me out to Buies Creek [North Carolina], a nice public golf course, and played golf, two or three rounds.  We came back and we talked, and he said, "Okay, now we got to haggle over the price."  He said, "I should offer you one dollar and you should ask for a million dollars, and I hope we can settle closer to one dollar than one million."  Well, he offered much more than I had imagined.  He offered well over 100K.  This is 1988.  I was making about eighty [thousand dollars] in the Air Force.  He doubled it.  I said, no need in me staying around.  I had my thirty.  I wasn't going to get anymore there, so I left.  And things had, the social system had changed here totally.  When we came back, we could live anywhere we wanted to, (laughter), where we could afford.  And so, I went there.
Story_ID: 31719
Speaker 1: And a friend of mine who was at the [U.S.] Air Force Academy [Colorado Springs, Colorado] with me, took over as chancellor down at Fayetteville State [University, Fayetteville, North Carolina].   He needed a chief academic officer.  This was a big act.  He needed a chief--so, he asked me to come down there and help him.  I went down there for three years as the vice chancellor of academic affairs.  In the meantime, Ed Fort [Edward B. Fort, long-time chancellor of North Carolina A&T State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] wanted to get his program going in computer science.  He heard about me from Mr. Spangler, or somebody.  And he talked to me.  He had an endowed chair.  And Ron McNair [Ronald McNair, physicist and NASA astronaut who died during the launch of the Space Shuttle Challenger on mission STS-51-L] was the man who I had replaced at the School of Math and Science.  So, that was up to where I come to it.  So, I came there and just created an accredited program, and stayed until 1999.  We got a, at that time the person who was the dean of the College of Engineering became the provost.  She asked me to come over and take the deanship of engineering until she could find a dean.  She left and went and took over as president of Norfolk State [University, Norfolk, Virginia], and I had my time in.  By 2009, I had ten years of that.  I decided I'd bail out, play golf.  North Carolina was a good place to play golf. Right, that's famous for golf. Yeah, Southern Pines [North Carolina] is one hour away.
Story_ID: 31720
Speaker 1: North Carolina A & T [Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]--I guess we'll go back to that.  In '91 [1991], you were the Ronald E. McNair Endowed Chair--who is Ronald E. McNair?
Speaker 2: Ronald McNair was the astronaut, black astronaut that perished on the [Space Shuttle] Challenger in 1986.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this chair was endowed by the, was it by the State of North Carolina, or--
Speaker 2: By the State of North Carolina.  And the NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] people also put some money into it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were named in 1991 the Ronald E. McNair Endowed Chair Professor of--
Speaker 2: Professor of computer science.
Speaker 1: --Computer Science at North Carolina A and T.  So, I understand that you were involved in geomatics?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And explain what geomatics is.
Speaker 2: Geomatics is like--if you're familiar with GPS [global positioning] systems, most cars now have them--they're hand-held systems.  Geomatics is locating a point on the Earth anywhere.  It's really basically what you know it as surveying.   Every time you build a home, you have to survey the land and lay it out.  Geomatics is that, but it's more than that.  It's locating places for airports and locating any point on the ground.  You can find it within a one meter square, with geomatics.  But its common name is land surveying.  We had a level and a transit (unclear).  But now, with the sophisticated laser technology, it's gone well beyond that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you break it down a little bit more? So, you were involved in developing programs to--
Speaker 2: Yes, to--degree programs in geomatics.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  We're going to pause here a second and we'll come back.
Speaker 2: And (unclear) is map, we're dealing with maps.
Story_ID: 31721
Speaker 1: Okay, you were talking about different aspects of geomatics, and you were--
Speaker 2: The advances gone to locating points on the ground and locating airports and good for navigating airplanes and space vehicles.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, it has an application--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --for those in flight.
Speaker 2: Right.  Now, that system on there can get you to one meter--where you're going anywhere in the air, from the air, on the ground.
Speaker 1: How did, how does it work?  I mean how does--I know I've watched--
Speaker 2: Using geometry, analytic geometry, really the connex sections.  These points cross, there's only one place where you can get a place crossing on any globe.  Do have my globe there?  There's only one place where two points cross.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you're at the level of--
Speaker 2: Using the satellites, and they use the Earth as a reference point.  You can refer to any point on the Earth within one meter of accuracy.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And you were explaining when we were off-camera about surveying, you know, land, using the same system.
Speaker 2: Same system, but it's much, much more rudimentary using the survey equipment.  It's been updated now to geomatics equipment, where it's all computerized.  Use sample data points and lay out the boundaries of a city or lay out the boundaries for a road, where they used to have to get down there on the ground and do it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what happens then, with a GPS [Global Positioning System], say?  Now I've got a GPS.
Speaker 2: Global positioning, yeah.
Speaker 1: I've got a TomTom [brand] GPS.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How does the, I mean, so--
Speaker 2: What the, what the system does is, it can tell where you're located on the ground by keying off of at least two satellites.  And they can see, they're eight up there at all times.  You can see about six of them all the time, but it only needs two to locate your point on the ground, it gets so crowded.  And it knows where you are on the ground.  And then you give an address, it can then send that address back and locate where that is, and you get you there through various routing systems--quickly calculate every route there, including the shortest.
Speaker 1: And all that data is entered in by human beings, right, who know where the--?
Speaker 2: It was entered by human beings.  Or, they have systems now that enter that.  They can follow it and enter it--enter it like, not like the photography, but almost like that.  They got systems that can capture that data and digitize it and break it down to where the computer can use it now.  So, the GPS system is getting less expensive to buy.  And they come on all the automobiles now, because that's a good way to travel from Point A to Point B on the Earth.
Story_ID: 31722
Speaker 1: Now, what else have you been involved in, in terms of computer science research?
Speaker 2: I've done a lot, in terms of, for the [U.S. Department of] Homeland Security people.  You know, in terms of recognizing people, you know, like you go through the airport and they scan you for any kind of tools.  And now the key thing, though, is recognizing an individual.  It's easy enough for me to recognize you in a clean space, like now.  My picture, you can recognize.  But what if there were a lot of noise going on, like the noise from the kitchen or the noise from the dishwasher?  And say, let's say you are out in the street and there are buses and other transportation, now trying to recognize you.  That becomes a problem of complexity, then.
Speaker 1: And how is that solved?
Speaker 2: Well, I have to simulate and get a lot of, get some quick samples of you, and identify some features--your eye, your ear or anything I can identify that belongs uniquely to you.  I can then recognize you in what we call noise.  Easy enough if you're out here in the clear.  I'm sitting here, it's easy for you to recognize this as Joe Monroe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so facial recognition--
Speaker 2: Facial recognition is an important thing for security purposes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about voice recognition?
Speaker 2: Voice recognition.
Speaker 1: Now, is voice recognition easier than facial--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I've done some of that, too.  Voice recognition is a little bit easier, because we have unique intonations.  That's why your voice sounds differently than mine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that sound, that's all sonar [originally an acronym for Sound Navigation And Ranging].
Story_ID: 31723
Speaker 1: Can you explain to me--you made a presentation in '95 [1995] called 'Formal Methods for ATA 95 Re-use.'
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was that about? Well, we were looking at the ATA language.  ATA was a language sponsored by the [U.S.] Department of Defense [DOD].  And we promoted it, we taught it at the [U.S.] Air Force Academy [Colorado Springs, Colorado].  And we tried to push it on the world.  But the world didn't cotton to it too well, because it was expensive.  But what it was good for, it was formally constructed and it was easy enough for me to have an ATA application here that--maybe the navigation of the airplane was in ATA.  Maybe I want to get that on a ship.  But you know, ships, their nav [navigation] systems are slightly different.  They look at three points out there in the water.  And you get deflections and all off that.  So, you need to re-use the same language, the same program.  Well, with the object-oriented methods and so forth, you could get--with some--a little bit of parametric changes--you could use that same program for that.  Totally different application, because it's different navigating underwater than it is navigating in the air.  That's what happened to young John [F.] Kennedy [Jr.] [son of President John F. Kennedy; he died in a plane crash along with his wife Carolyn Bessette-Kennedy and her older sister Lauren Bessette, on July 16, 1999]. When--even the horizon is different.  You get a false horizon when you're just over water.  And that's why he flew his airplane into the Atlantic Ocean up there in the Boston [Massachusetts] area.  Didn't know how to read his instruments.  So, I was just showing you how you re-use one program in one situation.  The stuff that navigates an airplane is different than the stuff you navigate a [U.S.] Navy--, a vessel on the water with, for example.
Story_ID: 31724
Speaker 1: Tell us about--there's another presentation that you made in '95 [1995] concerning adaptation and scalability in computers.
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's the idea of, say, you have a program that runs on a massive computer.  You want it to run on this little hand-held computer.  You're going into combat, you don't want to carry any big stuff like that.  Well, you got to, you want to scale it down.  You got to make it scaled down.  It's easier to scale down, actually than it is to scale up.
Speaker 1: Really?  Why?
Speaker 2: Well, you got a much, much further distance.  See, the scaling is a matter of the distance it has to--the ones and zeroes have to travel before they lose their context.  You've got to, you can scale up by repeating, put a repeater on there to repeat it, refurbish it along the way.  But scaling down is easier because they get more and more compressed, they're more accurate.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That makes sense.
Story_ID: 31725
Speaker 1: Tell us about being the dean of the College of Engineering at North Carolina A and T [Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina].
Speaker 2: That was a lot of fun.  I had all the classical disciplines there.  And my biggest thing there was fund-raising, raising funds to recruit students, particularly African American students.  It was a big challenge.  And our alums were not accustomed to giving much (laughter).  So, what I did was got with the companies that were recruiting African Americans--General Electric, Northrup Grumman, and all the companies that recruited--Merck Company.  And I got with the presidents of the people who handled the finances and told them, "Look, you don't need--if you want to beef up your African American population in engineering, see me."  And they did, and I did.  They came and saw our programs.  And what I did do to the programs, was make sure they were nationally recognized.  And the national recognition in engineering, there's something called the Fundamentals of Engineering, the FE exam, nationally standardized exam.  I convinced the students they could pass the exam.  And the big problem I had--the faculty wanted to run me off--was convincing the faculty that students could pass.  So, we went back to the math department where they enter--worked with them.  And we worked with the physics department, worked with everybody who had a hand in the fundamentals.  We worked with them.  We got our students passing at the same rate, or higher rate, than the students at NC [North Carolina] State [University, Raleigh, North Carolina].  Duke [University, Durham, North Carolina] was the only school in North Carolina that offered engineering that could out-perform the [North Carolina] A and T students in engineering.  The school at the University of Charlotte [University of North Carolina at Charlotte], we swooped them first.  (laughter)  Then we took NC State.  We never--Duke was always 100 percent.  We never could take them.  We'd be in the high 90s, 100 percent area every other year.  That got the program going, and we got more funding than we needed.  When I left, they had about five million dollars they couldn't find students to come take.
Speaker 1: Now, it says here that you also, under your leadership, there were more tenured or tenure-track African American engineering professors at A and T than any other place in the country.
Speaker 2: I just adopted from the [U.S.] Air Force.  I would find the ones who was good in the undergraduate program and sponsor him or her for two to four years in a doctoral program.  Most of them were successful.  Then the allocation [ph.] they had there was, I had to compete for them at the end, you know.  They could get big salaries elsewhere.  I had to get the salaries up, to do that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 31726
Speaker 1: In 2008, under your leadership, [North Carolina] A and T [Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] secures an NSF [National Science Foundation] grant to create an Engineering Research Center.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Now, that's the hallmark of a top-notch engineering program.  That was, turned out to be the first African American historically black college to get an ERC, Engineering Research Center.  And that's going strong.  We do bio-engineering there.  And what we do is, for example, we have a lot of international faculty, and so forth.  What happens there is we produce a material that can make heart stents, or any place you put it in the human body, and grow, just like we get your DNA [deoxyribonucleic acid] sample and make some material that will grow in your body, Mr. [Larry] Crowe's [interviewer for The HistoryMaker] body.  And then at the--rather than going back in there replacing that--as the material dissipated, it could be eliminated through normal bodily functions.  You wouldn't have to re-do--And this worked very, very well.  For some reason in India, they have a lot of youngsters born with cleft palates.  They required multiple--they do surgery on them, and as they grew, they have to do another one.  Well, with this material, that would grow, and they wouldn't have to do another facial thing.  Now, we haven't gotten--that was in 1988 that we set that up.  But we haven't got--the FDA [U.S. Food and Drug Administration]--we're close to FDA approval on this in this country.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So is it approved in other countries?
Speaker 2: Well, yes.  India is working in it, and Germany, they're using it.  But our FDA is a little more stringent.  But they've made a couple of presentations this year to the FDA.  They may be ready to go.  That's one place we ought to swing by (laughter).  You'd get another trip down here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, that would be a story.
Speaker 1: Now, yeah, it certainly would.
Speaker 2: Yes, for somebody.
Story_ID: 31727
Speaker 1: Well, now what about mentorship there [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Well, we created a program where--what happened was I kind of looked back at how I was mentored along the way.  See, the [U.S.] Air Force Academy [Colorado Springs, Colorado] has, it's an undergraduate institution.  I picked a guy up at Boulder [Colorado] who was doing research in my area, and I'd go up there in the summer.  The first summer I was like his post doc, although I was probably his age, or older.  I worked with the doctoral students.  And pretty soon, I was getting papers out of that, and doing it all.  So, here, when I bring a young faculty member on from one of these programs I sponsored in the end, I would put him with one of the senior professors.  He'd be a post doc the first couple of years.  But by the time he was ready for tenure, he'd have a lot of publications.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the mentorship I was talking about there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I talked to other HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] about that.
Speaker 1: Now, [North Carolina] A and T [Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] offers, does it offer a graduate degree?
Speaker 2: All the Ph.D.s in all the classical engineering, including bio-engineering.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you've got a Ph.D. program here?
Speaker 2: In all the classical engineering and in computer science.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, alright.  So, and those started in the '80s?
Speaker 2: No, it happened while I was there, but I didn't start it, and I had to start before I got--but--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It came to fruition while I was the dean, for the ten, during my ten year span.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: I just pushed it and worked with the chancellor in getting it through the UNC [University of North Carolina] system.  And I was instrumental in doing that, because I spent time at the system when I came to North Carolina.
Story_ID: 31728
Speaker 1: Now, you served on the Board of Directors for Computing at NASA [national Aeronautics and Space Administration], too?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: For five years.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And I served on the board here in North Carolina for ten years, the board that governs the practice of engineering.  Is that there?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's kind of, I--
Speaker 2: The board that governs the practice of engineering and land survey.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: For ten years, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Did you use the geomatics?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the geometrics was a big part of that.  I could work with those guys and talk to them about what they were doing, and could see how they were practicing.
Story_ID: 31729
Speaker 1: Now, you retired in 2009?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: And who took your place [as dean of the College of Engineering at North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Linda Krueger.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: Not Linda, Robin Krueger.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know you mentioned her before.
Speaker 2: Don't you tell her I called her Linda.
Speaker 1: I won't tell her.  If she doesn't see this, she'll never know.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)
Speaker 1: So, so what would you consider to be your major accomplishments at North Carolina A and T?  You know--
Speaker 2: I think upping the standards for the education of the engineer and the scientist.  I think that would be my major accomplishment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because, I say that because it's measurable.  When I came, they were passing the Fundamentals of Engineering exam at about 20-something percent rate.  I got it up to above--the national average is over 60 [percent].  Ours went to the 90s after four years and lots of fighting with the faculty.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I wonder where it is now.
Speaker 1: Well, where is it now?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I'll tell you what.  Before we eclipsed State [North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina] and the University of Charlotte, they used to publish it annually in the news, all the news [newspapers]--News and Record, the Charlotte--Raleigh News and Observer, the Charlotte News and Observer--and Raleigh, whatever their major paper is.  Once we overtook them, they stopped publishing it for, some strange reason.  Maybe it was no longer news.
Speaker 1: Maybe everybody knew, that's when they figured--
Speaker 2: It wasn't newsworthy.
Speaker 1: Right, maybe that's it.  But, and so, so you got the [Engineering] Research Center.  That's got to be--
Speaker 2: The ERC is big, that's big.  That was really, but that just happened under my watch.  And the other stuff, too.  But I had a hand in there, and God was blessing me because, the faculty didn't want to do it.  But I had a provost who supported it, and we just put it on them, you know.  Usually things come through the faculty, they have control.  I didn't (unclear) them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And when you came over from the [U.S.] Air Force Academy [Colorado Springs, Colorado]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --I mean, you, were you--you had already had some administrative experience as a--
Speaker 2: Yes, I had administrative experiences in the dean's office, so I knew how the problems were.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 31730
Speaker 1: So, now we always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I hope that we will start to live up to our God-given talents a little bit more.  I don't think many of us realize our God-given potential.  Because I see so many youngsters as I drive through the neighborhoods here, out there pounding the basketball, beating the basketball.  And they, some of them, some small number go on to college and play basketball.  And I'm not knocking basketball or football, because I like it as much as anyone.  But I just don't think a lot of our young men are living up to their potential.  I would like to see that.  And that's going to take an elaborate measuring scheme to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any other hopes or concerns?
Speaker 2: Well, I just hope that they'll live up to their God-given potential, and more will divorce the notion of being a Muslim, and come on over and be a Christian so I can see them in heaven.
Speaker 1: So, you think religion is really the issue?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I think, I think parenting and a whole host of things that I don't want to go into.
Story_ID: 31731
Speaker 1: But I look back, I harken back, and I fail to mention my wife [Sallie Monroe] and my sons [Joseph Monroe, Jr. and Robert Bruce Monroe].  I think the thing that's--we haven't even mentioned--but all the accomplishments I talked about after 1962, I had my wife supporting me in the background.  And you don't ever want to take off and forget your ground crew.  But every--even including my going for the doctorate.  I explained to her what it would be like.  She supported that.  And once I came out of the doctorate, she didn't support this.  The three-star general called me and said, "Joe, you have everything we're looking for to be an astronaut, because you can fly the airplane and you've got the Ph.D.  You'd be an excellent."  And I was so happy on the way to tell her that I was going to be an astronaut.  She said, "No."  Our oldest son then, it was about time to start playing baseball.  And earlier that summer--this is an interesting story about him.  When we were finishing up--okay, I forgot to mention this, too.  My wife went to more than bridge and golf--bridge and bowling--the second tour.  We were able to hire someone to take care of our younger son who came on the scene.  And she went and got a master's degree at Texas A and M [Agricultural and Mechanical University, College Station, Texas], in reading.  And the boys and I, well, I finished up like April.  And see, they had, the scheme there was once--so you didn't how, you know--a lot of kids didn't know when they were going to finish their doctorate.  Most people who left the [U.S.] Air Force Academy [Colorado Springs, Colorado], they had, we had two years to get our degrees.  If they didn't finish in that time, they'd come back, and we had to teach the load.  And they would do research, finish their dissertations there the next year.  So, they, everybody assumed, including Roger Bate, that when I came back I had not finished.  He said, "Joe, how much you lack?"  I said, "I don't lack any, I've got my degree."  He said, "What!"  It shocked him.  Well, Texas A and M had a scheme.  When you got your research published in a national refereed journal, you'd finish.  You'd write that up.  That's your dissertation.  That's the hallmark.  But it's sometimes very, very difficult to get things in a refereed journal.  It just happens my area was very interesting to them and hit with somebody who read it, and said, "Hey, this is good stuff."  They gave me a few suggestions.  And this was, I had gone there in September of 1970.  This was late 1971 then.  My complexity stuff was published.  They said, "Clean this up a little bit."  And he had me doing things like helping to read journals.  And he was a referee--and show him things that he needed to pay attention to, to give the writer.  And so they published my stuff.  He said, "You're finished, just write it up now."  And this was like January or so of 1972.  So, I had until May to get it wrapped up.  So I was my own typist, (laughter) and knocked it out.  So, I, we had a lady who came and cleaned up and did things, because my wife had waited until the second year to get started on her master's in reading.  So, I'd take the boys out to the pool everyday and put these life vests on them, and I'd lay back and had a good time.  So, we got to the [U.S. Air Force] Academy.  That summer my son was in a summer program.  He told the counselor that he could swim.  He jumped in the deep end (laughter).  The counselor saw him flailing around.  She had to pull him out.  She thought he'd be fine.  She came home and told my wife, said, "Hey don't frighten him but you need to--he thought he could swim, but he can't."  So I came home and night, and at the dinner table he said, "Dad, I almost drowned today." (laughter)  He was laughing at it.  I took him over that night to the pool.  He learned that night how to stroke away.  See, he had been supported by that life vest.  So--but I started that--because I came home and told her about General Talman telling me how he wanted to put me in the astronaut program.  She said, "No, you need to be with the boys some, now."  So, I told him.  He was shocked when I told him, 'No, I can't do it, but I know a guy from A and T who could."  Ron [McNair; physicist and NASA astronaut, who died during the launch of the Space Shuttle Challenger on mission STS-51-L] wanted to be an astronaut the worse way in the world.  And you know, as fate would have it, Ron perished on the Challenger.  That would have been Monroe on the Challenger.  So, you got to remember your ground crew.
Story_ID: 31732
Speaker 1: So, you said, now you have two sons?
Speaker 2: Two sons.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your sons, and what they're doing.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Jay Jay [Joseph Monroe, Jr.] was born at the end of 1964, and I went off to grad [graduate] school in 1965.  And he was really coordinated, very--he was born like at the end of December in 1964.  We got him a tricycle for his birthday in 1965, but we got it like in August, and assumed that he wouldn't know, so we just gave it to him.  He was riding that before he was one year old, well coordinated.  And so, he was--
Speaker 1: That is something.
Speaker 2: He was really awesome in terms of his coordination, and his thinking ability.  So, we, while we were at Texas A and M [Agricultural and Mechanical University, College Station, Texas], in that summer, my wife [Sallie Monroe] had some iron pills she used to put in the cupboard above the stove.  There was no way that he could reach that.  So, he had a two-stage problem.  He pulled a chair over and climbed in the chair, and climbed up on the stove and got the iron tablets.  A big mouthful, they didn't taste good.  So he called her.  (laughter)  She saw that.  But he went on to be a very, very bright young fellow.  He just didn't want to apply himself very much.  He played ice hockey in high school and baseball, and he went to the Air Force Academy, didn't like it.  I let him come out of there, and he went to the University of Colorado, played golf.  And he studied computers.  Didn't graduate with a computer science degree, graduated with a psychology degree, but he understood it.  Worked for all the professors on the campus, and finally got into IBM [International Business Machines], in their database scheme.  And about two years back, IBM picked thirteen people worldwide as their database experts, and he was one of those.  And he is doing very, very well in terms of his profession, and earning money and living the life.  He had, he works out of his home.  Whenever they have a problem anywhere in the world, he will try to solve it by phone.  If he can't, he will go on site for a week or two.  And most of these guys are from India and China that he works with.  They sometimes have to meet together when they take over a huge function, and the database gets complex.  The younger one was born in 1967.  He was ordinary, and they came on through the system.  The older one started riding then a dirt bike.  Well, that's how, that was, they got something significant about him.  When he was nine years old, we were living on the [U.S.] Air Force Academy [Colorado Springs, Colorado].  He wanted a dirt bike.  I said, "Oh yeah, if you, you know, the problem is I'll get you one, but you won't be able to ride it until you pass the licensing exam."  (laughter)  So, he wanted me to take him to the safety office to get--they had an Air Force regulation about that thick.  I had to carry it out.  The sergeant said, "Don't let him mess my thing up.  Now they're high school kids, they can't pass that."  Well, while my wife was in reading, he was her subject.  She had to do all these tests, so he'd be testing, tested to death.  So, he read through that book in about two months.  And said, "Dad, I want to go back and take the exam."  I said, "Don't waste the sergeant's time, now, you know, he--." I took him back and lo and behold, he passed.  I had no idea that dirt bikes cost about a thousand dollars.  I thought maybe a hundred dollars.  So, but I couldn't get out of it.  So, that fall they had an auction.  I got him one for about $800.  And he started riding that up and down the dirt trails, and so forth.  The younger came on, and by that time we'd moved off the academy.  He was just ordinary.  He didn't have to pass the exam, because we lived out on a golf course across the street from the academy.  And I was gone someplace with the golf team or the football team, or some team that I was tutoring.  And he popped his clutch, and his bike was so heavy they couldn't lift it up on the rack to put it on the car to take it to the shop.  So they said, "Mom, just go get us the manual." (laughter)  Went and got the manual, and she and those boys put a clutch on that bike.  And he rode it out of there, rode for about five years and sold it, and that clutch was still operating.  I couldn't put a clutch on a dirt bike to save me, if I had to. (laughter)
Speaker 1: So now this is--you got one son, you say is a--
Speaker 2: He's a database administrator for IBM.
Speaker 1: IBM.
Speaker 2: The younger one is a colonel in the [U.S.] Air Force.  He's waiting for general.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Coming to (unclear) this summer.
Speaker 1: Do you want to give us their names?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Joseph Monroe, Jr. and Robert Bruce Monroe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, Robert Bruce--
Speaker 2: Is the colonel in the Air Force.
Speaker 1: Is there a story behind the name Robert Bruce?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My grandfather was named Bob, or Robert, and my wife's father was named Bruce.  So, there's the story.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: And, you know Joseph.
Story_ID: 31733
Speaker 1: So, now when you look back at everything you've done to this point, again, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could change it?
Speaker 2: I'd probably listen a little more to my wife [Sallie Monroe].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what today do you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Legacy?  I'm still looking for my legacy.  I think, I think though, my legacy really is--and I've gotten into this.  This hasn't been mentioned.  I'm surprised that I've gone this long without mentioning it.  We have a Bible training center here that teaches men how to be better church workers in their church.  And I'm a discussion leader with them.  I've been that for twelve years now.  But I've learned how to do something called homiletics.  That is, read a book in the Bible and synthesize it like they do in the seminary school.  They're taught from that.  I think if I had to do something all over again, I would probably be the teaching--they offered me an opportunity to be the teaching leader in that, and I turned them down.  But I would jump at that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what's the name of your church?
Speaker 2: My church is the Cathedral of His Glory.  But this program is operated at any church that has the capacity to sponsor it.  Let me just give you some of the statistics.  In the Greensboro [North Carolina] area, we have 500 women meeting on Monday night, we have 500 meeting on Thursday, and we have over 100 meeting on Wednesday, and we have a similar thing in High Point.  We have a couple hundred meeting over there, women.  The men draw men from Greensboro, High Point [North Carolina], Winston-Salem [North Carolina], and Danville, Virginia.  And we have just over 200 men in the men's training.  And we go, we take a book of the Bible and spend nine months synthesizing it and tearing it upside down.  We've gone through every book now but Revelations and we're going to do that in two years.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So, I've learned the Bible upside down and outwards.  I need to practice it a little more.
Story_ID: 31734
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as one who tried to live the best life he knew how, in terms of following God's practices and principles.  The best father, the best husband, the best servant of God I could possibly be.  Because everything I've talked about, everything that's happened to me has been totally directed by God and my wife [Sallie Monroe].  God directed my wife, and she directed me, everything that's happened since 1962.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 31735
Speaker 1: On the caption, now what date is on that caption, on the plaque down there?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it's--
Speaker 1: 2000--?
Speaker 2: 2010.
Speaker 1: 2010?  (Indistinct conversation) Yeah, that's a gathering of the professors there that I served with at the [U.S.] Air Force Academy [Colorado Springs, Colorado].  Okay.  And that's when I became a permanent professor at the Air Force Academy.  And there's a family picture sharing that.
Speaker 2: Okay, do you know the approximate date?
Speaker 1: Ooh, 1976.  (laughter)  Sallie, who's that with you there?  Come tell me who that is.
Speaker 2: Sallie Monroe: Oh, that's the Bible Study fellowship, and that's the girl who was going to India.  She was at that time the assistant teaching leader, and she was going to India to serve.
Speaker 1: Okay, now that's in the computer with the cadets there.  Can you tell that?  That's the one I was looking for there while I was gone.  That's the one that's in the computer room with the cadets.
Speaker 2: About what year was that?
Speaker 1: About 1974.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)  That's my son Bruce there.
Speaker 2: Bruce Monroe?
Speaker 1: Yes.  And that's a picture there when I became a permanent professor.  And that's the family at the time, the two boys and our niece, Beverly.
Speaker 2: From left to right, can you name--
Speaker 1: Yes, that's Bruce down in the lower right-hand corner, Beverly and Jay Jay-Joseph [Monroe], Jr.--and that's yours truly on the right.  And the queen of the deal, in the center, Sallie, S-A-L-L-I-E.  And there's the full permanent professor picture with the badge and all.  There's another picture of my bride and I.  Ooh, there's, that's a picture at Texas A and M [Agricultural and Mechanical University, College Station, Texas] where they set up a chair in my honor.  They established an endowed chair at Texas A and M.  What year was that, Sallie, 2010?  2010.  Same one, the computer science department.  There's, and that little girl down there is Daphne.
Speaker 2: That's the same picture there?
Speaker 1: The same one, I believe.  That's Daphne and her cousin there.  Daphne is the one on the right, dancer, high kick.
Speaker 2: That's your granddaughter?
Speaker 1: Granddaughter there.  KU Jay Hawk coming up.
Speaker 2: And what's her cousin's name?
Speaker 1: Her cousin is Kendra.
Speaker 2: Sallie Monroe:  Kandra.
Speaker 1: And from left to right?
Speaker 2: Bruce, Jay Jay [Joseph Monroe, Jr.], Sallie, Joe.  Jay Jay on the right, and Bruce on the left.  That's their best faces (laughter).  Alright, that's the queen on the left, the king on the right.  That's our wedding picture, 1962.  That's a family portrait, I don't know what year--Jay Jay, Joseph, Sallie and Bruce.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (Unintelligible).
Speaker 2: Got the castle.  It's the site of my birthplace.  Of course, we're no longer living there.  That was like the late '80s [1980s].  Now they've completely torn it down.  Can you imagine that?  A nice castle like that, they take it down. (laughter)
Speaker 1: I can imagine a light windstorm tearing it down.
Speaker 2: Something took it out. (laughter)
