Story_ID: 91060
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The History Makers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Sister Constance E. Murphy, SSJD, Sister of St. John the Divine, Toronto [Canada] is our mother house.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I was born in Baltimore [Maryland].
Speaker 1: Right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --in 1904.
Speaker 1: Okay. And you are a sister of St. John the Divine?
Speaker 2: I'm a sister, I'm the oldest sister.  In a few months, I'll be, I'll be 100.
Story_ID: 91061
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Can you...before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we normally ask and they just require a brief answer, and the first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food?
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 2: No, though I come from a caterer's family and I know good, very good food.  I enjoy my food and we have a good dietician in our sisterhood, so we have very balanced diet, but I have no favorite food.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Color?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: No, this color is a lovely blue and the habit--the sisters--all the sisters wore black, so I just simply--we had a choice.  When I came in, we all wore this habit, black, a black dress for (unclear) beginning and a black habit and white veil for novice, a beginner so the habit is a habit that the mother founders designated.  It's a bit of unusual because the color of the habit has changed and the style, which is true of nearly all of the religious orders.  They all changed their habits, so they're more practical because you can do all kinds of work.
Speaker 1: But you do like blue as a color?
Speaker 2: I like this.  This is French blue, I like it, and I suppose, and we had--it was a pinafore, a habit that we put on, put your hands through sleeves and button it in the back, and it was a shade of blue--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Alright. Okay.
Speaker 2: --because we had schools and they felt--we looked like a witch.
Speaker 1: Oh, and [Laughter]
Speaker 2: Some children, even today, when--I don't ever go up to a small child.  They'll cringe or sometimes cry or run.  Most Roman Catholic children know nuns very, very well and feel very comfortable.  The sisters in habit, the (unclear) orders are not so well known, and also we have--the sisters in our order, we're wearing in (unclear) now, but it is reserved, it's not flamboyant, bright colors.  I'm one of the few sisters who wear the traditional habit of our mother founders, black.  This is called a scapula; it's like an apron, black cap and black veil.
Speaker 1: Now, ma'am, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: No, I like the weather in Canada, particular the fourteen years that I taught in the west, where we had deep snow and cold.  No, I have no particular time in the winter.
Speaker 1: Okay, you particularly like the deep snow and the cold?
Speaker 2: Yes, very much.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I send out periodically to stay--I worked there for 14 years and ended up being the head mistress of school, but we don't--we eat what's given to us and we meet frequently, meet daily, of course, really, but we are cultivate what the majority like, but the habit, I would say basically we all wear a habit, not lay clothes greatly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Vacation?
Speaker 1: Yeah, vacation destination?
Speaker 2: We have a summer house.  Do you know Canada?
Speaker 1: Somewhat.
Speaker 2: Area called Muskoka in the north--we have a lovely rest house.
Speaker 1: Can you spell Muskoka for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, M-u-s-k-o-k-a.  It is in the northern part of Ontario, the providence of Ontario.  The place is on the lake and ever since--we've always had a summer place for the sisters to go for the holidays for many, many years.  We rented a cottage up in Muskoka and later on when the family died or began to die, they gave us, they turned the cottage over to us, right on the lake.
Story_ID: 91062
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Small lake.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you now, let me ask you about your family.  How far back can you trace your family?
Speaker 2: I wish I'd had known about this.  Actually I am a,  my father's name was Murphy, my judge brother who just died were Murphys on the father's side, Murphys, on the mother's side, we were Howards, an old Maryland family, and we go back a good long way, a good number of years.  I never bothered particularly the early life of our sisterhood.  Of course, in the very, very early days, they were slaves, but we accepted ourselves and we had lovely grandparents, and lovely grand grandparents, but way back, before 1800, there were slaves, we had nothing to do with it.  They just were.
Speaker 1: Were there slaves in Baltimore [Maryland]?
Speaker 2: No, outside Baltimore, in Howard County and some of them were named "Howard," some of them took the name.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories that pass down through your family on either side about the days of slavery or any incidences that took place?
Speaker 2: Yes, there are.  We have a Howard--can't think of the Canadian name--we have a reunion every other year in Baltimore--or outside of Baltimore every other year in Canada, particularly in a town where slaves escaping from the United States crossed the Detroit River and were--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --oh in a channel?
Speaker 2: No, underground railroad.
Speaker 1: But that's Chatham, Canada Ontario, where they Buxton and that area?
Speaker 2: Yes, that area; and we meet every other year and we enjoy one another very much.  We met this year--no, just the past year, and we meet every other year and have a delightful gathering, 3000, 4000, or 5000.
Speaker 1: 3000, 4000, or 5000?
Speaker 2: Oh no, just a minute.  Well, we represent--our family is spread out all over Canada.  And suppose it is in the thousands right across Canada, and we enjoy the leadership of the Howard.  One reason I'm here now is that my cousin and I are going to write about my grandmother, Martha Elizabeth Howard, a lovely, lovely person, and I think she was about the 7th generation.  And we're hoping to get some stories and material from her, about her.
Story_ID: 91063
Speaker 1: Ma'am, did the Howards escape to Canada?  Is that why there are so many in Canada?  Did they escape slavery and move to Canada?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, our forebears.
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how they escaped?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: There is no story?
Speaker 2: Yes, there are stories, and we all have books about them, but I've never actually read--actually my cousin and I are going to go down to our grandmother's--to our family's archives, Afro-Americans, and our grandmother gave the first $500.00 to her husband to buy a printing press and she was a very, very fine person, Martha Elizabeth Howard, and nearly all of the girls, of us, have Elizabeth in our name, middle name, all of us, Francis Elizabeth, Martha Elizabeth, Sarah Elizabeth.  Many of us have that name.  We have a great devotion to her.
Speaker 1: Now, that's your great grandmother?
Speaker 2: No, our grandmother.
Speaker 1: Your grandmother.
Speaker 2: We knew about our great grandmother, but the grandmother that we knew--I, of all the children, daughters, I'm the oldest Howard grandchild, and I knew Martha Elizabeth Howard, and Martha Elizabeth Murphy helped him to buy the first printing press.
Speaker 1: What was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: John Henry Howard.  John H.
Speaker 1: John Henry.
Speaker 2: And his wife gave him or lent him the first $500.00 to buy a printing press and we haven't succeeded in getting much information about her, Martha Elizabeth.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he started with--John H. Howard started the printing press?
Speaker 2: No, John H. Murphy.
Speaker 1: Oh, Murphy, okay, so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --she first helped him to buy printing press.
Speaker 1: All right, so John H. Murphy--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --John H. Murphy--
Speaker 1: --took the press and he developed that eventually into the newspaper of the Afro-American.
Speaker 2: Afro-American, yes.
Speaker 1: What year was that?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I have to think about it.
Speaker 1: Well, we can find out.  That's published a lot in the family (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so that's in the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --there's a paper around here somewhere. It's in the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, sure. Well, we don't have to worry about it right this minute, but it was in the 19th century, right, when they found it?
Speaker 2: 19th century.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 91064
Speaker 1: You knew both your grandparents, you say?
Speaker 2: Knew them well, very well, and my father was the first boy, yes, and he was devoted to his mother.
Speaker 1: Yes, now I'm going to ask you about your parents individually.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right now, I wanted you maybe to reflect on your grandparents on some level.  What was your grandfather like?
Speaker 2: Grandfather Murphy because I knew all four of my grandparents?
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, let's start one at a time.  Let's start with--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Grandpa Murphy.
Speaker 1: --Grandpa Murphy and then Martha Elizabeth--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Martha Elizabeth was his wife.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, let's start with him.  What was he like?
Speaker 2: Well, he limped because he was injured in the Civil War.  He was short.  I mean he wasn't very, very, very tall.  He walked with a limp.  He was a bit autocratic, which never greatly bothered me because I knew all four of our grandparents, and our father and mother loved their parents, so there was a devotion and an obedience and nothing harsh, but he was very strict.  He used to take three newspaper, "The Philadelphia Enquirer" and the--I've forgotten, but he took three newspapers, "The Chicago Defender," something like that, and nobody could look at those papers until he--when they came, they were put in his office, which he called a "den."  He was a bit sort of an autocratic.  He was an editor, and he was--he had ideas, and they didn't greatly bother me because, to my mind, he deserved it.  He was sort of the head of the family, so he was the editor and this sister--this person here, her father followed grandpa Murphy.  He was called, "Grandpa Murphy," and he was a real newspaper man.
Speaker 1: Now, grandpa Murphy, was he born in slavery, himself?
Speaker 2: Yes, but he fought in the Civil War, and, of course, he attained citizenship.
Speaker 1: Did you know--did he talk about where he fought in the Civil War?
Speaker 2: A little bit--a little bit, but we were more interested in his early years with concern newspaper writing.  His wife lent him the first money to buy a printing press.
Speaker 1: Now, had he been a writer prior to purchasing the printing press.
Speaker 2: Yes because he edited a little church paper.  It was a Sunday school paper.  He was very proud. It had mostly church news, but it also Bible studies--Bible material in it, and when I came along, I was born in 1904, and the newspaper was founded in--you've got the date there I think.
Speaker 1: 1892.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 91065
Speaker 1: But he was a definite pioneer.  He was strict.  We were a little bit afraid of him.  He played an excellent game of croquet and periodically he took one of us with him.  He played an excellent game of chess, so I remember him as he wasn't terribly tall, but he was meticulous.  He was always meticulously dressed.  I never saw him in any clothes that printer would be wearing.  He was always the "editor" all the time I knew him.  I was born in 1904 and the paper was getting well established.  He was definitely the leader--definitely the head of the house.  Just one second--my grandmother was not afraid of him, but she had great respect for him, and they considered one another, but he ran the business, the house and the children too, but they were a team, but he was definitely in charge.  We are a bit afraid of him.  I mean we stood in awe of him.
Speaker 2: Now, when did he pass?
Speaker 1: I have to think of it when he died--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Okay--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I went to his funeral.  It was at Bethel Church, so it would be in the 18--leave it for me to find out.
Speaker 2: Okay, we won't worry about the date.
Speaker 1: 1800s.
Speaker 2: Well, it was in the 1900s actually, it would have to be, but tell me do you have any idea why they called the paper, "The Afro-American?"
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: You don't?
Speaker 1: No, I have no idea where the name came from except that I think knowing him and the times, they wanted a paper that would command respect and that it was both inheriting black and white.  We were of African origin and also of the United States of America.  Although we were not--well it was called Afro and American.  Both of those terms together constituted our proper place in this country, where we live in a country that is both white and colored, and so he wanted Afro-American--he didn't want to hide our African background nor our American participation.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was bit strict, sort of, and my grandmother, he and my grandmother were a team.
Story_ID: 91066
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about your grandmother?
Speaker 2: My grandmother?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Martha Elizabeth.
Speaker 2: We just loved her.
Speaker 1: Now, where was she born?
Speaker 2: Howard County.
Speaker 1: Howard County, Maryland.
Speaker 2: Yes, Howard County, Maryland.  That's why every year now we have a reunion, first in the United States and then in Canada.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --I'm sorry.  Some of the Howards escaped to Canada out of slavery then?
Speaker 2: Yes, fled.
Speaker 1: Fled.
Speaker 2: And her (unclear).  I wish I would have bought that little--I've got a little clipping that my father gave us all about background--she was at Howard, and the story I like best is that when times became very hard, for some reason or other, one of our Howard forebears had it within his power to buy the mother house--I mean the very house in which the Howards resided.
Speaker 1: The white Howards?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: He had, he had, it was in his power to buy it because he was a good farmer and he owned nearly a thousand acres, 900 something acres, but he wouldn't buy it.  He could have bought it and he lent them money to keep them from going bankrupt--the father--sort of the master or the realm or whatever he was called.  She was very gentle and all of her children loved her, her sons, and her daughters, and her grandchildren.  She was very interested in getting children from Howard County to come down to Baltimore [Maryland] so they could get a good education, and so she found women--different women, white and colored, who would like to have a girl, and she would come and live with them and do a little chores and things and go to school from there, and would be looked after by them, the person--I mean and a number of girls came from Howard County, and Mrs. Martha Elizabeth Murphy--they were in her care, and that's when she raised the money to build a YWCA, Young Women's Christian Association and that was her baby.  She raised money, and when the white YWCA wasn't about embrace her cause of bringing girls from the country to Baltimore.  She, herself, gave little tea parties on Sunday and so forth with nickels and quarters, she raised enough money to buy a house, so she bought a house for the first Young Women's Christian--colored Christian Association and it was called, Druid Hill  Avenue branch.  At first, it was called, "The Colored,"  but she said that none of the branches of the YWCA were called "white" or "colored," they were named for the street in which they were, and she wasn't about to make any change, so it was the Druid Hill Avenue Branch.
Speaker 1: Druid Hill?
Speaker 2: Druitt Hill.
Speaker 1: D-R-U-I-D.
Speaker 2: Druid Hill Avenue Branch and it was well run, and she it was owned by colored people; and she raised most of the money.  She was a very helpful person, very kind.
Story_ID: 91067
Speaker 1: And my father, her first son, was devoted to her; and I think we probably--we were at her funeral.  We were with her when she died.  That was the first time we ever saw our father cry.  She had a great many friends, and she helped any number of people.  She always found ways to help, and her house was just about two or three blocks from the house that she bought as was the YWCA, so she was in and out, in and out very, very much and her two brothers, John H. Howard and Green Berry Howard, those names were names of her forebears too.  And in her time when she was growing up, she was allowed to keep what's called the "egg money."  She and some of her sisters and friends used to look after the chickens and had the care of them, and sold eggs, turkey eggs, duck eggs, geese eggs; and they took them to market and sold them.  And they had the money, so she learned to handle money wisely.  And she was generous--and she was--Well I was devoted to her.  My father was the first son and she was devoted to him too.  And I the summer, we would all packed up, and my grandmother came around to lock up our house, cover the pictures, cover the chairs and all and then we went up to Gaithersburg [Maryland], where the Howard house was and we stayed there for a while, but as we grew, there was a neighbor's house called, the Prathers and they had a large house, but when their children grew up, they had a lot of space.
Story_ID: 91181
Speaker 1: You said that your grandparents entertained quite a bit.
Speaker 2: Well, not exactly entertained, but they had--they would have them for a meal, and because I can remember she had good, lovely, linen tablecloths and silver services.  My grandfather also used to buy things in auctions, so he bought pictures, vases, and silver service unit, tea pot, coffee pot, creme and sugar and all that, so they had two silver services.  I can remember them well, and they were beautiful.  He had bought them at auction.  So my grandpa--my grandfather was a well-known citizen and people visited him, and they would stay for a meal.  So she beautiful linen tablecloths and beautiful silver and beautiful flat silver, not flamboyant, but she--people were welcome to come, not to stay for tea, but to stay for dinner, so she frequently had dinner--important men--mostly men and my grandmother always had a girl to help her to cook.  And she was very gracious, and she loved all of us as grandchildren, particularly us seven because we were the children of her oldest son, and he taught summer school--every summer, he taught summer school, but before he taught summer school, he packed us all of us up, and we went up to Howard County [Maryland], where his mother and grandparents, and great grandparents lived, and then he stayed with my grandmother.  He stayed at her house on Druitt Hill and she just loved it.  Of course, he was her favorite son, so he didn't take many holidays.  My other grandfather, my mother's father traveled extensively, but my grandfather Murphy didn't.  She went up to Howard County.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, do you remember some of the men that would frequent your grandparent's home?
Speaker 2: No, except Booker T. Washington.
Speaker 1: Well, that's important.
Speaker 2: Well, all the--mostly, they were newspaper men, Chicago Defender, Philadelphia Enquirer.
Speaker 1: Robert Abbott.
Speaker 2: Abbott, yes.  I remember that she--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: What about Timothy Thomas Fortune, was he there?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't really know -- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --New York (unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --but I know that frequently my grandmother had guests and she always had the lovely linen and good, lovely silver and all.  And she was--she was--they came for dinner and they talked, but she didn't--as I remember, sometimes we had lunch with them too.  We didn't talk, of course, much, but the idea was she brought men from all over the United States in the newspaper business to visit our grandfather.
Speaker 1: Did you remember John Edwards Bruce by any chance or Ida B. Wells?
Speaker 2: There is a little--maybe my cousin has a little book that has all the editors in our time on it.  "The Chicago Defender," "The Philadelphia Enquirer," "North of Journal Guide," but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: "Cleveland Gazette?"
Speaker 2: I beg your pardon.
Speaker 1: "Cleveland Gazette."
Speaker 2: I don't remember Cleveland.  Most of the people I knew were from this area, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, but she was--she entertained not lavishly; and, of course, she always had a girl, had someone to do the cooking because very often he brought home guests, very often; and they talked.  And he had a room that he called, "the den."  My father had a room called, "the den," and it was like a private room that--but there were frequently visitors and they stayed for meals and were welcomed.  They talked about the newspaper business.  He also loved to play croquet very much and he took me also to see plays of [William] Shakespeare.  We didn't go terribly often because you had to sit in the gallery.  And he said sometimes you have to put your pride in your pocket because he wanted us to see Shakespeare, and he periodically took us, but we had to sit in the gallery.
Story_ID: 91182
Speaker 1: Now, can you tell us about your father?  Can you give us his full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: George Benjamin.  How do you spell Benjamin?
Speaker 1: B-E-N-J-A-M-I-N.  Okay.
Speaker 2: --M-I-N.  George Benjamin Murphy, he was devoted to his mother.  He was the first son, and a great, humble, modest benefactor.  One of our saddest things is that not too long ago, the George B. Murphy homes were torn down.  They were not too, too far from here, the George B. Murphy homes, but they weren't taken care of, and they shouldn't have had children in a home that had elevators--but there is a home name--but he was a great school teacher--a great principal.
Speaker 1: George B. Murphy homes, are they public housing?
Speaker 2: They were called "George B. Murphy Home," they were tore down last year.
Speaker 1: Were they public housing?
Speaker 2: Yes, public housing, much to our sorrow.  Some of us would like very much if they could rebuilt.  There was a school named for his father, "George (unclear) Murphy Public School," and there was a school for my aunt Francis, Aunt Frank, Aunt Francis, so there were three Murphy schools--well, four when you count Uncle Carl's buildings out in Morgan Park, but our father was a great principal--a great principal--large school.  He taught day school, night school, and summer school.  He had seven children.  There is a joke about Mr. Murphy.  He has the largest family of any principal in the city.  Of course, he had seven of us, then he a very large, Robert Brown Elliot School, and he was very proud of it.  As I said, he taught day school, night school and summer school purposely because lending his school for night school meant many people--poor people could get a proper education.  He was very gentle, and not greatly talkative, not greatly demonstrative, but a good, good father.  My mother was devoted to her father.  He was caterer and his secretary as well as his daughter, but my father belonged to the YMCA and Provident Hospital, and the Urban League, and the you name it, so he went to meetings, a great many meetings.  And he was interested in people.  And some of the things that were in the paper about my brother, William, and his regard for people he got honestly from our father.  And he was slight of stature and he wasn't demonstrative, but he was faithful, and he was prompt to meetings, and he was regular for meetings, and he presided.  He was a Presbyterian.  We were Anglicans, but my mother was Presbyterian, and so but he went with his mother, my dear grandmother, to the Presbyterian Church and my aunt Francis, Frankie, he was named after her too.  So he was a great churchman, and he was soft spoken, and he sat on a great many committees, and he worked.  He didn't just sit on the committee.  He worked.  As I said, he taught day school, night school and summer school.  He used to say he had to have them because he had seven children to bring up.  That was his little joke, sort of.  And every summer, he packed us all up with his mother and up to the country we went, and he came up on Friday afternoon, and he went home Sunday afternoon, but he stayed with her during the summer, but he sat on a great many committees, and he worked on a great many committees.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We were very proud of our father.  We were very proud of him, but he was most humble, but he sat on a great many committees.
Story_ID: 91183
Speaker 1: He [her father, George Murphy] was a, he was a school teacher or principal?
Speaker 2: He was a school master.  He was called--he was a school master, and his school Robert Brown Elliot School and his children did well, and many of them went to university; and one thing he did was he would coach them in algebra.  He loved Algebra, and he used to coach them because if he coached them in Algebra, often when they moved from grade 8 to grade 9, where Algebra started, where they were taught--used Algebra, he had already taught them, any of the children that were going to the university, so that they never had to learn Algebra in grade 9.  They learned in grade 8 and they could get on ahead, but we were very fond.  He wasn't demonstrative, but he was good.  He was a devote Presbyterian and have you seen the papers at all about him because my brother, William, who died last week had many of his qualifications as a leader in this city, sat on committees and great helping people.  My grandfather, he was my mother's father, he was a caterer.  He helped too in another way, but my grandfather Murphy helped colored people and his work was with the Afro-American, called "The Afro."  He was--when I wanted to be a sister and he was Presbyterian and my mother was Episcopalian or Anglican, he didn't want me, but he didn't do anything against it.  My mother didn't want me to be a sister, but I just went anyhow because I wanted to.
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask you about that later.
Story_ID: 91184
Speaker 1: But can you tell us about your grandparents on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: They were Episcopalians.  They were not Baptists or Methodists and high church--both--I mean my mother was high church and her father, mother, and sisters, she lost three brothers to Scarlet fever or something like that, they were prominent caterers and made some money too.  They had a good clients--no, what's the word I want--customers, no that's not the word either--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --clientele?
Speaker 2: Yes, and they lived downtown in the shadow of George Washington's monument right downtown, Center Street, a large house, a large house because on the ground floor, where the kitchens, store rooms and all that, and then it was three and half stories in that house.  And they entertained too.  They entertained very graciously.  And one year they would entertain--he's my grandmother's age, and then the next year, they would entertain their daughter's age group.  So they entertained.  They shared their--and they had a lovely large home, not pompous, but they had a lovely, and the first floor--and they had three of four kitchens; and they were noted for their croquettes, Hughes croquettes, and they were delicious, and they were known in Washington [D.C.] and Baltimore.  And they had--he had some customers in Washington in the diplomatic world and so forth.  Very generous--both of my grandparents--both of my (unclear) grandparents were generous.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry; the last name is "Hughes," right?  Their--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I beg your pardon
Speaker 1: What was your grandfather's name, it was--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: --James William Hughes.
Speaker 1: James William Hughes and your grandmother?
Speaker 2: My grandma was Mary Rebecca Hughes.  Mary Rebecca Hughes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And she was from Baltimore.  My grandpa--my grandmother was from Howard County, but we were the first grandchildren, and we were loved, not petted or anything like that, but they loved us, and we--and my sister, and I, and brothers--when we were invited to our grandfather Hughes to dinner, every Sunday, a boy and a girl were invited to grandpa Hughes for dinner and it was just a lovely dinner; and he had two cooks, and one of them cooked on Sunday too, so we always had--so Rebecca and I, we were the two girls, and there were, of course, three boys at first and then four, so we invited to dinner, and we had to mind our manner.  We had to wear a pinafore so we wouldn't spoil our Sunday dresses.  My grandmother--my mother's mother was very, very strict.  She wasn't particularly affectionate, and we had to mind our manners; and they very often had guests to dinner, and, of course, it was catered because he had two cooks, and one of them cooked the Sunday dinner.  And they often guests on Sunday for dinner, fairly formal--fairly formal.  We were the first grandchildren, and we loved both sides.  My grandmother [Mary Elizabeth] Murphy, she hugged us.  My grandmother Hughes did not.  She told us that we had to wear pinafores and so forth, and not exactly cold, but not greatly affectionate--we had a lovely childhood because we had two grandparents--I mean two sets of grandparents, and they loved us.  And we were the first grandchildren on both sides.
Story_ID: 91185
Speaker 1: Now can you tell us about your mother?  Can you give us her full name?
Speaker 2: Grace Lee Hughes Murphy--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --and was she--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: --And she was much like her mother, a little distant, she didn't hug us.  She was very fond of her parents.  They all--on their side, the Hughes side, they lost three sons, and it must have been a great agony because they had--my grandfather had a great business--a great catering business and he needed sons.  My mother was her father's bookkeeper.  And she made--when customers came, she had a menu book, samples of dinners, and luncheons, and weddings, and confirmations.  And there was a lot of entertaining.  There was a lot of money in the catering.  There were five or six caterers, and one was Jewish, and all sort of denominations, and they had their own clientele and so forth.  My father was a devote Episcopalian and went to church every Sunday.  We didn't have pew rent.  You know pew rent?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Some churches had--had a pew where only their families sat, and they paid--this called "pew rent," and nobody sat in those pews but their family.  And my grandfather had two pews because he had five girls, and then all of us came along too, but both of our families were gave.  They gave themselves.  They gave money.  They gave food like you wouldn't believe, no food was wasted.  My grandfather even--one of the men on his staff made soap because they had a lot of fat, a lot of grease because their specialty was chicken croquettes and they were fried in deep fat, and so I remember my grandfather had three kitchens, and the third kitchen, there was a rack and there was bars of soap, soap, soap, soap because he didn't waste that fat.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --He made it into soap?
Speaker 2: --it was made into soap.  I beg your pardon.
Speaker 1: He actually made soap out of the fat that left over?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes and lye--fat and lye makes soap and there--and the cakes of soap--I could just see them now, and they stood along a fence.  And they were cut and they stood on the fence to dry.  And then there were small pieces, and he used to give soapy water in bottles, and there were two orphanages, well there were four orphanages in Baltimore, St. Catherine's (ph) Home, colored girls, St. Mary's boys for colored boys, there were St. Elizabeth, which was Roman Catholic and it was a municipal; and there was--I know there were four, Maryland Home for Friendless Colored Children, that was their title--Marly Home for Friendless Colored Children and they had 70 some orphans.  And my grandfather gave them a lot of help, you know, chicken wings, chicken bones, chicken water, and, of course, lettuce; all kinds of foods was not wasted.  He bought good food and made salads and desserts and this and the other.  And things were--they were very generous, even as a child, I realized that.  They didn't waste anything.  And they handled good food and good ingredients.  There were two large stores not too far.  One was called, "Harpermagore" (ph) and "Jordan Stabler," and they sold all kinds of sauces and special foreign flavoring and all, those two stores because he had a good--he didn't call them customers, but I forget, but--and he was very gentle, very soft voice, very fond of my mother.  And they were all fond of him.  We said if--my brother, George, made this up: if grandpa--if grandma Murphy had married grandpa Hughes, we would have been satisfied with one set of grandparents.  I don't know how we expected to have it but they were our favorites.  Our mother's father and our father's mother were our favorite grannies in all kinds of ways.  And we were the first grandchildren.  So we had a lovely childhood.
Story_ID: 91186
Speaker 1: Yes, I'd like for you to try to reflect back on childhood and give us an example of some of the sights, sounds, and smells of growing up.
Speaker 2: Well, for instance, our grandmother, my father's mother, and Aunt Frank, they came around and locked up our house when we were going up to the country all summer long, and they took us to places.  We didn't have a lot of parties and so forth, except that our grandfather's catering company, when we had parties, they gave us parties, but we didn't celebrate birthdays, periodic parties--both sides, one was Episcopalian and one was Presbyterian and they were devout.  They never missed church.  They gave generously.  They helped the poor.  They worked--they didn't work a lot in the church because they were busy I mean during the week and all.  I mean they didn't belong to a lot of clubs and so forth, but they gave generously and they sat on boards, and there were a fair number of orphanages in my time, and they helped them very much.  They helped the poor and the needy.  They helped the beginning of the YMCA and both my mother and my father were low key, but very generous and helpful.  They helped the poor and they helped the needy.  And they helped YMCA, YWCA--
Story_ID: 91187
Speaker 1: What kinds of things did you enjoy doing when you were a little girl?  What did you like to do?
Speaker 2: Well, school--because we loved our school because there were thirteen school teachers in our family at one time.  Um, we built the block--that is we were the first colored people to move into the 14th block of Argyle Avenue, which was all white, but as small children, we played with white children, and they, with children.  We had no prejudice when we were small.  Later on, I think it came, but we were sort of low key family.  People came--they belonged to a Whist club.  I'll never forget it.  They played good Whist, and they taught us that Whist is the game of "kings," so we were trained--we played good Whist, and they were about six tables, and the principal of our school, and vice principal, professional people--in my father's and my mother's club was the "Whist Club," and they played--no, it was called "The Fort Nightly Whist," and they enjoyed it very much; and, of course, my grandfather catered it too.  That was his contribution to it.  And my sister and I skated, and the boys had bicycles.  They had the bicycles--we never got a new bicycle, we inherited their bicycles.  And, of course, our summers were in Howard County, every summer.  Then we had--with Aunt Sue, my father's sister, was in Somerset, PA, and, of course, we were seven children by degree, so we had a little team there--I mean we played in our yard.  We jumped--we skipped rope, we played jacks, and we played games, lift stick, so we played games.  And broke the block and we didn't know anything about prejudice.  We didn't know prejudice.
Speaker 1: Did you have any friends that were white?
Speaker 2: Yes, we played games with them.  We skipped rope.  We skated, we played jacks.  We played with them on our block, the 14th block of Argyle Avenue.  And I suppose for all of our early childhood, we played with colored--we played with white children.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 90877
Speaker 1: I think most of the things that I'm saying are not boastful.  They just were, but nearly all the things I said are in here.  And one of my friends--we have the bishop's picture, and all of (unclear) and so forth.
Speaker 2: Can you hold your book up?  Yeah, I just wanted to see the cover of it.  Can you hold it up?
Speaker 1: Yes, it's called, "Other Little Ships," and it comes from the Bible, from St. Mark's Gospel, and there were also other little ships.  And when the people in the Bible, in the time of the Apostles, asked God--because there was a storm, they calmed the storm, and because the Apostles asked him to save them.  They were afraid; then he calmed the sea.  And also there were other little ships who profited too.  It wasn't just the ship where the Apostles were other people; every ship on the sea or on the lake, when the storm was calmed, profited.  There were also other little ships and they all profited.
Story_ID: 90878
Speaker 1: And all four of my grandparents were church people.  They never missed church.  I don't ever remember them missing church, and they walked.  They were left in time to walk.  They weren't terribly far--my father going to the Presbyterian church with his mother and my his sister, Aunt Frank, the Hughes side, my grandfather and Grandmother Hughes, and all of my aunts went to the Episcopalian church. And--
Speaker 2: I was asking (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But were like a clan.  We were sort of no nonsense family--even the way we played Whist.  They played Whist seriously.  They played a good game of Whist.  So we had a fair number of aunts.  My mother had four sisters, and my father had five sisters, so we had lots of aunts and lots of cousins and we played with them, but mostly we lived in the western part of the city.  Now, I have a cousin named, "John III" that every time I come down--He is crippled now.  He has to walk with a stick.  Grandpa Murphy walked with a stick too.  My grandfather used to walk with a cane.  We didn't flaunt ourselves.  We were very happy with our grandparents, and because there were a fair number of us, we didn't have a lot of friends coming in.  We could have a ball game in our backyard.
Speaker 2: With just the family.
Speaker 1: --with just the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And we skipped rope--my sisters and I skipped rope, played jacks, and had dolls, but we didn't go out a great, great deal.  We were born downtown, by the way.  We were born around the corner of our grandfather's catering business.
Speaker 2: How would you describe yourself as a little girl?
Speaker 1: Well, nothing very much.  I never felt a lot of this or a lot the other.  I was a very matter-of-child.  My aunt Francis, named for this Francis, she was very fond of me because said I was going to be a good school teacher, and I think I was.  I was in church on Sunday and two or three people talked and I taught Algebra; and we laughed a lot in the parish hall when we had our tea.  And they said, "You taught us Algebra, sister, and you taught with a vengeance.  I mean they liked it.  "You made us understand it."  So they didn't--some people don't like Algebra, but they said that they looked forward to the algebra and they had a lot of fun, enjoyed.  I hope that I haven't given the impression had the ideal situation, but we weren't poor, neither were we rich.  We had a sense of values, and we shared, and we helped, and my parents sat on committees, not a great many, but they were--they helped.  I think the word "helped" is a good word because they helped all situations.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 90879
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about school?  Now, where did you go to grade school?
Speaker 2: What did I do?
Speaker 1: Where did you go to elementary school?
Speaker 2: Well, I went to, first, I went kindergarten through my father's school, school 112, Carey (ph) Street School, so we all to our father's school.
Speaker 1: What was the name of it?
Speaker 2: Robert Brown Elliot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then in grade 3, the school was overflowing, so we went to Division Street School, a little near our house.  We walked to school. We went to Division Street School and we had good teachers.  We had good teachers all the way through because colored people were just beginning to teach in the public schools and Aunt Frank, my aunt Francis, taught Psychology, History of Education, and Theory of Teaching, so she taught in the normal school and she was some teacher because she wanted her pupils to know how to teach.  And only one of my aunts went to university, Aunt Lillian.  She went to Oberlin [College].  That's where my brother, my judge brother, went to, Oberlin.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was the first college to admit colored people.  A great many colored people taught school and taught well.  We didn't know anything--the segregation that existed in the theaters and some of the very smart shops, but my mother--my mother--we didn't go to those shops.  We had a dressmaker to make our clothes for three or four reasons.  If you had your clothes well made and they lasted.  There were two girls, I was the younger, so I inherited my sister's clothes, but they were good clothes.  Now, what else?  We were clannish because we had two sets of grandparents and they--and both of our parents were the oldest children.  My father was the oldest boy on his side.  My mother was the oldest girl on her side, so they were friendly with their families.  And all grandparents came to us periodically; and we also helped them, and we worked on Saturday mornings, and got--made about ten cents or twenty cents or something like that.
Speaker 1: Now, can you tell me about school?
Speaker 2: School?
Speaker 1: Yeah, how did you like school?
Speaker 2: We liked school.  We enjoyed school.  There were no frills.  It was solid arithmetic and a great, big Algebra book--I mean Geography books.  That's one thing too that both of my grandfathers traveled fairly widely--both grandparents, and father--my mother's father traveled to Cape May, to--I forgot--Saratoga Springs.  My grandfather traveled concerning people in the newspaper business.  Now, what did you just ask me?
Speaker 1: I wanted to move on to school.  I wanted to go past your grandparents, talk about your experiences in school.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  We--well, the normal school, it was a good normal school, and it was free.  It was a 2-year course and you didn't have to pay like nurses go into training now, and we had good teachers.
Speaker 1: Now, normal school, is that high school that you're talking about?
Speaker 2: Normal schools, where you go to learn--to a school after high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, I wanted to start at the beginning.  Okay, elementary school, you were talking about--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --we had kindergarten--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --you were talking about Robert Brown Elliot.  You were there from K-3 and then on Division Street.
Speaker 2: 3 to 8.
Speaker 1: Okay, then what was next?
Speaker 2: High school, nine, 10, 11, 12.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And not a lot of frills, just good sound reading, writing, arithmetic.
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am, but what high school did you attend?
Speaker 2: There was only one high school when I came along.  It was called, The Colored High School."
Speaker 1: That's a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Later, there were lots of elementary schools.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Lots of elementary schools, and my father was one of the first colored principals, and he was a good principal too, very good principal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 90880
Speaker 1: We, we had good teachers, no frills, but just good sound reading, writing and arithmetic.
Speaker 2: Now, were there any particular teachers that made an impression on you that you want to tell us about?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Well, we liked our teachers.  They--a great many--there weren't a great many extra things.  There was reading, writing and arithmetic, and, of course, my father was a principal of the largest elementary schools.  We had a--I can remember our gymnasiums and all around the room--around the gymnasium were dumbbells in racks, you know, and Indian clubs, so we had--and we had field days, lovely field days, and we wore (unclear) blouses because we were near the Naval Academy.  We played--we didn't have a great many clubs.  School was sort of matter-of-fact.  Most of our teachers had come from the north and were Wellesley [College], Radcliffe [College], Brown [University], good, sound colleges and Howard University was in Washington [D.C.], Lincoln [University].  My brother went to Lincoln.  I got a scholarship to Howard. I didn't go because my mother wanted me to go north to school because she thought I had all of my early years with college children, we would have to move through races, so she didn't wanted us to go to a colored university, so I went to Penn.
Speaker 2: Yes, but I didn't want to get that far.  I was asking you about grade school if there were teachers there that you remember that made an impression on you.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Can you give us their names and tell us what they actually did?
Speaker 1: Well, there was Ms. Ida Cummings, a kindergarten teacher and she was good.  Ms. Nichols--I forget the names of my elementary school teachers, Mr. Holland, and then two of my aunts, Aunt Isabel and Aunt Frank, so a lot of our family taught school, and it was more--it was a matter-of-fact.  We didn't have a great many clubs and extra things.  It was reading, writing and arithmetic, and a great big geographies, and facts and history. It was a very matter-of-fact kind of teaching.  We didn't have a lot, a lot of clubs.
Story_ID: 90881
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.  Now did you have--did they teach you much about African American history in school?
Speaker 2: About what?
Speaker 1: African American history?
Speaker 2: No, no, not a great deal, not a great deal, but I think when I was in grade 8, we knew about Paul Laurence Dunbar's poems.  School was sort of matter-of-fact.  I don't know any other way of putting it, and they wanted us to have a sound background; and a great many of us went to normal school because we were of larger families, and then we went to universities.  And we were very near Washington [D.C.] and Washington had a very good school system, and we had a great many friends there.  Baltimore was sort of low key.  We had good teachers.  They were from Brown and Wellesley.
Speaker 1: But were most of your teachers white or black?
Speaker 2: My teachers were all black and in the normal school, they were black too, but they were well-educated.
Speaker 1: They were educated at Brown and Wellesley?
Speaker 2: Brown, Wellesley, Radcliffe, the New England schools, Penn, Chicago University, and then some of the New England schools, of course, Brown--good schools, they came from good schools in the north; and so many--many went to Howard University too.  My uncle Carl taught us--I mean he taught German and he went to school in Germany.  He has a masters or doctoral.  I think he had to stop his education because of the war, but he had his masters.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Ma'am,--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Everybody--but there was a great upsurge of going to northern schools when I was coming out of high school and thereafter because what happened lots of our girls went to--went to summer school, Radcliffe, Wellesley, University of Penn, a lot of them went to summer school and night school too.  There was a great up serge of getting high school--I mean university education, and they--so there was a love of learning.  There was good, sound education.  And we had Indian clubs and dumbbells and all, but we didn't have a lot of frills.  We had good, good, sound teaching.  I can remember Ms. Fairly Barber taught us Geography and it was good Geography.  And Mr. Pennington taught Biology and Physics.  We had the basics.  I had Physics, Chemistry, and, of course, English grammar and English composition, and good poetry.  We had good poetry, basics, not many, not many frills, and not many clubs, school clubs.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Story_ID: 90882
Speaker 1: Now, were you involved in any clubs when you in school?
Speaker 2: I played basketball.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's about the only thing I did.  I did play basketball.  I was small.  I could jump.  I could jump center.  And, of course, we had a lot of this--calisthenics-- a lot of that, Indian clubs and dumbbells.
Speaker 1: What is an Indian club?  Most people wouldn't know what that is today.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know how--let's see--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --it stands about a foot high and it's narrow, and they sit and you swing them and we had races, and we had field days--field days, and they were beautiful, and we all wore, in my set, we all wore mini blouses and skirts because the Naval Academy was not far from Baltimore, and the Naval students wore the mini blouses--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --I think the most interesting thing for people today, who listen to this, is that you all wore skirts to gym class, right?  You didn't wear pants?
Speaker 2: No, we wore bloomers and skirts--we wore blue pleated skirts, like a skirt uniform sort of.  Life was sort of matter-of-fact.  I mean--I don't--you see I started school in 1908, let me see if that's right--I was born in 1904 and I went to kindergarten, Ms. Ida Cummings, when I was four, so--school was much more matter-of-fact.  We didn't go to school for fun.  We went to school to learn.
Speaker 1: Now, you graduated from high school?
Speaker 2: Colored High School.
Speaker 1: Colored High School?
Speaker 2: Colored High School.
Speaker 1: In 1922, would it be?
Speaker 2: I forget.  Yes, I think that's it.
Speaker 1: 1922?
Speaker 2: I came out in three and half years because I went in as a little kid at grade in kindergarten.  My father had two kindergarten classes.  Let's see, I went to school beginning in February, that's right.  I was born the 2nd of February, so I started school in the February and came out, graduated, in three in a half years.  I didn't go--they combined because graduation was in June, not in February, so I came out in three and a half years.
Speaker 1: So it could have been in 1921, it could've been.  I don't know.
Speaker 2: '21 [1921] or '22 [1922], I forget.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Story_ID: 90883
Speaker 1: Now, when you were in high school--had you come up with the idea that you wanted to be a nun in high school?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What were your aspirations?--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We had nuns.  We had nuns all in our church when we were this high and they taught us--we had guilds.  We went to Sunday school, and during the week, we had what was called "guilds."
Speaker 1: Now, this was in the Episcopal Church, right?
Speaker 2: Episcopal Church.  Now, St. James Church was a more intellectual--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's the Presbyterian--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, it was good.  I mean the best colored people, I think, went to Presbyterian and Anglican Church, but we had strong women Catholic because we had a cardinal.  I remember we had a cardinal well and we wore veils and Sunday school, white veils in the Sunday school.  School was school.  They weren't out to entertain you or to make you enjoy it.  We wanted to pass and get on, and I knew one of seven children that I wasn't going to go to university.  The boys would go to university because they could work in the summer and they were worked in the post office on Christmas and all.  And so, of course, my sister and I didn't do any work like that, but life was much more sort of matter-of-fact, and we enjoyed it.  And we liked learning and we had good teachers.  We had good teachers.
Speaker 1: What were your aspirations in high school?
Speaker 2: I was going to be a teacher.  There was no question--Rebecca and I, my sister and I, both went to normal school.  We were going to finish grade nine, 10, 11, and 12 and go to normal school.  It was free and then I began to go to summer school, University of Penn [Pennsylvania]. Then as soon as the boys were getting on, then I took a leave of absence from Penn from teaching and went to Penn; and that was not too far away.  And my mother had friends in Philadelphia.  I didn't live in the dormitory.  I lived with some of my mother's friends, my aunt's bridesmaid.  Life was--I don't know if it was because we came from matter-of-fact family, but the colored people with whom we moved, were solid.  We had a fair number of doctors and lawyers--and, of course, the Afros--I had two businesses in our families, the caterers and the Afro, so we knew about that side, but school, we liked school; and my father was very interested that there would be summer, so the children that were slow or failed, didn't have lose it.  And we were promoted every six months.  We didn't go by year.  We went high one, high two, high and low meant the first six months or the second six months.
Story_ID: 90884
Speaker 1: How did you do in school?  Did you make good grades?  Were your grades good?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was an 85-ish.
Speaker 1: Okay, that would be a B, or what?
Speaker 2: It's a low A and high B.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We weren't brilliant.  None of us were brilliant, but we were good students.  We did our homework faithfully.  Every night after supper, we had lovely dark, bronze tablecloth and my mother spread over the table.  And we did our homeroom around the dining room table, and mother sat there and mended clothes and read the paper and everything.  And my father was invariably at meetings, good meetings.  Home at about 10 or 10:15.  And we had pigeon hole for our books, a little cupboard; and we liked school.  Let's see, I played basketball.  Of course, we had calisthenics a lot and we had field days.
Speaker 1: Tell me about graduation from high school.  What was that like when you graduated?
Speaker 2: Well, we had--we wore very pretty white dresses, and the high schools in Baltimore were all in one week or two weeks because the city banned and the city--what else?--music provided--yes, we had special--lovely singing--we had music teachers too by the way.  We had white music teachers.  They were good.  They were from Peabody.  It was a subject too.  Graduation, we all wore white.  It was at the Lyric.  You know the Lyric?
Speaker 1: No, ma'am.
Speaker 2: It's a lovely theater, concert hall.  And all the graduations took place in one week like in the early--Monday morning, Tuesday morn, Tuesday evening and the Baltimore City band played the music and the Baltimore music teachers taught us music, which we sang at commencement.  And there was a speaker, and they were--just the beginning when I was in normal school, they began to have parties, little dances, graduating from high school, and more elaborate, then I went to normal school; and I taught normal school.  I often taught--I taught summer school too sometime.  Teach--school teaching was the thing in Baltimore.
Story_ID: 90885
Speaker 1: Now you went to Penn [University of Pennsylvania] to become a teacher, right?  You went to normal school first and then you went to Penn?
Speaker 2: I went to normal school for two years and then I went to Penn summer school right away because I couldn't go to university yet.  The boys were getting on by degrees, and so I went to Penn, lived at the dormitory at Penn three summers, and then I took a leave of absence.  I went in as full-time high school student, I mean college student, and then I came back and taught in junior high school.  That was (unclear) and then I taught--then I graduated from--I taught junior high school and then I went back to Penn and graduated from the University of Penn.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 90886
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah. So you graduated from Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --'28 [1928]
Speaker 1: Your major at Penn was Education?
Speaker 2: Psychology and History of Education.
Speaker 1: Okay, Psychology and the History of Education.
Speaker 2: Theory of Teaching.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I was in the College of Education.
Speaker 1: Were there any outstanding professors there that took an interest in you that really helped you at Penn?
Speaker 2: Yes, but I have forgotten--I've forgotten--yes, we had good professors and they--W, Professor Weygand (ph), Professor Loury.  See, I was in the College of Education.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I've forgotten--we had good Psychology teachers, very good.  That was the growing the university.  That was the growing subject--history of education.
Speaker 1: Ma'am, what activities were you involved at Penn?  Did you play basketball there too?
Speaker 2: At Penn?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I ran.  We had, what was called, "The River Field," the school--(unclear) river ran through our campus.  I ran and I played basketball. I was small and I played jumped center on the team.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was it.
Speaker 1: Did you run in the Penn relays?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You didn't run them?
Speaker 2: Because it was football.
Speaker 1: No, Penn relay is a track meet.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, track.  No, I didn't do anything like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You see when I was at Penn, I was a mature student, and my family had some dear friends, who wrote me and another person.  He was a medical student, and so we went--my education at Penn--you see I was getting four years in three and half years or something.  And you see I went to the College of Education, and I didn't have to go four straight years of college.  I took summer courses, and took a leave of absence, and took a solid year.  Then I came down to Baltimore [Maryland] and taught in the junior high school, which was new.
Story_ID: 90887
Speaker 1: Just--I want to go back to Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] for one second.  Were there very many black students at Penn when you were there?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Do you have any idea how many?
Speaker 2: Well, unfortunately--we had dear friends of our parents, and also; therefore, one of there friends was a doctor and he had been a classmate of the provost.  We didn't have a president of the University of Pennsylvania, we had a provost and my mother's friend was in the class of the provost.  Now, let's see, what did you ask me?
Speaker 1: No, I just asked you how many black students were at Penn.
Speaker 2: No, there weren't a great many.  There was a bit of snobbery.  I mean--I entered a sorority that--her mother here founded a good sorority, founded at Howard University.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: What was the name of the sorority?--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Sororities grew.
Speaker 1: Yeah, what was the name of the sorority?
Speaker 2: Delta Sigma Theta.
Speaker 1: Okay, Delta Sigma Theta, well known.
Speaker 2: We--it was good.  We--we were interested in philosophy, and you see I had been teaching school.  I was a mature student.  We didn't have many dances and all that kind of thing, although every weekend, Tom Williston and I used to go to Germantown to stay for the weekend because two of our mother's friends were at Penn.  There was a bit of snobbery I think.  We didn't mix with a lot, and on weekends, we went to Germantown because I didn't live in the dormitory.  I lived down on Christian Street.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --but the first summer I went to Penn, I lived in the dormitory, the first summer, and thereafter, I lived downtown.
Speaker 1: Who was Tom Williston?
Speaker 2: You know a school called, "Williston Academy?"
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Anyhow some of his forebears were--Tom Williston was the doctor--the son of a doctor and his father was a friend of Booker T. Washington, taught at Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama]; and Tom Williston and I were friends of Dorothy Warrick and Bill Warrick out in Germantown, so we didn't spend a lot of time on campus for more reasons than one.  We had a fair amount of social with friends of our family.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: I did some summer school.  We were interested in getting degrees; and even--and beginning of sororities too.  There was a much more serious tone at our university.  There weren't a great many colored students at Penn, not a great many.  It was a large campus though.  There were 1728 graduates.  The reason I remembered the graduated was because when we were sitting at college hall or wherever we sit, or constitutional hall, somebody along our row said--I don't know where I heard it--but somebody said, "There are 1728 graduates in the year 1928," and they said, and you will remember it because it's a cube of 12.  You take the cube of 12, it's 1728.  So I'll never forget how many students there was.  And, of course, I went to summer school, and I taught school.  My education was education-oriented.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We all taught--most colored people taught school or were doctors--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Right --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --in my set.
Story_ID: 90888
Speaker 1: Ma'am, you said one of your relative founded Delta Sigma Theta [Sorority]?
Speaker 2: Here.
Speaker 1: Well, that is significant.  Can you tell us more information on that?
Speaker 2: Well, you couldn't enter a white Greek letter institution unless they were Phi Beta Kappa.  You know Phi Beta Kappa?
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 2: Yes, well if you were brilliant enough, you could join Phi Beta Kappa, but it wasn't social.  It was definitely scholastic and high scholastic.  Most of our professors were Phi Beta, but then there was Delta Sigma Theta started I think it the '20s [1920] and it was very scholarly, and it was very socially and family, sort of thing.  And it was--and we did a lot of reading, groups and it wasn't as social, but we had dances.  We had some dances, but I wasn't typical because I didn't go right from high school into college.  I went to normal school for two years; and it was good normal school teaching.  Aunt Frank, Aunt Francis, and it was  her first year--I mean the first year of having colored teachers in the normal school, so she taught Psychology, History of Education and Theory of Teaching, and it no nonsense.  It was good, sound teaching.  I learned how to teach.  I learned--I was introduced to Gerontology and Psychology and liked it very much.  I've always liked it.  And also for a couple of years when I was at the university, I assisted in the Psychology with children.  Penn had Saturday classes.  Mothers would bring their children, who were a little slow learners or something, and some of us helped in that department and we liked it very much.  We were sort of student teachers of psychology.
Story_ID: 90889
Speaker 1: Ma'am, tell me about when you graduated from Penn in 1928--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --'28 [1928].
Speaker 1: --you had a chance to go abroad, right and you went abroad?  I think you went to Austria and some other places.  Tell us about.
Speaker 2: I had an unusual situation.  My best friend went to Smith College [Northampton, Massachusetts].  You know Smith College?
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 2: She went to Smith.  Her father was a school principal and my father was school principal; and both of them headed night schools.  Hilda, my friend, and May Wright, and some of our friends went off to university.  I didn't go to university until I got myself into university--I mean my parents helped me too, but most of my friends were only children and they went to rich schools, Wellesley, Radcliffe, Bryn Mawr, Vassar, all the New England colleges, and the men went there too.  My brother went to Brown.  We--the whole sort of tone was more sort of mature, also family, there is a little bit of snobbery I think.  Most of us taught school, and there was good school teaching too.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --I was asking you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We had clubs.  We had very nice clubs.  There were clubs among our parents and among us children too, clubs.
Speaker 1: Ma'am, I was asking you about your trip to Europe.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, Europe.  Now, my father's friend was Mr. Anderson, he was a school principal and his daughter, elementary school, and his daughter was my friend.  She went to Smith, a very fine girl school.  Now, let me get it straight.  We all lived in Druid Hill Avenue.  Do you know Druid Hill Avenue?
Speaker 1: No, but you mentioned it before.
Speaker 2: It is a significant street.  It was a very nice street.  Many colored people bought their first houses there.  Hilda--let's get this thing straight--she went to Smith, yes, Smith College, came back and taught Latin in the high school.  I was teaching in the junior high school.  They lived in a very nice house in Druid Hill, but then they wanted to move out into the suburbs out here, up the street, right up the street, here.  So they built a house, and they were very interested in having a house in Morgan Park, but it was called something else too.  The mother, Mrs. Anderson, didn't want to move out here.  She wanted to live on Druid Hill Avenue.  All of her friends lived along there, her clubs, her church, and everything, but Hilda and her father wanted to live out here in the suburbs, very nice.  And so they--the mother told them that she didn't want to live out here.  She was lonely (unclear).  They didn't get home until 5:00 and then the next morning early out again, and so, she got depressed, and she just lived up the road here.  And they built a lovely house, and garden and all, but she was lonely; and the house was lovely, and the grounds and everything.  One day, they came home--she had taken her life.  They found her lying in the kitchen floor with her head in the stove oven with the gas turned on full.  She was teaching Latin in the high school.  I was teaching Algebra in the junior high school.  Her father, Mr. Anderson, and my father were both principals and friends, and, of course, we were in shock.  So after we got over the funeral and all that, she taught mildly and as soon as half past three came, she went right home and he did too.  They came to our house for meals, and we invited them to supper and so forth.
Story_ID: 90890
Speaker 1: Hilda became depressed.  I, at that time, was interested in, there was sisterhood called "The Sisterhood of All Saints," and a lot of my mother's friends and all belonged to the auxiliary because they had orphanages; an orphanage of about 75 boys and an orphanage of about sixty girls.  So they all--all of my mother's friends helped in these two schools; and their children did too--we did too.  Anyhow, Hilda just went into depression.  She taught Latin and we felt strongly that she was going to take her life like her mother did, and I was going out to the sisterhood regularly to help with the orphans.  And we were doing, my sister and I--we were doing a lot of helping, taking the children to the circus and doing a lot of social work, sort of, with the orphans.  There were a fair amount of orphanages, I don't know why, but there were.  So Hilda went on and didn't get any better.  She just taught Latin and she was a good teacher, and came home; and that was it.  And her father went to school master's clubs and things like that.  After a while, we were thinking if this went on, she was going to take her life, so I took her up to the orphanage to St. Catherine's Home, just up the street from our house, and I got her to help me to take children out for walks, and to the circus and to this and the other, and I told them about Hilda and she was only half-hearted, but she sort of like to do it.  One of the sisters, named Sister Ana Gabriel, had a blood sister living in Florence, Italy, she had a finishing school of about thirty or forty rich girls in Florence and it was flourishing; and she got the idea that she ought to buy another property and enlarge her school.  So to do that, she took summer guests, and in the meantime, I had been taking Hilda, my friend, up to St. Catherine's Home to coach poor, slow learners and doing things, and she had a car, she had her father's car.  So we did all kinds of things, and she became a little bit better, but then after a while, one of the sisters out there had a sister in Florence, Italy, named Ms. Ellison, and she decided to buy some property in Florence and enlarge her school, so she took some summer guests.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am.  So is that how you all got to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So what she said was, what the sister said was "Take Hilda to Florence.  Take her to Italy and take her mind right off of it," so she wrote to her sister in Florence to say would she take two young, colored school teachers, so she said, "Sure," and we went to Florence, and that did it.  We had a wonderful summer, wonderful summer, and she got, she got out of her depression.
Story_ID: 90891
Speaker 1: Okay, so you just stayed for the summer?
Speaker 2: No, it was the next summer too because it our passports were good for two years and the next year was the year of the passion play 1930. You know the Passion play?
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: All the sessions are on number ending in 0; so 1930 came up and we had passports, and they we good for only one more year
Speaker 1: The Passion play is about the death of Christ right?
Speaker 2: The death of Christ, his passion, and it last all day long, and Thomas Cookinson. You know Thomas Cookinson?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: They sell--they have charge of travel. It was every ten years, so right away, the sister said to Hilda and me "you got to learn some Italian" so we studied Italian, and we read all about Florence and we knew all the places--the special places of interest, and we  studied all the places of importance, Pompe, and Rome and so we went off to Italy for summer 1929 and used our passports the next year because it was the Passion play, and we went the next year and we had two friends, learning music in Vienna, and I had my classmate from Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] , who lived in Nuremberg, so we went to Nuremberg, and we had wonderful two summers, just wonderful because we had, they taught us the place, how to really visit, and how to get the greatest joy, and knowledge and so far.  After a while--my last year in Europe that I got there, I got the idea that I was going to be a sister too, and when I came home from Florence, I didn't tell anybody, but I was going to be a sister--so all that year, then the following year, and then I went in.
Story_ID: 90892
Speaker 1: What was it about becoming a sister that attracted you?--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --oh we had sisters in our church.  We had sisters all our lives in our church, and they assisted the clergy and all, also they had little guilds--when we were small, every child in the Sunday school belonged to a little guild, and we learned to tack, and to knit, and to make things.  We went to Sunday school on Sunday, but during the week, each of us belonged to a guild and the sisters ran the guilds; and mother, and my aunts, and I think her mother did too were interested in the poor children.  And so we used to go up and help them--we helped the sisters.  We took them out in Halloween.  We coached them in their studies.  We took them shopping.  We did all sorts of things with them.  We were like junior auxiliary, and so we saw the sisters two or three times a week.
Speaker 1: Yes, but what was it about what they were doing that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I don't know, but we grew up with sisters.  I've had sisters in my life all my life.
Speaker 1: Yes, but not everyone becomes a nun.
Speaker 2: So, --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --No, but some do.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's why I was wondering what it was.
Speaker 1: Well, I had a lot of close contact with sisters too.  We used to go to the orphanages and help--and my mother and my aunts were on the auxiliary.  They were part of our life.  My parents played Whist.  They didn't--they didn't play bridge then.  They played Whist.  My family is a helping family.  My father helped the sisters too.  We have been a helping--both sides of my family, both of my grandmothers and my aunts, all had something to do with helping the poor, the needy, the sick, serving, that's what sisters do.
Speaker 2: Was it the service aspect of--you thought of it as serving?--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Yes, well it was a way of--you gave your life, and you were interested in it.  I had boyfriends because I had five brothers.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And Baltimore had a cardinal, don't forget that.  There were only about eight or ten cardinals in the whole world for a while, so it was a Roman Catholic city, and nuns everywhere.  And you didn't go anywhere, but there were nuns and walking in twos and threes, boarding--I mean at schools, orphanages.  There was a poverty.  It was a port city.  People came from the port--from the islands, West Indies, and Baltimore--and it wasn't--it had good music, it had art gallery.  It had the first statue of George Washington, but it was a serious city with lots of convents.  You could hardly walk anywhere without there were some nuns, always walked in twos and threes, they did.  One of the nuns was a member of the Bonaparte family, Napoleon Bonaparte, was a nun.  So we grew up in a city of--of course, Baltimore was called the "City of Churches," too, in a city of churches, head offices of convents--not head offices, but mother superiors.  It was a way of life; and my father did a lot of help; and my family--my side of the family did a lot of help.
Speaker 2: Yes, but it's a serious choice, and I just wondered what was the thing that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --I don't know.  It was a perfectly normal thing to do.  I had boyfriends, I had five brothers.
Speaker 2: You did not have any aspirations of raising a family or anything?
Speaker 1: I beg your pardon.
Speaker 2: You didn't think about raising a family or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --I had plenty of cousins.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I taught school.  My children, that I taught, were my kids.  I was at church two days ago at St. James, I met three people.  They couldn't--they saw me coming into church.  They couldn't wait for the service was over to grab me and hug me.  I taught them Algebra, but we have been a helping family.  My mother--my sister and I, when we outgrew our clothes in the summer, I got my sisters clothes, and they were good; we had a dressmaker because you couldn't go to the shops--and buy things to the shops, but we had dressmakers to make our clothes.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --you told us that, but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --What I mean is we were--there was a certain high, seriousness in our family.  My father was a devote Presbyterian.  He liked the sisters too, but when I felt called, my mother didn't want me, but my father, he didn't greatly mind for me to be a sister because he loved the sisters too.
Speaker 2: Was there a particular moment that you knew you were called to become a nun?  I mean did you feel a moment?
Speaker 1: No, just gradually--gradually coming.
Speaker 2: There was an incident or a day that you said, "Well, I think I want to be a nun?"
Speaker 1: Well, I must have, but--you see-Baltimore [Maryland] was a Roman Catholic city, and you didn't go anywhere in the street without bumping into a couple of them.
Speaker 2: But you didn't become a Catholic nun, you became a Anglican nun?
Speaker 1: No, but Anglicans had sisters.
Story_ID: 90893
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, right, I know--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: --I'll tell you another thing too.  Across the street from grandma Murphy was a huge orphanage, white; it was about half a block.  And my grandmother had, what was called, "a busy body."  It was a device that you hook on a mirror here, and a mirror, and a mirror there, and you could fasten it onto your window, the second floor, and grandma Murphy--when my grandma was going down to the Y or going to visit the sick or going someplace, I used to go and answer the telephone, and across the street from us was a huge orphanage with about 50 or 60 sisters and I used to sit on the second floor because you could look through a busy body and see who was ringing through the doorbell.  You could see across the street.  I could see the nuns--and Baltimore, you'd be surprised how many nuns there were.  My sister was very social.  I wasn't very social.  I was--I was--my father was very--my father and I were very close and helping people--helping people--helping people a lot of our life; and my grandfather--both grandfathers helped people on committees.  And also they mixed with the nuns.  They mixed with nuns too.  My father was in and out of convents that had orphans and nuns, boys and girls.  There is a story: they say that one day the bishop of Maryland went to St. Mary's Home for orphan boys for Christmas, just to wish them a happy Christmas and bring them some candy and stuff.  And so the bishop, they said, said to one of the boys, "What are you going to be when you grow up?"  And he said, "I'm going to be a colored gentleman like Mr. Murphy."  That's the bishop has told that story, so.
Story_ID: 91075
Speaker 1: You, you don't, that's almost like prying into people's private business sort of.  I mean we can tell their generalities.  We had thirteen teachers in my family because teaching--her father was a university professor, some were principals, some were elementary school teachers, all kinds of teaching.  We were teachers too.  There were things run in families and people have calls.  You can't pin people down.
Speaker 2: Well, when you're interviewing an individual, you ask the person why they do things they did.
Speaker 1: Right, you keep on pushing.  I think I've told you enough things--that I was drawn to that kind of thing. It was, it was. I didn't see any visions telling me to put on a veil or something.  I had boyfriends too because I had five brothers and my brothers brought boys in and out of my house, and at university, I had boyfriends, but I have always been a sort of seriously-oriented person.  My sister had lots of boyfriends.  I had boyfriends and I could have married.  I had boyfriends just like myself, librarians, doctors, Dr. Tom Willison, Dr. Walter Williams.  I had boyfriends, sort of, but you have calls.  You can't pin, always pin it down, so the more--I can't tell you anything else except that at a certain time I felt-and when I, the last summer I was in Europe and I was in and out of convents, in and out of art galleries, in and out of churches-in and out of, of course, Italy and Florence, of course, there are lots of convents too and lots of spirituals buildings, and it was a normal channel for me.  And my father loved the sisters, but he didn't want me to be a sister.
Speaker 2: Now, your mother was particularly upset.
Speaker 1: She didn't want me to be a sister either, and she loved the sisters too, but that was my business.  I mean I could do what I wanted to do.
Speaker 2: Sure, okay.
Speaker 1: And they both wished that I would marry and have children, and grandchildren, and all that kind of thing, but I had known sisters since I was this high--this high.  When I was about four, there were sisters--closely.  We had guilds.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --now, you said your mother--you said earlier that your mother was upset about--it took her a little time to get used to this.
Speaker 1: Yes, she did and I didn't come home either.
Story_ID: 91076
Speaker 1: When you decided to become a nun, you had to go off--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --there were only Roman Catholic nuns, but there were white nuns, Episcopal,--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but they did try to have a colored nunnery.  They did try way back--eight or ten colored sisters, but it didn't take off, but the Roman Catholic sisters galore.  This was a city of sisters.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you have to go away in a convent in another part of the country?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, the sisters that I knew were in Catonsville [Maryland] and also they were white.  They were white sisters.  Most of the colored sisters were Roman Catholic.  Most of the white sisters were Episcopal.
Speaker 1: Yes, how do you spell that, Catonsville?
Speaker 2: C-A-T-O-N-S-V-I-L-L-E.  They're called the Sisters of All Saints, and every time I come home, I visit them.  My boy cousin always drives me out there and I spend some time.  I mean, for instance, why did I teach school?  I mean there were other things to do, but I was drawn.  If you would have seen at St. James Church yesterday, the day before, three people whom I taught hugged me and they hugged me.  They just said, they were so glad to see me.  And it was just a joy.  And I taught them.  I was their teacher.  I taught them Algebra.  And they just loved it because we were teachers.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: So you can't always give account of why you were this or why you were that.
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.  Can we get past that discussion now and talk about the convent?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Or--did you go to a convent next?
Speaker 2: Did I go to a convent?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Where did you go?
Speaker 2: Toronto, but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Toronto--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes,--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --and what was the name of it?
Speaker 2: The Sisters of St. John the Divine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There is a whole chapter in here on us.  The Sisters of St. John. It was Anglican.  It was Episcopal.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Okay.  So--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And I went up there to visit a couple of times.   I had time to have my vocation tested--I mean whether I was called or not, and you see, we have race prejudice in Baltimore [Maryland] too, in all sisterhood, the Roman Catholic sisters--there colored Roman Catholic sisters.  There were not many colored Anglican sisters, but there were sisters in Philadelphia, sisters in New York, sisters in New Jersey, Anglican sisters, but they found and they helped me find too--to find sisters in Canada, and some of the sisters had come to Baltimore [Maryland] to go to John Hopkins Hospital to learn how to do--there were different things that they came down, and they stayed with our sisters, these sisters that I knew, but remember we had sisters in our life.
Story_ID: 91077
Speaker 1: This very brother who died--when I came home from school, I was that naive, one of the sisters was there all day when my mother was a midwife; and when I came in, she said, "you got a baby brother."  They had been there all day, and they came other days to stay.  And my brother, William, I used to drive him to All Saints Convent to meet sisters, to do errands, to do things and everything like that, and my grandfather, my catering grandfather.  He loved the sisters too and so forth, so sisters have been a part of my life, sort of.  From the beginning, there hasn't been a time when there hasn't been some contact with sisters.  I remember when I was very young and I loved them.  I liked them too, and they liked us too.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And things runs, work runs in families.  Grandpa would have every one of us in the Afro American [newspaper] if he had his way, every one of us--all of us worked for our grandfather Murphy on Saturday afternoons.  All of got 10 cents, seven, eight and nine and 10, but my brother, George--not many--not all of my family liked the Afro.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: How are you drawn to your profession?  What is your profession?
Speaker 2: History.
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: History.
Speaker 1: Say?
Speaker 2: History.
Speaker 1: History, why did you take history?
Speaker 2: I love it.  I want to know the answers.  I want to know why we're doing things that we're doing, and how they started.  I love that.
Speaker 1: Well, I have something of the same thing in the spiritual life because I've known sisters all of my life.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I want to know why we're here, and why we're doing the things we're doing.  That's what I want to know and then it makes me feel more grounded with what I'm doing at the present time, which is actually searching the past.
Story_ID: 91078
Speaker 1: I wanted you tell us about your training.
Speaker 2: What training?
Speaker 1: Your training as a sister.  You went into a convent with the sisters in the convent, St. John, Sisters of the Divine.  What was your training like?
Speaker 2: Well, do you know anything about nursing schools?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  I want you to tell us.
Speaker 2: I'm just--ma'am somebody is going to be watching this tape that's not me.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --I'm just saying--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Ma'am, Someone is going to be watching this tape that's not me.  It's not me that you're telling this to, it's to everybody, and people would like to know.
Speaker 1: Well, I've told them a whole lot of things and to my mind, all the things that matter.  I've told them all the things that matter.  I was born in that atmosphere.  I liked it, and I'm very happy in it now.
Speaker 2: No, I'm not asking you about that; what was your training like?
Speaker 1: Well, we have lessons.  We have lectures.  We have--first of all, you go in and you visit, and you see how life is lived, and then you go to the mother superior and you say, "I would like to know more about it," well, then come and visit.  Come for weekends, come for retreats.  You know about retreats?  Come to learn about it, read about it.  There are books, and books, and there are convents, and convents, and you learn to pray.  You learn to guide people.  You learn to help.  You learn to visit and when you first come in, you first called an "Postulant," and you wear a simple cap and a simple dress, and you--for six months, you're a postulant.  Then the sisters vote if they think you have a call, and then if you are, then you become a novice, a newcomer.  And you have a special habit, and a white veil, and you do all kinds of things; whatever you take part in, sewing, reading, and taking retreats, and taking--and visiting convent, visiting life.  And then you move on year after year, for three years, and after three years, the sisterhood takes a vote, you write a letter and say that you feel you're called to this life and the sisters take a vote, and you're voted, and there is a required time of asking God to confirm your wish and your belief, and that goes on.  And finally, after three years, the sisterhood agrees that you have a call to God, and then you take vows, and you get a ring, then three years in succession, you go apart, and think about it and pray about it, and think about it, and pray about it, and pray about it, and after a while, you finish another year, then another year, and then another year, and then that makes six years, and then after six years, the sisterhood votes that this call of God.  It's not just a call to help the poor and the needy.  It's a call from God.  How did the 12 apostles join Jesus?  Did you ever think about that?
Speaker 2: I've read about it.
Speaker 1: Well, it's the same type of thing.  They left their families and followed Jesus.  It's a call.  I mean we're all called to do something, to make something of our lives, so what happens is that people are called to nurse, or to teach, or to do this, or the other, or become a sister, and it's a calling, "vocation."  And it continues.  And although I taught and I love to teach and everything, I felt I was called to serve God more intimately, and call, a call, a call, and then you follow it.  And nobody can tell you when or how--it's a thing--it does in some families like doctors often run in families and their families.
Speaker 2: We went over that before.
Speaker 1: It's the same thing.  It's a way of life.  It's a way of life, and it rubs off on people.  It answers an appeal.  I mean my sister was very popular and very pretty and so forth, but--and I had boyfriends because I had five brothers, but I never had a particular call like my sister.  She loved the social life and that kind of thing, and she did; and she married and had a very happy life.  And I felt that I wanted this way of life, and it was shown me.
Story_ID: 91079
Speaker 1: Well tell us something about what you did after you finished your training.
Speaker 2: Well, we had schools; we had hospitals; we made communion wafers.  We made all kinds of priest vestments that they wear.
Speaker 1: Did you do all that?
Speaker 2: We took turns. In three years time. We did six months of this and six months of that.  And some of us went to universities; some were sent to university to perfect it.  It goes on.  It goes on.  We are constantly taking courses even now.  And we have retreats, quiet time to think, leave our active life and return to more passive thinking, praying.  And I have been a sister a long, long time; and it's part of me.  And it isn't unlike any other profession.  It's a call to go that way.
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am, but what did you do--didn't you teach in a?--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --I was head of a school.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: I taught school.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --you started off as--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --I also--we do various things.  We do whatever we can do or prone to do--the mother superior and her counsel.  We're moved periodically--14 years running a home for the aged.  Yes, I taught school for 30 or 40 years.
Speaker 1: Now, you taught out in Saskatchewan [Canada] for a while?
Speaker 2: Yes, and in Toronto too.
Speaker 1: Toronto, all right.  Saskatchewan is sort of isolated.
Speaker 2: But I was head mistress.
Speaker 1: All right, but what was the name of the school?
Speaker 2: It was Qu'Appelle diocese school.  Qu'Appelle was the name of the area, and "diocesan" means of the diocese.  Well, there are schools all over the world.  And they develop, and they--and people have to go in and study, just like you go in and study for medicine or study for science or whatever it is, you study the life of Christ, the Bible ministry, just like any profession.  You're a part of it--you're attracted to it, and you go in, but nobody can quite tell you the detail that there is a way--there is no way.  It's God's way.  You feel the call, and you answer the call, and you go.  And that's all I can tell you.  It just goes on that way; and the sisterhood trains you in certain ways.  I mean even though I'm 99, I still take lectures on Bible studies, lectures on ministry to the sick, ministry to the elderly, all kinds of things.  We're always learning and improving, and then when we get old, we go back to the convent, to the infirmary, and you live in the infirmary, and you're taken care of.  I don't know anymore to tell you.
Speaker 1: Um, so when you taught at Saskatchewan, you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --I came home after fourteen years, and then I was assigned.  You get assigned here and there.  You get assigned and we don't ask necessarily, but whatever we're inclined to do.  And also for the first three and half years of our life, we're trained to make communion bread, we learn to sew, we learn to cook, we learn to build.  So wherever--every sisterhood has houses all over the world, all over the city, and you get sent there; and you work there for six years, twelve years, ten years or something; and then you move to another house and you do that and so forth, and so forth.
Story_ID: 91080
Speaker 1: When you reflect back on your life, what would you consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: What I consider what?
Speaker 1: As your legacy when you reflect on your life?
Speaker 2: What do you mean by legacy?
Speaker 1: Well, what you left behind for other people.
Speaker 2: Well, it's all in here.  Well, I taught school; I visited people; I helped the sick; I talked about the Bible.  I talked about the needs, getting rid of race prejudice and I lived a perfectly normal--my life wasn't greatly different from my father's life.  He was a school principal and he liked people; he did things for people.  My life is very similar.  And he was very Godly.  He was a Presbyterian, devout Presbyterian; and so that nobody can quite tell how you became this or why this affected you.  Things run in families.  Why do you have line of doctors?  We had a long line of teachers.  God puts us--I believe God tells us where to go, what to do.  We pray and he answers our prayers and puts us in a situation.  I would be teaching now I suppose if my hearing weren't so impaired, but it's a ministry, and to become God-like.  We're trying to be like God, to love people, and to work with them, and work for them.  And this thing rubs off and continues, and continues like any profession; and we are ready to become sisters, it's called a profession service--like you say, it's a profession.  It's something that I feel called to do; and you can't tell where it starts or why, but you know you're being called, and so you leave where you go, and you go.
Story_ID: 91081
Speaker 1: Ma'am is there any advice that you have for young people that wanted to--a young person today that would want to become a priest or a nun?
Speaker 2: Well, to young people I say:  Try to give thanks for your own family from which you came that you learned early to do the right thing, to tell the truth, you went to Sunday School, you go to Guilds and you learn about relationships and how to make the world a better place; and you do it with training; and then if you feel that you're called to the spiritual side, then you pray.  You stay by yourself a fair amount of time to ponder it, to think about it, ask God to help you.  And you get shaped.  You get shaped, and then situation--you come into a situation where you have to do something about it, so you do things and all the while, being led by God, being called by God, being shown how to make a change; and then you go on from there.  You just live it, and there is no set pattern, but it's an inner thing.  God talks to us, tells us.  We have time of prayers, long time of prayer, and we don't socialize and that kind of thing.  We have no interest in that kind of thing--only thing to serve God and carry on his work.  And then you do, and you carry on, and on, and on until you die.
Story_ID: 91082
Speaker 1: Now is there anything that you would have done differently in life?
Speaker 2: No, because I was still fortunately allowed to teach.  I love teaching and I've nearly always--I've taught--so I taught Sunday School, and I taught ordinary school.  I taught Algebra.  I taught History.  I ran a boarding school. And my father was a great teacher; and my brother who just, my brother who just died--they are full of articles in the paper about him and how he was trying to get rid of race prejudice, how he was getting people to help one another--my father--my brother, who just died, trained a number of people unwittingly, unconsciously, to become lawyers. And he's--I'm collecting all the articles I can in the papers, the story of my brother is in many, many papers, and they'll be in magazines, how he wanted to break down race prejudice, wanted to help young men to learn the l- learn about the law, and what a gratitude is owned him for the things he did.  And in his field the same as in my field.  We aren't just born.  We feel that God has a place for us, a reason for us, and He throws us into that channel.  I mean I must've wanted to be a sister, I was attracted to the sisterhood; and there were sisters there to show me how to do this, to show me how to do the other and so forth.  And you just, you go and that's how life develops.  And children learn from their parents, children learn relationships and things get done; and they learn to be selfless, and not after their own will, but of a higher will and a call, and sometimes there is nobody in the city where you are, you get called out of the country, out of the continent, off to Africa or someplace, and you feel that's your call; you don't hear a voice, but you feel that you want to serve, serve, serve.  And you can't put your finger on it, but you want to serve; you want to be useful; you want to be God's handmaid or God's lad or what.  And it goes on and not a thing that has any written rules.
Story_ID: 91083
Speaker 1: Do you have--could you tell me what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: What are my what?
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well, I hope that this thing called, "race prejudice" can go, that you don't see the color of a person's skin, you see--and the same with friendship.  Who decides about friendship.  That's just as difficult to locate or find the source of.  And I want us to be live as a family, live as brothers and sisters, and do good, and not call people names, and not think about them as different.  Flowers are different.  Vegetables are different.  People are different and wherever you are, not self, but the other person.  You are called by others.  You are called by God to serve and not just to get.  And by degrees, it possesses you.  It becomes a part of your nature.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean you look at the flowers in a vase.  They are different color.  Why are they white, or why are they pink, or why are they large, or why are they round?  People are the same.  Seeds are sown by parents and grandparents.  I had wonderful grandparents.  They sowed good seeds with all of us; and they didn't preach to us and tell us to do this.  They just were there, and my mother wanted me--she wanted me to marry and have children and that kind of thing like she did my sister, and she only had two girls.  My sister and my mother were great friends.  I was (unclear).  She wanted me to be like my sisters and do the social things and so forth.  Well, I wasn't inclined that way.
Story_ID: 91188
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay, which book are you holding in the top photograph?
Speaker 2: The--the colored one.  It's the not green one or the white one, the one next to it.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay.
Speaker 2: "Other Little Ships."
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA SPEAKER:  Those are all four books that you've published there?
Speaker 2: Yes, and there are two or three more, small ones--books of prayer in large print, books of hymns in large print, helps to the elderly.  All the books that I've done are to help really, mostly, the elderly.  In the last 50 or 60 years, that's been my field, the elderly.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay.
Speaker 2: And all those books are about the elderly.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA SPEAKER:  And in that bottom photograph, where are you?
Speaker 2: In the front door of our convent.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think that's--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA SPEAKER:  --That's in Toronto?
Speaker 1: Toronto, yes.  That's our convent door.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay.
Speaker 1: And all of those pictures of her are her children and grandchildren who are in universities, and my family in universities, but I haven't been able to gather as many as she because she lives in Toronto and her children live--(simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA SPEAKER:  What's your cousin's name.
Speaker 1: My cousin's name is--I forget--I'll think it personally.  She's my father's cousin and she lives in Toronto.  She was born in Toronto.
Speaker 2: Is she a Murphy?
Speaker 1: No, she's related to the Howards.
Speaker 2: Oh, to the Howards.
Speaker 1: And she's very nice to me.  I've got a bag.  I'm getting ready to go off to visit somebody--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA SPEAKER:   --(unclear)--(SIMULTANEOUS)--
Speaker 1: --or speak somewhere.  There was a lady and I ran a home; and her nephew used to come and see her every week.  After he came to look after her, he would do errands.  He'd go to the library and he'd go this place and he'd go that place and drive me to meet, go to the hospital, go to comfort people who just lost somebody, somebody died every week.  And he's going to meet me at the station tomorrow.  Whenever I travel, he comes to take me to pick me up and take me to the convent; and he--that started because his aunt--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --That's your brother?
Speaker 1: We were seven.  There's one missing.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA SPEAKER:  I'm sorry.  I made a mistake.  Can we do that again?  Left to right again, I'm sorry, I made a mistake.
Speaker 1: You mean, this--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --yeah, just start again.
Speaker 1: Which is left?
Speaker 2: Well, just start where he is and name them.
Speaker 1: Howard, William, Constance, George--George--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --that's your mother, right?
Speaker 1: My mother, Grace, my brother, Jim, my sister, Rebecca, George B.  He was (unclear).  There were seven of us.  One was drowned.  His name was Houston and he was driving out west, and he went swimming, and he--and that's some anniversary because the men, they all have button hole, they all have a flower, so I think it was my mother's and father's, maybe their 30th anniversary or something like that, and I happen to be home.  That's my immediate family.  Now, they've all gone, George B., Rebecca, Jim, my mother, my father and the other brother.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA SPEAKER:  Penn Alumni from cross generations, picture of their sister, Constance Murphy, ED'28 [1928] one of 24 Penn pioneers featured in the book, "Franklin's Daughter," Lolita Jackson, ENG'89 [1989], and Bonnie Eisner, Event Coordinator.
Speaker 1: I don't know that picture.  I mean my cousin got it for me.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was on the internet on Penn News.
Speaker 1: He was buried this week and the papers--every picture--every paper had something about him.  I've got about seven or eight articles about him.  He believed in brotherhood.  He didn't believe race prejudice.  He wanted more people to be lawyers, and know the law and help one another; and he was kind, and he never turned anybody away.  And I feel very, very sad; and I was the first child to see him when he was born.  When he was born at home, my mother didn't go to hospital when she had her babies.  They were born at home and when I came home from school, there was a sister, white, Episcopal, and she said, "You got a baby brother upstairs."  And she didn't let me hold him because he was so fragile, but loved the sisters.  I used to drive them when him when I'd go out to places.  So that's my judge brother.  Hopkins Hospital to (unclear) my mind and brain and all for testing, the Baltimore Longitudinal Study on Aging and I went down there the other day to say good-bye.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION
Speaker 1: That's at John Hopkins' Hospital, and to say I'm not coming down anymore.  I don't think--I mean if the Lord wants me, but I think I'm too frail, so I go down every year and I stay two weeks--I mean two days or three days and they give me--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --this is at the John Hopkins at Baltimore Longitudinal Study?
Speaker 1: Baltimore Longitudinal Study--longwise, in a line.  Ships, it comes from the Bible, St. Mark's Gospel when the apostles were in a ship with the Lord and a storm came up; and he was--and they were frightened and they called on the Lord to help them, and he calmed the storm and the apostles.  And he calmed the storm, not only for them, but for other little ships.  It's right out of the Bible, St. Mark's Gospel, "Other Little Ships," every time we did good to one person, they pass it on, "Other Little Ships," other people.  So the thing is to do good is carried on.  We're all ships on the sea of life and as we do things, we do them, and they're always--every time you do good to someone, it's passed on to the others, whether they know it or not.  Sometimes they know it, sometimes they don't, but nothing that is good is lost.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA SPEAKER:  Why did you decide to write the book?
Speaker 1: Well because I had been so blessed with--so many good things came my way, to be a sister, to be a teacher, to be a visit, to share life.  I wanted other people to know the good things that sisters do.  There are sisters all over the world--
