Story_ID: 39304
Speaker 1: All right.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Roland Sebastian Martin, R-O-L-A-N-D, S-E-B-A-S-T-I-A-N, M-A-R-T-I-N.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: November 14, 1968, Riverside Hospital, Houston, Texas, Harris County.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Journalist.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: May 2, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at my home in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia].  I always make it clear, I live here, but I'm from Houston.
Story_ID: 39305
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm up.  And they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: No problem.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food, absolutely.  Gumbo.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color, of course.  Black.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year, actually, it's a favorite time of the day, and it's about 6:30 p.m. when the sun is setting.  It is golden, and it's absolutely gorgeous when the sun is setting across a golf course.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, Jamaica, Negril, Jamaica.  My wife and I, we've been to, 'Swept Away', the resort there, probably six, seven different times.  So, that's the favorite spot for us.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite phrase or saying, absolutely, and it's what I do as a journalist, "If you do good, I'll talk about you; if you do bad, I'll talk about you.  At the end of the day, I will talk about you."
Story_ID: 39306
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Reginald Lynn Martin, Sr.] side, but I'm gonna ask about them separately, then put them together.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Her name is Emelda Joyce Lemond Martin, E-M-E-L-D-A, Joyce, J-O-Y-C-E, Lemond, L-E-M-O-N-D, Martin, M-A-R-T-I-N.
Speaker 1: All right, now, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth, November 30, 1947, born in Houston, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, well, now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Well, my, my grandparents, my maternal grandparents were actually born and raised in Opelousas, Louisiana.  It's O-P-E-L-O-U-S-A-S, Louisiana.  And my grandmother's, her folks, they were from Louisiana, but my grandfather, his parents actually migrated from Haiti.  And so they migrated from Haiti to Opelousas, Louisiana.  And then after they had gotten married, they, that was the great Creole migration that took place from Louisiana.  And they were part of that in terms of moving to Houston.  There was a, there was a huge contingent of people who migrated from Louisiana, Southern Louisiana to--the destination actually, for a lot of them, was actually California.  That's why, if you go to Oakland, California, if you go to the Bay Area [San Francisco, California], there's a huge Creole population in the Bay Area because of that particular migration.  And, but they actually stopped in Houston.  And actually, it's pretty interesting because we have relatives along that whole path.  You have people who stopped off in Baytown, Texas, stopped off in Crosby, Texas, and then they stopped off in Houston, Texas.  And so for my grandparents, that's what they did.  And they, they stopped off in the Clinton Park neighborhood in Houston, Texas, near the now, now near the Houston ship channel, the Port of Houston.  And that's actually where I was born, where I was raised, right there in Clinton Park, not far from where my grandparents lived.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 39307
Speaker 1: So the Great Creole migration, now, this takes place, what, in the 1930s?
Speaker 2: This takes place in the, late 1930s, early '40s [1940s], so yes.  So you're talking about that period of time.  And, in fact, it's interesting, in the Easy Rawlins character, Walter Mosley in his book, Easy Rawlins actually is from Louisiana.  Of course, they went to Los Angeles [California], but same thing, in the character in that particular book.  So, yeah, that migration took place, and Merv Aubespin, A-U-B-E-S-P-I-N, and Merv is a great journalist.  He had, in fact, has for the last decade has been actually working on a book about that very migration, that, that Creole migration that took place from Louisiana to California.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, all right, so it's been called the Great Creole Migration.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And these are the black people of French--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --lineage?
Speaker 2: Yep, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Migrating to--you said their original goal was California.
Speaker 2: Yeah, a number of people, the plan was obviously for a lot of people to go from, from Louisiana to California.  But along that stretch, folks just simply stopped off and just stayed in the different cities.  And so that's why we, if you go to Houston, Texas, there's a huge, huge Creole population there.  They might call themselves, Frenchmen.  They might call themselves any number of things, but I have a huge, a ton of relatives who live there in the Houston area, of course, other parts, in Baytown, Crosby.  And I'm talking about I have upwards of three, 400 relatives who, and they had, you know, kind of multiple kids who all stayed there as well.  So that's all a part of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  I knew that Los Angeles had a lot of Louisiana people.
Speaker 2: There you go.  And that's why, that's why Zydeco music has a huge influence there in the Houston area.  You have a significant black Catholic population because most of these folks were Catholic, just like my [maternal] grandparents.  They were Catholic as well.  And so, that's why you have such a strong connection between the, between the Creole population there in Houston with folks from Louisiana.  And we often will go back to see relatives there and where my grandparents actually were born and raised.
Speaker 1: Okay, was there an incident or some overarching reason or a leader of this migration?
Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge.  It was just basically for a lot of folks, upward mobility, because you're talking about living in Opelousas.  It is a, you could call it a country town, much like many, many other towns there in Louisiana.  And so it was a, it was an opportunity for jobs, things along those lines where folks would actually decide to leave.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And, in fact, yeah, 'cause like, for instance, comedian, Paul Mooney, his folks were part of the migration from Shreveport, Louisiana to California.
Speaker 1: That's Paul Mooney who influenced--
Speaker 2: Richard Pryor.
Speaker 1: Richard Pryor.
Speaker 2: Wrote for him, worked for him, yep.
Story_ID: 39308
Speaker 1: Are there any stories about them [Martin's maternal grandparents] in the [Great Creole] migration and how it happened or--
Speaker 2: Not necessarily.  It was just a matter of them making the decision to move and packing the family up and heading out to Houston [Texas].  And so, my, my, my mom [Emelda Joyce Lemond Martin], she was born in Houston.  And so she is the, she's number six out of eight kids.  And so some of the earlier kids were not born in Houston, but she was.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the older ones were actually born in [Opelousas] Louisiana?
Speaker 2: A couple of 'em, yeah, but others were born in Houston.
Speaker 1: All right, so, now, what did your mother say about growing up in Houston?
Speaker 2: You know, first of all, I mean our family then and now, extremely close-knit family.  And so when you have that many kids, you really don't have time or I always say, you don't have room for friends.  But, but, but growing up in Houston, my grandfather idolized my grandmother.  He worshiped her, and it was always interesting, again, having that many kids, they were multi, I mean a multi-talented family.  My, my aunts, along with my mom all could sing, and they often would sing at different churches and events in and around the city.  My uncles played instruments.  My grandfather was a huge baseball fan, often coached family members in ballgames.  And, in fact, later on, we would have, you know, we all went, basically, we all went to the same church as well.  And so, you know, later on we would always play these huge softball games at the park 'cause, you know, my grandmother with eight kids, she had about forty or so grandchildren.  And so, you know, we could fill out two or three baseball fields, our family alone.  But, but again, growing up in Houston for her, in Clinton Park.  Clinton Park was a unique neighborhood because it was one of the first black neighborhoods developed by the federal government.  And so there used to be a nine-hole golf course that actually took, that actually was in the community.  And so the clubhouse was actually on the same street where my grandparents live.  They lived at 250 Georgia Street.  And so the clubhouse was, was further down.  And also there was a huge wooded area, there's a huge, huge park in Clinton Park.  And there was a huge wooded area.  And so my grandfather and his brothers would often go hunting in that area as well.  And so Clinton Park was a, was a very interesting neighborhood, like I said, was near many of the, you know, later the chemical plants, things along those lines.  So a lot of the folks in that neighborhood, blue-collar workers who worked at various plants.  That's where they all lived.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is the third ward of Houston, right?
Speaker 2: No, no, not third ward.
Speaker 1: It's not third?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  Clinton Park, Clinton Park is considered really Northeast Houston, but it's right next to what is now the Port of Houston, often called the Ship Channel.  And the Ship Channel Bridge is not far as well.  And so you have in that area of Clinton Park, you have Galena Park, and you have Galena Manor, all--and also Clinton Park, all in that particular area.  Across the freeway was the community of Pleasantville.  So, but this was all predominantly, this was all African American community.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 39309
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Emelda Joyce Lemond Martin]--what high school did she go to?
Speaker 2: Mom went to Jack Yates High School [Houston, Texas].  She went to Jack Yates High school.  My dad [Reginald Lynn Martin, Sr.] went to Jack Yates High School.  He started at Worthing High School where my [paternal] grandfather, Jewel Martin, actually was a teacher there.  But he later transferred to Yates High School, and that's where both of them graduated from in '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Jack Yates High School is one of the most historic high schools in Houston, named after Reverend Jack Yates who is, who was a minister, a very important civil rights leader in Houston in the early 1900s, actually, the late 1800s, early 1900s.  And by chance, and it's not like, you know, we, I did not necessarily grow up attending Yates games, things along those lines because Jack Yates is in the third ward.  We lived in Clinton Park, so I mean you had some distance there.  But because of the School of Communications, that's how I ended up at Yates.
Speaker 1: Okay, the big rivals were Phyllis Wheatley.
Speaker 2: Yep, yep, with Phyllis Wheatley.  My mom, she was, they often, you know, went to the games.  She, you know, they would always tell us about those particular games.  Like I say, it wasn't, it wasn't like that was a huge part of my childhood, going to Yates-Wheatley games because, again, we didn't live in third ward, didn't live in that particular neighborhood growing.  And so we were on the other part, other side of town.  But clearly, you know, when I got to Yates, learned a lot more about the history of the school.  And, of course, they, they had their yearbook, and so I would often, you know, go through that, and you would see the photos and the coronations and the huge pageantry of those games and things along those lines.
Speaker 1: Now, what were your mother's aspirations in school?
Speaker 2: She was part of the French team.  She was in the French Club.  She was very much in love with math, and that's, that's really what she--that's what she loved.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did she have a desire to go to college or did she go to college?
Speaker 2: Had, had some desire to go to college.  What ended up happening was they graduated and then she and my dad got married.  They had my brother, November 13, 1967, Reginald Lynn Martin, Jr.  And then, but eventually both of them didn't go to college, and, but that never stopped them from mandating that that was the case for us.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 39310
Speaker 1: So, let me go to your father's side.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Reginald Lynn Martin, Jr. [Sr.], R-E-G-I-N-A-L-D, Lynn, L-Y-N-N, Martin, M-A-R-T-I-N, Sr.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's senior and my brother is junior.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: April 25, 1947, Houston, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what can you tell us about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: They were born and raised--again, born there in Houston, his mother and father.  His, his grandmother, who was his dad's father, lived with him.  And they actually came from Oklahoma.  And a huge Indian influence for them.  In fact, my grandmother often would wear her hair in the same way many Indian women would wear their hair.  In fact, I remember seeing photos of my brother--excuse me, of my dad and his brothers, literally, with the, with the hair sort of parted in the middle, and the ponytails all the way to the ground.  And we saw, I remember going to my, I remember going to my great-grandmother's home on my dad's mother's side and seeing these photos.  And you talk about, and we're sitting there, you know, who are these four guys in this photo?  Then she told us.  We were like, wow.  And so, but again, most of, most of that family, they're in Houston, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you know what Indian group they were?
Speaker 2: I do not know.  We have been looking back at that.  She passed, my great-grandmother passed--on my dad's side, passed when I was maybe five or six [years old], and so didn't really have the opportunity to get that knowledge, that information.  And so we're still sort of, sort of tracking that information down.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But definitely, again, came from Oklahoma to Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you can get them back to Oklahoma--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but then it's--okay.  All right, so, so they, do they come to Texas in the '30s [1930s] or '40s [1940s]?
Speaker 2: Come to Texas, yep, same period.  And my, my dad, excuse me, my dad's father and my [grand]mother, they had several kids as well, a total of--my dad has a total of eight, it's a total number of eight of them.  But there were four boys with his mother and his father, and then he later remarried.  And then my, and then his mother later remarried.  In fact, my mom's, excuse me, my dad's mother, left actually shortly after he was born because of physical beatings from his father.
Story_ID: 39311
Speaker 1: Okay, so we were talking about your father's [Reginald Lynn Martin, Sr.] side of the family.  Now, what did they do for a living?
Speaker 2: His, my parents?
Speaker 1: Well, your father's parents?
Speaker 2: Got yah.  Mother, was a homemaker, and his father, much like many men, worked at the plants there in Houston [Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay, and I don't think I asked you the same thing about your mother's family too, but--
Speaker 2: Same thing, exact same thing.  My [maternal] grandfather worked at various plants. Like many of the men, didn't have high school education, coming out of Opelousas [Louisiana], worked in the fields there, and then coming to Houston, worked in, worked in the plants there.  Now, the neighborhood we grew up in, same thing.  So like many of the African Americans there, blue-collar workers.  There were a number of manufacturing facilities and other kind of places all around Clinton Park, (unclear), that whole area.  And so, that's what they did.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, your dad went to Jack Yates [High School; Houston] too.  He graduated in '66 [1966] as well [same as Martin's mother, Emelda Joyce Lemond Martin].
Speaker 2: Yep, yep.
Speaker 1: Now, what were his aspirations in high school?  Did he ever talk about what he wanted to do?
Speaker 2: Well, it was, it was very interesting.  My dad was a very good student, but what took place when he was in high school, his grandmother suffered a debilitating stroke.  And so he had to spend a lot of time really having to take care of her.  His older brothers were not as responsible as he was and so it fell upon him to have to take care of her.  So that really hurt or really took him off focus in terms of education.  And, and it's very interesting because there's no doubt that that was painful because he really enjoyed school, you know, different classes, as well, a voracious reader in terms of very knowledgeable, which is, which was really passed down to us, really making that perfectly clear to all of his kids but also, the importance of what family means and responsibility in taking care of family as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 39312
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how they [Martin's parents, Emelda Joyce Lemond Martin and Reginald Lynn Martin, Sr.] met?  I know they were both at Jack Yates [High School; Houston, Texas], but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, actually, my dad was going to someone--he was seeing somebody else.  And he went to this young woman's house.  My mom was a friend of hers, and she was there.  And then my dad saw her there and was far more interested in her than he was this other woman.  And that's what ended up happening.  They ended up getting together versus him being with the other woman in his high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So did they get married right after high school or--
Speaker 2: Got married right after high school, and, see, they graduate at different points, like my dad graduated--at that time, they sort of had that mid-year graduation.  And then they had the spring graduation.  So that's what happened there.  So, yep, got married and shortly thereafter, had my brother [Reginald Lynn Martin, Jr.], a year or so later, my brother was born.  And then I came one year and one day after my brother.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I still mess with him, saying I screwed up his first birthday party by sending my mom into labor (laughter).
Story_ID: 39313
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you think about your parents' [Emelda Joyce Lemond Martin and Reginald Lynn Martin, Sr.] talents, their dispositions, their looks, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Actually, it's pretty interesting because 'Ebony Magazine' did a story on mothers and sons and all these people were saying, "Oh, my God, you know, seeing your mother, you and your mom have the exact same smile.  I mean we can just, I mean spitting image."  But what's interesting is when I am in public with my dad, people swear that's my brother.  And so whenever people say that, I'm going, well, yeah, I'm their child.  Of course, I'm gonna look just like 'em.  And so it really is very interesting.  It depends upon who I'm with.  I mean really, when I'm with a lot of people, I've actually met people who knew my mom, and when they saw me, they said, they literally said, is your mother Emelda Lemond?  And I was like, yeah.  And they said, my God, you look just like her.  And then the same thing with my dad.  So, you know, that's always a good thing.  So some kids sort of look more like one or the other.  I'm really in many ways right down the middle in terms of taking after 'em.  My dad, although I prefer to lose more weight, we literally wear the exact same size as well.  So whenever he comes to my house, he doesn't even pack.  He just wears all my stuff.  He's known to take my stuff too so I got to be very, be very careful to make sure he doesn't spend lots of time in my closet.  And so, and so in terms of looks, I mean seriously, I, people's, I mean I've met many people.  They swear, they say there's no way in the world that's your dad.  There's no way.  It's gotta be your brother.  So I said, I could take that two ways.  I said, either I look real old, I said, or, we've got great DNA and he looks young.  So I'll take the latter versus the former.  In terms of, in terms of talents, it's pretty, it's pretty, it's interesting because my mom, my mom and, my mom is very talkative, and so I, there's no doubt I get that from her.
Story_ID: 39314
Speaker 1: My dad [Reginald Lynn Martin, Sr.] talks, he's very thoughtful, like I said, when it comes to reading, when it comes to just attaining knowledge, very much like that.  In fact, it was interesting growing up, first of all, my dad worked at Amtrak for the bulk of my childhood.  And my dad literally reads the entire paper.  And when I say he reads the entire paper, I don't mean, okay, he reads every section.  No.  He literally reads the entire paper.  Whenever you would, when classified ads were huge in newspapers, they would always have, you know, a space somewhere in the paper, and they would just sort of tuck a story back there in the classified section just to fill the hole.  He would be reading that story.  And we used to have these battles growing up because by the time I got to the seventh grade, we had a 'Newspapers in Education' program in my junior high school, William Holland Middle School.  And so I started really reading the paper as a result of that, and so I would then, so at, at school, we got the 'Houston Chronicle'.  That was, that was the NIE program.  But at home, we subscribed to the 'Houston Post'.  Both were broad sheets.  And so I would start reading both and my dad literally, I mean it would take--first of all, you couldn't touch his paper until--this is truly a man thing, you could not touch his paper until he read it.  Okay, fine.  But it would take him, he would spend five days reading the Sunday paper.  I mean he read the whole thing.  And I'm sitting there going, "Dude, seriously, it shouldn't take five days to read the Sunday paper."  And so we started having this battle of wills because he would read it, wouldn't think about it, would throw the paper away.  So I'm going in and taking the paper out of the trashcan.  I'm knocking food off of it.  It might be wet, and all of that.  So we're going, and my mom is going crazy because she's seeing this go back and forth, back and forth, back and forth.  And she's like, "Look, Reginald, stop throwing the paper away so he's, so he can stop going in the trashcan and pulling it out."  And so then he would remember sometimes, and so then it, then I got tired of waiting for him to read the newspaper, got sick and tired of waiting.  So I would go read it first.  So then he started hiding the paper.  He would hide it in his top drawer.  Okay, that's easy to find.  Then next thing I know, he would hide it, he would hide it under the mattress.  Well, that made no sense 'cause there was a lump in the mattress.  He would hide it under the bed.  Then he would hide it in the closet, didn't matter, always found the paper.  And so I would, I would even get to the point of literally finding the paper, and then I would methodically take the plastic off and then I would lay the paper out on the, on the kitchen table, be sure not to break the creases and read the paper, finish before he would get home, slide it back into the plastic, put it back in the hiding space.  And so finally, my mom was like, okay, enough of this back and forth.  So he finally got around to just finishing the paper and then putting it in my room.  But he would watch news all the time, same thing.  And so, I mean I'm talking about all the time, morning news when he was on furlough from Amtrak, still getting paid from Amtrak, but frankly, being paid not to work, he's watching the noon news, the four o'clock, the five o'clock news, the six o'clock news.  Then, when they created four o'clock newscasts, he was watching that.  When a new station in Houston came along and created a nine o'clock newscast, he was watching that.  He would then, another station created a seven o'clock newscast, he would watch that.  He would watch a ten o'clock newscast and watch somebody else's rebroadcast of the ten.  I'm like, man.  I'm like this is ridiculous.  And then the problem is, we had to turn to the news station fifteen minutes early because he did not want to miss the beginning of the news.  He would literally watch the preview of the newscast.  So we call it the tease, and we're going, "Can we finish watching the rest of the show?"  Never happened.  And so, it was always interesting, that back and forth.  But in terms of just the ability to just gather in all this information and learn, and so no doubt I got that from him.  My mom [Emelda Joyce Lemond Martin] was a, a great type, typer in school.  Also, when she graduated, she worked at an insurance company.  And I remember we got a typewriter.  We got comput--we had the first Apple, one of the first early Apple computers.  And then we had a--
Speaker 2: The little Mac Plus?
Speaker 1: No, it was the, it was the Macintosh, I'll never forget that doggone green screen and all that sort of stuff like that.  And we had a computer, and so I'm sitting here, you know, typing on it.  And I type real fast with two fingers, and mom got so ticked off because she said, I mean she yelled at me big time because I finished this project real fast.  And she was, she was like did you look at the keys?  And I was like, yeah.  Boy, she got ticked off.  I mean she was ticked, I mean she was hot, yelling, cursing me out, everything.  So when I was at Yates [High School], I had to take a typing class in my senior year which, I mean it was crucial because, I mean that was a skill needed to be a journalist.  So a lot of the, a lot of the things that we were about, my parents forced us to read.
Story_ID: 39315
Speaker 1: Let me go back a little bit.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: We always ask this question as part of our routine.  Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Ah, man, earliest childhood memory?  And I wouldn't even know what the earliest childhood memory is, you know, other than, I mean I remember--and I don't know how old I was when this happened.  I mean I was a kid, I'm talking about, I had to be five or six [years old].  We had a (laughter), we had a family cookout.  We lived on Defender Street in Clinton Park [Houston, Texas].  I lived in Clinton Park my entire life, my entire childhood.  So the first place we lived was on Defender Street, and that was our first, that was our first home in that neighborhood.  And then later, we moved to 222 Pennsylvania Street in the same neighborhood.  But we had a family gathering, and it was a barbeque.  We were in the backyard.  And I decide to, and again, having no idea about cooking or anything, I decide to get some leaves and some grass and to throw them on the barbeque fire.  And I'll never (laughter), I'll never forget, I remember being, I remember crouching down and throwing the leaves and the grass on the fire.  And my dad [Reginald Lynn Martin, Sr.] runs up and he smacks me on my behind, and I still can remember turning around and seeing him.  Oh, man, I get my butt beat because when you're barbequing, okay, you don't realize that, that smell is gonna be on the meat.  Ah, man, I got, ah, man, I remember I got whipped big time.  I remember crying.  Then I got sent to my room.  I remember being in our bunk beds, and then later, I guess by an hour or so, I was allowed to come back outside.  And all my other cousins were ticked off at me because of how the meat tasted (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now were you--
Speaker 2: That was crazy.
Story_ID: 39316
Speaker 1: Was it just you and your brother [Reginald Lynn Martin, Jr.] in the household or did you have other brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: No, no, it was, my brother was born in '67 [1967], and I was born in '68 [1968].  My sister, LeVita, was born in, July 27, 1970.  But then my second sister didn't come along until June 19, 1975.  And then my third sister was born March 9, 1978.  So for a five-year period, it was just the three of us, yep.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Now, you, earlier, you asked about in terms of looks.  It's interesting.  My grandmother showed my dad [Reginald Lynn Martin, Sr.] this black and white photo of a baby, and my dad absolutely swore it was me.  In fact, it was my mom [Emelda Joyce Lemond Martin].  He was, I mean adamant, that's, that's Roland.  My grandmother's like, nope, that's your wife.  So even in that case.  There are few--now, what's interesting is there are few baby photos of me 'cause my parents were going through a rough time financially.  And they're not that, there're only a handful of, and I'm talking about maybe a couple baby photos of me.  And probably there are not more photos--by the time I was four [years old], more photos, but not many during that period.
Story_ID: 39317
Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up [in Houston, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Oh, (laughter).  Well, what was interesting is, my parents [Emelda Joyce Lemond Martin and Reginald Lynn Martin, Sr.] wanted to make sure that their children were exposed to different things.  And so they purposely took us to restaurants.  They purposely took us to, took advantage of museums and parks and things along those lines.  I mean I remember taking many family trips to the natural museums in Houston, the space museum, the history museums.  That was really important to them.  It was important to them for us to go places that, and to experience also different foods.  To this day, I hate Mexican food.  I just don't eat Mexican food.  I'll eat the chicken.  I'll eat the fajitas, by itself.  That's it.  I remember going to a Mexican restaurant when we were kids, and I ordered a burger and frees.  Man, my dad was ticked.  I mean he was hot with me.  He hated when we did that.  And so, I mean we had a war of wills.  I didn't, I didn't lose it.  That was one of the early war of wills we had that I would not give in, so I can be stubborn that way.  But that was, that was important.  It was always, growing up in Clinton Park [Houston] was, was pretty interesting because we were the only siblings of my mom who lived in the neighborhood they grew up in.  So we spent more time at my [maternal] grandparents' house than any of their other grandchildren.  And that was always cool because our church, the church that we, that I was born, raised in, was baptized in, the first meeting for that church was actually in my grandparents' living room.
Speaker 1: What was the name?
Speaker 2: The church was Our Lady--Our Lady Star of the Sea Catholic Church, black Catholic church right there on Fidelity Road.  And it was, again, three blocks from my grandparents' house.  Clinton Park Elementary School was right there in our neighborhood.  We lived, oh, eight, ten streets from my grandparents' home.  So it always, you know, we would always go past their street when we would, would head home.  And so their house, a lot of times was a stopover.  When we had to go to their house, we would do so.  It was always, it was always, I remember it used to be always interesting.  We'd be coming home from school, and you literally could smell, maybe it was other houses as well, but you could literally smell what they were cooking.  So we would be going down, we would be walking down the street, and so it was me and my brother [Reginald Lynn Martin, Jr.].  And then later, my sister [LeVita Martin], and we would be walking down the street, and go like, man, what is mother and papa cooking?  So we would just hang a left on Georgia Street, and go right to their house.  My grandparents were ridiculous coffee drinkers.  And they were always, I mean I'm talking about afternoon, always drink coffee.  So, what they had--we'd be drinking coffee.  Maybe that's probably why I'm so wired today, and it was weird, I don't even drink coffee.  I, I, seriously, I think the last time I probably had coffee was at their house when I was maybe eight or nine [years old] or literally, we were that young.  I haven't had coffee since then, but I probably got enough caffeine in me.  That's probably why I'm so wired today.  I don't, I, I don't do coffee.  I don't do hot tea.  I don't do a energy drink.  When I'm up, I'm up.  So that was always, that was always cool, and it was, it was, I just--it was always great because we would, we would always walk home from school.  We would always, like I say [beeping alarm], we would always walk home from school.  We always, we were always outside doing stuff.  But my dad was very protective.  When we got bicycles, he wouldn't let us ride them around our neighborhood.  I mean he just wouldn't.  He would not.  We could only ride in our backyard.  And we're going, dude, seriously, it's grass.  It's difficult; didn't matter.  If we did ride bicycles, he would literally, would put them in the car, and we would go to the park.  But he insisted, see, he was very protective of us.  And so, and so, again, early on, he wouldn't--I don't know if it was because he was afraid other kids would try to steal the bikes, if it was safety, with cars coming; wouldn't do it, wouldn't do it.  But it was, but we had a very--and the thing is with my family, oh, my God, when I say, "close-knit," again, we all nearly went to the same church, all of my grandparents.  And when I say my grandparents, I'm speaking of my mom's side.
Story_ID: 39318
Speaker 1: We did not--my dad's [Reginald Lynn Martin, Sr.] father was killed by his second wife.  So I--when my dad was nine [years old].  So I never knew my grandfather.  His mom left the home shortly thereafter, after he was born because of physical beatings from his dad.  And so--
Speaker 2: So does that tell--
Speaker 1: --his formative years, he did not, he didn't know his mom.  In fact, he did not, his mom was alive all those years, and my dad did not meet his mom until 1980.  And I'll never forget, and again, we, so, you know, we're kids and we're growing up, we're very close to my maternal grandparents, didn't talk a lot about my dad's side of the family; knew his brothers, my Uncle Jewel was in the [U.S.] Marines.  He would always come and stay with us for two to three weeks at a time when he was back from the bases or whatever.  His other brother, J.D., we saw sparingly.  His other brother, Melvin, stayed in Houston [Texas], so we would see him a lot.  His brother, Gus, ah, come and go, you know, every now and then.  Gus was really his half brother.  We would see his other, his sister, my Aunt Juanita every now and then.  But that was it.  My Uncle Jewel who was my dad's uncle, my great uncle, his dad's brother, we saw him a lot.  He really was the only, my Uncle Jewel was the only family member on my dad's side who we consistently saw a lot of.  He was the one who was a school teacher in Worthing [Texas].
Speaker 2: Now, you said earlier, I think, that one of your father's brothers left because of the beatings or something?
Speaker 1: No, no, no--
Speaker 2: That wasn't--
Speaker 1: --no, my father's mother.
Speaker 2: His mother left.
Speaker 1: Yeah, his mom left.
Speaker 2: What was (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So he grew up with, he grew up without knowing his mom.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I heard that part, but I thought you said earlier that somebody's brother left because of, or another relative--
Speaker 1: Un-un.
Speaker 2: --left--
Speaker 1: No, it was my, it was my, my dad's mom.  So he grew up without his mom.  In fact, if it wasn't for his, his grandfather taking care of him, he likely would have died, because, again, not having the mother there, dad not really taking care of the child.
Story_ID: 39319
Speaker 1: And so, and so growing up, we had this really, really close-knit family on my mom's [Emelda Joyce Lemond Martin] side.  And what was interesting about that was, my [maternal] grandparents did not want my mom to marry my dad [Reginald Lynn Martin, Sr.] because of his skin color.  Now, my dad's skin tone is the same as mine.  But my mom is extremely fair, and my grand--so remember, you, remember, when you talk about that Creole population, coming out of Louisiana, I mean you had that serious thing when it came to skin, when it came to the brown paper bag test you always would hear about in Louisiana.  My, in fact, my mom's best friend in high school, my grandmother would not allow her to be her matron of honor 'cause she was too dark.  And so there was a lot of friction early on between my dad and my mom's parents because of his skin tone.   And, but later on, out of all--how God works, out of all of my mom's brothers and sisters, out of all of their spouses, there was no one who was closer to them than my parents.  And, in fact, when my grandfather was dying, he told my, he told my dad that.  He apologized for what happened when, before they got married, when they got married, and he said, "Reginald, not even my sons have taken care of us like you have."  So, lots of family gatherings, and lots of, I mean just--I didn't have room for friends growing up.
Story_ID: 39320
Speaker 1: Now, your father [Reginald Lynn Martin, Sr.] wasn't a Creole, was he?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, he wasn't a Creole.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And that was a part of it as well.
Speaker 1: Did he convert to the Catholic Church?
Speaker 2: Yep, he did convert to Catholic Church.  And I was baptized, and so we went to Catholic Church all those years.  You, when you talk about those sights and sounds, we had so many family gatherings, but we used to throw a party, I mean at the drop of a hat.  And I remember one, I mean our, our house was party central for our family.  Remember, this is a huge family.  But just, it was just sort of this natural thing where our house became--it was always my [maternal] grandparents' house after church.  I mean that was all the, every Sunday, that was a gathering place.  But a lot of other events, it was always our house.  It's not like we had a huge house.  We didn't have money.  We didn't have any of that, but it was just, it was all about family get together's.  And so I remember we had these crazy New Year's Eve parties.  One of my uncles worked at Astro World, and so he hooked up this huge fireworks display.  I mean so, I mean here we are living in Clinton Park [Houston, Texas].  And so we sit here and block the street off and have this huge fireworks deal.  So it was, it was just great growing up with family.  And I made the point earlier, I mean literally, and it's true, I didn't have--never in my life have I really had friends.  I mean, you know, you meet people, and you say, oh, this is my childhood friend.  And I have no memories, none, and I've thought about it.  I never spent the night at a non-relative's house.  I, I didn't, I mean I had friends at school.  But I didn't have friends, those friends did not translate to after school.  Yeah, I might have went to someone's birthday party.  I mean, not might have, I did.  I did go to folks' birthday parties and stuff along those lines.  But I didn't hang with friends.  I, I didn't, it wasn't like, hey, let's get together and we're gonna go here and here.  Let's ride our bikes together or we're gonna go to the store.  No.  For us, it was absolute family.  And again, I would joke that I just had too many relatives, but, yeah, I had tons of cousins.  And so it was always really pretty much just me and my brother [Reginald Lynn Martin, Jr.].  And that's just how our family was.
Story_ID: 39321
Speaker 1: Now, how was the neighborhood, Clinton Park [Houston, Texas] in terms of--
Speaker 2: Clinton Park was a, it was a perfect example of a working-class neighborhood.  You had, growing up, a number of the people in Clinton Park were homeowners.  And folks took care of the homes, and they took care of their yards and things along those lines.  And then you could, and then, I mean you had, you had folks, you had drugs.  It wasn't like it was prevalent, but then all of a sudden, you can--I can remember the transformation as it went from homeowners to folks passing away to their kids taking over the homes or then renting it out.  What was in, I remember watching as the neighborhood began to slowly crumble.  But what was interesting about my street really, the, that portion of Pennsylvania, all of that mess was sort of kept out.  Our home, the home next to us, the home across the street, the other home across the street, I mean all these other homes, they took care of their yards, took care of their homes and would not allow any sort of foolishness.  But then you saw it begin to change.  It was a picturesque neighborhood in terms of trees and yards--what was interesting is about, as the neighborhood began to go down, that's when my parents [Emelda Joyce Lemond Martin and Reginald Lynn Martin, Sr.] hooked up with several other people and they said they wanted to start a civic club.  A lot of people said, man, you guys are crazy.  I mean that's just nuts.  And so they began to meet, and the Saturday they launched the Civic Club, I mean it was like eight o'clock in the morning, and I remember it when we had--and again, my parents had five kids, so they had day laborers.  So I remember having to make the signs and the leaflets and stuff, and we had to go door-to-door, passing the stuff out.
Speaker 1: You were in high school then?
Speaker 2: Un-un.
Speaker 1: Grade school?
Speaker 2: I was in elementary school.  I remember it was, I had to have been, let's say sixth, fifth, sixth, seventh grade, something like that.  But it was, but I remember being a kid, and it was so funny because KTRK, the ABC affiliate did a story on launching the Civic Club.  And the reporter was Arthur Wood.  And how things happened, of course, I later go into journalism, and later, I'm a member of the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ], and I meet Arthur Wood again.  And Arthur--and I follow Arthur's career.  He followed mine.  It was always interesting that we came, our paths crossed that early.  But they really, they said, we want to change our neighborhood, and they began to work on it.  And, again, people say it can't be done.  And I use this in my speeches all the time, when I talk about how do you change a community?  And they began to meet in homes and they began to, you know, how do we do it, and talk to the police and talk to the fire department.  Who do we pick--who picks up trash or whatever?  And they began to make those calls, and the next thing you know, they had small, you know, let's have a trash pickup day.  And then let's have a--we had one success.  And the next thing is what else can we get?  You know what?  We need our park refurbished.  And we need a senior citizen's center.  Then it was, we need new street lights, and we need paved streets and a new sewer system.  And literally watching my parents--and again, my parents were not people who were in the newspaper, didn't have mega homes, didn't go down to the City Council.  They weren't in the paper or on television, but they were just your real-life community activists who cared about their neighborhood and all of the things that they fought for, they got.  And so I watched as a child, I literally watched parents who understood the value of change, the value of activism, the value of commitment and never forgot it.
Story_ID: 39322
Speaker 1: And so I recall and being in middle school, testifying before the Houston City Council about the closure of our community pool.  All of a sudden, my parents [Emelda Joyce Lemond Martin and Reginald Lynn Martin, Sr.] began to work with political campaigns, and, you know, not big-time advisors.  They were working on phone banks, and they were--all of a sudden, they ended up running the phone banks.  And it was, what was interesting is that my parents were natural leaders who were moved to make differences in the community.  But what was always interesting was that, they would come up against a line that can vault them to the next level and wouldn't jump over it.  And I saw it.  I mean I literally, I remember it.  I remember my parents worked on the first campaign, the campaign of the first female mayor of Houston, Kathy Whitmire.  And later on, my mom was named to the Historical Commission.  And so she was involved with that and I remember my dad being concerned about all the time she was spending.  And then she eventually left, left doing that sort of stuff.  I mean there were people who were--my mom later became one of the co-chairs of the Metropolitan Organization, a faith-based community organization fighting for change in neighborhoods.  And I remember traveling with her on the bus to Austin, Texas, when they were rallying there, meeting with legislators.  And so, I mean as a kid, I, I remember sitting there, being at their rallies and meeting with these folks and coming across City Council members.  And so maybe it's part of the reason why I've never been afraid of power.
Story_ID: 39323
Speaker 1: Power has never intimidated me.  Political people have never intimidated me.  I remember when I was in high school, senior year, Yates High School [Houston, Texas], State Representative Ron Wilson came to our school.  And in many ways, then Representative Wilson, very arrogant, very cocky--I've heard those words before.  And I began to question him and challenge him on parliamentary procedures 'cause he was known as a parliamentary expert in the Texas Legislature.  And I began to hit him about policy and bills, and he--I remember, I remember literally, he turned to the teacher and said, "Who is this kid?"  And so that happened, that happened several times.  It happened when political folks would come to school.  But, again, because my dad [Reginald Lynn Martin, Sr.] watched five hours of news a day, and he read the paper, I read the paper everyday as well.  So, I was a unique kid in that I was very informed about what was happening in our communities, what was happening in our city, in our state and our country.  And so I could joust with political leaders about those very issues.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, I take it you liked school?
Speaker 1: Yes and no.  I, I was, I really did not become, I really did not buckle down in school until the second semester of my sophomore year in high school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I mean I would, I would do well in certain classes.  I would do--I never liked math.  Now, I can negotiate my butt off.  I can make money.  I can talk about multiple revenue streams, but I hated math, just despised math.  It just--math never, ever clicked in my brain.  History clicked.  I breezed through history.  That was easy for me.  But the thing with, the thing with--I guess what bothered me the most about school was, I was always more interested in the external knowledge of what should have been taught and things on those lines.  I mean I, I've literally, I, even in college, I preferred reading stuff that had nothing to do with our classrooms.  That was still educational for me.  And, and maybe, I think maybe part of that was because I was so consumed with news that I was literally reading history as it happened, that other stuff did not really mesh well with me.  I wasn't, you know, my brother [Reginald Lynn Martin, Jr.] in junior high school, he was Mr. Holland.  He was on the football team.  He was on the basketball team.  He ran track.  I only played baseball, wasn't, I've never been interested in football.  My grades in junior high, my dad would not let me play, and understand, my dad, you know, likes sports.  We loved to watch sports.  Everybody in my family watched football every Sunday, men, women, did not matter.  But my dad did not play when it came to sports.  My dad would, he didn't care about athletics.  It was all about academics.  In fact, I got pulled out.  I was a, we played, we went to Vanguard Elementary School, Pleasantville Elementary School.  We were in the band.  My brother played trumpet.  I played coronet.  Then we couldn't afford the instruments for the second year, so we stopped playing.  But then when he went to middle school, he continued playing the trumpet.  I, I was late, procrastinated in going to sign up for a saxophone.  By the time I got there, they had none left, so I had to play the bass baritone horn.  Then I went from beginning band to advance in the same year.  What was interesting, when I, and so I was a medalist, seventh grade, eighth grade, walked into Yates High School, first chair, as a freshman.  I did not make it through the first semester 'cause my dad pulled me out of the band because he would not, the band instructor said, you know, we have big halftime show.  He has to stay here for practice.  And my dad said, he's not here for band.  He's here for communications.  And we went from an issue of staying late for band to me literally being out of the band.  And the band instructor said, Ms. Chappell, said, well, "If he can't stay for practice, then he can't be in the band."  And he said, you'll have his uniform tomorrow.  And I'm going, how in the hell did we go from concern about the band to me being out of the band.  It didn't matter.  To him, it was all education, did not matter.  So none of that stuff mattered to him.
Story_ID: 39324
Speaker 1: Now, let me get this straight.  Now, you started at what grade school?
Speaker 2: I started at Clinton Park Elementary School [Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was our neighborhood school.  By the, I was there for first grade, second grade.  By the third grade, I transferred to Pleasantville Elementary School.  They had a Vanguard program.  My brother [Reginald Lynn Martin, Jr.] was accepted into the Vanguard program--
Speaker 1: Now, what's the Vanguard--
Speaker 2: Vanguard is considered an advanced school.  It's a magnet school.  Houston had a, has a very extensive magnet school program.  It's, and so it was considered a school for advanced children.  And so I went there in the third grade, and I was there from third through the fifth grade.  And then my brother, and my brother was there.  My sister, LeVita [Martin], eventually, L-E-capital V-I-T-A, she eventually ended up there as well.  And then we all matriculated to William Holland Middle School which was across the street from Pleasantville.  That was the middle school we were all zoned to.  And, in fact, it's interesting, William Holland, happened to be a former principal of Yates High School.  He was, the school was named after him.  And then after being in middle school, we had those, we had the magnet school days.  And so we had an opportunity to pick what magnet schools we wanted to go to.  And so my brother, he actually went to our zone high school for high school.  He followed a girlfriend there, but after that broke up, he went to Jesse Jones High School, their Vanguard program.  I went to Jack Yates School of Communications.  My sister went to the high school for health professions.
Speaker 1: So they had a school of communications in high school?
Speaker 2: Yes, we had our own television station, radio station and newspaper in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I loved sports and so I loved media, I loved music.  And so, I said, hey, I think I'll be a DJ.  Dad [Reginald Lynn Martin, Sr.] said, no.  You're not gonna do that.  And another piece of advice that he gave me totally changed my whole career trajectory.
Story_ID: 39325
Speaker 1: Yeah, I just wanted to ask you if there are any special teachers in grade school or middle school before we get you to Jack Yates [High School, Houston, Texas]?  Or anybody that you remember as a mentor?
Speaker 2: Well, I'll never forget, actually, what's interesting is, I've always gravitated to strong-willed teachers who wouldn't take stuff off of anybody, including me, but who I also would push to the brink.  It was always this, again, this sort of war of wills.  The toughest, I'll never forget, the toughest teacher at Clinton Park Elementary School was Ms. Crawford.  This was, she was a large woman, tall woman, towering figure, and, man, she could wield the paddle better than any man in the school.  No kid wanted to act a fool and get lit up by Ms. Crawford.  So she was a tough taskmaster, and who made it perfectly clear that you're going to get educated.  When I went to Pleasantville [Elementary School], I had a number of teachers there who, who, again, same thing, pushed us--at Holland Middle School, it was Mr. Brewer.  He was a seventh grade, Texas history teacher, same thing.  I mean I'll never forget.  He loved to wear these short-sleeve shirts with these huge biceps, and man, he could light folks up too.  See, there's a, again, I was very familiar with the paddle.  My parents [Emelda Joyce Lemond Martin and Reginald Lynn Martin, Sr.], it was so funny, my parents would ask us where's the form?  Now, I don't think my parents ever signed the corporal punishment form for my sisters.
Speaker 1: So they had a form in Houston?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you had to, if you, as a parent, you could allow your child to be paddled.  And so you had to sign the form.  My parents would ask me and my brother [Reginald Lynn Martin, Jr.] for the form.  They're like, "Where is the form?"  So it was always, that was always funny.  And I probably, I got lit up more than, I got lit up more--in fact, I led the family in whippings.  I don't even know who was even in second place.  I was always doing something.  I was always talkative in class.  And see, the problem, well, my brother as too, but, see, he had better grades than I did.  So, you know, I'll never forget, I mean we were watching a movie, and one of my brother's teachers called the house to complain to my parents about him talking in class and finishing his work early and bothering other students.  And my dad was really didn't feel like talking to her 'cause he's like, we were all watching this family movie.  And I'm sitting there going, Oh, so, if a teacher calls the house for me, I get jacked up.  My grades weren't as good as his.  That was always a problem.
Story_ID: 39326
Speaker 1: But I always got in trouble in school, always.  I was always talking.  I always challenged, and I was always a challenging student in that I asked questions.  And I would, and also, I mean I wanted answers.  And it wasn't just, "Oh, you're just trying to disrupt."  No, literally, if, you know, I would literally have debates.  I'll never forget going (laughter), never forget going to high school.  I had a teacher, Ms. Joseph, who, she'd say in the classroom, she says, "No president," she said, no, a person cannot serve more than eight years as president.  And I'm sitting there, and I'm going, it's not true, said, it's just not true.  So I raised my hand, and I said, that's not true.  She said, "What do you mean it's not true?"  I said, that's just not true.  I said, [President John F.] Kennedy was killed November 21, 1963.  LBJ [President Lyndon B. Johnson] takes over as president.  He wins the nomination in summer of 1964.  He runs for re-election--I said, now, he chose not to run for reelection.  He could have served another four years.  I said, so he served four years of his own, could have served another four years, and he served the last remaining months of Kennedy's first term.  And we went back and forth, and I'm looking at her going, okay, you're just simply wrong.  And, man, I put it on the test.  She still marked it as wrong.  And so I remember after class was over, I said, "Look, you're upset 'cause I guess you got embarrassed."  I said, but you're wrong.  The facts simply don't support your argument.  She was still upset.  And so to tick her off, I think, we had some kind of word grading deal.  I had like 103, this was a government class, I mean I aced that class.  I mean I could do that class in my sleep.  I think I had like 103 average in this class.  And so I had to retake this test and just to tick her off, and, man, she was ticked, I sat there and went, "Okay, I'm gonna answer this, this, this.  I'm gonna ignore the rest of these answers.  I then graded myself.  I said, okay, I'm gonna make a 30 on this test.  So there you go.  So my grade drops now, to what, 102.3?"  Oh, man, she was ticked.  But she still would not admit that she was wrong.  So, and it always happens, always happens.  So there were some teachers who I would really, really challenge.
Speaker 2: So this was in high school?
Speaker 1: This is high school, some teachers I would really, really challenge.  So I, I never really, you know, I wasn't one of those kids who, "Oh, my God, this is my favorite teacher," because, again, I looked at school in a much different way.
Story_ID: 39327
Speaker 1: I mean I was--I read, I, I read so much out of school.  It was different because again, growing up as a child, I mean during the summertime, we had to, we had to go to the library.  My parents [Emelda Joyce Lemond Martin and Reginald Lynn Martin, Sr.] mandated that we all had library cards.  And so we had to go to the library every week during the summer, did not matter.  And you had to check out a minimum number of books.  Now, what would often happen is, I would max out.  So they said, you could only check out fifteen books.  I would check out fifteen books every week.  I would read those fifteen books each week.  Several summers, I read 300 books.  I mean just consuming the books.  And the other thing though, when you asked about childhood, and this is what I think is so sad about children today, we had, we had extensive parks and recreation programs in Houston [Texas] during school, but really during the summertime.  And I remember being a part of singing programs, drama programs.  I remember we had, they had a parks and recreation event at this theater or whatever, this venue, and it probably held four or 5,000 people.  Now, I remember being on stage performing, not even afraid it was four or 5,000 people.  And I remember another program, one of the summer programs, it really was sort of a day camp, and they had the box lunches and everything like that.  But you did arts and crafts and it was sports and stuff along those lines.  But all of that, as I think back to my childhood, the learning environment was so significant that it wasn't like we had this just boring summer.  We would literally have to go down to the park by 8:00 a.m., then take the buses, and they took us to another park across town where we were there all day.  And then by three o'clock, you came back and were dropped off at your park.  But it was a, it was a massive summer program, and I remember a lot of the young folks who worked there, they'd wear all the same color tee-shirts and stuff.  They were all college students or whatever, but the learning environment was so amazing because of all the stuff that we were taught.  And I remember arts and crafts stuff.  I remember, again, drama stuff.  And so when I think back to what, what--I think back to the lack of those programs today and cities cutting those kind of programs, you know, it begs to, you know, the questions, "What are kids learning?"  And then I had the opportunity to meet people who were from other, different environments.  And so I mean I didn't come across white kids a lot in my neighborhood until I really got to middle school, which really was a mixed middle school.  But all of that was so critical to my development as a kid.
Speaker 2: Now, I wonder, and this occurred to me, during the era you grew up, there were black bookstores, were there any in Houston that you--
Speaker 1: There were black bookstores, but we didn't, we didn't frequent, I mean we--the bottom line is we didn't have the money to buy books.  I mean my parents, I remember, I remember my parents buying encyclopedia set.  I remember we had--remember when 'Ebony Magazine' put out the brown leather volumes of 'The History of Black America', and I believe there were four.  I think we only had two.  There were some children's books my parents bought.  But really, we were extensive users of the public library.  There was a, there was a public library in Pleasantville.  And so that was the matter of hop into the car, drive into the next neighborhood, and we were always at the library, always.  I mean I remember, I remember the day, it was so fun, where I literally and, and figuratively, not literally, when I read everything in the children's section.  That, the library was broken up.  They had this one section in Pleasantville Library that was the children's section, so all the children's books.  And I remember being twelve or thirteen [years old] when I said, I'm done here.  And there was also a cut off.  I could not wait--so you could only be a certain age to check out the other books.  I couldn't wait.  But I had so far surpassed those books.  And so when I went over, and I remember I was crazy about stats.  I could literally memorize sports stats, memorize--I knew history.  I knew all those things.
Story_ID: 39328
Speaker 1: I remember one night when my mom [Emelda Joyce Lemond Martin]--my [maternal] grandmother had a catering business.  In fact, she was a homemaker, but later on, she worked at a flower shop, my maternal grandmother.  And then she decided to open up her own catering business.  My [maternal] grandfather stopped working in plants, and then he really became sort of this junkman, yardman.  He would fix stuff.  I remember his whole backyard was ridiculous.  He had old refrigerators and washing machines.  I never, ever saw their backyard grass.  It was just junk.  It was just--but that's just what he did.  And he always fixed stuff around the neighborhood.  So here's my grandmother opening this catering business.  And we're working with the catering business.  And it was, it was, it was just so, it was so interesting just working in that environment and the knowledge you're picking up.  And it was just, it was just all, all of those things sort of just worked, just fusing all together.  And I remember, again, when we talk about reading, it was, it was so funny.  I decided, okay, so one night--I was talking about catering.  My grandmother, my mom started baking cakes.  She went to cakes.  She was working with my grandmother's catering business, her side job and so she decided to learn how to bake cakes.  We were losing money.  My aunt said, what the heck.  Let's stop farming it out.  So one night my mom is baking cakes.  And so we're listening to the radio, crazy music fan.  And they had this station we're listening to.  And they had this contest on.  And they asked a soap opera question.  My mom knew the answer.  She calls in, and she, you know, she gives the answer.  And she wins.  And she got a chance to meet a couple of soap opera stars, and a year's subscription to 'Soap Opera Digest'.  So later on, they had this, they had another question that came up.  And it was some question dealing with Lou Gehrig.  And I recently read two books on Lou Gehrig.  So I'm sitting, so, they asked the question.  And so the station is on, and my mom is over there baking cakes.  This is like eleven o'clock at night, and my dad's [Reginald Lynn Martin, Sr.] over there.  We're all in the kitchen.  So I'm sitting there doing something, and they, and I hear the question, and I go, "Oh, that's Lou Gehrig."  My dad goes, what do you mean?  I said, no, the answer to that question is Lou Gehrig.  And so he goes, "You're sure?"  I'm like, yeah, I'm sure.  So he calls the station, and puts me on the phone, and they put me on the phone, and he goes, my father, put me on the phone, and I go "Yeah, it's Lou Gehrig."  And the guy is like, "How old are you?"  I think I was, I don't know, nine, ten [years old].  He said, how do you know this?  I said, easy, I started reciting all the stuff about him.  And so it got to the point where literally, I mean I just remembered just stuff.  I remembered stats, I remembered figures.  And again, a lot of different sports people.  And it got to the point, I remember we used to be in my grandfather's house, and we'd be watching the games or whatever, and they would go, "Man, who was so and so who did this hit?"  And I was like, "So and so."  And they would all be looking like, "Okay."  And so later on, by the time I get to college and even when I get out, my parents literally--this is before IMDB, International--Internet Movie Database, they would be sitting and he would be watching a film.  And just, you know how you would say, "What was the name of that movie" or what did they play in?  And I would go, oh, so and so, so and so.  And so they would even get to the point where they would just, they would be stumped and they would call me.  And then I would say what it was.  And so that was all because of the reading.  That's why to this day, I can't listen to a book.  I can listen to sermons.  I can listen to speeches, but I don't listen, I can't listen to a book.  I have to read a book.  I still read eight to nine books at one time today.  But I have to literally read a book.  And I can retain the information.  And so that's what I'm saying for, and so from an education standpoint, I had all of that going.  It was all of that outside of school that was so, to me, a lot more interesting than what I had to learn in the classroom.
Speaker 2: Speaking of school--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I called grandmother.  Yeah, grandmother initially was a homemaker--you asked that question, initially was a homemaker, but, and we can get into it.
Speaker 2: She went into the catering business.  But, now--
Speaker 1: The catering business is a huge part of my life.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 39329
Speaker 1: Sports in Houston [Texas], I guess, 'cause you got involved, you really started to focus on sports so when--
Speaker 2: I, we watched sports.  We were huge Houston Oilers fans.
Speaker 1: Those were the days when--
Speaker 2: That was Earl Campbell,--
Speaker 1: Earl Campbell.
Speaker 2: --Robert Brazil, Elvin Bethea, we were huge Oilers fans, never had an opportunity to go, to physically go to one of the games, too costly.  It was so many of us which is one of the reasons why I, for Christmas one year, I bought six season tickets to the Houston Texans really so my nieces and nephews had an opportunity to go to the game to experience it.  So my whole family gets to go, so I might go back for two or three games, but they get to use my tickets whenever they want to.  But Rockets [Houston Rockets], as a part of, in fact, it was part of one of the programs with our with our Parks and Recreation Department.  We went to a couple of Houston Arrows games, hockey games, when we had the hockey team there, but also we were Astro Buddies.  The Houston Astros had a youth program.  And so kids could be Astro Buddies.  And you got a hat, you got an Astro Buddies jersey, and then you got tickets to games.  And I think, in this package, if I'm correct, it was like, you know, twenty, thirty games.  It was a pretty interesting package, and so the three of us were Astro Buddies, my brother [Reginald Lynn Martin, Jr.], me, and my sister, LeVita.  And so my parents [Emelda Joyce Lemond Martin and Reginald Lynn Martin, Sr.] would take us to the Houston Astro Dome, would drop us off, and we would have our tickets and our Astro Buddy stuff, and we would, we would go to the game.  And that was always, that was, that was always fun because, again, here, you had some level of independence because you're being dropped off, and you know you're a kid, and you're going in to, to the games and stuff.  So that was always cool.  And there was always a period, they had sort of these little clinics, and then there was a certain period where you could get to go on the field and run the bases.  And then there were also, and then what happened was, my mom's sister, Pam, later married a baseball player who ended up playing for the Houston Astros, Cliff Johnson.  But that was always fun being an Astro Buddy.  That was always fun.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a--
Speaker 2: Fond memories of that.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite player?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because I'm left handed, it was Jose Cruz.  Cesar Sedano was a center fielder and because, again, my Uncle Cliff, they're now divorced, he lived in the same neighborhood as Sedano.  So I actually met him once.  But, but also, Joe Sambito because he was a left, he was a left-handed pitcher.  I played little league baseball and was, was a star pitcher until we actually, until we were playing, I played for the Padres.  My brother played for the Pirates.  He was one year ahead of me, and I'll never forget, you talk about, again, sports.  We had a playoff game.  There really were two star pitchers.  That was me, there was this white kid, I can't remember his name.  He was a right hander, I was a left hander, and we got to the playoffs.  And I remember watching his coach.  I'll never forget.  That probably was the first time I ever saw somebody white literally just beg my dad.  We were going on a family vacation to New Orleans [Louisiana].  My dad worked for Amtrak.  So we're taking the train to New Orleans.  And I really wanted to play, but we had the family vacation.  Man, this coach did everything to beg my dad to let me play.  And, man, I wanted to play so bad, and my dad was like, nope.  We're going on this family vacation, did not care about the game, which, of course, down the road, explains a lot between, the same thing with the band and everything else.  But, man, I wanted to play, and we were playing in the front yard.  And we had these, in our flower bed, there actually were, there were some, there were some bricks down there.  And they really were sort of under the grass, and I'll never forget, I came down on my shoulder, hurt my shoulder, didn't play baseball again.  I picked it up when I was a junior in, junior in high school [Yates High School].  But it was just, just to mess around.  I said, what the heck, I can at least get me a letterman's jacket out of it.  But even since then, I still had shoulder problems.  And I think back on it, you know, one never knows, but the bottom line is, I had fun then.  But I do think, I do think about being a very good baseball player and what would have happened if I didn't injure my shoulder as a kid.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 39330
Speaker 1: Now, Jack Yates High School, you're in special communications--
Speaker 2: School of Communications.
Speaker 1: School of Communications.
Speaker 2: I remember Randy Thomas came to William Holland Middle School.  They made the presentation.  I looked at four different magnet programs.  I looked at Milby High School, petrochemical department, hate math.  We can get rid of that idea.  Sterling, Sterling High School had an aviation magnet school, more math.  We can get rid of that.  Two areas that I knew I was excellent at and that was talking.  So it came, so it really came down to the law enforcement and criminal justice magnet program and Yates School of Communications.  When I was in the eighth grade, we had this Roman, this Roman Deal or something like that.  I forgot what it was.  It was some kind of Roman history program.  So they wanted to do this newscast, and I ended, I was the sports anchor of this Greek-Roman newscast with a dress and Roman costumes and stuff.  So I was the sports caster for that, liked it, knew I liked--and again, I watched all of this television, read the paper and, but what interested me really was being a DJ.  So I go to Yates, and I remember saying it one day.  My dad [Reginald Lynn Martin, Sr.] was like, "Hell, no, you're not gonna be a DJ."  I mean he nixed that immediately.
Speaker 1: Now, were you aware that Tom Joyner was broadcasting out of Houston [Texas] then?
Speaker 2: No.  I mean I listened, no, actually, no, no.  Tom Joyner wasn't in Houston.  At the time I was growing up, we had strong local stations.  The two big stations was 94.5 and you had Magic 102.  Magic 102 was the king.  Everybody listened to Magic 102.  So you had the Snowman, you had Doc Kilgore, all DJs, and so, and we always listened to music.  You had Skip-a-Lee Frazier on the AM side, historic DJ, KCOH, KYOK.  And so, so that, that medium, that's really what interested me.  My dad said, "Hell, no."  I mean it wasn't even--when I say he shut that down, I mean shut it down.  So I had to go, okay.  So I mean I went to Yates thinking I'm going into radio.  That got shut down immediately.  So I picked, 'cause we, we had, because we had a strong newspaper program, radio and television, and you got to pick your dominant track when you were in, when you were a freshman.  And so I went ahead and picked television.  And I remember my sophomore year, walking to our television--'cause the first year, you just did, you're in high school.  You're dealing with basic stuff.  It really wasn't until your, you're dealing with prac--you're dealing with theory.  Your sophomore year is when you had to really pick your track.  And I so I picked television.  And I remember going into my tenth grade class and, man, I, it was immediately oil and water between me and the teacher, Mary Waites.  I mean I'm talking about oil and water, didn't like her, she didn't like me.  And I remember her saying, "You are the most arrogant student I've ever had."  And I was like "Whatever."  And she said, well, by the time you leave here, you're gonna end up the best student to ever come through this school.  And I went, I know.  She said, see, that's what I'm talking about.  And we, I'm telling you.  We used to go, I mean we used to go at it.  I couldn't stand having to deal with her, but the reality is, again, I go back to that strong will.  And so I knew she was, I knew she knew her stuff.  It was the best class.  And she always picked, folks always were like, oh, my God, she's so tough or whatever.  So it was always oil and water, but there was actually mutual respect there, mutual respect, there, no doubt.  And that's actually, and that is exactly what happened.  By the time I graduated, I won the Ambassador Award for the top student in my class there, and was clearly, I mean, and I dominated in television, in radio.  I took Newspaper just for one year and dominated that as well.  You know, it was so funny to me 'cause the teachers competed.  And the newspaper teacher always hated the fact that I never took her class.  I did not take her class until my senior year because she hated the fact, and I remember, I never--'cause she told me, Thelma Johnson, she hated another teacher to say, you know, that's my student.  So the radio, the TV and the newspaper teachers always would say, you know, that's mine, that's mine because of the track you chose.  And it, it drove, she told me, it drove her crazy that I did not take her class until my senior year 'cause she really couldn't take credit for my development as a student.  She said, Mary Waites had to get all the credit for it.
Story_ID: 39331
Speaker 1: So was there any particular project in high school [Yates High School, School of Communications, Houston, Texas] that you look back on as a pivotal--
Speaker 2: We did all of it.  We did all of it.  I mean I'm talking about, I would shoot, I shot, I shot 150 programs a year.  Whenever--Yates was such an historical school, many top figures, when they came to the school, they came to Yates.  But my freshman year, I remember--and I wasn't really a part of the TV program my freshman year.  I remember when Janet Jackson came to the school, and whenever--anytime somebody came to the school, they eventually came down to our television studio for a sit-down interview.  And so, by the time I got in the tenth grade, I was low man on the totem pole but was quickly rising.  And so you name it.  Any program we had, we shot.  We videotaped it, and then I eventually became the go-to guy, and so I would get pulled out of class a whole lot to shoot.  I would get pulled out to sit, do an interview with folks, I mean you name it, celebrities, athletes, politicians, anybody who walked through that school.  By the time I got to my junior year, there were, you know, I was first pick.  I, like I say, I got pulled--every teacher knew.  Every teacher was told that if he gets called, you let him out of class to come shoot this.  And it got to the point, and so my classmates always saw me carrying this heavy, I mean we--see, remember, this is 19, this is 1984, '85 [1985], '86 [1986], '87 [1987].  And so my God, you had these steel cases, and you had the camera and the, and the recorder, and you had the cables.  I mean we had, you know, sixty, eighty pounds of gear we're carrying around.
Speaker 1: Well, what were you shooting then?
Speaker 2: We were shooting, we, we were shooting VHS, Beta tapes were way too large.  So we started, VHS really became, really took off, and so we started shooting VHS.  And then, and it really was camera and the VHS recorder.  So here you are with the VHS recorder strapped on your shoulder, and you're shooting.  And when we going through the classrooms, Mary Waites made us, we had to do skill assessment.  You get to literally set up your entire E and G system in ninety seconds or two minutes.  And so we were timed by it.  I mean you had to set up tripod, camera, recorder, cables, white balance, camera on, ready to go.  And we got tested on it.  We had to learn every cable, RF cable, every, I mean every cable, Mit cables, what was mono, what was stereo.  I mean, so you had to, I mean literally, that's how intense it was.  But it was, it was so valuable because you could master the theoretical, but you had to do the practical.  And we had some students who were great in the classroom, horrible in the field.  We had some who were horrible, who were horrible in the classroom, but great in the field.  I could do both.  And so that's really what separated me from a lot of the other students.  And I could do in front of and behind.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: I never had a desire to be in front of the camera.  The first--we could not go into the studio, I mean literally, we were not allowed into the studio the first semester of our sophomore year, the total classroom.  And so when we finally were allowed into the class--into the studio, I'll never forget.  I mean everybody was hyped.  And so when she unlocked the door, all the students rushed in.  They all went to the set.  And I remember standing back, and I went, okay, all these people are on a set.  I mean, it was probably like, you know, fifteen students.  So I turned to Ms. Waite and said, "Question?"  Where does the person sit who tells them what to do?  She says, they sit, they're in the control room.  I said, "I'll be in the control room."  So I never really, so although I am on air now, it was never my primary desire to be in front of the camera.  It always was about being behind the scenes because that's where the power was, determining who was a producer, being over the scripts, all those different things like that.  I was thinking that way as a high school sophomore.
Story_ID: 39332
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what other activities were you involved in, in high school [Yates School of Communications, Houston, Texas]?  Were you in any clubs or student government or anything like that?
Speaker 2: That was it. Nothing else was more important.
Speaker 1: Just baseball and--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I, it was all School of Communications.  I wasn't interested in any other groups.  I didn't do, I mean I ran for the Yates Court when I was a senior.  I, some friends of mine that were on the baseball team, and I went, oh, we got a baseball team?  And, again, Yates High School, we were a dominant power, you know nationally, in football, basketball, even women's basketball, other sports, whatever.  And I remember I was talking to a friend of mine, Tracy, was the last name Harris?  We used to always play Spades every day, played before school, we played at lunch.  That's what we did every day.  Every day for four years, we played Spades.  And Tracey was on the swim team, and we were like, we got a swim team?  Seriously?  And so we, we were all talking and so Tracy said, yeah, man, we got Letterman's jackets too.  So we were like, man, how in the hell, we can get us a letterman's jacket?  So we start trying to figure out all the sports we had, and, again, we had no clue.  I was not interested in football or basketball, played basketball when I was in junior high school, knew I wasn't good enough, but it didn't matter.  My dad [Reginald Lynn Martin, Sr.] didn't care.  So I was like, man, okay, I gotta figure--so we literally started figuring out what we can do; couldn't run track, wasn't fast enough, wasn't going to swim 'cause I didn't like swimming, didn't really know how to swim.  I could, I could manage it, but never liked swimming.  So I said, fine, we can do baseball.  So I found, when I found out, a friend of mine said, yeah, man, we got tryouts.  So I tried out for the team, made the JV [junior varsity] team my junior year, was on the varsity my senior year.  That's how I got our jackets, it was literally, that was--it was all about we need to get a jacket because, and then--now, it was interesting in the School of Communications, the newspaper students had jackets.  Nobody else did.  They raised the money or whatever and got it, so I remember my senior year, I was too funny, my senior year I was talking to, was it my senior year?  Yeah, my senior year, I was talking to our coordinator, Shirley Hall.  And we were in her office.  I was with David Webb, who, David was my partner in crime in the School of Communications.  And I said, I think we need jackets.  And (unclear) we were the best two students.  And I remember her saying, well, you don't deserve 'em.  Now, she was new as coordinator.  And I said, what did you say?  I said, "Do you know who you're talking to?"  So I started running it down.  I said, every program at this school, I shoot.  I said, I've shot 150 a year.  I went through this whole, I said, I've earned more medals in television and radio than any other student.  I went through this whole deal.  I mean I was so, I was so angered by her dismissive attitude because she didn't know what I had done.  And when I say "sacrifice," I mean I sacrificed.  I shot, I didn't go to football games to enjoy them.  We shot the games.  That was work.  I remember traveling to Belmont for a game we played, and that press box was way up there, and you're lugging heavy equipment up those steps or whatever.  And so I was offended that she would say that.  After I launched into a tirade against her and was very cool and methodical, she picks the phone up, and she calls Thelma Johnson who was a newspaper teacher.  And she says, "Ms. Johnson, I'm sending Roland Martin down.  I need you to order him a jacket."  And I said, I thought so.  And we had to, they asked us what slogan we wanted on our back, on our jacket.  And I'll never forget, all the students used to always call me, "Oh, there come Mr. TV" 'cause I always had the gear.  And so that's what I chose, "Mr. TV."
Story_ID: 39333
Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned Arthur Wood, and you mentioned some of the disc jockeys [DJs](unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Arthur Wood was a reporter.  I later met Lloyd Gight (ph.) who was a reporter, who I later, all met years later as professionals.
Speaker 1: And did you have like a--Arthur Wood was somebody you kind of looked up to as someone--
Speaker 2: Well, no, no, I just saw him on television.
Speaker 1: Television.
Speaker 2: You know, I saw him on television.  So, you know, I met him in person, I was like okay, cool.  Here's a black guy who's on television and get to actually meet him in person.
Speaker 1: Did you have any heroes in terms of the media in those days?
Speaker 2: The way that I always answer that question, I mean there were people who I watched and to see someone who looks like me was important.  It really was Max Robinson.  In our household, it was, we watched ABC, ABC local, ABC national.  So I remember when Max Robinson was part of the three anchor head teams of Frank Robinson, Peter Jennings and Max Robinson.  Frank Washington was, Frank--I'm sorry, Frank Reynolds.  Franks Reynolds was in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia], Peter Jennings was in London [England] and Max Robinson was in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And so to watch, to watch him perform was great.  I remember--and then, of course, as I went through high school [Jack Yates School of Communications, Houston, Texas] and then college, I also began to read media books.  I began, I remember watching Jessica Savage.  And I remember reading her book.  I remember when she was killed in the car accident.  She was a white, female anchor on NBC.  And so I remember other figures as well, watching them and reading about them as well.  But in terms of African Americans, absolutely, it was Max Robinson.  But I also read the newspapers.  So I remember Robert Newberry was columnist with the 'Houston Post'.  And so you would always see him column.  And, in fact, his daughter was, attended at Yates School of Communications with me.  So I remember meeting her, Renita (ph.) Newberry.  And so, those really were the dominant figures, people who I would come across.
Speaker 1: Now, did you watch 'Tony Brown's Journal'?
Speaker 2: No, not really, not really.  We were not, didn't watch a lot of PBS, other than growing up 'Electric Company', 'Sesame Street', stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a local black news and affairs show?
Speaker 2: We did.  Claudette Sims anchored that show and it'd air on a Saturday.  And so she did, she did that show and met her.  Also, again, in terms of our community involvement, I remember, and this jogged my memory the other day, I was actually at an event.  We were talking about the fight to find a cure for sickle cell.  And these folks were trying to explain to me about sickle cell.  I said, I'm quite, I know what it is.  And they didn't realize, I said, yeah, I said, we used to go door-to-door in our neighborhood.  There was a national sickle cell telethon.  And KTRK did the local portion of that, and I remember us raising the money and then going to the station and being on television, dropping our money off, how much money we raised for Sickle Cell Anemia Foundation.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm trying to think of--one person who was really smooth in the media, though he wasn't a media person, but Lee P. Brown.  (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, later, he later became, first of all, as a kid growing up, we first saw Lee P. Brown when he was the mayor of, excuse me, the police chief in Atlanta [Georgia], in the Atlanta child murders in the early '80s [1980s].  And then later, of course, he became, he came to Houston as the first black police chief.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 39334
Speaker 1: So when you were on the verge of graduation [from Jack Yates School of Communications, Houston, Texas], what school had you set your sights on?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, let me go before that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: You asked things I was involved in, really in junior high and high school, it was school, it was in high school communication, but then personally, it was my [maternal] grandmother's catering business.  She started her own catering business--she worked at a flower shop after having all of her children, children growing up, so she began to sell flowers.  Then she decided to do flowers on her own.  Then she decided to branch out and do catering.  Growing up, my mom [Emelda Joyce Lemond Martin] and dad [Reginald Lynn Martin, Sr.] helped her.  Me and my brother [Reginald Lynn Martin, Jr.] started first.  Then I started.  So we really started catering at eight years old.  And, man, that was crazy.  I mean, and I don't mean, oh, you know, you guys fold some napkins.  No, no, no, we were literally candelabras, setting stuff up, (unclear) runners, carrying crates of dishes, washing dishes, flowers, you name it.  My dad did lots of the cooking.  My mom did the cakes.  We all helped with it.  Some my cousins, it was so funny, some of my cousins used to see us get paid with my grandmother, you know, fifty, sixty bucks, and they're sitting there going, "Oh, my God.  What can we do?"  And they were older than us.  Man, please.  They started trying to cater.  They couldn't even get through two hours before they were complaining about their feet and everything.  And so, you know, we, we had to learn--I mean how do you sit here and cater and you're fully dressed?  That's why for so many years, me wearing--growing up, I never wore jeans.  I didn't even care.  I've probably owned two pairs all of high school.  So I was used to wearing slacks and dress shoes all day 'cause that's what we had to do.  That was important because you're talking about entrepreneurship, you're talking about worth ethic.  Work ethic is a huge thing for me because so many people, when young people ask me the question, the key to success, people rarely bring up work ethic.  They talk about everything else except that.  Catering actually taught you that.  I mean there were some times we had three weddings in a day, different parts of the city, different cities.  And so you're talking about a wedding over in Baytown [Texas], a wedding in Houston [Texas], a wedding here, and so I mean, you're sitting here--we may have had five weddings in a weekend.  So imagine, you know, you're going to school five days a week.  When school is out, head to your grandmother's house and you're prepping for the weddings that weekend, and then boom, Saturday morning hits.  It's 7:00 a.m., it's 6:00 a.m., you're at your grandmother's house loading that van up.  My wife to this day, she tells anybody, she said, nobody can pack better than him, whether it's a suitcase or how to pack stuff in the trunk because when you have to pack one van.  And you gotta pack stuff for three weddings and how to separate it and what wedding is this, yeah, that gets, that gets a little different.  But, again, I was doing that at 10, 11, 12 years old.  So that was really was what I did outside.
Story_ID: 39335
Speaker 1: But also, by the time I was in junior high school at our church, they decided to start a junior division of the Junior Knights of St. Peter Claver.  The Knights of St. Peter Claver is the world's largest black Catholic organization.  My [maternal] grandfather was a member of the KPC.  My [maternal] grandmother was a member of the Ladies Auxiliary.  That's the female division.  In fact, at the, the chapter in Barrett Station [Texas], well, no, it was Crosby, it was Crosby [Texas].  Crosby or Barrett Station, my grandmother was the, she was the, she was the president.  She was the top lady.  And so they were called Ladies and Knights.  And so probably around, when they started the chapter at our church, we decided to go ahead and join.  And a lot of my leadership stuff was born out of that, but also, understanding politics and people because we went to--I was in the seventh grade, was in the seventh grade.  We had a conference at St. Mary's Catholic Church.  It was our state conference.  It was our first one.  And I remember, so we go to the conference, and I mean here they, I mean you've got a thousand-plus black boys, black girls.  So this is a whole new experience.  And so we're sitting in the back of the room and it started late.  We're, it's sort of chaotic, and so we're sitting here going, man, this is nuts.  What's going on here?  This makes no sense.  And so my brother [Reginald Lynn Martin, Jr.], me and my brother and the other guys from our chapter, but me and him were really sitting next to each other.  So it was a couple, it was several cats who were sitting around us.  And they were saying, man, this is crazy too.  It don't make any sense.  So we all hit it off.  So this is, this is a Friday.  So we're going through our meetings and boys, and they had the girls.  And, again, we had, this is a business meeting.  We were talking about amendments, our constitution, money we spend, initiatives working, all that stuff along those lines.  And so we decide to, we go okay.  We decide things aren't really running well together.  So we decide on Saturday daytime, man, we gotta change some stuff.  So what ended up happening was, we got with some cats from two other churches, and we decided, we plotted a takeover right then of the organization.  So that night, me and my brother, we did our part.  We went home, and we were coming up with our agenda.  We began to make flyers.  I remember telling my mom [Emelda Joyce Lemond Martin] and dad [Reginald Lynn Martin, Sr.] about it.  And mom was going, said, what are ya'll gonna do?  We said, we're taking this whole thing over tomorrow.  So on Sunday, they had an election.  That's exactly what we did.  Unbeknownst to the guys who were running the organization, we literally, quietly went to different people, talked to different people, said this is what we're doing.  One of my jobs was to line the votes up, and when election time came, we ran our own slate.  These guys had no idea what hit 'em.  And in a matter of forty-eight hours, we took over the entire state organization.
Story_ID: 39336
Speaker 1: And then at the time, you could only have one person from each chapter [of the Junior Knights of St. Peter Claver] who could serve as a state officer.  So my brother [Reginald Lynn Martin, Jr.], they picked him, and if there was a model, it was sort of the Kennedys.  He was an out-front person who did the smiling.  I was a Robert Kennedy who dropped the hammer.  And that's exactly what my job was.  And we did.  We took it over.  We totally took it over.  To this day, if you--and what happened was, when we took it over, we instituted the Ladies--it was very interesting.  The ladies, the women, the adult women and the girls, their dress code, they wore all white.  That was the deal.  Guys, we had all kind of different stuff.  So we said, fine.  We're gonna do a dress code.  We change, changed the, the shield, redesigned that.  We instituted a dress code, completely rewrote the constitution.  We, we changed it all.  Before, the men pretty much ran the guys.  We booted them out of the deal.  I remember shutting down several of the elders in one of our meetings because according, many of--again, these guys, they never even bothered to read the constitution.  So in our constitution, it stated that an elder could not speak in our junior meeting unless called upon by, by one of the leaders.  But these guys were used to just running the show, just "No, you can't do that, no, you can't do it," whatever.  And so I, and so they appointed me to be Parliamentarian that was appointed.  And I remember sitting there waiting.  And one of these guys, I'll never forget.  I mean he jumped up and he started railing against our guys.  And I immediately shut him down right there.  And he said, "You can't talk to me in that way."  I said, "Yes, I can.  You read this section of the constitution."  And so we invented, and to this day, to this day, when you go to Texas, they still, first of all, the adults still talk about those arrogant brats who came in here who took it over.  But many of the things that we instituted back in 1982 and '83 [1983] are still in effect today.
Speaker 2: Okay. And St. Peter Claver, I believe was a, in South America, he had something to do with--
Speaker 1: Right, South America, and then they--
Speaker 2: Freeing slaves.
Speaker 1: Right, and then, and then when they launched KPC, they took that name.  They're based in New Orleans, Louisiana.  That's the national headquarters.  And really, that was, we pretty much stopped being involved by 1988 once we got to college.  But I can tell you right now, that was a hell of a five years because we traveled all across the state, had a blast, met a lot of young cats, ticked off a whole lot of people.  But that really was, I mean we were, in many ways, we were way ahead of a lot of other guys.  It was, the Junior Knights of St. Peter Claver was extremely important to my leadership development because literally, we ran it.  Literally, we determined where our money would go, our dues structure.  I was charged--that was the first time I ever rewrote a constitution.  I was charged with, and that was, we learned Robert's Rules of Order.  And I became a master at it.  And in organizations from that point on, I was always the guy who knew how to use the rules, who could shut people down by using the rules, who could change the rules to my benefit or whatever.
Speaker 2: And when I joined the National Association of Black Journalist [NABJ] and became the National Student rep [representative] in 1989, the exact same thing happened there.  They had no idea.  They did not see me coming, and they had no idea what was gonna happen after that.
Story_ID: 39337
Speaker 1: So this experience [leadership of Junior Knights of St. Peter Claver] and the experience as a caterer [helping his maternal grandmother]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, teaches you a work ethic--
Speaker 2: Work ethic--
Speaker 1: --and also--
Speaker 2: Work ethic, leadership development and understanding responsibility.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, the catering job also took you all over the city, I would imagine--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah--
Speaker 1: --and the surrounding area.
Speaker 2: Took us all around the city, surrounding area.  We, we even did some weddings as far as Victory [Texas] and Dallas [Texas], and so, absolutely.  And also, I mean as a part of that, you never knew who you would, what, the people you would come across.  And so I remember we did a wedding in Baytown, and I forgot the guy, but Tony Dorsett was in the wedding.  We did, you know, weddings and you ran into entertainers and other people and political folks as well.  So, yeah, you never knew who you would come across.  And so it was always, it was always great--and plus, my brother [Reginald Lynn Martin, Jr.] and I, we always managed to check out all the fine women who had weddings as well.  So, yeah, so we, we had a blast doing that.  And what ended up happening is, you know, my grandmother as she got older, she really couldn't run it anymore.  We took it over from her.  And so my brother, myself and my parents [Emelda Joyce Lemond Martin and Reginald Lynn Martin, Sr.], we then owned the catering business.  And now, my brother, he owns it and runs it.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's great.
Speaker 2: So that's continuing for a third generation.
Speaker 1: It stayed in the family.
Speaker 2: Yep--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --still here.
Speaker 1: All right, now--
Speaker 2: And that's called, it was Lemond's Catering.
Story_ID: 39338
Speaker 1: Now, well, back to college.  Now, did you have good counseling in high school [Jack Yates School of Communications, Houston, Texas] in terms of (unclear) going to college?
Speaker 2: You said good counseling?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in terms of where you'd go to college?
Speaker 2: The, the decision about college for me really came down to an economic one.  I doubt very seriously if my parents [Emelda Joyce Lemond Martin and Reginald Lynn Martin, Sr.] made a combined, more than $70,000 a year, maybe 75 [thousand] combined.  So my brother [Reginald Lynn Martin, Jr.], he was in college a year before I was.  He chose to go to Texas A and M [University], had a President's Achievement Scholarship, academic scholarship.  And then I was looking in different places, and although I was one of the top communications students in the country, I mean really a private school was totally out of the question.  And I was very cognizant, I mean I wasn't one of those kids who said, "Oh, no, you know, I want, you know, I'm going here and it doesn't matter," and you're putting your family through economic hardship because I had to be aware that my sister [LeVita Martin] was right behind me.  My parents literally had three kids in college at one time, plus, my two other sisters who were at home.  And so, that, that was very important.  And so I was looking at other schools.  But I remember going to Texas A and M.  It was, I went on a weekend to visit my brother, stayed with him that weekend.  And if I recall, that was actually the only time that whole school year I actually went and stayed with him.  And it was a weekend we played Texas Tech [University].  And I just loved the whole environment, just the beauty of the campus, the trees, the landscape, just had a, just a really good time.  Clearly, him going there was a huge part of it, my older brother, but, you know, but it was just I really enjoyed the experience.  So I wasn't pressured to go.  It wasn't like, "Look, you're going where your brother's going."  But it really was just, I just enjoyed that weekend and that experience.  And we attended a couple of other events down there.  He was in the gospel choir, "Voices of Praise."  He pledged Alpha Phi Alpha [fraternity], so I got a chance to meet a number of other folks.  And also, at that point, Texas had, they had automatic admittance if you were in the top 10 percent.  And I didn't care about the SAT [Scholastic Aptitude Test], didn't need it.  All I cared about was getting in that top 10 percent.  And I remember, and remember, I wasn't, you know, I didn't--I blew off my whole freshman year.  That was a horrible freshman year.  And it was really, I remember I was in a biology class and had a teacher who reamed me out about, you're gonna have to get your act together and focus on school.  And so I said, okay, fine.  So really, I did not apply myself till the last two and a half years of high school, and got grades up in the top 10 percent.  I believe, I believe we had a graduating class of 460, and I was either 32 or 42.  I can't remember what my number was in the graduating class.  So I got automatically admitted, qualified for an academic scholarship targeting minority students.  And that's why I went to Texas A and M.
Speaker 1: Now, is Texas, it's in College Station?
Speaker 2: College Station, Texas, about ninety miles from Houston.  So it's not far at all.  It's actually, so you go from College to--you go from Houston, you go by Prairie View A and M University, and then you go to College Station.  Prairie View had a pretty good--it's very interesting, Prairie View had a, had a decent communications program.  We even had people who came, we even had people who, I remember a class of students from Prairie View coming to Yates.  Prairie View never bothered to recruit me.  It was the weirdest thing in the world that here I was, I mean clearly, flat out, the best student at this school, never bothered to recruit me, never bothered to--TSU [Texas State University] never bothered to recruit me, University of Houston, same thing.  They came over, never bothered to recruit me.  Actually, I got turned off by Prairie View because Diana Fallis as an anchor in Houston.  And she later, after she stopped being an anchor, she became a professor at Prairie View.  She brought, our teacher brought her and a class of her students to PV [Prairie View], and she completely ignored--now, here we are.  We're trying to impress them or whatever with our production.  She completely ignored us, didn't talk to us, had a funky attitude.  And as an ambassador for, as a potential ambassador for the university, she totally turned me off.  Prairie View had no shot to get me, none, and it was after the fact, folks were like, why didn't you go to Prairie View.  I said, they never called.  I mean you would think that if you're, here, at a specialized school, and you have a communications program, you might wanna walk in, just like with athletics, who's the best one here?  They never did.
Story_ID: 39339
Speaker 1: So [Texas] A and M [University] had a decent [communications] program?
Speaker 2: It was an okay program.  And if, I mean, to be perfectly honest, and I said this, and I think I kind of ticked off our dean--see, I was ticking off folks even in college.  I had a stronger communications program in high school [jack Yates School of Communications, Houston, Texas] than I did in college.  So it really wasn't about, I mean, so for me, I mean, look, I knew I was getting a job.  People in the business were looking at me even as a college freshman.  So I wasn't worried about getting a job in the industry.  That was going to happen.  I decided at fourteen [years; age] I'm going to be in communications.  That was a done deal.  What also changed, when I as at Yates, though, I was going to go into sports, and my dad [Reginald Lynn Martin, Sr.] refused to let me do it.  See, first he told me I couldn't be a DJ [disc jockey].  But he said something to me as a sophomore that I had no idea what the heck he was talking about.  But it all played out.  He said, I do not want you to go into sports.  I don't want you to spend all of that time getting your knowledge, learning how to do your business and then you get replaced by an athlete, by a former athlete.  And I was like, "What are you talking about?"  Now, remember, Bryant Gumble was the host of 'NFL Today' on NBC.  And so I'm like, what are you talking about?  So he wouldn't let me, he would not let me go into sports journalism.  My senior year, my senior year, Dan Patrick was the main sports guy at the CBS affiliate.  He gets fired or leaves or whatever, Gifford Nielsen--now, Matt Musil was the backup anchor, weekend anchor.  Everybody's thinking he's getting the main job.  Gifford Nielsen who was the quarterback for the Houston Oilers retires and become the sports director, main anchor at the CBS affiliate.  So I literally saw this play out, and a lot of people were going, are you guys nuts?  Why is this guy, I mean it was, he had no broadcast experience.  He had to wear these powder blue suits on the air, nothing.  And he became main anchor.  And that's what, that was the primary reason I did not go into sports journalism.
Story_ID: 39340
Speaker 1: Texas A and M [University].
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: So, you had a better program in high school [Jack Yates School of Communications, Houston, Texas] (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember telling the dean--
Speaker 1: --I'm sure he'll be glad to hear this.
Speaker 2: --yeah, he was not happy when I said that.  You know, but we didn't have a television program.  It was really more newspaper oriented, didn't really have radio as well. [Pause].	Yeah, we didn't have a strong TV program.  That was really what I majored in, in high school or radio.  It was really was print oriented, but that's not why I even went to the university.  I went there, again, understanding my parents [Emelda Joyce Lemond Martin and Reginald Lynn Martin, Sr.], understanding costs, understanding being at the same school, made it easier for them, made it easier for me, my brother [Reginald Lynn Martin, Jr.] as well, knowing my sister [LeVita Martin] is coming behind me.  So this is really why I chose to go there and enjoyed it.  I mean I had a fabulous four years there.  I did not work on the school newspaper because, and, again, I was a much, I was a much different student.  How I viewed things, I was in a much different way.  I always felt that a school newspaper was more of a laboratory, and by the time I got to college, remember, I'd already put four years in communications.  I was way ahead of any freshman walking on that campus.  I was way ahead of nearly every senior.  And so I didn't want to work on the school newspaper because I felt it would, it wasn't going to give me the challenge that I desired.  And that's one of the reasons why I worked at a local radio station, running the board.  I eventually interned and basically created a part-time job at a local newspaper, 'The Bryant-College Station Eagle'.  I interned at the television station.  At that television station was one of the first, the first times I experienced clear, quiet racism in, in my life in terms of career.  I had dealt with being pulled over by the cops and stuff along those lines.  But they had a part-time sports position that became available.  I, I excelled as the intern.  News people said it, sports people said it.  They all say, off play, this is a shoe in.  Roland is getting, Roland is getting this job.  He's getting it, period.  I remember taking a walk with Alice Brown.  Alice Brown was a dogged investigative reporter for the station.  And she was very good friends with Jeff Braun who was the news director.  And we took a walk, and she said, you're not gonna get this job.  She said, years ago, Jeff had a run-in with an African American guy who was doing some stuff at the, at the station, and he vowed never to hire a black male again.  Other people at the station told me the exact thing.  So forget the fact that, I mean I was, what, it wasn't even close.  I mean wasn't even close.  And I didn't get the job.  They hired a guy who actually was a classmate of mine named John Oakley.  I was in one of the classes with John.  John was a great guy.  I correspond with him to this day on Twitter.  But John wasn't even in the same category as me.  And I left the station.  I refused to go back as an intern.  I could not see, I could not go there as an intern, knowing full well that the sports anchor, the sports director, the 6:00 p.m., the 10:00 p.m., the 5:00 p.m. producers, the executive producers, I could not sit there when everybody in that small newsroom, everybody flat out said, "This guy has it, no way in the world he shouldn't be on the air."  I didn't get the opportunity, so I left.
Story_ID: 39341
Speaker 1: And so what did you do next?  Did you--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I then went to, I then began to, I later began to work at a radio station [College Station, Texas] running the boards.  And in terms of gains, stuff along those lines; lost that one because it early, I lived right across the street.  It was early in the morning, and you're running these boards.  And, ah, man, and you were--so what happened, you would, on weekends, they had this programming, it was just dead boring.  I mean gardening shows and stuff.  It was on the AM side.  And then you had to switch over for a game or whatever, and so you would flip it.  Dude, you could go to sleep for like forty minutes and get back up.  So I did that.  So I overslept a couple of times (laughter) and missed a couple of hits.  So I lost that job.  But it was like no big deal, but I was, you know, that was like no sweat, whatever.  And also while I was in college, I worked at the Texas A and M [University] video department.  And that's also another time where I encountered something interesting.  Bobby Maidey (ph.) who's now dead--oh, I so wanted him to still be alive to see what I do today.  We were, Norman Schultz was running the athletic department and video lab.  Norm really was a film guy.  Norm was a master film guy.  But under Jackie Cherell (ph.) Texas A and M became the first university to go all video.  So Norm really was operating out of his element.  He was just operating out of his element.  And so Bob Maidey was an assistant coach and so Jackie put him over the program.  And I mean he really was an ass.  I mean he really was.  And he didn't know what the hell he was talking about, what he was doing.  I still get a kick today when, to think they named the video lab after him, and people call him, you know, a pioneer.  And he didn't know what the hell he was doing.  He didn't.  I mean I saw it every day.  The dude was clueless.  And so I remember one day though sitting there, and he was friends with our defensive line coach.  And he couldn't stand this one player.  I think Leon Hale, his name was Leon.  And so he was like, he said, Roland, you know, not you, not you.  But Leon, Leon, he's a nigger.  And I'm sitting there going, "Leon's a nigger."  Not you, you're fine.  You're good, but he is.  I mean he's lazy.  He's gonna cost him his job, and I'm sitting there (laughter), and I'm sitting there going, I know what you're saying about me.  And he eventually tried to run me off.  I, the job played out, but I really had gotten tired of the antics anyway 'cause I wasn't doing much.  There was the other guy who was in the lab, and let do more of the work.  But it was so interest--and I watched this guy as he would bad-mouth certain players when scouts were coming because they, because we had to give them the video.  And I saw the underside of college sports, where if certain coaches didn't like a player, they would trash them to the scouts.  You would think that they would be trying to boost a player to go NFL [National Football League].  I watched, I watched how they would trash certain players they didn't like, affecting their potential NFL careers.  I mean it was a great opportunity to work in the lab because we had some of the state-of-the-art equipment, but I really didn't get an opportunity to do a lot of shooting because we had a couple other guys who shot the whole game.  I mean, and, and, but the great thing though is Jackie Cherell paid well.  He paid players well, and he paid those of us who worked for him well.  And so that job was really great getting me through my first couple of years, having that job, and paying for school.
Story_ID: 39342
Speaker 1: Now, you're in school [Texas A and M University] for, you graduated in--
Speaker 2: Got there in August, 1987, graduated December, 1991.  So I was there four years and three months.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went to summer school, three of my four years there, absolutely loved it.  I loved summer school.  You only had about, we had 40-plus thousand students.  You probably had half of that for summer school, went to class every day.  But there was a lot of, in terms of African Americans, a lot closer-knit, a lot of opportunities to really see each other, get together, bond.  So I loved going to summer school, and I wasn't one of those folks who, "Oh, I'm homesick for home." Nah, no need to come home.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you pledge A Phi A [Alpha Phi Alpha, fraternity]?
Speaker 2: Pledged Alpha, spring of 1989 and I--there was no other fraternity I would even consider.  I mean my brother [Reginald Lynn Martin, Jr.] was an Alpha.  I saw those guys up close.  I went on road trips with them.  People always assumed I was an Alpha when I was a freshman and sophomore.  But, yeah, I really, really, really enjoyed, you know, that whole experience.  And, again, the brotherhood was also valuable.  And it was interesting though that my line was, you know, most of these times when guys, most of these times when guys pledge, they really aren't involved in stuff.  But my line was a little bit different.  Number one on our line was Kevin Phillip Roberts.  Kevin was the first black drum major in Texas A and M's history.  John Williams, Number two, he was the president of the National Association of Black Accountants [NABA].  I later became the board member of the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ].  Number four, Freddie Ricks, was a point guard on the basketball team. Had Paul Stafford at Number five, he was Vice President of Student Government.  So we had, let's just say we had, our line was accomplished and a bit arrogant that we had stuff already.  And we felt like Alpha needed us, versus the other way around.  So we were a little bit different (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 39343
Speaker 1: Now, I have a note here that in 1989, you were able to attend the NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] convention?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that, there are moments--when you begin to track your life, and you begin to say, you know, what changes the course and the direction of your life?  Going to NABJ in '89 [1989] was one of those events.  We went to the NABJ regional in Little Rock, Arkansas.  We heard about NABJ, and a group of us said, hey, let's go to the regional conference.  And so the regional conference was March, something like that, of 1989.  And so we went to, you know, we, we took a university bus, and we drove from College Station, Texas to Little Rock, long trip.  And a group of students went and met DeWayne Wickham, he was the president.  I met Debra Mathis who was a reporter there.  She later became a White House correspondent for Gannett News Service and other journalists, and it was just so invigorating to really see and meet these black journalists.  And so, that year the convention was in New York.  So, man, we said, we gotta go.  We gotta go to the convention.  But we were broke.  We had no money at all.  And so my dad [Reginald Lynn Martin, Sr.] was, my dad was considering switching jobs.  And, so while that was going on, we were trying to get money, and so we began to say, okay, fine.  We'll, let's write these foundations in Texas for some money.  And so we start doing that.  So we wrote about thirty foundations.  We found this book, and we went through every single one.  This is who we are, this is what we're trying to do.  So we write all these letters.  We get twenty-nine rejection letters.  And we're sitting there going, sssh, this is not looking good.  We had no, you know, we couldn't, we had no money from the university.  I mean we had, we--it was tough.  And we get a letter in the mail, and it was a very nice letter.  Here's the deal, you know, Roland, so glad to hear from you.  This sounds like a great endeavor.  And there was a $1,000 check in that envelope.  And it said, the Strake Foundation.  And it came from George Strake.  George Strake was a guy I met, who came to Yates High School [Houston, Texas] for Career Day when I was a junior.  We had no idea it was even Career Day when he came in, along with--there was a woman who was an Asian judge.  She was an Asian female who was a municipal judge in Houston.  The two of them came to my government class.  Coach Ronald Mumfrey (ph.) was the coach, and they came to our, came to our government class.  And we had Q and A.  And as part of this deal, they said this guy was chairman, former chairman of the Texas Republican Party, ran for Lieutenant Governor.  And so none of the students had any questions, so, of course, I'm reading the paper every day.  I started peppering this guy with questions.  I mean I'm hitting him, talking about policies of [President Ronald] Reagan, all kind of stuff.  And I know he's thinking, who is this black kid hitting me with these questions.  And so, Coach Mumfrey had me walk him to his next class, and we really talked several hours after that.  Eventually, he called my parents' [Emelda Joyce Lemond Martin and Reginald Lynn Martin, Sr.] home that night to tell them, "Man, you guys did a great job, you know, raising your son."  His daughter happened to be in the communications program at TCU [Texas Christian University].  So he personally wrote them, said, look, I met this fabulous student.  You guys will want to bring this in.  They tried to arrange a lot of financial aid, but the problem is TCU is a private school.  And so the economics just didn't work, and so I went to Texas A and M [University].  I crossed paths with him when I covered the economic summit that took place in Houston.  But really the key was really me asking those questions in 1985.  That's what started the relationship.  That's how we got that check, and that check allowed us to pay for our hotel rooms in New York.  My dad worked for Amtrak.  I told my mom, and she said, you need to go ask your daddy 'cause he literally was going to leave a job, and one of the jobs, working (unclear) on those big tankers, very dangerous job, but paying a lot more money.  And my dad asked me the question.  I remember I was sitting at the kitchen table, sitting at the kitchen table, and he was, he came in, and he said, "How important is this convention?"  And I said, attending this convention could absolutely chart the course of my career.  And that's how I was able to take the train for free to New York.  Me and my sister went, Levita [Martin].  She stayed at my Uncle J.D.'s house.  He lived in Long Island [New York].  I went to the convention.  She enjoyed New York, and nearly every job that I've had in my career, nearly every job I've had, probably except for two, were a result of the relationships I built attending that first convention.
Speaker 1: And your father stayed on the job at Amtrak to make sure--
Speaker 2: Stayed with Amtrak.
Speaker 1: --that you could go.
Speaker 2: And later retired from Amtrak, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 39344
Speaker 1: And just going there [National Association of Black Journalists (NABJ) convention in New York], and, in fact, that's, the convention, I'd already decided I was running for the student rep on the board of directors, threw my name in the hat, same thing.  And, in fact, going back to Parliamentary procedures with Junior Knights of St. Peter Claver, the guy who was a regional director forgot to submit my information for the ballot.  And I was initially off the ballot, and I remember going to his hotel room, this John Hansen, and I said, you're going to fix this or I will do everything in my power to destroy you at every turn.  So I was always--and people were like, man, I can't believe you threatened him like that.  I said, he screwed up.  I said, he screwed up, and it was so badly run, the student election was so--they blew us off so bad that they really even forgot I was in the election.  Thirteen students were there, thirteen students, no, sixteen students were there, sixteen students.  I won thirteen to three.  And the rest is history.  Students, everything that most of the students have today, I led and created.  It was, and the board had never, and, again, I go back to KPC, I go back to catering, I go back to all of that leadership development.  The board had never, ever come across--I was the second student rep.  The first one, she never even showed up.  To this day, I never even met her.  And so they were like, you know, who is this kid?  They had never, ever come across a high school student, a college student like me 'cause when I went to board meetings, I went to board meetings.  I read the constitution, the bylaws, procedures, and I got more, I got more initiatives passed than any other board member while I was on the board.  And it was, it was an interesting experience, and, in fact, I was on the board with Jonathan Rodgers, who later became, later was the one who hired me at TV One.  Neal Foote who made it happen for me to get hired at 'Black America Web', Neal was on the board.  And so, so many different folks, but that experience also was critical in terms of my development because that's where I got to meet some of the top people in media, head hunters, organizational folks, all the different media companies.  And so that, the NABJ has played a crucial role, the most significant role, I would say, in my professional career.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 39345
Speaker 1: Now, one significant individual that you meet there is Vernon Jarrett.
Speaker 2: I met Vernon, right, and, in fact, '89 [1989] was the first year I met Vernon.  And Vernon was a tough-as-nails figure, somebody who spoke exactly what was on his mind.  We instantly gravitated to one another because he saw me in action.  He saw me, he saw me at their business meeting shredding leadership and loved it.  And he was like, who the hell is this kid?  And that's where we first, first met each other and always stayed in touch, always loved seeing him at the convention.  And, in fact, the weekend I interviewed to be the consultant or editor of the 'Chicago Defender' was the weekend he died.  And I so, I so wanted--no, I take that back.  The weekend I interviewed, he was still alive, but when I got the job is when he passed away.  And I so wanted him to hear me say, I was taking up with the 'Chicago Defender'.  He would have loved it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you continue to go to--I guess you continued with NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was on the board.  They paid my way and everything.  I went in '90 [1990] to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], '91 [1991] to Kansas City [Missouri].  In twenty-four years from '89 [1989] to 2012, I've only missed three conventions.  One covering the Republican National Convention in 1996.  I was only seven months out of college when I worked my way onto that team, totally blew folks away when I was in Austin, Texas.  They said, how dare you have this kid, you know.  He has no experience.  They said, he's from Houston [Texas], he knows, the city, but also I showed them my political skills of volunteering to work on Super Tuesday.  I missed the 2000 convention in Phoenix [Arizona].  My appendix ruptured at the Democratic National Convention the night before.  And then 2012, I'll miss in New Orleans [Louisiana] because I have a speech in Canada.  Then I'm attending a wedding of a TV One colleague, but I've always made it there.  It was interesting being in college because that was a period where people kept saying, you should only study one thing.  But coming out of high school [Jack Yates School of Communications, Houston], I knew that was crazy, so I always said, I'm gonna do more.  And I remember there was a young lady who was ahead of me.  She was one of the people who helped us go to Little Rock [Arkansas].  When she graduated in 1990, we had one of the most debilitating advertising slumps prior to, prior to 2008.  She could not get a job because she never took a TV class.  She was strong in newspaper, but she didn't bother to take TV.  She could have easily been an editor or producer, but she had no foundation.  And I said, that'll never happen to me.  So I always, I always thought different.  I always diversified in terms of what I did.  That's why--now, I did choose newspaper as a starting point, but I always focused on all the different mediums.  That's why when convergence came along, I was totally positioned for it.  I was prepared for it.  I wasn't caught off guard.  I can do radio, television, newspaper, morph into the Internet.  I can do audio, do video because I did that in high school.  And that's, so that formed the basis of everything, what I do today.
Story_ID: 39346
Speaker 1: Now, you graduated [from Texas A and M University] in 1991?
Speaker 2: Yep, graduated December of '91 [1991], and I had my job already, November of '91 [1991].  That was interesting because 'Birmingham News', I interviewed with them.  I was, all sixteen editors wanted to hire me, but in Alabama, they allow you to factor in a credit report before you hire somebody.  HR [Human Resources] would not let them hire me, and the editor was so apologetic.  I mean they wanted me bad.  And it was crazy to me.  I'm like, come on, I'm a college student.  Are you nuts?  And I was talking to Don Flores, who was president of the National Association of Hispanic Journalists [NAHJ] who I met at NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists].  Don was the publisher of the Gannett paper in El Paso [Texas], 'The El Paso Times'.  He said, Roland, call Drew Marks, who's assistant managing editor at the 'Austin American Statesman' and so I called Drew, talked to him, sent my clips.  They brought me into Austin [Texas] for an interview.  I believe it was on a Wednesday.  I borrowed a fraternity brother's car to drive to Austin.  I had the job offer the following week.  And so, the last month of college, I already had my job.  And I, I graduated December 20th, had my graduation party.  And I started in Austin ten days later.
Story_ID: 39347
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're working the 'Austin--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: 'Austin American Statesman' [Austin. Texas].  I went there as a (unclear) neighbors report, and six months after being there--seven months after being there, they promoted me to Travis County government reporter, and then six months after that I left to go to the 'Fort Worth Star Telegram'.  The 'Houston Chronicle', my hometown [Houston, Texas] newspaper, was recruiting me.  I always knew I wanted to cover politics.  I knew what I liked, knew what I didn't like.  And then they pulled this chart out.  I said, look, I wanna cover politics.  They pulled this chart out, showing me, it might be ten years.  Here's all the folks who are in front of me.  We do it according to seniority.  They said, hey, we want you to cover the police beat for a couple of years.  I said, I can go back home.  I knew I hated the police beat.  I tried it for a weekend in Austin--when I was in College Station, despised it.  In fact, when I was in Austin, I was interviewing, and they said, what do you think about the police beat?  I said, I don't.  I said, if you--and remind you, I'm a college student, looking for a job.  I said, if you're considering me for the police beat, don't even think about it.  And so that made no sense to me.  And so, Ken Bunting, who I met in 1989 at NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], Ken wanted to hire me out of college, had a great interview, but the 'Dallas Times Herald' shut down that, shut down the month before I graduated.  So you had a flood of professional people who were now in the market.  And so he knew he couldn't pull the trigger.  And so it wasn't until he, but it was about fourteen months later when he interviewed me, and I flew up, went to Fort Worth [Texas], and I--also Austin [Texas], I also knew that where I wanted to go in Austin wasn't going to happen because so many professional journalists were coming to Austin to retire because of quality of life that I surveyed the land and said, you know what?  I'm not gonna get the kind of opportunities that I really want if I stay here.  And that's why I left, and I became a City Hall reporter at the 'Fort Worth Star Telegram'.  The last day in at the '[Austin] American Statesman' was on a Friday in January.  I started Monday in Fort Worth.
Story_ID: 39348
Speaker 1: Now during this time, you got married too, I believe?
Speaker 2: Got married.  I started at Fort Worth [Texas] in February, got married a month or so later.  And so, yeah, first wife, Debra [Duncan], was a television anchor in Austin [Texas] and really, she was comfortable staying in Austin.  But I knew she could do better, and so I said, look, I'm going to Fort Worth--publically, I was saying, I'll come back.  No, my deal was, I knew Austin--I'd beyond Austin, you know.  She needed to leave Austin as well to really go to the next level.  And that's why I went to Dallas/Fort Worth.  And so, and spent two and a half great years at the '[Fort Worth] Star Telegram'.  I wasn't there a couple of months before the Branch Davidian Compound caught on fire and was a part of that reporting team, covered, of course, the blowing up of the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City [Oklahoma], was one of our top breaking news reporters and really, that's where I made my mark, the ability to be able, to be just dropped into any kind of zone and report, gather the facts and kick stuff out as quickly as possible.  What made, what really made me leave was, first of all I witnessed also that you might be the best African American, but you still will be passed over for somebody lesser.  Ken Bunting had been a reporter, city editor, state editor, assistant managing editor, had worked at multiple newspapers, multiple places.  I mean Ken had "the" resume of all resumes.  And when the publisher was trying to name an executive editor, he picked a white female who was a columnist who had never in her life, even in college, edited a newspaper.  You're sitting there going, okay, I'm sorry.  Huge experience.  No experience; passed him over.  And I remember at his, the announcement, I mean I was ticked; everybody trying to put the right face on.  I don't hide emotions.  If I'm ticked, I'm ticked.  If I'm happy, I'm happy.  And I remember all the people were lining up to shake her hand, genuflect, I wouldn't do it because she wouldn't, didn't deserve it.  Debbie Price was not deserving of that job.  Everybody knew she wasn't qualified for it, and Ken left shortly thereafter.  And I knew, I mean Ken was a mentor.  He was the guy who hired me, and that was just shameful to watch that happen.  And the reason I left the 'Fort Worth Star Telegram' is because when we went to Oklahoma City, the first two days, we did not have an editor on the scene.  Now, mind you, this is 19--you know, '95 [1995], (unclear) it was '94 [1994], one of the two.  And I sit here and go, in the first days, we're on the scene, you know, my hotel room becomes our newsroom.  I'm helping coordinate stories back at home.  We're sitting here, who assigns, doing what.  I mean, so, again, leadership stepping up.  There's a vacuum, assuming responsibility.  We send an editor, they send an editor in.  Kathy Veddor.  The best two days of our coverage were the first two days.  The worse two were the next two days.  And really, after those two days, she and I clashed big time, but at the end of the five days there, I was going back.  And she tells me, hey, I learned a whole lot from you, but don't tell anybody.  When we got back to Fort Worth, she got promoted three times in a year and a half off of that particular week.  And I saw, I said, wait a minute, come on.  Are you serious?  And, but what the experience told me was, the experience showed that I could lead a team of people when it came to news, and that was the reason when I got an opportunity to be offered a job as a news director, morning anchor at KKDA, AM, that's why I took it.
Story_ID: 39349
Speaker 1: After leaving the '[Fort Worth] Star Telegram', I went to KKDA, and I was one of the youngest news directors in the country.  And that really was about running my own show.  That really was about being able to be in control of the newsroom.  Yeah, we only had a couple people, but still, you're still running the show.  And it was there that I oversaw our special O.J. Simpson coverage.  We did twelve hours of coverage of the "Million Man March."  I got to host special shows, news specials, depending upon what took place.  And it was a really great experience because, again, you could mold and shape.  You--I was determining what was important, what was the lead story, what we covered.  And I would, I would, I hit the city all over.  I would go all over the MetroPlex, covering stories, hitting four or five in a day.  I mean it was exhilarating, but the other, I spoke about NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], I spoke about [Jack Yates] School of Communications, but the other life altering or career altering thing was when I got a phone call one day from a woman who said, Michael Irvin [former Dallas Cowboys player; National Football Association (NFL)] has been arrested on drug possession, and they're covering this thing up.  We got so many stupid crank calls all the time.  Troy Aikman [former Dallas Cowboys player; NFL] was arrested, having sex with a guy.  We got, we just got dumb calls left and right.  So I ignored it.  A week later, I get a phone.  What the hell are you doing?  They're covering this thing up.  Okay, fine, sure they're covering it, you know, give me a number.  Give me a case number.  The person gives me a number.  So I go to the City of Irving, go to the police department.  "Sir, we can't give you that report."  I'm sorry, what do you mean you can't me the report?  It's an arrest report.  How, arrest reports are public.  That's one of the few things I remember about covering the police beat when I was on it in college, they wouldn't give it to me.  So I started snooping around, and I talked my way into this other detective, and he pulls--and again, he was very open and honest.  I said, "Here's what I'm looking for.  I have this number, and I have two names."  And he pulls it up, and he said, yep, Michael Jerome Ervin, Alfred Roberts, and then he tells me the two women.  And I began to put the pieces together.  We had no, I mean I, we didn't have a First Amendment lawyer at the radio station.  So I called Drew Barry who was assistant news director at WFAA.  I said, Drew, before I tell you this, you've got to promise me you will not run the story before I do.  Drew's like Roland, I can't make that promise.  I said, oh, yes, you can 'cause when I tell you this story, you're gonna want to be the first TV station to know about it.  He goes, and Drew, I met through NABJ.  And Drew says, okay, what is it?  He agrees to my conditions, and then I tell him.  He's like whoa.  Man, you're talking about Dallas Cowboys, Super Bowl winners, top player, now Hall of Famer.
Story_ID: 39350
Speaker 1: And so what ended up happening was, the police department wouldn't come off the evidence they gathered in the room.  They literally were trying to cover it up, they were trying to keep it quiet.  Their lawyers jumped on it, got it released, and then I pieced all the pieces together.  I tracked the people down.  I went through the whole deal.  And I'll never forget, I called Greg Moore, who was then assistant managing editor--no, he was the top editor of the 'Boston Globe'.  And I called DeWayne Wickham [also a HistoryMaker], and I called one other journalist.  And I remember, I called them about three different times.  And I called Greg the last time, and Drew said, at FAA, we can't go on a single source.  And I called Greg the last time, I said, Greg, if I get this wrong, talking about a screw-up in my career.  He says, "Do you have it?"  I said, Greg, this is a lock.  I got it cold.  He said, well, go with it.  And thirty minutes later, at 5:30 p.m., I go on the air, and I do a five-minute and forty second report on this story.  And it sends shockwaves across Dallas-Fort Worth because at six o'clock FAA does a story crediting me with breaking the story.  I'll never forget coming home, which I was driving home, and I was listening to Randy Galloway, WBAP, and he's going, Ah, this can't be serious.  This little station [in Southern accent], "KKDA, you mean to tell me, not the 'Dallas Morning News', not some other", some little, this little KKDA."  I mean he was trashing us.  This can't be true.  It was dead on, and that story goes national.  It goes national.  Then witness tampering, I break that story, the other elements of the story, I break.  I eventually, and then--I remember ESPN came down.  They told their, I met one of their reporters.  When he left, he told the next people, this is the only person you need to call.  Every media outlet in Dallas, every morning, was listening to my broadcast to see what I was breaking next.  And when they were looking to plea bargain, I broke the plea bargain story.  And that just--and that's when I won awards from NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists], won eight, got citations from the Associated Press, Managing Editors conference.  But that just changed everything because in Dallas-Fort Worth, it became, who the hell is this guy, Roland Martin at KKDA Radio.  Nobody knew about me, but it totally had blown them away.  That was a huge career changer for me.
Story_ID: 39351
Speaker 1: So I spent time at KKDA [Dallas, Texas], but here's the--after all of that, after that an "Million Man March," the station didn't wanna go to the next level.  And so I felt we became stagnated.  I began to get really angry because we weren't doing anything, and then one day, I had interviewed--I had talked to people at KRLD Radio.  And I wasn't really interested, but then I got a phone call on a Sunday night from Chuck Smith, the general manager, telling me not to go on the air the next day.  Well, hell, if you're in radio and somebody tells you don't go on the air, you know something is up.  So I called the news director at KRLD, Jack Hynes, I said, hey, can we talk tomorrow, tomorrow morning; had a meeting with Chuck Smith at 10:00 [a.m.].  I met with Jack at 8:00, got the job offer.  So I walked--from KRLD, walked into KKDA, sat down, I said, "How long is this gonna take?"  Sat there, let 'em talk.  I didn't say a word.  He tells me, we're going in different direction.  You wanna do more, whatever.  And I said, where's my final check; didn't say a word.  Got my final check, went right to the bank, cashed it, put the money in the bank, started at KRLD the following week.
Story_ID: 39352
Speaker 1: Let me ask you a question about the "Million Man March."  Do you, there are, I know there are conflicting reports about how many people were at the Million Man March--
Speaker 2: A million folks were there.
Speaker 1: Okay, (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That, it was, it was a massive number.  I mean I can tell you, the people--it was, forget this notion of 400,000.  I've been at events, covered events, 400,000, not even close, not even close, not even close.
Speaker 1: Well, just tell us how you were involved and what did you do?  Did you report for it, this massive--there's never been a march this large in the history of the--
Speaker 2: When, when the thing started, I actually was at the 'Fort Worth Star Telegram', and I had been keeping up with it and in April, I believe it was in April, Minister [Louis] Farrakhan spoke in Dallas.  And they wouldn't let me cover the event because I had written some column on Farrakhan at the 'Houston Defender', and my first internship was at the Houston Defender, and later after I became a professional, I wanted to write columns.  And in Austin [Texas; at the Austin American-Statesman], they wouldn't let me write a column.  They said, oh, it's a great column, but we won't run it.  I'm going, why?  If it's good, it's good.  And that's when I said, fine.  Then I got to Fort Worth, they wouldn't let me write a column.  I said, fine, I'll write for the 'Houston Defender'.  So they wouldn't let me write a column because of what--they wouldn't let me cover it.  So I went to the event anyway.  And it was so funny, Chris Shultz--he and I went to Texas A and M [University] together, he actually, they had him cover it.  And so Chris had no idea what the hell Farrakhan was talking about.  So he couldn't figure out what the story was.  And he was sitting there with his laptop going, what in the hell is the story?  So I actually wrote the first eight to ten paragraphs of the story.  And he was, and so he reads it, and he's like "Wow."  He said, that's what the hell he was talking about?  I said, yeah, because he didn't--he couldn't put it all together.  I sat there, I sat there and wrote it.  To anybody out there, yep, I wrote that story, didn't get a byline, but I didn't care.  I wrote it for him.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is the story about--
Speaker 2: This is of the event, of his--he had spoken--
Speaker 1: His speech at the event?
Speaker 2: --to 10,000 black men in Dallas [Texas] at the Convention Center.  And so, and then later that night there was a massive tornado that tore through Lancaster.  And I had, I wanted to go cover that.  So I was up literally thirty-six hours.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, so I knew that, I knew what was going on.  And so I said, this is gonna be big.  That June, they had a planning meeting in Houston.  Cornell West was there, Farrakhan, a lot of people were there.  And I said, we need to cover this.  My (unclear), like, no, we're not interested.  It's not gonna be a big deal.  I said, look, fine.  You don't have to send me.  I'm from Houston.  I'll go myself.  Just give me a laptop.  I'll go cover it, fine, whatever.  Went to go cover it, and I did, and that's when I got the job offer from KKDA.  And I left the paper.  I resigned from the '[Fort Worth] Star Telegram' on Juneteenth [June 19th] and my last day was on July 4th.  So I call that true emancipation.  By noon, I said this is different.  And I remember when he spoke in Houston, same thing.  They booed it from one--they wouldn't let him speak at TSU [Texas Southern University].  They moved it to a church, and it was massive.  I said, this is gonna major.  So when I got to KKDA, I said, we've gotta cover this thing.  We gotta cover it.  And the station really didn't, I mean they didn't, they didn't do this stuff, okay.  They played oldies, they played, you know, blues, whatever.  I said, no, no, we've got to be on, we've got to cover this.  So Chuck Smith said, fine.  I'll approve it, and that's what we did.  And so we chose, the anchor was gonna be in Dallas, I would be in D.C.  Michael Williams was a big-time, black Republican who's a friend of mine.  Michael said, let's go together.  And so luckily, that was cool because literally, you know, again, this is, this what?  '94 [1994].  This is '94 [1994].  So you can't--no, it was '95 [1995], I'm sorry.  This '95 [1995].  Cell service sucked.  So you couldn't dial out.  We had problems trying, you know, call back.  You know, I had two cell phones, ten batteries, you know, this huge kit.  And luckily, Michael was an assistant secretary for the Department of Housing and Urban Development.  So we go to the, his former office.  Securities talk to another guy, Raymond Thomas, and, now, they let us in.  So we pretty much broadcast from the "March" [Million Man March] right there in the hotel, from the conference room.  And so that's really, that's really how we broadcast that.
Story_ID: 39353
Speaker 1: And so, but once KKDA [Radio, Dallas, Texas] decided, they, they were--I mean, that, O.J. [Simpson], the Michael Irvin [former Dallas Cowboys player; National Football Association (NFL)] deal, and we are high, they don't wanna do anything else.  So I really, I really--I won't say I got depressed, but I really said, fine, whatever.  I just, I really didn't care.  So I'm playing golf.  I go in, I anchor, 5:00 to 9:00, boo, I'm done.  I'm not covering stuff, and then I got an opportunity to write for a black newspaper, the 'Dallas Examiner', and then later, the folks at the 'Dallas Weekly' caught my eye--you know, I caught their attention.  And then their editor was going through all kind of drama, and the guy said, look, I need somebody who can come in and, on an interim basis, and keep this shop in order.  And that's what I did.  And I eventually became the managing editor.  So I was actually doing KKDA and the 'Dallas Weekly' at the same time, and then stopped doing KKDA, and then I became, I went, became the boss at KRLD.  I became, no, I became a reporter at KRLD.
Story_ID: 39354
Speaker 1: Two weeks in I knew I didn't wanna be at KRLD [Radio, Dallas, Texas] 'cause they just, it was--
Speaker 2: So you're back at KR--
Speaker 1: I was at KKDA [Radio, Dallas] and I went to KRLD.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I wasn't, it was nothing.  Really, I was bored to death.  I was in, in--see, they thought, we're 50,000.  We're KRLD.  But that didn't mean anything to me because, you know, when you go from news director to morning anchor to now you're just, you know, morning drive reporter, not really determining the news.  See, again, that's the big, I wasn't determining what I wanted to cover.  I wasn't interested--my marriage was in the crapper.  She [Martin's wife, Debra Duncan] was in Houston [Texas], opportunities and we're commuting, wasn't good at all.  And so after six months, you know, they wanted me to quit.  I said, look, I don't quit anything.  You gotta fire me.  And so they did.  And I still did the '[Dallas] Weekly', and then I decided to, to leave.  I decided to save my marriage and leave 'Dallas Weekly', a job I absolutely loved.  I could have stayed there easily, and I went to Houston.  So I left in 1999, February, 1999, to go to Houston.  I interned at the 'Houston Defender', called Sonny up, [Sonceria] "Sonny" Messiah Jiles, became, got the job as managing editor of the 'Houston Defender' and was in Houston a month and a half when my wife decides that she wants to get a divorce.  I move out, and again, I wasn't in Houston because of the work.  I was only there to save a marriage.  And so, and even, Sonny and I got along great, but her vision was different from mine because again, I was used to running my show.  My whole deal was, you brought me in to do this; let me do it versus, you're still trying to oversee it.  So I knew I wasn't gonna stay there long.  I knew it wasn't a good fit for what I was trying to do.  I was very aggressive on the Internet.  They were really taking their time.  Even back in 1999, I was there.
Story_ID: 39355
Speaker 1: And so, by the end of, by the end of that year [1999], I'd already decided I'm going back to Dallas [Texas], bought me a home.  I met my wife, Jacquie [Hood].  In fact, the day--I joined, the day my first wife [Debra Duncan] said she wanted a divorce was the day I joined Brookhollow Baptist Church and met Jacquie, but really did not connect with her until six months later.  I was divorced June of '99 [1999], and then January of 2000, I'm back in Dallas.  And so that's when I was, you know, and that was a very difficult time in my life because I had a job that was offered to me.  When I got to Dallas, couldn't talk to the guy, wouldn't return phone calls, and there was no job.  So I went through a very difficult period of freelancing, trying to put gigs together, very, you know, unequal, trying to make money, very hard time, not consistent.  And it really was a very, it was wilderness period of eighteen months.  And so here I'm with somebody, and, you know, we're gonna get married.  And we did in 2001, but that, you know, 2000 was a rough year because it wasn't a steady job.  Then I went through about, again, you know, several months and then these guys were doing this, a major broadcasting cable network, I met these guys.  So I pitched an idea to them to do this special, a political special.  I negotiated a fee of about 10,000 per month, and that was a God-send.
Story_ID: 39356
Speaker 1: And then all of a sudden, August 2000, I, I have a Toyota Four Runner.  My lease is up, but I'm still driving it, saying, look, then I can't afford to pay the miles.  I need a car.  I parked it at DFW [Dallas/Fort Worth, Texas] Airport, I go, I fly to L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  We're doing great work.  The last night of the convention [Democratic National Convention, 2000], early that day I go to lunch--
Speaker 2: This is the Democratic National Convention.
Speaker 1: Democratic National Convention.  I go to lunch.  I have some spicy shrimp and linguini, stomach feeling kind of sick.  I'm thinking, all right, I've had gastroenteritis, let me go lay down.  I lay down, I wake up, feel good until I turn this way, sharp pain.  I can barely walk, and when I say, "barely walk," I mean literally, barely move.  I'm in immense pain, but I gotta get down to that convention center.  Vice President Al Gore is giving his acceptance speech tonight.  I go to convention center.  I tell my crew, shoot this.  I mean I'm in massive pain, massive pain, but I'm still going and find my crew.  I remember sitting down under the bleachers, I mean under, in one of the hallways.  Gwen Ifill [also a HistoryMaker] was set up there with her team.  They were watching the broadcast.  I sat down on the floor, watching their small monitor.  I'm in, I'm in, I am in terrible pain.  And I see the guys after, I say, look, go here and shoot this here.  Then we're done.  I go back to the hotel room.  I'm there.  I wake up at two o'clock in the morning.  I go to Centinella (ph.) the clinic, guy checks me, doesn't really find, doesn't really diagnose it.  He said, go back, rest.  He said, if you wake up, you still got pain, don't get on that airplane.  Go to the hospital.  When I woke up at 6:00 [a.m.], my flight was at 8:00 [a.m.], I was too pained to get up.  So I went back to sleep.  I missed it.  When I woke up, called an ambulance, and I said, come pick me up.  And that's, and that's when, as they told me, I had appendicitis, got there--and I was in the hospital there five days.  While I was in the hospital, I had my friend back in Dallas go get my car.  She got there, couldn't find it.  It had been repossessed.  They had been tracking it.  And I'm sitting there, no health insurance, nothing, and I go, and I--now, mind you, I got this job, 10 grand [$10,000] a month, freelance deal.  I need that 10 grand a month.  I'm out six weeks, all of August, half of September recuperating at my parents' [Emelda Joyce Lemond Martin and Refinald Lynn Martin, Sr.] home in Houston [Texas].  I gotta finish this project, and luckily, I was well enough after six weeks--the pain was intense because it perforated.  And I finished the project, and 2000, and so it really was from all of 2000 to the first six months of 2001.  But I was in a very difficult period financially.  But I never, I never doubted myself.  I never got down.  God made it clear that I will provide for you.  And, and while I was going through this period, God is downloading stuff into me, downloading all of this information into me of what my career is about to look like.
Story_ID: 39357
Speaker 1: And then around June [2001], that's when I became news editor of 'BlackAmericaWeb.com', which was--I had that job for a couple of years.  And that was Tom Joyner's news and information website, and I took that site to, I mean what--the plans that they had for the first six months for that website, I exceeded it in the first two weeks.  And, and even that was interesting because a year later, by May of 2002, I was in prayer, and God said, you're not gonna be at this job past June 2003.  And that's when I began, God began to really speak to me about my first book, 'Speak, Brother! A Black Man's View of America' and how that was going to position me to make television appearances and lead to all of that.  And so I self published my first book.  I mean I was like, you know, I don't know how to publish a book.  And I was tossing and turning.  I'm in my bed, and I went to my guest bedroom, and I'm on the floor.  I went to my prayer room, and God took me to the book shelf and said, "Pull these books off."  They were small books, large books, medium sized books.  (Unclear) all these books, and that's what led me to publish 'Speak Brother! A Black Man's View of America'.
Story_ID: 39358
Speaker 1: Now, I notice after we get to about 2000, your dialogue kind of changes in terms of, I mean your expression kind of changes in terms of God telling you to do this and that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because--
Speaker 1: Did you go through a conversion or something?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, what happened was, I was in Austin [Texas], I was in Austin.  This is before, I'm commuting back and forth.  So this is, this is '95 [1995], '96 [1996].  No, no, no, this is '94 [1994], '95 [1995].  I'm commuting.  When I was covering that, when I was covering that event in Houston [Texas], a bunch of us went out to dinner, the "Million Man March" planning meeting, a bunch of us went out to dinner, Cornell West, among them.  And so Cornell was riding with me.  So here we are in my Mazda Miata, it's Houston, it's four o'clock in the morning.  We're going back to the hotel.  I'm dropping him off.  It's like 95 degrees [Fahrenheit; temperature] in Houston, tops down, his Afro is blowing in the wind.  And I begin to ask him, I said, about the issue of spirituality.  And so he says, Ah, Brother Martin, he said, interesting question.  He said, you know, when I'm in a contemplative mood, I might go to the Catholic church.  He said, when I need my butt kicked, I'll go to my old-fashioned Southern Baptist church.  He said--at the time, his wife was Ethiopian.  He said, you know, I don't know what they're even talking about or saying or chanting, but he said, something about the chants and the drums has a spiritual effect.  And I had covered, there was a big issue in Dallas [Texas] when Khalid Muhammad was supposed to speak at Friendship West Baptist Church.  And when the pastor was out of town, the deacons voted he couldn't speak even thought the pastor had already said he could.
Speaker 1: Now, give us a, who was Khalid Muhammad?
Speaker 2: Khalid Muhammad was the national spokesman for the Nation of Islam, the role that Malcolm X played to Elijah Muhammad.  And he played the role with [Minister] Louis Farrakhan.  He made some very nasty comments at King College in New Jersey about the Pope, and that led to his suspension from the Nation of Islam by Farrakhan.  And so he was supposed to speak in Dallas at this church.  The deacons overruled the pastor.  The pastor was out of town, and so I went to cover the speech and Khalid Muhammad says, "We're going to Friendship West on Sunday to confront these deacons."  So I'm going, okay.  So I go cover the story.  And I had been to Baptist churches before, but it was totally foreign to me.  So I'm covering this event, and a phenomenal sermon.  And that's what really got me, 'cause earlier I was in a Catholic, I was at St. Mary's in Austin downtown.  And we were saying the Apostle's Creed, and literally, I mean I, I know the entire Catholic liturgy by heart.  I mean I'm just repeating, and then I stopped myself.  I said, what am I saying?  I'm thinking about dinner, football, whatever.  And so, from that point on I started, I said, I'm not going to read a single one of these--I'm not gonna say a single one of these prayers, unless I'm reading it.  And it really started getting me to think about why was I a Catholic.
Story_ID: 39359
Speaker 1: And then my, and my church [Our Lady Star of the Sea Catholic Church] in Houston [Texas], the black priest left.  They brought in this Italian priest.  And he took down all the Kinta cloth.  He ordered no more gospel music.  He totally removed anything Afro centric from the church.  This was the church I was born and raised in.  This was the church my grandparents founded, were founders of.  And so my family eventually leaves Our Lady Star of the Sea.  And it got me thinking about the Catholic church and what am I getting out of this.  And so, I'm sitting there going, and I realize the homilies were not speaking to me.  And so that's when I left, so about '95 [1995], after that conversation with Cornell West, that's when I came up with the concept of a spiritual graduation which led, which turned out to be one of the essays in my book.  And that's when I left the Catholic church and joined Friendship West Baptist Church.  And so as I became, you know, because, again, as Catholic, you're not studying the Bible.  You're not really taught this personal relationship with Christ.  And so that's what started the whole process.  And then leaving Dallas [Texas] in February of '99 [1999], going to Houston, wife [Debra Duncan] says she wants to get a divorce, joining Brookhollow Baptist Church and even God led me there because when I was visiting in December '98' [1998], God said, told me to pull out all my tapes of Ralph West, and then said, "You're going to that church this Sunday."  Again, that wasn't my plan.  She was at, attending another church.  But God said, this is where you're going.  And it was by joining that church, a whole different phase of spirituality came about under Ralph Douglas West, who was the pastor of Brookhollow Baptist Church, also called the Church Without Walls.  But this also coincides with me being separated, going through a divorce and God taking me through this shedding of that marriage and relationship, and now I'm going into something new.  And so, yeah, that's when a different level of spirituality, another spiritual graduation comes about, that has had a lasting impact.
Speaker 2: Okay, 'cause I notice the discourse changed at a certain point, and I couldn't figure out--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean as I got more into my faith, again, going from the Catholic church to Friendship West, going from Friendship West to Brookhollow, again, those were all spiritual graduations.  And that's what, and that's what really changed.  So, so more of a personal relationship, more of a personal profession.
Story_ID: 39360
Speaker 1: And after 'BlackAmericaWeb', I still went through another--we took over this Christian newspaper.  We're trying to raise the money, me and this friend, Neal Foote, to make it happen.  This is May, 2003, had a great opportunity, put out several great products, but simply didn't have the money to make it happen.  And so, from 2003 to June of 2004, another financial crisis, if you will, because, same thing, trying to make it happen, trying to build something, trying--and money still unsteady, but still not worried about it.  And it was in September of 2003 where I met one of the investors in the Chicago, in Real Times, a parent company of the 'Chicago Defender' [Chicago, Illinois].  And we're talking at the Congressional Black Caucus, the problems they were having.  2002, another investor was looking to buy the company.  He asked a friend of mine, Mike Price, who was one of the vice presidents at the '[Fort Worth] Star Telegram' [Fort Worth, Texas] to do some due diligence on the company.  I helped Mike with that.  The guy never bought it based upon our advice.  Yet two years later, I ended up interviewing to become the top editor there, and began as an editorial consultant of the 'Chicago Defender' in 2004, nine days later, take over as executive editor.  And that, that's what led me to move from Dallas [Texas] to Chicago, and it was a very difficult decision because my sister and her two kids were living with us.  We'd [Martin and his second wife, Rev. Jacquie Hood Martin] been married less than six months when they moved in with us.  She fled a violent marriage, and that decision, to move to Chicago, again, changed the course of my career.
Story_ID: 39361
Speaker 1: All right, Chicago [Illinois], 'Chicago Defender'.  Now, what did you find at the 'Chicago Defender'.  This is one of the historical mainstays--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --of black people in the Twentieth Century, and the 'Chicago Defender' was distributed all over the country at one time like the 'Pittsburgh Courier' and other.  So what did you find?
Speaker 2: In 2002, when I did the editorial analysis of the paper, all I had was the documentation, staff, payroll, stuff along those lines.  In '02 [2002] a friend wanted me to help him with getting some cable business.  And so he went to the cable show.  And so he, I went along with him as a consultant, and I asked him to stop by the 'Defender'.  And pulling up to the paper, walking into the paper, was like a time warp, just, you know, the old building, the newsroom.  And I'm going, "Wow."  Now, sure, if you had the money to refurbish the whole place, you could say, oh, it had character.  It felt, you know, no, this was dirty, grimy, dusty.  This was, this was despicable.  And in 2004, when I became the editorial consultant, that was the exact same thing.  I remember interviewing with a head hunter, and I had the paper in front of me.  They handed me three papers, and I was waiting for the publisher and one of, and a couple of the other executives to come.  And they were about an hour later.  And, man, I marked up those papers so bad, it was unbelievable.  I mean those papers were bleeding red ink.  And you just saw, see, you were sitting here going, seriously?  How in the world could you guys put this out and let it go out the door, 'cause I was very tough in the, in the interview.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the nickname it had in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Yeah, "Chicago Offender."  And the interview took place in about March, and this happened, this actually was around the time that Vernon Jarrett [also a HistoryMaker] died, when I interviewed.  And I get the offer in June to become the consultant.  So I go in, and the first day, you know, I remember the young woman who was the editor, she clearly wasn't understanding what the deal was.  And so she's thinking I'm still running the show.  This guy is coming in, and finally, I had to make it clear.  I'm not here to stand around with a clipboard.  There are going to be some changes here, very matter-of-fact, stunning to the staff.  But this thing was dead.  This thing was, not comatose.  There's, there was no reason in a real business world the paper was even still alive.  And I remember she got upset.  Her name was Sabrina, she got upset, got angry.  She decides to, you know, I'm taking some days off, go on vacation.  Now, that's the dumbest thing in the world for you to do when a consultant just walks in.  When she got back, she didn't have a job.  Day One, I saw how deplorable this paper was, totally staffed, not even acceptable standards of quality, of training.  And so I remember the first day coming in, and I'm looking at their content flow and stuff was just all over the place, I mean just--the sports guy's laying out the sports section.  It's two o'clock in the afternoon, and he's done.  And I'm going, okay, are there games still going on?  It's Sunday.  Yeah, it is; nothing, just it was crazy.  And I remember, I remember I immediately changed the story flow, content flow.  And so the next day, they had a board meeting.  So, and you had these factions on the board.  They were already, different investors fighting each other.  Folks didn't want me hired, didn't, you know, Clarence Nixon was the CEO of Real Times.  They were mad at him, and so, I knew all this.  So I walk in, and I get attitude.  And I remember one of the, one of the guys goes, well, you know, how long do you think it'll take for you to, to put in this new system.  I said, it's been in place twelve hours.  What?  What do you mean it's in place twelve hours?  I said, I mean I've already put it in place.  I told you I'm not wasting time.  And walking in [to the 'Chicago Defender' office], and when you--first of all, forget physically, in terms of the building, how deplorable it was, finances were worse.  We were finding checks that hadn't been cashed in years, finding money--we were finding out that we had people who were selling the newspaper, who owed us upwards of $200,000.  I'm going why in the hell are they selling the newspaper, and we're not getting a check.  There were no checks and balances.  It was absolutely deplorable.
Story_ID: 39362
Speaker 1: I remember--and, again, historically, he's a fantastic photographer.  But he was turning in crap.  I'm sitting there going Bobby Sengstack, how are you giving me photos, and then you, cut-lines and no names and ages.  Well, what is this?  Why am I spending $175,000 on photography, and we don't even own the rights to the photos?  I mean it was just pure madness.  And so it really turned into 18, 20-hour days.  I mean it was a grind.  Then you got Chicago [Illinois] politics.  Then you got folks who had been pimping the newspaper for years, and so all of a sudden I'm coming in, and I'm saying, no, we're not covering that.  No, we're not doing that.  People were saying, "Why are you not putting this in the newspaper?"  Because it was crap.  Also, they literally were rewriting press releases and just putting them in the newspaper.  That's not what you do.  And so they got mad when I brought in the Associated Press, when I brought in other things.  But we had no choice because we were trying to turn the corner to make it a respectable paper and to build it up.  And it was just being, fallen into just disrepair.  And so while I'm fighting resistance from staff [at the 'Chicago Defender'], I'm fighting resistance from some folks in the community, now, I'm fighting, you're fighting history because you got people walking around talking about, "Oh, the 'Defender' was this and was that."  I said, yeah, "Was."  You can't talk to me about 1940, 1950.  I don't wanna talk about the Great Migration.  This is 2004.  We're dead.  What are you talking about?  Then you're fighting board members.  You got to fight the investors.  It was just crazy.  And so it was a grind every day.  And it was exhilarating.  It was tough, it was bitter.  At times, it was nasty, but I've always had a fireman's role in terms of you don't hire me to run a steady ship.  You bring in a person like me when the building is burning because you need somebody with a "I don't give a damn" attitude.  And that's exactly what I had.  So I wasn't afraid to offend a staffer, a board member, investor, somebody in the community because I was trying to save an institution.  I remember when I was fighting for us to move the paper.  "You can't leave the building."  Yes, we can.  First of all, the building had already been sold to finance the sale.  It would have cost upwards of $7 million to refurbish the building.  The entire company wasn't worth 7 million [dollars].  Now, the people who bought it overpaid for it.  The entire company wasn't worth a dollar over $3 million.  It wasn't. Forget all that equity in the name; sorry.  It wasn't worth jack.  So we have a tough deal on our hands.  And I had a CEO who was behind me a 100 percent, but then he made the mistake of getting seduced by the business.  This is a guy who was a consultant, worked in other areas.  He had never worked in media.  And I remember--we used to go to Tempo Cafe every night to eat.  I mean it's one and two o'clock in the morning.  It's open 24 hours and everything.  And I told him.  I said, this is the most seductive business in the world.  Everybody wants to be in media.  Everybody wants to be in the paper.  Everybody wants to be in television.  You're gonna get invited to places you've never been invited to.  You're gonna get invited into rooms in clubs that you didn't know existed, solely because you're the CEO of this media company.  Do not get seduced.  And he did.  He got seduced by the power, and that's where our falling out took place.  And, and the problem there was the owners didn't know media, and they wouldn't listen.  I was trying to elevate the paper.  I was trying to, and the paper had lost money twenty consecutive years.  2004 was my first year, '04 [2004] to '05 [2005], we lost money; '06 [2006], we made money, '07 [2007], we made money.  I don't believe they've made money since I left.  They wanted to keep the paper, this local community paper.  I said, guys, we're not a local community paper.  We're the 'Chicago Defender'.  Our archives, according to the university, the company that sells in the universities, was the most important black archive in the country.  But they were living, everybody was living on what the paper used to be, whereas I'm saying this is present day.  And so I remember getting criticized, you know, it's all about you.  I said, if you went back and did, and researched every story done on the 'Chicago Defender', it always involved, not paying its bills, fights with family members, getting sued.  I had to change the story.  I had to change the page.
Story_ID: 39363
Speaker 1: And so because I was the new guy in town [as executive editor of the 'Chicago Defender'], I had to absorb the attention and put the focus on me because I'm new and fresh, 'cause there was nothing else new and fresh about us.  And so you created enemies.  I remember when these guys were, I remember we had a guy who was writing a column.  And I fired him because I saw what he was doing.  He was writing--he wanted to do a series on black mayors around Chicago [Illinois], but he was promoting certain people and certain friends, and he was attacking certain folks.  And I saw this column two consecutive days about the same mayor.  I said, wait a minute.  This little mayor in this small town ain't that important.  So I didn't run it.  I remember getting a phone call at 6:30 in the morning from this person's publicist.  How dare you, you don't run this column.  I said, first of all, who the hell are you telling me what to run?  And so I said, secondly, why are you, how do you even know what I'm supposed to be running?  And he said, this person is one of the most powerful, black elected officials in Illinois.  I said, well, I never heard of him.  And the guy who I offended and fired, he started protesting.  So they started, and I remember, man, they brought--and see, I knew the game.  One of the guys on the inside of the 'Defender' who was one of the, on the management team, he was helping 'em.  He was feeding them information.  He fed them my salary.  All of a sudden my salary is appearing in letters, different stuff along those lines.  So I'm fighting external and internal forces, but it didn't matter 'cause I wasn't gonna lose.  And that's really where the battle was.  It was a battle for the future of that newspaper.  And I loved it, I loved running it.  I loved what we could have done, but they did not want to go to the next level.  And that's what led me to leave, and I'll tell you.  It was November of 2006, and my contract was up five months later.  And I remember sitting in, and I had been going back and forth in '06 [2006], what would I do, what would I do?  And I was in prayer, and God told me point blank.  God said, "Enough is enough."  He said, "Until you publicly declare that you are leaving the 'Defender', I will not open a single door or opportunity for you."  And I said, well, God, you know.  Okay, but I'm in Chicago.  My wife's [Rev. Jacquie Hood Martin] here now.  I still have my home in Dallas [Texas], you know, I'm getting paid $110,000.  You're telling me to make this decision and no job?  God said, I'll take care of that.  He said, "I've never failed you, but you have to publicly announce that you're leaving.  Otherwise, you're not going to commit to make the decision."  And I remember sending an email to Jonathan Rogers at TV One 'cause I'd been doing commentary for TV One.  I joined them a couple years previously.  I was doing my WVON radio show.  And I told Jonathan my decision.  Jonathan said, good, here's some things I want you to do for TV One.  We had never had the conversation.  It was a month later when I was, we had been talking to CNN for five years.  I'd been appearing free on, free appearances on television for four and a half years, from July 2002, up until that point, free on CNN, Fox, MSNBC, Court TV, BET [Black Entertainment Television], you name it.  And I was brought to New York to shoot a pilot, actually for Paula Zahn's show, and they said, who is this dude?  He was the star of the pilot, and that's how I got the contributors deal with CNN.  And I announced I was leaving the 'Defender', November of 2006, caught CNN's eye for real in December, 2006, and had an agreement with them in February 2007.  And so that's when I left--I was still with VON [WVON radio].  I was doing TV One, commentaries, weekly commentaries, doing mid-day, initially with WVON, daily with WVO--morning drive. Loved radio.  And that's when CNN started.
Story_ID: 39364
Speaker 1: Yeah, was this the first time you had hosted a call-in, talk show on the radio?
Speaker 2: No, I had, when I was KKDA [Radio, Dallas, Texas], I had appeared on a number of different shows, but also I hosted several specials where I was the host of the show.  So in terms of a consistent show, yes, but I had previously filled in and hosted shows.  So it was still, it was still a new experience, you know, hosting--and, in fact, before that, I actually moderated a conversation with Rev. Jeremiah Wright, [Rev.] Arthur Brazier and [Rev.] James Meeks for WVON [Radio, Chicago, Illinois].  I brought in just to do that.  And that's really what was a spark to say, and 'cause Melody Campbell, I'm sorry, Melody Spann Cooper, who was the owner, she really wanted me to be on the air when she met me 'cause she was like, ah, man, this guy is young.  He's energetic.  He's bringing a fresh perspective, and that's how it all started.  And then in 2005, that's why I got the show.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's another institution of Chicago.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Once the Voice of the Negro, now, Voice of the Nation.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and during the midday show, ten to one.  And it was so funny because, again, going into Chicago, people have their own, you know, ways of life and how they wanna do stuff.  And I just didn't care.  I was, I was willing to shake it up and challenge status quo.  And that's what it was all about.  So I did that for three, three and a half years, and when the Tom Joyner Morning Show came to me in July of '08 [2008] to join them, it was a very difficult decision.  People were saying--because I had to give up my show.  And I really loved the show, and it was a very hard decision to give up a three-hour a day radio show, where you got so much feedback and energy from, to do a six-minute daily segment.  I knew, sure money was different.  Nationally, it was different, but it still was a very, very hard choice to give it up.  And I still miss radio to this day.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 39365
Speaker 1: So you announced--you left the '[Chicago] Defender', 2006--
Speaker 2: Yeah, now, it's November, 2006.  I was leaving.  I, I really left the building around February, 2007.  That's about the time I was going back and forth to New York doing lots of stuff with CNN and then began to do CNN commentary analysis, shots of pilots, and '08, 2008 was when it really changed because I was on the air a lot which really was a breakout year television wise when I really hit the national scene and began to really get lots of notice.  Of course, the timing was being in Chicago [Illinois].  I did not start covering then Senator [Barack] Obama until--I mean I arrived in July, 2004.  So that was, you know, three months left before he ran--of his U.S. Senate campaign and then covering him in those years in the U.S. Senate and then the presidential campaign.
Speaker 1: What's your political analysis of the Obama campaign?
Speaker 2: Right moment, right time, right message, right person, and it helped that they had somebody who everyone felt was the inevitable.  So, therefore, you could play under the radar for so long.  Some people used the phrase that President Obama is remarkably blessed.  Others would say very luck.  So whether you're spiritual or not, there is no doubt, there's never been an ascent to literally go from being a State Senator, watching as the top Democratic and Republican nominee for U.S. Senate all fell by the wayside.  You end up running against Alan Keyes for the United States Senate.  He wins, you know, easily.  I remember we made, we created these special newspapers, a four-page spread, so that after Obama won, all the newspapers, all the TV networks could hold it up, which gave us promotion value.  That's really why I did it, for free promotion.  The polls close at seven [o'clock].  At seven o'clock and one second, literally, the Associated Press called the race for Obama.  Then he gives his speech, takes folks by storm, comes to the United States Senate, charms his way through that, announces he--I means he's hot.  He's blazing hot, announces he's running in February, 2007.  June, 2008, he's the nominee.  That's a hell of a four-year window, to go from State Senator, who was not a top State Senator to become your party's nominee.  That's a hell of a four years.  Robert Carroll has a book on LBJ [President Lyndon B. Johnson] called 'Means of Ascent'.  I think this probably is called "Rapid Ascent."
Speaker 1: You know the story about the Senate, the State Senate campaign, don't you?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Unopposed basically there.
Speaker 2: Yep, absolutely.  That one loss to Congressman Bobby Rush is the one blemish, but rapid ascent.
Story_ID: 39366
Speaker 1: Now, did you know President [Barack] Obama when he was, you know, before he became a senator [Illinois State Senator]?
Speaker 2: No, didn't know him before, and, in fact, at Congressional Black Caucus in 2003 where I met one of the investors of Real Times, I was at the dinner that night, and I'm walking the floor talking to people, meeting and greeting and schmoozing, and I run into George Washington who was running for U.S. Senator from Illinois.  And I run into this skinny guy who's tall, with some big ears, whose name is Barack Obama.  And I remember him giving me his card, and after that, I mean that was--we met, we talked, we shook hands, you know, good to meet you; I'm running for U.S. Senate.  Okay, good, pretty cool, got his card.  Well, July, 2004, I become the consultant and in August 2004, then Alderman, Dorothy Tillman, has her Roots Festival.  And I'm there with Clarence Nixon who is the CEO of 'Real Times', and so she leads us to the front row.  And so we sit down.  Senator Obama shows up, State Senator Obama shows up, and so she motions him over.  She sits him to her left, I'm on her right.  She says, you two know each other?  I said, I don't.  He goes, we met.  And I go, really?  Now, mind you, I remember a whole lot of people.  And he says, I like your columns.  And I'm going.  What the hell is he talking about?  My columns don't run in Chicago.  What happened was, when he gave me his card, I must have--I added his email to an email distribution list that I'd been sending out.  And so every week, he had been getting the syndicated column that I had been writing.  And that's how he was familiar with my work.
Story_ID: 39367
Speaker 1: This column, we should point out, was a syndicated in 'Detroit News'--
Speaker 2: In May, 2002, in May, in March 2002, when God first spoke to me, no, no--yes, in March, 2002, when God first spoke to me about my book, He was really beginning to put the, downloading in me what I was going to be doing to build this platform.  And one of those was to get a nationally syndicated column.  And so what I did was, I took some of my columns from 'BlackAmericaWeb', packaged them, looked at the various syndicators out there, looked at who had African Americans, who didn't.  And I sent them to '[Chicago] Tribune', to several others and 'Creative Syndicate'.  And I framed it as, I'm Roland Martin.  This is who I am.  This is what I'm doing, but also I'm a post--I have a post-Civil Rights Movement perspective in that I'm a post-Civil Rights Movement baby.  That's how I framed it.  And I said, I have a fresh perspective for the Twenty First Century.  And so I sent that all out and everything like that. 'Creative's' came back, said, we loved it.  We want to sign you up to a seven-year contract.  And so while I was actually shooting, while I was actually getting ready for the book cover shoot for my book, 'Speak Brother! Black Man's View of American', that's when they called me.  And they sent the contract, and I signed it, so I started with the syndicated column in the fall of 2002.  And the purpose of the book, the purpose of the book really was to position me to be able to get on television.  That way, you got a book.  They can refer to you as, oh, so and so.  That's really what the purpose of that was.  So book comes, I published my first book.  I get the syndicated column.  I make my first appearance on CNN, July, 2002, while I'm editor of 'BlackAmericaWeb.com', and that's how it all begins to build from there.
Speaker 1: Okay, I just thought it, so we didn't miss that.  So, President Obama had read your columns.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was State Senator.  He was reading my columns, and so I didn't realize it.  And so that's when I began to cover the race and things along those lines. Did some stories like that, but because I was so busy just trying the day-to-day, what's happening in Chicago [Illinois], really wasn't doing a lot of stuff, wasn't going to Washington [District of Columbia] covering stuff, but was still doing stuff in covering things there in the city.
Story_ID: 39368
Speaker 1: And, and after leaving the '[Chicago] Defender', I'm still in Chicago [Illinois].  I'm still on VON [WVON Radio] in 2007.  Then when 2008, tail-end of the campaign, I join the Tom Joyner Morning Show.  And so while I'm there, my wife, Jacquie [Hood Martin], she's working at Kennedy King College.  She becomes a vice president.  But really, by '08 [2008], and really by 2009, I have no ties to Chicago.  I'm not at the 'Defender', I'm not at WVON.  And so I'm spending most of my time on airplanes.  In fact, I buy my car, I bought my Navigator in 2008, November, in Texas, had it shipped to Illinois because I didn't want Illinois license plates.  I wanted Texas license plates.  And it took me four years to put 15,000 miles on the vehicle.  I was never there, never at home.  I mean I was traveling, I'm, speaking began to blow up, and so I'm doing CNN.  I'm doing TV One, I'm doing Tom Joyner, I'm doing the syndicated column.  I have a book, I published my second book, 'Listen to the Spirit Within: 50 Perspectives on Faith'.  We had already just published my wife's book 'Fulfilled!: The Art and Joy of Balanced Living'.  And then things were just taking off.  And it was just, you know, '08 [2008], '09 [2009], '10 [2010], '11 [2011], '12 [2012] and just keeps moving and going.
Speaker 2: Okay, tell me this, now, of the venues you've been, that you've appeared on since 2008, what, who's, 'cause I know I just have a, I know I see you on different shows--
Speaker 1: Right, I appear on any show.  First of all, I'm under contract with CNN so I can't appear on any other cable news networks.  I can do broadcasts.  I was CBS, the 'Early Show' a couple of times, but, but it's just all a matter of getting called, based upon just getting called.  That's what it's all about.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you have to kind of stay ready to--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's just a matter of them, they'll send an email, "Hey, are you available tomorrow or this evening (unclear), hey", you know, breaking news is happening.  Can you get to the studio now.  I mean I've had, I remember, I remember I was at NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] in Dallas [Texas], and this was, wow, I forgot what year we were in Dallas.  I think it was '05 [2005] or something like that or '06 [2006].  I can't remember the year we were in Dallas for our convention.  And I was on a panel about being on television, about television appearances, about, you know, becoming, you know, a commentator.  And I was sitting there on the panel saying, you must always be prepared.  And I get an e--I get a phone call saying, "Where are you?"  I'm like, what do you mean where am I?  And they said, well, you're supposed to be on set right now.  I said, you guys never called me back.  They said, you know, we can push it for ten minutes.  Luckily, the studio I always did it from was really right next to downtown, so I bolt out of the session, say, here's a perfect example.  I have to go.  And they were like, are you kidding me?  I said, no, I'm dead serious.  And I literally got up, bolted out of the panel, jumped in the cab, headed right over to the studio and did the hit on TV.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I mean, I should, that's just how it happens.  It is, it's very, you know, it's okay in that you pretty much know what your schedule is.  I mean you might have a crazy, busy time.  You might go hard for a week, ten days, and the next thing you know, it might be slow for a couple of weeks or whatever.  It ebbs and flows, depending upon what's the hot political story.  My wife, Jacquie, totally understands it.  She gets it.  You know, we met at Brookhollow Baptist Church in Houston in '99 [1999], got married in April 2001, so, you know, she understands the nature of this business.  She understands what this game requires and how things change all of a sudden.  And, you know, you know, we don't have any children so it's not like, you've got to balance that whole deal there as well.  But things can change on a dime, and you never know what's gonna happen.
Story_ID: 39369
Speaker 1: All right, you've described sort of a lifelong preparation in terms of the news and such, so you really have to stay on your toes in terms of what the breaking news is and what--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  I mean you never what's going to hit.  What I often tell people is, you can't, sure, you can talk about anything that you want to.  But I always say, just like with speaking, you really sort of have these three areas of expertise.  And so for me, I would say it's political, social, then cultural.  In terms of the broad areas.  African Americans specifically because I've spent more years in the black press than I have in the mainstream.  My first internship, I turned down an internship with CBS News to work at the 'Houston Defender'.  You know, KKDA, not black owned, but black targeted, 'Houston Defender', 'Dallas Weekly', 'Dallas Examiner', 'Chicago Defender', major broadcasting cable network, 'TV One', 'Black America Web'.  I also was news editor for two years for 'Savoy Magazine', the magazine, it was black owned, targeting African Americans.  And so that's a very unique perspective and very few people who are in mainstream media, who are African American bring that to bear, which is one of the reasons why I often talk about things that are specific to black folks because I've covered these issues.  But you do have to be always prepared, always reading, and it's not just to me, again, understanding current events.  It's how do you allow history to inform you and inform your perspective about what's happening in present day.  And so a lot of times, I will reference things historically, whether it's Civil Rights Movement, whether it's different aspects of that, whether it's things in the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s], '90s [1990s], but also I make a point of offering a point of view that is a black point of view.  I'm not trying to be generic.  I make it clear, I'm unapologetically black.  I'm not afraid to say I'm a black man.  I'm not afraid to, if we're talking about, and other people are making a reference to something and they use something from the Beetles or from The Rolling Stones, hell, I'll use the Temptations or Frankie Beverly and Maze.  You know, so I see my job as being able to offer a much different perspective, that is different from what other people are able to bring to the table.  But it's also one where, look, I didn't go to one of the so-called elite schools.  I'm not one of these [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia] mouth pieces.  I don't really even spend lots of time with the same folks there.  I, what I hear a lot from folks, is man, you say exactly what I'm thinking.  You say what I wish I could say if I was in your position.  So they think it, I say it.  I always say, I don't have a filter.  If it comes in my head, it's coming out my mouth because it's about the authentic in what you say and do, it's about being authentic in what you write.  It's also about being unapologetic.  We have way too many people in this society who are unwilling to speak truth to power and unwilling to challenge the status quo, even if it's talking to our own folks.  And I've never been one who was afraid to do so and who isn't afraid of the criticism in defending our position.  I always get a kick when somebody Tweets me and they say, well, Roland, you know, why do you have to come back so hard?  Did you not think I was going to defend my position?  That's exactly what I'm here to do.  I'm not here to go, okay, yeah, you might be right.  No, if I think you're wrong, you're wrong.  And so that's the position that I take.
Story_ID: 39370
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a, of all the different CNN platforms, do you have a favorite one?
Speaker 2: No, no favorite platform.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because each platform lends something differently to your skill set.  Television is a different beast than radio.  Radio is great and unique because you are dialoging directly with people, and you're allowed to really expound on something if you're on a three-hour radio show.  TV is different.  The written word is different because we process information differently when we read it compared to when we hear it.  And so writing plays a different role.  Social media also is a lot different because social media, unlike TV, radio or online or newspaper or magazine, social media is absolutely immediately, meaning it just happened and boom, you've already weighed in.  So the medium leads you to do different things.  Magazine is far more thoughtful than anything else because you have a three-month lead time.  So, if you for, you know, what is, what is, in terms of deepest, most thoughtful, it goes from books, at the highest level, to magazines, to I would then say, newspaper.  I would then say newspaper, online.  I would then go to radio 'cause you can expand longer, television.  Then I'd probably say in social media in terms of what's the immediate and quickest.  And so all those different platforms allow you to exercise different levels of your thought process based upon the moment because see, for print, the words are always there.  Sure, you have transcripts now for TV and radio, but that doesn't compare to that written word because how you're able to turn a phrase or how you're able to say something to cause somebody to go, man, and jolt, that jolted me in a different way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 39371
Speaker 1: I have to ask you about this and people will beat me up if I didn't.  But, in terms of the criticisms of the first black president of the United States, [President] Barack Obama, criticized from a certain segment of the right, the white right--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and being black, period, he's criticized, you know, for not being black enough by certain black people, and then there are people that wanna refine his mission.  Is he really progressive enough--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and so all these questions, what, do you have an analysis of the analysis of Barack Obama?
Speaker 2: I would say, first of all, you have to look at him obviously, in the historical terms of being the first African American president, even though he's bi-racial.  But he considers himself to be African American.  And so you have that aspect, and I totally get it.  But you also have to accept the fact that he's also the 44th president.  With that, you're going to have critics.  You're going to have people who don't like you because, for whatever reason, your race, your gender.  He caught hell during the Democratic nomination process because you had women, namely, white women who said they wanted Hillary [Clinton].  You're going to have people who look at you because of party.  You're going to have people within the African American community who're gonna say, look, you should do more, and we expect more.  You got 95 percent of the black vote.  There's a thing called return on investment.  That wasn't just because, just because.  And so I think one of the things that black people also have to acknowledge is that we are far more hypersensitive about anything said about President Obama than any other president because he is considered to be one of us.  That's real.  People who deny, they're lying.  For instance, you can't find me a black person who had an issue if somebody said George W. Bush or Mr. Bush or George, but if you hear somebody say "Barack Obama," "Barack", they go, "How dare you?"  You call him President Obama.  Now, for me, I've done it.  But I believe in the respect of all positions.  So when you hear me talk about Congressman Ron Paul, I'm not gonna call him Ron Paul.  I'm not going to say, "Hillary Clinton."  I'm gonna say, Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton or then Senator Hillary Clinton or Reverend [Jesse] Jackson or Pastor Jamal Bryant.  I mean, I'm using those titles.  Even my wife, she is an ordained minister.  I typically, when I'm introducing her to somebody else, I will say, Rev. Jackie Hood Martin.  And so, but black folks are very hypersensitive to anything said about President Obama.  I understand that.  I do think though it works in a negative for us because it prevents us from having an honest dialogue about something we do not like that he might do that could be negative to African Americans.  And so this whole notion of, you know, the brother already got lots of stuff on his plate.  Let's not put more.  You're the president.  You ran for the job.  This comes with the territory.  And so I think there are a lot of people who have failed to adequately critique this president like we would somebody else.  I get the criticisms of Tavis Smiley, Cornell West and others.  The problem is when your criticism is deemed as personal and not policy.  The mistake both of them made was making personal attacks on the president, not policy critiques.  Once you turn your audience off that way, they're not gonna tune in.
Story_ID: 39372
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  What are--and what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Pure and simple, education.  Education has always been the gateway to opportunity for black folks.  And when I see reading rates, math rates, when I see comprehensive, when I see the massive high school dropout, all of the economic problems we face are tied to our education problems.  All of our housing problems are tied to our education problems 'cause they're tied to economics.  Even when you look at our high rates of cancer, HIV-AIDS, tied to education.  We can't talk about poverty unless we talk about education.  That, to me, is a problem for us.  And you could put every issue you want to on the table, I don't care, law, criminal justice, prison industrial complex, health, you could put every issue on the table.  They all go back to education.  And that, to me, is the fundamental focus that we have to be focused--you cannot talk about economic rights and ignore education because if you don't have a high school diploma, you're not gonna be able to create wealth.  If you do have a high school diploma, but you don't go to college, you still got problems.  So that, to me, I think is our fundamental issue.
Story_ID: 39373
Speaker 1: As a young man in media, in the position you're in today, as somebody who's a post-civil rights, what are your long and short-term goals?
Speaker 2: Well, this is all I wanna do.  I've had people come to me and they say, you should run for office.  I've had, I've had political consultants come to me and say we'll pick the job, we'll raise the money; not interested.  I sign every book, "Continue to do God's will and He will continue to bless all that you do."  And so I know exactly why I'm here.  It is to do exactly what I'm doing.  So, I've owned the paper, I've run a website.  The goals have changed so many times because I've already met 'em.  I mean before I was thirty [years old], I said I wanted to cover a political, national political convention.  I wanted to be a boss.  I wanted to do this stuff.  I did that by twenty-nine.  Okay, now, what?  (Unclear) All changes.  Right now, absolutely.  I want to host a five-day a week television show on CNN.  It could be anywhere, because that five-day a week, national show affords something else [phone ringing].  Hold on. [Pause]. I would love to do a national syndicated radio show.  See, again, the most important thing for me about goals is I don't even really think about them in terms of long term and short term because what you might determine is a long-term goal can literally happen in months.  And so I simply look at things happening in your life and your career as constantly moving and evolving and constantly changing.  The most important thing to me for anybody to understand, and I know this might seem strange to some people, is to understand that you can be content, happy as well as motivated to go, to go to the next level all at the same time.  Now, most people will say that's crazy.  Content means that even if I never get a five-day a week show, I'm still content with what I have and I'm still happy.  The problem is when we're never content.  We're not happy, and we're always trying to get the next thing.  And we never, ever enjoy what we have.  And then what happens if we never get the next thing, now, are we disappointed?  Are we frustrated?  Do we not consider ourselves not being a success?  And so at every level, I was just as happy making $50,000 a year, running the 'Dallas Weekly' as I am right now.  I was just as happy when I had an apartment running the 'Dallas Weekly' as I am sitting in this 20,000 square foot property.  I was just as happy, running the 'Chicago Defender' as I am sitting on CNN, talking to people in 200 countries.  I have never, never considered, oh, CNN to be better than TV One, never thought the '[Austin] American Statesman' and the 'Fort Worth Star Telegram' were better than the 'Houston Defender'.  When I went to KRLD Radio, that was KRLD, CBS, 50,000 watts, heard all over North Texas, KKDA, 1,000 watt radio station [never thought it was less than KRLD] [phone ringing].
Story_ID: 39374
Speaker 1: Sir, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Purely and simple, being honest, being transparent, honest and saying exactly what needs to be said, no sugar coat, no dancing around it, in your face and to the point.  Every place I've been, that's the way I've rolled.  I've never worried about getting fired.  I never worried about, oh, they might hurt me doing this here.  I just believe that when you speak it the way it is and what has to be said, that's all you can ask for.  And I would rather speak truth to power than to pull my punches, then look myself in the mirror and say, man, what did I do that for, 'cause I think you betray yourself.  You betray your ancestors.  I don't think Frederick Douglass would have done it.  I don't think Ida B. Wells-Barnett would have done it.  I don't think Ethel Payne would have done it.  I don't believe Lerone Bennett would have done it.  I don't believe Vernon Jarrett [also a HistoryMaker] would have done it, and so I always see myself within the same vein as those amazing journalistic ancestors who said what had to be said and didn't worry about the critics, didn't worry about the money because what you say, that's what resonates.  When I have people come up to me and say my son and my daughter who are 11 and 12 and 14 follow and listen to what you have to say, when I hear, when I've heard people say, man, you have forced me to get more involved in politics.  Every time you're on, I listen.  That's all that matters.  That matters, that will always matter more than a check, always.
