Story_ID: 624568
Speaker 1: I want to start out by having you state your name in its entirety and spell it for us, and the name of your company and today's date.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Today's date is the tenth.
Speaker 1: July 10th.
Speaker 2: July 10th.  Okay my name is William G. Mays, M-A-Y-S and I am President and CEO of Mays Chemical Company, Incorporated.  Today's date is July 10th, 2000.
Speaker 1: Okay and we're in Indianapolis, Indiana.  I want you to also--what does G stand for?
Speaker 2: G stands for Gerard, G-E-R-A-R-D.
Story_ID: 624569
Speaker 1: Okay, now there are five questions I ask at the beginning that have no relevance or anything so we ask them of everyone.  What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color is probably black.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I think I like to go to the Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food that I can't eat is probably salmon.  I love it, but I do eat it, yes.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of year, Summer, what else?
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Do it right the first time.
Speaker 1: Okay, good.  Some people they go on and on and I'm like--
Speaker 2: No, my answers will be very much to the point.
Story_ID: 624570
Speaker 1: Okay, I'd like to--I'd like starting out with people to talk about their, their youth.  And specifically would like to have you talk about your parents, who they were, their names you know what, what they were like.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I grew up in Evansville, Indiana, and I guess many folks would say probably middle class because both of my parents were educated, with my dad getting his master's of--Theodore C. Mays from Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] in the early '40's [1940's].  And my mom also with a master's degree in special education from Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana].  My Mom's name is Joy J. Mays, and I think I had pretty typical childhood, other than in Evansville [Indiana] I grew up and went to segregated schools.  At that time in the '60's [1960's] schools were pretty well segregated.  So I attended an all black elementary and high school until my senior year until when they kind of just dis--disrobed everything and sent the kids to whatever school was necessary in the senior year.  So I ended up graduating from Evansville Central [High School, Evansville, Indiana], which was a predominantly white high school in 1963.  I graduated in the top ten of my class and went on to Indiana University.  So I think that the push for this drive to go on to, to school, really came from my parents who as I say were pretty highly educated for the time.  And my dad was very inspired to inspire me to deal with chemistry.  He taught chemistry in high school and college.  As a matter of fact, I even typed his--one of his master's dissertations.  So I had kind of an involvement with chemistry at an early age, which obviously has continued even today.  And my mom was very active in, in charitable kinds of things in Evansville, but she also taught.  And so I guess between the two of them I had a pretty, pretty strong dose of, of education.  My two brothers, older brothers who are twins, also hold degrees from Indiana University.  So you can see Indiana University is a very influential institution in our lives.  As a matter of fact, on the same day my--I got a Master's, an MBA in business, one brother got a doctorate in education and one brother got a bachelor's in education.  I guess actually it was in social science.  So--and three different campuses.  So we thought that was kind of a unique situation back in 1973.
Story_ID: 624571
Speaker 1: That's' great.  Let's go back.  I'd like to go back a little bit more to your parents, and for your father, what--do you know much about his parents and you know, what he where he was raised?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my dad [Theodore C. Mays] grew up as one of I guess six children whose father was a Methodist minister in Arkansas, in Malvern, Arkansas, which is outside, maybe 40 miles from Little Rock [Arkansas] or so.  Between Little Rock and I guess Pine Bluff, Arkansas.  And I remember going down there visiting the family in, in Arkansas every Easter.  And we would drive down to, to Little Rock from Evansville [Indiana].  He actually taught school down at--I guess he, he finished Shorter College [Little Rock, Arkansas] and taught at Philander Smith [College, Little Rock, Arkanasas] down in, in Little Rock [Arkansas].  And I guess that's where he met my mom [Joy J. Mays] in the late '30's [1930's].  And they ended up back in Indiana--back I guess in Evansville.  And so from a family history standpoint, all of I guess on the Mays' side are pretty highly educated teachers.  I think his brothers, he had two, two brothers.  Dad was kind of oldest of the, of the oldest of the, of the six kids.  But the two brothers were--finished college.  One was an engineer and the other was a teacher.  And then the same thing with, with the sisters.  One, the youngest sister just finished and taught in the Gary [Indiana] public school system.  So I think education kind of ran in that side of the family pretty, pretty strongly.
Speaker 1: Did he ever talk to you about growing up in Arkansas?
Speaker 2: Well not really cause we had enough flavor of Arkansas going back once a week for that--I remember we didn't stop except for gas cause it was no place to, to, to really pull off the road, if you will.  We would have to time it so that we could drive straight through and I remember just some of the I guess segregated experiences just in, in, in, in going through Arkansas.  But really was, it was not that much exposed to it because once we got there, we kind of just stayed with our own people I'd guess you say.  And so I never really experienced much in the way of segregation except being told to go to the back, or you can't drink out of that fountain, which was a little different than how I was growing up in Evansville.
Story_ID: 624572
Speaker 1: Now what about your mother, where was she from originally?
Speaker 2: Mom [Joy J. Mays] again was from Indiana, her family was in Indiana.  She met Dad [Theodore C. Mays] I guess on a--when they were down doing some, some--when she was down doing some volunteer work.  And they got together and I guess got married and came to Indy--to Indiana.  And I think she probably, or he followed her back to Indiana because her family was fairly well-to-do in Indiana.  And on her side of the family, they were certainly not wealthy by what we would consider, but I think middle class or upper middle class was pretty, pretty much the, the norm at that time.
Story_ID: 624573
Speaker 1: Now how would you describe your, you know your mother [Joy C. Mays] and your father [Theodore C. Mays]?  I mean your mother, what type of person was she?
Speaker 2: Mom was I guess one of those kind of persons that always instilled doing it right, being honest and forthright.  I think that's where a good bit of the, the philanthropy came from, from my exposure to her.  I remember spending lots of time in church, that was not unusual.  Every Sunday we'd go to Sunday school and that could extend on both sides of the family.  I think that my father instilled just the hard work because even though he taught school nine, ten months out of the year, and most teachers took off in the summer, I remember he worked a menial job at an ice plant just to earn extra money so that we could have, quote, the little extras that, that weren't provided by teacher's salary.  So I guess I learned a little bit of the perseverance and hard work and, and that's what he instilled along the way.  And, and he always indicated that you were never too, too educated or never too big to work hard.  And I think that again is, is part of the, the area that was instilled and, and follows me even today.
Speaker 1: And who would you say you're most like?
Speaker 2: I think I'm probably more like my, my father, even though he died at a relatively early age.  I was in college, probably sophomore in college in '64 [1964] when he passed, and he was 55 at the time when he, when he, when he passed.  And so I had those just fond memories of a lot of the areas that, that he helped me with, particularly in working and, and sorting out to be an academically strong student and still being part of a group.  Because as you can imagine as a teenager, even back then it was kind of frowned on when you have straight A's if you happen to be black.  So you, you kind of had to run the, the, the balancing act of how to make good grades, how to, how to study and do the right thing there, but also belong.  And I think he was very instrumental in helping me to bridge that gap.  And even as going into college, one of the things that I remember him saying is that whatever you do, you've got to finish.  And even though he passed and didn't live to see that, I was very, very inspired when I received my honorary doctorate in 2000 because he had tried so desperately to get a doctorate degree from Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] in chemistry back in the early '40's [1940's].
Speaker 1: And he had tried or didn't have time or what--?
Speaker 2: Well he just felt that he was not going--they were not going to award a, a doctorate degree to an African American at that point in time.  And while others who also pursued it ultimately got it, it was many years down the road.  And so he took the credits that he had accumulated, accepted the master's degree and went back to teaching because he said he just--he had a family and just couldn't afford to take the time out, the five, six or seven years that it was going to take of additional time and work to be able to complete that degree.
Story_ID: 624574
Speaker 1: Okay, let's talk about growing up in Evansville [Indiana].  Evansville is how large?  We were trying to-
Speaker 2: Evansville is probably 110,000, maybe a little larger, probably in the six or seven square block area at that point in time, there were seven or 8,000 African Americans living in the projects.  I lived just outside of that area, but close by, within walking distance, four or five blocks.  As I say, I grew up with segregated schools.  And so all of the, all of the schools had districts except Lincoln [Lincoln High School, Evansville, Indiana].  Lincoln, if you were an African American, you could attend from any place in the city.  So people were bused in, and that was my first experience with bussing because kids from outside of the immediate area were bused to Lincoln.  And I never was bused, I always walked.  But I had experiences just watching those folks and the whole bussing issue.  So I guess I would view my tenure at, at Lincoln and even before Lincoln, Chestnut-Walnut [Elementary School, Evansville, Indiana] which was again, an all black elementary school, as being very positive.  I had a chance to have excellent, really outstanding teachers because again, there were no white teachers at Lincoln, they were all black.  But they were highly educated.  I think almost to a teacher, there was--everyone had a master's degree and they really cared for the kids.  They really went out of the way to try to ensure that the kids would be successful.  And I think that then still just an awful lot of discipline and determination to succeed in spite of being from a segregated environment.
Speaker 1: You know what I find surprising about that is that it's--you have an education, similar to a southern education but you were in the north.  And I mean I grew up--you're not that much older than I am.  And my parents were from Pennsylvania and they didn't have, you know they didn't have it segregated like that.  What about Indiana?  I mean is this--I'm just--
Speaker 2: Well Indiana of course is the home of the Ku Klux Klan.  I mean let's get real.  I mean it, it grew up--the Klan was founded here and the Grand Dragon was right down in Greenwood, Indiana, which is just ten miles south of Indianapolis [Indiana].  So I mean that whole area of Indiana and then bordering right next to Kentucky.  And Evansville is just a rock's throw from Kentucky.  So you, you would see that there is a pretty negative influence perhaps.  And Indiana for the most part is rural.  Indianapolis is an exception, but most of Indiana is pretty rural.  And so you have lynchings and other things that we don't talk about in Indiana as much, but if you look at the history of that, it did occur in Indiana.  I mean you didn't have to be in rural Mississippi for that to happen.
Story_ID: 624575
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'd like you to share just like maybe two or three childhood memories with us.  It may be, you know, about times with the family, it may be times with friends, it may be, you know but you know things just to give a sense of your sort of life growing up.
Speaker 2: I think one of the memories that I have that was pretty vivid was when I got a chance to go to my senior prom and I had this brand new car that my mom [Joy J. Mays] and dad [Theodore C. Mays] had just gotten.  And I was out on the date coming back from the senior prom and some guy opened the door and I ran into it with this brand new car.  And I was just, just absolutely petrified at what I was going to say to my parents when I brought this car back in.  Fortunately, they were very understanding and didn't do that much damage but it, it always stuck in my, in my mind as a, as something that--cause I couldn't understand why this guy was out at two in the morning.  I knew why I was out, but I couldn't understand why he was out along the way.  So that sticks very vividly in my mind.  I guess other childhood memories, I think playing, playing football.  I wasn't very good, but at least enjoying the ability to get out with my, my friends and be a part of the group.  I was--it was really an exciting memory.  I think as I look even earlier, walking to school, to grade school three blocks from my, from my home at that point, and feeling very secure and very safe.  And then moving at a later point to, to a much larger house in a different environment and not having the same degree of, of feeling of security and safety.  And yet nothing ever happened.  We didn't really have gangs in Evansville [Indiana].  We might have, I didn't know about them back at that point in time.  So I used to read a lot about what went on in Chicago [Illinois] and New York and Harlem [New York City, New York] and dream about how I'd love to go to those kinds of places.  And when I got older, I did.  But that early point in life I probably was pretty much a homebody and stayed pretty close to, to the tried and true in Evansville.
Story_ID: 624576
Speaker 1: So what would you say the young Bill Mays was like?  How would you describe him?
Speaker 2: Young Bill Mays was probably pretty boring, pretty studious, pretty--very serious.  Learned to read at a very early age.  Could entertain himself; didn't need a lot of people, although I spent a lot of time in groups.  I participated in a lot of different clubs and organizations, so I guess I was always an organization person.  And I, I think that I would characterize Bill as, as someone who was, was going to be successful because he was determined to be successful.
Speaker 1: And was there anything that you dreamed to be at that point, or wanted or, you know we--you know you--people have--
Speaker 2: I think that at that point I, I didn't really recognize it, but I had the entrepreneur binge even back then.  I carried the Chicago Defender.  I remember going out delivering the paper every week and I had a weekly paper route because I didn't want to get up every day and deal with it.  I remember how to deal with collecting receivables and because the folks didn't always pay every, every week.  And so I had to carry the, the receivable because the paper demanded that you send them a money order every week before you get the next week's paper.  So I remember trading comic books and buying them at pretty low prices from the Salvation Army and--because they'd get them free.  And then they'd sell them at two for a nickel or something like that.  And I'd collect those and then trade them.  And I always tried to trade--you got one of mine, I got two of yours kind of thing.  So that was again, part of the--I think the entrepreneurial binge back, back early on.  I remember in grade school selling peanuts and popcorn or whatever in the little candy store that they had for students to participate in.  So it was a job where I learned to make change, learned to make friends, was honest, learned to keep track of inventory, learned to do ordering.  So all of that I think began to, to mold and shape me.
Story_ID: 624577
Speaker 1: Now how much, how much--how many years were between you and your brothers?  They were twins.
Speaker 2: Yes, they were twins, four years.  They were born in October, I was born in December four years later.  So they actually finished high school before, before I did.  In other words, we weren't in high school at the same time, so they were off to college when I was beginning high school.  But we have a pretty close relationship that, that continued on, continues on even now.  My brother Ted [Mays] works for one of the affiliated companies with Mays Chemical and he runs the property management company.  And his twin brother Bob [Mays] works in Evansville [Indiana], is Director of Student Teaching and Associate Dean at the University of Southern Indiana [Evansville, Indiana].  So you can see that education theme still stays, still stays around.
Story_ID: 624578
Speaker 1: What do you think were some of the things that shaped you as a young person?  I mean other things.  Were there any other things that you think sort of shaped you and made you who you are today?
Speaker 2: Well I think juts being exposed to, to success.  I think my parents [Theodore and Joy Mays] made it a, a very special point to introduce me to successful people to try to show me the difference between right and wrong, and to, to help me make my own decisions, but also to try to instill that--in the ultimate, final analysis, you are the decision maker and you have to know the difference between right and wrong and, and make those correct decisions.  I think the church background early on is every helpful.  I mean I've never lost that, that commitment to religion.  And I think that the, the commitment to success, the drive to be successful, and yet to also reach back and help.  Because again, it was my mom [Joy C. Mays] that said no matter how successful you are, you always need someone to share it with, and you always need to help someone else be as successful as they can be.  So I think that all of that molded me early on.
Story_ID: 624579
Speaker 1: And you said that your family moved right near the--close to the housing projects [unclear].
Speaker 2: Yes, that's correct.
Speaker 1: A small area.  What--did you have any sense since you were from an educated, you know, an educated family, did you have any sense that you were different from the other?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, absolutely.  Well first of all you're different because your father [Theodore C. Mays] at the, the school that you attended.  So that made you different right off the top.  The fact you lived in a single family home and had your own bedroom made you different because that was not the norm.  The fact that you had access to a car.  So from an economic, socioeconomic standpoint, the different--the differences were pretty stark and very clear.  And that's why I say it, it--you add to that then trying to excel in education, which was not something that was treasured by so many of your peers, it was, it was difficult.  And you had to, to be able to blend in and be able to be a part of the group.  And I remember early on going to my first dance, my first concert, the Mircales' concert.  And I remember that my dad said well I don't like the element that's there.  And so I begged and cried and whatever to go.  And so he says okay, I'll take you.  And I said well you can't--I mean that will make it bad if--he said I'll stay in the balcony, you can go down to the, to the, to the floor.  And so I went with him the first time.  And folks were really surprised to see me at the, at this concert cause that was just out of character.  And I said well you know we all grow up and so I, I remember doing negative things, smoking cigarettes just to be a part of the group, or drinking I think it was peppermint Schnapps in high school.  And I didn't like peppermint Schnapps that well, but, but I did like Bacardi rum and so you go through those stages and hopefully move away from them and out of them and learn from them.  I think that I was stronger because I was exposed to some of that at an early age and again was able to, to move through it and say well I don't really care to smoke, not that I don't--not that I can't, but I just don't care to.  So I think it's those kinds of decisions that help you as you formulate your longer term strategies.
Story_ID: 624580
Speaker 1: Now your father [Theodore C. Mays]--the fact that he went, you know, got his degree in chemistry is a little, you know different too.  What, what--did he ever talk about why he was attracted to that, or you know why?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  I think he just had a fascination with--I remember going with him to the lab on, on occasions.  And I think he just had a fascination with quantitative chemistry and it just kind of grew and developed.  And he was really pretty good at running qual schemes and, and dealing with that element.  And of course that allows you as a teacher, and this was one of the things that he always tried to get me to do no matter what I wanted to go into because I talked about business.  And he says well whatever you do, you need to get an education degree so that you can always teach.  And I did not--while I chose to deal with chemistry, I didn't really go very much into the education side, although I did a couple of education courses so I could have I suppose, gone back very easily and gotten the methods courses and practice teaching and taught if I had to.
Story_ID: 624581
Speaker 1: Now let's--so you--were you a good student?
Speaker 2: I was a great student in, in high school.  I wasn't very good in college [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] because I think what happened in, in college I had been pent up so long in, in high school with, with, with dealing that when you got to that ultimate freedom of a large university like Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] where you could do anything virtually any time.  And the consequences weren't known for, for some time, but they would ultimately come.  So I think that I might have flunked out of that university if I hadn't gotten a grip on certain things and, and some of that I think I attribute to my wife-to-be who was in college at the same time, who was at University of Evansville [Evansville, Indiana].  And I think the other setting blow was when my father [Theodore C. Mays] died in '64 [1964], then that   was a wakeup call that I needed to really get my act together and I began to get--figure out what I wanna do with my life because I couldn't depend on anybody other than myself to, to really shape the future.  He had done all that he could do at that point.
Story_ID: 624582
Speaker 1: Well let's talk about that a little bit because I've often--I mean I still have my parents, but I've heard people recently say that you don't really become an adult until you lose your parent.  And I've heard people who are older than myself say that.  And I'm just wondering what was that time period for like you?
Speaker 2: Well you know if you, if you envision someone who's 19, who didn't have to worry about how the tuition was paid, or whether there was food to, to eat and then all of a sudden, that, that becomes a, a shocker when he's out of the picture.  And my mom [Joy J. Mays] says well we've got to make some changes because I--now I have to work full time and I've got to go back and complete my master's and take care of myself and so that means you've got to take care of yourself.  You're the youngest, but you've got to now step up to the plate because I can no longer do the things that your father did cause I don't have the resources to, to do that.  So I think it was a, a nice awakening call at that point and I'm glad to say I rose to that occasion to be able to carry on.
Speaker 1: Did your fath--your father [Theodore C. Mays] and you had a close relationship though, too also, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And so that's what I'm saying.  A lot of times you know when you have a close relationship, you lose a parent that's close like that, you miss their--that conversation; being able to talk things out with them and all of that.
Speaker 2: Right.  Well I think that certainly is a, a major factor in that, in that regard.  As a teenager, I was just getting to the point where I was developing that relationship, to talk about some of the, the more critical things in life when he was taken from me.  And while my mom would certainly be available to, to talk and to deal, it just wasn't the same as, as trying to, to talk to, to him.  And I, I think I grew up very fast at that, at that point, and certainly I grew up in other ways to be able to say I'm--I've now got to, to fend for myself and make sure that I can be in a position to take care of my mom.  Because our dad had always done this and I know I'll make it, but I've got to make sure that she's, that she's okay.  So I think my focus shifted more from me to her, and to ensure that she had the kinds of things that, that she needed to, to, to live a productive life.
Story_ID: 624583
Speaker 1: And that happened your sophomore year, right?
Speaker 2: That's, that's correct.  That was--
Speaker 1: Now you had decided when you--you had already decided when you graduated from high school [Evansville Central High School, Evansville, Indiana] that you were gonna go and pursue a chemistry degree.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Now why was it?  Was it a, a son mirroring his father [Theodore C. Mays], or was it that you really were enamored of it because you had, you know, been to his lab or you know--
Speaker 2: I, I think it was a little bit of both.  I think--chemistry is very difficult, and I, I think you have to push yourself to deal with a subject area like that, particularly when you don't have other concrete reasons to look for success.  The only people that I knew at that point that dealt with chemistry were doctors, as you could imagine, and other professionals, dental folks or whatever.  So I think I was impressed with the fact that I would say that I was going to be in chemistry, and not be a pre-med.  There were a lot of folks that wanted to, quote, be in pre-med.  Chemistry was many times the dividing line that kept you out of medical school and so I was certainly strong enough to get past the, the chemistry part.  And I guess after a while I just kind of--you got so far in it that you had to, you had to excel in order just to stay in it.  So I was quite pleased that I knew that once I completed that degree, I wouldn't have to worry about a job.
Story_ID: 624584
Speaker 1: So when your father [Theodore C. Mays] passed, we wanna go back to that.  When he passed away, you said you know that was sort of a wakeup call.  And my thing is that happened in your sophomore year.  So how did the Bill Mays change, you know, for junior and senior year?
Speaker 2: Well I think Bill Mays went back to Evansville [Evansville, Indiana], spent a year in Evansville going to the University of, of Evansville [University of Evansville, Evansville, Indiana], getting my act together to make sure that I was disciplined enough to go out again on my own, even though at that point without Dad around, parental supervision was basically whatever I wanted it to be.  So that wasn't, that wasn't much of an issue even in Evansville.  So I think that going back to school, back to Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana], cause I was determined to, to complete the, the degree at Indiana University because that's where he had finished.  And I, I just absolutely felt that was critical.  I focused in on trying to excel, trying to deal with organizations, but also deal with being--I guess making a contribution, being at the top of the organizations.  So I was in Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity and had been in that fraternity since really my freshman year.  And so I began to look at ways to excel and how do I get out of, of school.  So I think from that point it became the discipline of study and the regimentation of this is, this is what I've got to do to get out.
Speaker 1: I have, I have one question before I go to the fraternity question.  Did you have any regrets when your father died?  I mean the fact that maybe you hadn't been performing up to par or--
Speaker 2: Oh I probably felt a little guilty because it was an opportunity for me to go to the Air Force Academy [El Paso County, Colorado] that through some of the connections that he had and he raised the issue.  And they would have, even after my freshman year, accepted me in the Fall of my sophomore year.  But my grades were less than admirable at the end of the freshman year and so they kind of passed on that option.  And Dad I think always felt that that was something that would have been wonderful to--for me to have done.  Now I'm not sure that, that I would have done very well at the Air Force Academy anyway, or any other academy, any service academy, because I just wasn't cut out for that.  So in that respect, that might have been a mixed blessing.  But I think the, the disappointment of Dad just not getting a chance to see me excel in college like I had excelled in high school.  I think that would be the, the best way to, to phrase it.
Speaker 1: When you say you're not--you weren't cut out, you, you, you by nature, you know very disciplined.  What do you mean by that?
Speaker 2: I don't think that the regimentation, I, I don't think that I would have done well with, with that.  The discipline part's fine.  But I don't think being like everybody else just wasn't my thing.  And I, I don't think that has changed any.  So I, I just from my limited exposure to what it would take to be a career officer, you would have to sacrifice in some ways that I probably wouldn't have been too enthused about doing.
Story_ID: 624585
Speaker 1: Now let's talk a little bit about the, the fraternity because you did--you pledged, pledged your first year, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What--I want to talk about--going back to more theoretical questions, but things--why, why do you consider--you've had a long association with that fraternity and I saw you were, you know, honored there.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But why do you think joining fraternities--why do you think--and why did you join that particular one?  But--
Speaker 2: Kappas were the best.  I mean that--you know the answer to that.  You know that, it doesn't matter which one you ask about, you're gonna get that answer from any of them, so--
Speaker 1: Okay, but let me ask you then why do you think fraternities, why do you think they're important?
Speaker 2: Well I think the sense of belonging, again having the brotherhood or sisterhood for that matter, giving you a place in a, in a situation like Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] where there may be three percent, may be as many as five percent of African American descent, very, very large at that time, 15, 18, 20,000 students and now it's 30,000 students on campus.  And having a place that you can retreat to, a place that you can come back and feel like you belong and get away from the hostility of the-
Story_ID: 624586
Speaker 1: I think the, the feeling of belonging is, is very important.  And being part of a group, part of an organization, having some place to retreat to from the hostilities.  And that's the way I would say it of, of campus life.  The fact that so many of the organizations on a campus like Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] were white organizations.  They had no, no particular interest in black culture or black history or black exposures.  The dancing was different, everything was different.  So I think that's why you end up leaning toward an organization like that.  Now Kappas specifically, my dad had always wanted to, to be--and he felt that was one of the, the--was the best fraternity.  And so that certainly was an influence.  I think that Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity had a house.  It was founded at Indiana University, and that was significant to me.  I looked at the people that were in the fraternity and they were more like me, I guess is the way to say it.  As a matter of fact, I mean if you look at the--at that time the three of the, the base fraternities, you had the Omegas [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], and you had Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] and you had Kappas.  And the Alphas were more the high strung intellectual types in more ways than one, and the Ques were more of the doggie type, athletic perhaps, and Kappas were kind of in between.  They had intellectual capacity, they played sports, but they weren't extremes.  And I guess those were the--if you look at Ques and Alphas, they tended to be extreme, at least as far as my exposure at Indiana.
Story_ID: 624587
Speaker 1: So, so you go back to Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] for your senior year.
Speaker 2: Yes junior year, yeah.
Speaker 1: Junior year.
Speaker 2: Junior year.
Speaker 1: You--but I--now when did you go back to Evansville [University of Evansville, Evansville, Indiana]?
Speaker 2: Well that was at the end of--
Speaker 1: Your sophomore?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, I see cause it happened that year.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you went okay, I thought you were back for a year.  Okay so and when did you meet your wife?
Speaker 2: Well I had known Rose all along.  Rose is from Evansville [Indiana].  So she went to Bosse [Benjamin Bosse High School, Evansville, Indiana], the bougie high school, but went on to University of Evansville and majored in nursing.  And so we grew up together in church.  So I had known her, although we didn't date until probably my senior year when I took her to the prom.  She was in the car when I, when I ran into that, that door.  So that relationship has been around for years and years and years.  She finished I guess I would say on time at the end of her fourth year, which would, would have been the end of 1967.  Actually I didn't--until January of '68 [1968], so I was a little, little tardy in my, in my departure.  But chemistry is a much more difficult discipline and that's what I tell her along the way.  That doesn't, that doesn't carry much water.  But that's, that's really the, the, the reason I guess why the influence of, of going back to, to Evansville too.
Speaker 1: This is--I don't usually ask these types of questions at this point in the interview, but--I usually try to get the factual things over with.  Since we're on with your wife--I mean you married your high school sweetheart.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 624588
Speaker 1: I would like to know--and you're still together.  And a lot of people, you know this has not been the days and times for long, long marriages, and especially when you start that early.  And so I would like to ask you, you know what do you attribute your success?
Speaker 2: Well I think--one thing it's cheaper to keep her--that's, that's certainly one, one aspect.  But I, I think what happens in any relationship and what causes them to fall apart perhaps is that two people don't grow.  And you have to grow in so many different ways that if one is growing and one is not, then it's pretty easily to, to leave one behind.  And I think just like I've tried to excel in, in, in business and I've had reasonable success at that, she has certainly excelled in, in her chosen field.  And you, you can't compare certain things.  You can't compare business to nursing.  Her PhD is in pediatric research nursing.  And she's certainly an outstanding scholar in her field and very, very dedicated to it.  Now having said that, you contrast business and if you look at the amount of, of money for an example, that maybe a business person commands versus an educator, there is no comparison.  So you don't go down those paths of trying to equate or, or try to deal with success from vantage points of, of money or economic success.  So I think you have to learn that early on.  That you got to continue to grow, you gotta have obviously mutual love and respect.  You, you've got to be able to know what's, what's--when someone needs space and when someone doesn't.  And we've just managed to work through whatever difficulties that we've had over the years.  And we will have been married, I guess 33 years now, we got married in '68 [1968].
Story_ID: 624589
Speaker 1: So you got married right, right, right before--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Right after--that's what I'm saying, yeah.  Right after--remember she [Rose Mays] had finished in June, so she was already working, Rose was already working up here in Indianapolis [Indiana] and she had a little I guess it was a stipend or something where you had to work to pay back kind of a loan that you got.  So she worked at Central State Hospital in pediatric--in psychiatry--psychiatric nursing.  And so when I left school in January, then she insisted--she had set this wedding date of April and she wasn't changing off of that even though I began to weasel a little bit in '68 [1968] about well maybe we shouldn't just rush into this and so and so forth.  And her response is yeah we need to--we haven't rushed, we've been dealing with this for some years and so it's time to move on.  We didn't have any money, really, even though I was working as a test chemist at the time.  It's the title they gave me at [unclear], and she was working.  I think between us we made a thousand dollars a month.  And her parents were not well off and so she paid for most of the wedding.  We had a very simple wedding in Evansville [Indiana].  Just one of my friends, as a matter of fact, that was in the picture you mentioned, Ed Marshall, who's now a doctor in optometry at Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana], was my best man.  And Rose's brother and one other guy.  So we only had three people in the wedding besides ourselves.  And so it was a small, quaint little wedding at the university chapel and a reception right there.  And that was basically, that was basically it.  I went down--we went down together on Friday, got married on Saturday and I was back to work on Monday.  So there was no honeymoon.  We went to, to--across the, the, the bridge to Kentucky just to say we went someplace on a, quote, if you call it a honeymoon for one night in Holiday Inn, but that was all we could afford, all the time we had.
Story_ID: 624590
Speaker 1: So those early years then of your fir--you came--you, you were working you said as a test--
Speaker 2: Chemist
Speaker 1: Test chemist.  And so what was that, what was that whole experience like?
Speaker 2: Terrible--the way to say it--I knew I wouldn't like working as a test chemist, but that was the, that was the job I was qualified to hold, and that was what my education prepared me to do.  So if you're gonna major in chemistry, you gotta be a chemist to just decide that you knew that wasn't what you wanted.  And I really had a leaning towards business.  I had worked at a internship for Lazarus in Columbus [Ohio], which was a selling feat in and of itself, to convince a department store to hire a chemistry major to come work in the retail training program.  So I did that in the, in the Summer of '67 [1967].  And just loved--I didn't like retail, but I loved selling and I loved the ability to convince people to, to buy and to deal.  So my love was turning to business very strongly, but I tried the test chemist.  I worked six months there and then got a job working for Procter and Gamble [Cincinnati, Ohio] in sales.  And that's where--that was in '68 [1968] in the Fall.  And that's when I really began to, to fine tune the skills of salesmanship.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 624591
Speaker 1: Now did you move to Cincinnati [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: No, my Procter and Gamble assignment was in, was in Indianapolis [Indiana].  So I could stay in Indianapolis, which worked well because my wife [Rose Mays] had then left Central State after her year and went to work for VA [Veteran's Administration] Hospital.  And so that worked out fine, she could work and, and I could work and we had now what was to us significant money cause we probably doubled our monthly income.  And we again didn't have any kids at that point, so it was just the two of us and so we just worked and spent time with, with each other.  So that part was, was good.
Speaker 1: So now P and G, what was that experience?  What did you learn in there that you think, you know has helped you?
Speaker 2: Procter and Gamble is just a wonderful company.  We called it back then Procter and God because it was so dominant and so powerful in so many areas.  I, I think that what I learned there was how to excel and to really, really put to work all of the skills for an end purpose, that is not only do you have to sell someone on a particular product or a particular ad, because I was extremely good at selling folks on advertising to run in the newspapers.  But you also had to then follow through to make sure that the product that you sold them got sold.  Because it didn't do any good if you sold a thousand cases of Crest toothpaste and two months later there was 900 cases still around.  You, you hadn't accomplished your job.  So I think I learned that it was not only the beginning, but also the end, the follow-through.  I learned also skills in people, in, I guess in how to present, make presentations.  I also learned about discrimination again.  I found it out which was not so much at P and G, but in others around me where areas in central Indiana--even told my sales manager that they didn't want me calling on them, that I was not qualified even though I was among the very best in the Midwest, as represented by all kind of awards that I, that I'd gotten.  And so my management explained it to me and said don't, don't worry, you'll run across people like this, just keep working, keep excelling.  And I guess kind of the retaliation my management used was that if, if we don't--if you don't have a Procter and Gamble sales rep calling on you, then you're not eligible to receive the discounts that go with the, with that program.  And so the merchants' response was well send me another sales rep.  He says no, the sales rep for your territory is William G. Mays.  And if he's not calling on you as you've requested, then there will be no sales discounts, there will be no promotional allowances, there will be nothing that Procter and Gamble will give.  And this is, this--he represents Procter and Gamble in this area and no one else will represent P and G to you in this area as long as he's the sales rep.
Speaker 1: Now was that sort of indicative of P and G at the time, or was it that it was the, you know we're talking about early '70's [1970's]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we're talking '68 [1968] to '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Or was that the person that they were just, you know, taking a position, or--
Speaker 2: No, I think that's Procter and Gamble.  I don't know that Procter and Gamble was that enamored with, with blacks.  There was one in each of the, in each of the districts.  We had districts, or five districts I guess in our region.  I was in the Toilet Goods Division, which as the--I think the elite division.  We had the division that introduced Pampers, and I was part of the introduction team that took Pampers across the country at an early--
Story_ID: 624592
Speaker 1: I don't think it's so much that Procter and Gamble [Cincinnati, Ohio] cared so much about any of the race policies or civil rights issues per se, but what they did care about was the fact that, that a representative from P and G would not be shunned in any way.  And there are any number of examples that I could point out where other situations came about and they took a stance that was very strong because--not necessarily because I happen to be black, but because I happen to represent Procter and Gamble.  I remember one with a Holiday Inn early on where the proprietor didn't have a room that I had booked in advance.  My management said well why didn't you book this room earlier?  And I said I did.  And here's the reservation, the confirmation number.  And so he goes up and proceeds to, to get the room.  And when the guy says well yeah, we have plenty of rooms.  He said well why didn't you honor this room to this--and he says well I just didn't--I mean we don't, we don't really care to have him here.  My management, manager immediately went to the telephone, called his management in Cincinnati [Ohio] who called somebody in Memphis [Tennessee] who Procter and Gamble had a national contract with, with the Holiday Inn chain.  And said if this ever happens again to any Procter and Gamble representative, we will cancel this contract across the country.  And not only will you have your people apologize, but we want it in writing, we want it in the next 48 hours, and we want all rooms for this sales person comped.  So as I say, I'm not sure that was because of the blackness as much as it was a slap at Procter and Gamble as a corporation, and they just did not tolerate that in any shape, form or fashion.  And back in those days and maybe even now, Procter and Gamble--you couldn't run a grocery store without P and G.  They're just too dominant in so many different products.
Story_ID: 624593
Speaker 1: What were some other things you've learned that are either about yourself or about corporate America?
Speaker 2: Well I think again the real experience was--I found that I was competing and I could compete very well.  I found that I had the discipline, I had the skills, I had all of the tools necessary to be successful.  I was the top sales person in the district, in the Cincinnati [Ohio] district the three years I was there.  I made quota every year, matter of fact exceeded it.  I won the Double Dollars Awards for, for sales excellence.  I put together more creative ads, and just did some things that were extra that really caused me to excel.  And I think because of that experience with Procter and Gamble [Cincinnati, Ohio], it allowed me to get into the graduate business school at Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] because I could at least point up to an area of success and real success, and as I mentioned, you know my undergraduate, the grades were not stellar.  And when you try to get into graduate school is when you really find that maybe you should have spent a little less time partying with the Kappas and a little more time studying with the Alphas.
Story_ID: 624594
Speaker 1: Now you, you--and what I read, it said that they were surprised at P and G that you decided to just quit instead of taking a leave of absence.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Because you were on a track.  And why did you decide to, to do that?
Speaker 2: I think that one of the things that my management said was that you know you're really good if you could leave Procter and Gamble [Cincinnati, Ohio] and get rehired, cause we just don't do that.  So why take the risk when you can have a leave of absence?  We don't have a problem with you going back to graduate school, but we think that it, it would, it would be a shame for you not to get an opportunity to come back.  And my response to that was I didn't want any entangling alliances, and I wanted to be able to pick Procter and Gamble if that's the case, but I also didn't want to feel an obligation in any way.  And I felt that if I were really good and P and G was really the company, that I could figure out how to get back.  So I call it a little bit of arrogance, a little bit of conceit and a lot of just wanting to be on my own and making sure that, that I didn't have any strings attached.  So I did get an offer from Procter and Gamble.  I really felt good.  I remember that I had several offers from major corporations, matter of fact I think I lost track after eight or nine, coming out of graduate school.  So Procter and Gamble was one of them and I remember the telegram they sent back to, to Rose [Mays], which was again just kind of indicative of P and G.  They sent a telegram to my wife congratulating her on having such a outstanding husband that, that he could get a job offer from Procter and Gamble.  So that was their subtle psychology, cause she was all excited about well we know we gone take this job offer in Cincinnati.  I mean this is gonna be brand management.  I mean you know we get to move to Cincinnati and I've already got jobs lined up.  And I said no, we're not gonna do that.  So that was a, that was kind of a, an exciting situation cause I was in control of that.  And the job I picked, which she just couldn't believe, was, wasn't with a chemical company.  And wasn't with a, a, a sales company, but it was with Cummins Engine Company in Columbus, Indiana.  And here she's been in Indiana all her life and Rose says I cannot believe that I am going to Columbus, Indiana.  And she was teaching at that time.  She had finished her master's and she was teaching, going to be teaching at IU [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] in nursing.  And so she commuted from Columbus, Indiana to Indiana University literally for the four years that we were down there.
Story_ID: 624595
Speaker 1: What part--what did you learn in business school?  I mean you had been out--you probably came in thinking you knew it all.
Speaker 2: Oh no.
Speaker 1: You didn't'?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  I'd been out, I knew, I knew certain things.  But remember as an undergraduate in chemistry, I'd never been exposed to business.  So I didn't really know accounting.  So I was hungry for accounting, for business law, for management, because those were courses that I'd never gotten exposed to and I'd learned only through I guess just experience.  To hear the formal theory and, and that's why--the reason that I didn't stay at P and G and not go back to graduate school was because I was afraid that I'd move up too far in P and G without the kind of foundation to really let me excel in business and move into management.  So I was like a little sponge going back to graduate school, totally different than undergraduate school.  You know undergraduate school, the prof didn't show up 15 minutes, everybody's running out the door saying well he didn't make it, we don't have class today, blah, blah, blah, blah.  In graduate school, prof wasn't there 15 minutes, I'm cussing him out, want to go into his office wanting to know why in the heck he wasn't there cause I needed to understand this cost accounting.  I needed to understand how this absorption cost model worked.  I needed to understand how cash flows would help me in, in, in business.  So it's a whole different attitude.  Even though I was still involved with the fraternity [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity].  I was an undergraduate advisor.  Stayed in the house because I needed to be able to fund the, the education.  But I was, was so disciplined that I'd get up every day, put on a coat and tie, and go to the library, go to the business school, and I'd stay in business school just like I was working for Procter and Gamble [Cincinnati, Ohio], from eight to five.  And so I'd come home, back to the frat house and of course as most undergraduates would be doing, there's a party or there's this or that or the other.  I'd eat dinner and I'd say hey I'm here if you guys want to talk to me.  If not, you know I'll be here for two hours and if not, then I'm going back to the library.  And so it was just a far more disciplined individual.  And you could understand why at that point.  I was a little older, I had gotten married, I had now a daughter.  I had my older daughter Heather was born in '71 [1971] when I entered school.  And so I couldn't, I couldn't afford to, to play around.  I had given up an income, in my mind a sizeable income at Procter and Gamble to go back to graduate school.  And even though I was on a fellowship, there's no comparison between the income that I was making at P and G and the fellowship, what it paid.  So I was a much, much more disciplined, stronger individual that had a direction and a commitment for excellence that was even greater than what I had in high school.
Story_ID: 624596
Speaker 1: Now was anyone mentoring you at this point?
Speaker 2: No, no really didn't have anybody.  It's unfortunate, but again when you go in business, the mentors are far and few between, I mean few and far between.  I think that that's another reason why I ended up with Cummins Engine Company because Cummins at that time in 1971, '72 [1972], in that period, '73 [1973] and on throughout the 70's [1970's], was one of the few Fortune 500 companies that I could find that had a black vice president that had real influence.  There was--as a matter of fact, there were three black vice presidents.  One of them was in Personnel, one of them was in Corporate Action, and one of them was the Controller of the, of, of Cummins Engine Company.  And so for me to look out and actually touch three black vice presidents in the same company was just unheard of in my estimation in 1973.  So I went to Cummins really to get exposure to top management cause the only job offer that I had that I felt gave me exposure to the very top of a corporation so that I could see how does corporate America run, how does it really work.  And my first--my offer was as Assistant to the President of Cummins Engine Company.  So I was the first black assistant there.  And I learned just an enormous amount.  It's a program that they have that allows--I guess the kind of training and development of, of individuals in various roles where they are mentored by senior management.  So of course the president of Cummins happened to be white, but he was just extremely liberal and that's the--those are the days of the J. Irwin Miller.
Story_ID: 624597
Speaker 1: And I remember the talk when we--when I first moved down to Columbus [Indiana] about getting a house and of course even though I was going to be earning substantial money at Cummins [Engine Company], I didn't, I didn't have any savings; didn't have any down payment.  And I, I don't know whether it was legal or whatever at that point, but the president of Cummins said well just go to the bank and tell them you work for me, J. Irwin Miller owned the bank, his family owned the bank as well as Cummins and a lot of other stuff in Columbus.  And so it was--they kind of ruled the, the town.  And so I go into the bank and the, the bank guy says you find the house you want?  I says yeah, but it's really, really expensive.  I think it was forty thousand dollars.  And, but at that time that was, that was an expensive house.  And he says well how much you--I say you probably need to put ten percent down.  And I said I don't have four thousand dollars.  And he says I know that.  And he says we'll loan you that.  And we'll set this mortgage up and move on.  And the whole thing took less than hour, and the next thing I know I'm a homeowner, on the way to becoming a homeowner.  And that's just one of the experiences in a Columbus, Indiana where you have the dominance of, of a corporation like, like, like Cummins.
Speaker 2: I bet Rose [Mays] was happy at that point.
Speaker 1: Yes, absolutely, absolutely.  Well we had--I mean we could live the life.  We had a housekeeper that came in every day, cause she was going off to work.  And we had a babysitter that, that we could put Heather [Mays] in childcare.  And then when our second daughter came along, we had a--then a babysitter to come into the house so then we didn't even have to move the kids, and we could afford this all very comfortably because we were making then by anybody's standards, a fairly decent amount of money.  And so the opportunity then to leave Cummins was one that, that I really had to think about and that was to get me in business for myself or if you will, closer to that, when I was offered an opportunity to run Specialty Chemicals in 1977.
Story_ID: 624598
Speaker 1: Okay, so I was asking about how you know--often things are not as they appear when they're recruited.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: And what, excuse me, what attracted you were these, you know here there were black people in positions of authority and it was different from P and G [Procter and Gamble, Cincinnati, Ohio].
Speaker 2: That's correct, absolutely.  And different from any other corporation that I had, that I had been exposed to and I went on a lot of interviews.  As I say, I had eight or ten job offers.  So when you get a chance to fly to Midland, Michigan and interview with--and then you assume everybody's putting their best foot forward in whatever capacity they feel is best.  And you tour and you interview and you don't talk to anybody black of any consequence, then you start drawing conclusions.  And that included Eli Lilly up here.  And one of the things--the statements I made to Lilly and made it in more than one occasion, was that they had no black Vice Presidents.  At one time they had one and he died and they knew he was dying when they made him a Vice President, and that's what I'd say.  And there hasn't been one before then and since, and that's just most recently changed in the last couple of years.  But during the time that I worked at Lilly for a summer.  So I think it was--you take a little bit at face value, but when you talk to the Controller of the company and you see his name on the checks, then you, you feel that that's--they're going a little more than--that's not just lip service when he actually signs the check.  And so Dale Barnes' name was on the check.  When I talked to Ulric Haynes [Ulric St. Clair Haynes, Jr.] who left Cummins [Engine Company] and was the Ambassador to Algeria, and was instrumental in the--freeing up the hostage situation there with Algeria back when the Iran--Iranians had the hostages back in the--I guess in the, in the '80's [1980's], late, late '70's [1970's] I guess, or you look at someone like a Jim Joseph who was the Secretary, Undersecretary of Interior who left Cummins [Engine Company] to accept that position in the Carter administration.  And most recently James A. Joseph was the Ambassador to South Africa.  I mean these were real people that had real positions.  And so I felt that Cummins was really committed to trying to do what, what was the correct thing.  They weren't always successful, but at least they, they tried.  There were other friends.  The other thing that happened is we developed some very strong bonds.  The other guy who's in that picture, Vernon Stansbury, that we talked about on the wall.  Ed Marshall's on one side, Vernon Stansbury is on the other.  Vernon got his graduate degree from Harvard and he was recruited same time.  He came to work for Cummins [Engine Company] at exactly the same time.  And so we still remain friends today.  We have significant business investments with each other, and he lives in Washington.  And he's very, very--he runs his own business and very successful in his own right.  So I think you look at the friendships that we developed and there were just a few of us blacks in Columbus [Indiana].  But we, we spent a lot of time with each other.  We had the resources to, to do some things.  We, we could--we flew to Spain together on vacation, which was the first time I'd really ever been out of the--
Story_ID: 624599
Speaker 1: Yeah, we flew to Spain together, a group of us.  Ed Dugger, you may--that name may ring a bell where he now has his venture capitalist firm in Boston [Massachusetts], was part of the group back at that time, and his wife Liz.  So I mean we had just an interesting, exciting group of folks that, that kind of hung together.  I look at now the current President and CEO of Cummins Engine Company, Tim Solso was a part of that group.  He's white, but extremely positive.  We used to drink together back in those days, in '72 [1972], '73 [1973], and '74 [1974].  So I think all of that is kind of what compelled us to, to succeed in business.
Speaker 2: Now so I just have one more question on that.  So a lot of times you know you'll find blacks in a white environment and they're separate, they don't talk to each other, they don't help mentor each other.  They're sort of like everyone's scared, you know that, right.  You didn't find that?
Speaker 1: No.  It may have been because we all came in from a highly educated, highly independent--I guess we, we didn't have any fear of each other and our own abilities to succeed.  So that kind of meant that we--that we tended to spend time with each other because we weren't trying to, if you will, impress each other.  And that was kind of like the, the feeling of the Kappa house where you could leave the hostile environment of the corporate world and, and, and go to someplace where folks knew and understood what you were going through, but you didn't have to worry about if you had an extra drink or something bad you could say, and it stayed right there.  So I think that experience, those days were, were really quite good.  Those four years were very, very significant in my development as a, as an entrepreneur, a future entrepreneur, and certainly in my development on the philanthropy side.  Because that's when I first learned form Jim Joseph things like giving back and he set the tone at Cummins for Cummins Engine Company to give five percent of pre-tax profit to charity.  And they set up the Cummins Foundation.  And I remember the, the pondering about whether Cummins should leave South Africa because at that time there was a lot of controversy about Apartheid and the Sullivan principles.  And I mean all of this was, was very much in my--and, and because I was dealing with top management, then I was exposed to all of this and really could, could kind of formulate my own thoughts and opinions about what, what was right and what was wrong.
Story_ID: 624600
Speaker 1: It seems that you could have definitely been on the perfect track.  I remember talking--I can't remember--there's a professor at, at Harvard Business School who recently, I think last year, published a book you know saying, talking about how blacks were tracked in corporate America, it too them longer, you know.
Speaker 2: That's probably true.
Speaker 1: The whole thing--but they had to go longer [unclear].  But why was it--I mean what sort of--there must have been something that was sort of inside you.
Speaker 2: Well I think what happened, I think it was two things.  One, I had been in--I'd moved up--my position out of Cummins [Engine Company] to a middle management position in planning.  So I was involved in coordinating, manufacturing, finance and marketing.  And it gave me wonderful exposure.  I'd moved up, I reported to the Vice President of Planning.  So from a staff position, I had moved up significantly.  But my word from graduate business school is that if you really wanna make it, you've got to get into the line and responsibilities.  And I tried desperately to get into automotive marketing.  And the Vice President of that area just didn't--just--he and I just didn't see eye-to-eye because I had beat him over the head so much in the planning route because he hadn't done--a lot of times he would pull from the cuff and--typical marketing type.  And so we didn't see eye-to-eye on that.  And so I, I think that when this offer--this opportunity came along to do something totally different, which was to run this small chemical distribution arm of a larger manufacturing operation, and I'd spent four years in Columbus [Indiana] and Rose [Mays] was commuting.  And this was a chance to settle in Indianapolis [Indiana].  So I think it was a combination of factors.  And I, I just said I think it's time for me to try my hand at, at, at being a little more independent and running my own show.
Speaker 1: So now how did this come about?  You were offered actually the presidency, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It came about because--
Story_ID: 624601
Speaker 1: The position at Specialty Chemicals came about because one of the Board members of Chemical Investors which owned part of Specialty Chemicals, a guy by the name of Bill Norman, who incidentally was Executive VP [Vice President] of Amtrak marketing until the last few years, but he was on the Board of Chemical Investors and they were looking to recruit a minority and they felt that it would be best if it were a black, but certainly male at that point to run a chemical company.  So lo and behold, who would--if you, if you looked at who had the kind of qualifications to run a, a company that happened to be a chemical company with graduate degree, who understood planning, who understood finance, who understood management.  All of that was right in my skill set that I had developed and proven.  So it was a, a natural to be able to approach me to, to do that.  And they had tried in 1976 and had put a Hispanic woman in who had no business experience because basically they were just trying to create a, a front and take advantage of the governmental programs.  So they decided that they still needed somebody who, who could run the company.  And so I was recruited and I joined the company in 1977.  I took it from a few hundred thousand dollars in annual sales to five million dollars when I left in 1980.
Story_ID: 624602
Speaker 1: And you--and why do you think you were able to do that?  Let's just get that--was it a combination of your sales and the--
Speaker 2: I think, I think it was a combination of all the right factors.  One, I had outstanding sales experience from Procter and Gamble [Cincinnati, Ohio].  I mean I had developed all the skill sets to do that.  I knew all about planning, certainly a substantial part cause that was my job at Cummins [Engine Company].  I understood planning from the standpoint of finances because that was also my job.  I had the graduate training and so all of the skill sets necessary to run a company, particularly a chemical company, were there.  I was young, eager, able to put in the time and I had the roots in Indianapolis [Indaina].  So all of that worked out, and still had good relations with people at Eli Lilly, which was one of the main companies that we would market to.
Speaker 1: And what do you think you learned in that environment that has helped you with your own?  What--because you were President at that point, different being, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well what, what you learn is you make mistakes on somebody else's money.  So I made all the mistakes I could make, I thought, on Chemical Investors' money.  And cause when I started Mays Chemical, I didn't have any money to waste.  So I, I also understood the, the element of risk taking, that is rational risk taking I guess is the way to say it.  So I think there was--I learned when I, when I left the company that you can be so successful that you cause jealousies around you.  And I took, as I say, Specialty Chemicals, which was just supposed to be a part of Chemical Investors.  Chemical Investors was involved in chemical manufacturing.  They were going to manufacture the generic drugs that [Eli] Lilly no longer wanted to make or whatever.  A nice market niche.  I mean there are several generic houses that do quite well.  The problem with Chemical Investors, they got hooked up with raising money and not about doing the actual business of, of manufacturing.  So they were so busy raising capital that they never got the manufacturing off the ground.
Story_ID: 624603
Speaker 1: Now there was some, some--especially you had some issues though at the end because--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --there were things that changed and they weren't--they, wait--something about the minority change--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the issue was Bill Mays was too independent and because I reported to an independent Board of three, three blacks and two whites, then I could run the company.  And even though Chemical Investors owned 49 percent of it, that--the 51 percent and the Board and I would say in an instant to the President of Chemical Investors, I report to the Board of Specialty.  So in--I guess in January of 1980, he called a special meeting and--of all the shareholders--and changed the composition of the Board of Directors of Specialty to remove the Chairman of the Board of Specialty.  And he could do that because if you have 13 individuals that own stock, and it was 13 I believe that owned the 51 percent.  And several of them probably were given the stock in Specialty because again it was created by the President of, of Chemical Investors and they didn't understand stock, and so to them it was just a piece of paper.  And so it was easy for him to get the proxies and get control of the vote, and so he did.  And he changed the composition of the Board.  And in my estimation and as I told him when you do that, you have now changed it from a minority controlled company to a non-minority controlled company.  And I won't operate Specialty [Chemicals] as a front organization.  So when that occurred on January 28th I believe or thereabouts, then I probably resigned within a few days and set out to start Mays Chemical.
Speaker 1: Is this person still around?
Speaker 2: Zengraft is not.  Zengraft is gone to Texas and he tried to do some of the same shenanigans down there.  I haven't--I bought what was left of Chemical Investors in 1985 after I had basically put it out of business.  So because again, the skill sets and elements to, to run it, I had mastered and, and dealt with.  And the people that he brought in essentially cause he wasn't gonna make the same mistake again of bringing somebody in who could really run it.  So the people he brought in were good people, but not necessarily skilled at--
Story_ID: 624604
Speaker 1: So the, the folks that, that he brought in to run Specialty Chemicals after I left, and there were three or four, were not really adept at doing it and making the changes and they were more interested in the glamour of being President than in trying to, to, to actually compete.  So I built Mays Chemical up and as I say, bought what was left of Specialty in 1985.
Speaker 2: That must have felt pretty good.
Speaker 1: I did because I think anybody that was still there, virtually everybody that was still there, I fired and just set my own people in place.
Speaker 2: Now okay so you decide, okay you're gonna go out on your own.  What is Rose [Mays] saying at this point?
Speaker 1: Fortunately Rose didn't know that.  She was--Rose had accepted a fellowship and had our kids in, in Baltimore [Maryland].  And so I--she had started September of '79 [1979] on this fellowship and that was kind of something that she always wanted to do.  And it was a year's fellowship.  And so when I flew out in January and told her that--or February, in early February, that I had resigned and that I was going to start my own company, she looked and said well I hope you get it together before I get back because actually before I think the kids and I get back.  You know I'll be able to take care of them while, you know, we're all together out here, cause the fellowship pays you know, reasonably well and they got an apartment and so on and so we'll be okay.  But when we come back to Indianapolis [Indiana], you better have this company off the ground and be able to, to make something out of it.  And her first response I think though the first words out of her mouth was really what took you so long?  So I think that supportive kind of posture from the very beginning without ever saying you can't give up this job, this, this money and, and you know we got a mortgage that--you know all of the things that you, that you would--might expect to hear.  I took all her savings bonds and cashed them in.  I don't think I had any.  I then--cause I had P and G [Procter and Gamble, Cincinnati, Ohio] and Stock, and so I didn't have--I didn't cash that in.  And took a second mortgage on the house and proceeded on to, to start, to start Mays Chemical.  And I think that when I, when I look at it, I didn't know that you--that, that that probably wasn't the way to start a company; that you needed a business plan--cause I didn't have time.  I was reacting from the situation.  I had just written the marketing plan for Specialty [Chemical].  I had just signed several major contracts, one of them with, with Mead Johnson in Evansville [Indiana] under Specialty's [Specialty Chemical] name.  I'd just done one with, with Abbott [Abbott Laboratories] and so then I had to go back to these folks in 60 days and ask them for business that I had just gotten a good part of it for Specialty [Chemical].  So fortunately they knew the situation, they understood and they, they empathized quite a bit with me.  And over time I was able to get significant business from them.  I think the first--the, the first piece of business that I got actually came, I'm trying to remember whether the check came first from Upjohn or the purchase order came first from Abbott.  But Abbott and Upjohn were the two that I shipped to.  I think it was that I got the first contract from Abbott and the first check from Upjohn.  And it took a while, it took over a year for [Eli] Lilly to even come on board because again, the people that started Chemical Investors were--had been a part of Lilly so they had so much influence in the Lilly purchasing stuff.  But toward--as a couple of years rolled by, then I began to make inroads into Eli Lilly.
Speaker 2: Now was there any trepidation on your part?  I mean I know you were acting out of anger and sort of like I'll show them, you know at some point.  But was there ever a point you were like that first year what did I do?
Speaker 1: No, I don't think so.  I remember my attorney, well my attorney friend and I, we were over to the house and drinking and, and he says you gotta be crazy.  He says why would you--you, you can't just give up a job and go do this.  And I said well I see right now I need addition--I need other attorneys to give me advice along the way.  So no I don't think I ever thought about it being a mistake.  I didn't even--I never thought about it from a fear standpoint because again, I think I had the credentials.  I knew I could get a job; I had excelled at Procter and Gamble.  I had done well at Cummins [Engine Company].  I'd even done well at Eli Lilly.  I mean I--and so I think that I could always go work for another Fortune 500 Company if that's what I wanted to do cause I had the credentials, I was young enough and I had the skill set.  So it never even occurred to me one that, that there was any reason not to try this at this stage.
Story_ID: 624605
Speaker 1: So when you--well let's talk about were there, are there milestones in the whole sort of life, lifespan of Mays, you know growing those, you know first five, I would say five, five, seven years that were--cause they say five years is the turning--right.
Speaker 2: Well I, I think I talk about it, it took the decade of the '80's [1980's] to do fifty million dollars in sales.  We grew the first year if I told the bank what we, what I rally expected to do, they never would have loaned me any money.  They'd thought I was crazy.  But I think I told them we were going to do one million, two million and three million or something.  In reality we did 2.2 million the first year, 5.6 million the second year, and something over eight million the third year.  So we were growing by leaps and bounds as far as sales and the only thing that kind of pulled me back a little bit, that, that taught me that growth is expensive, was that we didn't make any more money in Year Three than we did in Year Two.  And so I said something is wrong, we need to get our infrastructure in place, our systems in place.  And that's happened at other points in our growth cycle too at Mays [Chemical Company].  You, you bite off and you, you have to chew it.  But it takes substantial resources up, up front.  I, I think that the, the question comes up from time to time, well when did you think you really kind of had it made and that you were able to relax a little bit or reward yourself?  Cause I don't remember taking really much of a salary during those first few months.  But I think in December of that, of that year, of 1980, I think I sat back and wrote a check to myself for twenty five thousand dollars and just said well you know that's for me.  You know I think in 1981 for a Christmas present I gave my wife a, a restored Mercedes, a 1968 280SL, SLC convertible.  So I mean I think along the way you have areas of success and you, you reward yourself a little bit.  And I probably was no different, it's just that for me success was just being more successful and so it didn't take a lot of monetary--I mean that goes with the turf, but that wasn't always the driving force.
Story_ID: 624606
Speaker 1: So were you enjoying it as you were going along?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that any time you build an organization from scratch, I remember--
Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: Okay, go on.
Speaker 1: I, I remember when my, my Controller who's still with the company, Vice President and Controller Bill West first came, he had--I helped him when he went out west to bet his MBA [Master of Business Administration] and we had dinner at a restaurant in November after I'd started the company in March and we talked off and on.  And he said well you need to bring me in sooner rather than later before you just screw up all this accounting stuff cause you know just enough to be dangerous.  And he's right.  Although I think one of the cardinal principles that I always used was to get expert advice.  So the law firm Barnes and Thornburg that is one of the largest in the state of Indiana, did the incorporation and is our attorneys today.  I mean they still handle all the litigation and everything associated with, with Mays Chemical and affiliated entities.  I, I think about the big--at that time big eight, big six, whatever accounting firm, Pricewaterhouse is now PricewaterhouseCoopers of course, but PW [Pricewaterhouse] did all of our accounting work for the first ten years.  It was only as they got larger and we got to a point where we could deal with some smaller firm, but they put in place all the systems and, and whatever.  I think the insurance that we have, I mean we were very loyal.  We've been with St. Paul for years and years.  Prior, prior to that it was Liberty Mutual.  And they really took care of us because chemicals is something that many insurance companies just shy away from.  So I think if there was a, a lesson that I learned in, in business is go to the very best.  You pay a little more at the, at the top, but in your final analysis you need to get the best advice from the best advisors and you need to take that advice cause that's what you're paying these folks to do.  So I think all of that helped me as I moved through the, the business cycle of, of growing Mays Chemical.
Story_ID: 624607
Speaker 1: Now you also said when you started out there was--who gave you space?  You said that that, that was--
Speaker 2: Yes, one of the competitors.  Now this shows you too--who did not like they way Chemical Investors and Specialty Chemicals had treated me, encouraged me to, to go out and I said I don't, you know I don't have the money, I don't have the space.  I mean you could imagine it's like getting thrown out of your home, you got nothing.  And he says well I got an office next to, to me, this was the President of Superior Solvents, a major chemical company here in Indianapolis, a white gentleman and, and without him I probably never would have started Mays Chemical.  Because he loaned me a--I leased his secretary and his Xerox machine, and coffee.  His secretary would type my letters and bring me a cup of coffee and I could do copying.  I had a phone line, one line put in on his phone and she could answer it when I was out on the road.  And he said what would it take?  And I said gee, I don't know, it probably would take a hundred thousand dollars, I don't know.  He says fine, he says if you got the--if you had the money would you do it?  And I said well yeah, but I don't have the money.  I mean I'm not working.  He says I'll loan you the money.  So he says now you have to pay it back with interest.  And so I paid that loan back in less than two years.  Matter of fact, I only took fifty thousand dollars, paid it back in two years or so and never looked back because I was able to build the business fast enough and use some creative ways of collections and, and whatever, to, to really make it, make it all work.
Story_ID: 624608
Speaker 1: And do you think during that period you experienced any of the problems that have traditionally been faced by minority businesses?
Speaker 2: I imagine I did.  I probably didn't know exactly, but again part of it is understanding the relationships.  One of the, one of the people that I developed a friendship with early on, and I mean I mentioned Byron Bettis [ph.] who was President of Superior Solvents at the time.  I mean who was very strong in the chemical industry.  So there is a good contact that helped me with suppliers, that, that I could buy product from when I didn't have suppliers that would sell to me directly.  He bought it, financed it and I paid him for the product.  But I also developed a relationship that came from again Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana], when I was on the School of Business Board there, the Alumni Association School of Business, there was a gentleman there by the name of Andy Payne.  And Andy at that time was Executive Vice President of a little bank in Indiana called Indiana National, probably was the largest bank at that time in the state of Indiana.  And so he developed a friendship and kind of a mentoring-ship to say that I want to help you succeed, so when I started the company I met him in '77 [1977] when I was on the Board.  When I started the company in 1980, he just kind of sent a little note down to one of the Senior Vice Presidents and just said you know set up lunch with, with Bill Mays.  I wanna see how his company is doing.  Well of course the Senior Vice President didn't know me from Adam, so he sent something down to the Vice President who didn't know me, who sent something to the AVP [Assistant Vice President], who kind of vaguely knew me.  And then I think it was really the corporate lending agent that, that handled the account.  Yeah, I remember that, they don't do much.  That company is just small, it's just--he's just starting out, it does--it's not doing much.  So anyway I had lunch with five senior, five people at Indiana National all the way up to then the, at time Andy has now moved up, I believe the President.  And so in one fell swoop everybody at this bank knows Bill Mays and Mays Chemical, and is really geared to, to thinking that they're pleasing the President when they make this loan.  So they're figuring out--well we gotta figure out how to do this because if we don't do it, we're gonna have to explain it and we're gonna have to explain it all the way up to the President because the President is interested in it.  So I also learned that if you can get the right people interested, even if they don't say make a loan or do this or do that, people's perception, their feeling is that they may conclude that that's something.  So it's worked out very, very well.  We still have after 20 years, significant banking relations with that, with that company.  I think the first debt that we--the first loan that we got from Indiana National was--our debt to equity was 17 to one.  Now they don't like me to say that, but now if you go much over four to one, certainly if you get to five to one, they won't make a loan, rarely.  So we were 17 to one and got our first loan, two hundred thousand dollars.  And never looked back.  I think now the relationships with Mays Chemical alone are at 20 million dollars.  Now the successor bank has gone through several changes, but now Bank One of Indiana.
Story_ID: 624609
Speaker 1: Okay, when you talk about the early days of Mays Chemical and you talk about the employees that we had, I indicated Bill West who finished his MBA from University of Southern California [Los Angeles, California] and worked for Arthur Anderson I believe in the--as a Controller, as a Accountant in the control function.  He came on, he started in February of 1981.  But was recruited actually, he and I had been friends, so we actually started talking in, in mid-1980.  Martin Miller who was the son, is the son of my part-time bookkeeper, and is still with the company today, was at IUPUI [Indiana University-Purdue University Indiana] in, in systems and came to work for Mays Chemical in January of 1981.  And he is now the Vice President of Operations for Mays Chemical.  We look at our third person in that, in that year that came on, it was a Customer Service Representative, and Jesse stayed--Jimmie Jackson stayed with us for the first 12 years or so of, of Mays Chemical, she's moved on now.  But she was full time.  And then the other full time person that was later that year was a Sales Rep that was then--is now in business for himself, but he stayed with the company for four years.  So when we think about it, we had to say very small skeleton of people, but very dedicated and very hard working.  And we were able to, as I say, take the company in that period of time, three years, from nothing to eight, nine million dollars.
Story_ID: 624610
Speaker 1: So that's what I wanna know.  Why did it work?  Why do you think it worked?  It has a lot to do with, you know, some people who are entrepreneurial--
Speaker 2: Well I think that part of the philosophy that I have personally as an entrepreneur, and I've tried to encourage particularly minority entrepreneurs to develop more of this, is you need to hire people that have more skills and better qualified, stronger discipline than, than the entrepreneur.  I think that so many times, particularly when I look at minority entrepreneurs, they, they have in the past at least, not wanted to surround themselves with people who were, who would outshine them.  And I will say in an instant that I don't have any problem that the people that I have hired are smarter than I am, that they bring more skills to the table, and that they certainly bring different skills, cause otherwise I couldn't grow the company if everybody was only as skilled up to the level that I am.  They have to be--have a greater skill set.  And so I think you will find when you look through the roster of people in senior management at Mays Chemical, you would be very visibly impressed with the graduate degrees that are there.  Probably a third of the entire company have bachelor's degree in, in some form or another.  I think one of the more interesting people to come to, to work at, at Mays was John Thompson who is now the Vice President of Sales and Marketing.  John came, graduated--his undergraduate is from Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York], his MBA is from Columbia [University, New York City, New York].  And he came about because he read of Mays Chemical in a Wall Street Journal article.  The article occurred in August of 1973, I'm sorry, 1983.
Story_ID: 624611
Speaker 1: The article came about in 1983 and it was talking about Chemical Investors and this guy, Zengraft, Jerry Zengraft and the shyster nature of what he was dealing with, and this, remember this was before the collapse of, of that company.  But again, even the news media was picking up on it.  So this reporter was in town from New York to talk about Chemical Investors.  But along the way he was fascinated when he talked to me and said well I'd like to come back and do a story on just you.  So he wrote an article about growing too fast.  And--cause we had grown really quite, quite handedly as I indicated from zero to nine million dollars in that three year period.  And so he talked about the dangers of growing.  And that was published in the Small Business Section of the Wall Street Journal in August of 1983.  John Thompson was working for McKenzie and Company in New York at the time, and saw that article and wrote me.  And wanted to, to come to work for, for Mays Chemical.  And I said why would--one, I can't afford you.  An MBA from Columbia working for McKenzie, the premier consulting, you know, New York City, you know that didn't even, that didn't even make any sense.  But he persisted and said yeah, he said well we ought to talk about it he says, because I really want to get to the Midwest, I really wanna get my family out of New York.  And Midwest is a place that I--and I know the chemical industry, I've studied it at McKenzie, and I could really do a, an excellent job.  So that was probably I guess in November of '83 [1983], and John Thompson came on board in early '84 [1984].  And so he's still with us.  So surrounding yourself with, with good people and, and young people, cause I'm one of the older people in the company.  I think that there may be, may be as many as ten percent of the company that's 50 or above, certainly 55.  So I think that that bodes very well for the, for the company too.
Story_ID: 624612
Speaker 1: And so this--so you would say that your--was your turning point in five years, or was your turning point at three?
Speaker 2: Well I, I don't--I, I guess I never really looked at the, the turning point, per se.  I mean because I never--we were profitable from day one.  So we didn't really lose any money.  I think that, that we went back--our first fiscal year was in May, it should have been in April because the only month we lost money was March and April.  But we didn't catch it until we had gone down the road because again, I wasn't very sophisticated in, in the accounting side.  And so it was only after a while that we discovered that gee, we needed to--we could break off so we could use the Sub-S Corporation election and deal with taking the loss personally and, and that good stuff.  So I'm not sure that we, that we ever had a point where we were concerned about finances, per se.  And if that's the turning point that you use, then I, I, I guess then that never really happened.  I think that as we began to move up and get, get awards and get more recognition, then that became more kind of the, the, the norm than the abnorm and, and we began to get just awards and, and moving on up in business, and excelling at, at every turn.  And so I, I guess I would say that the heyday might be more in the, in the early, early '90's [1990's], late '80's [1980's] for Mays Chemical.  Not that we're you know, past that now, but I'm just, just saying that when I Think of some of the significant milestones that really occurred and they, they really occurred in the late '80's [1980's] and early '90's [1990's] to set the foundation to where we should be as we--decade of the, of the '90's [1990's] we did 50 million dollars in annual sales.  Look at '90 [1990] to '95 [1995], we doubled to 100 million.  And then you look at '95 [1995] to 2000 and this year we should be approaching, running on a 200 million dollar level of annual sales again.  So we will double again.  And that's pretty, pretty substantial growth.  And when you consider that we only had two acquisitions, one very small, the Specialty Chemical one, and then United Chemical, which was probably a ten or 12 million dollar revenue coming in '87 [1987].  So those are really the only two, all the other growth has been internal.
Story_ID: 624613
Speaker 1: And if you have--you've always also looked at other deals, though, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Through this whole process.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And do you think that's been a positive or a negative in that way?
Speaker 2: Well I think that you buy companies for a variety of reasons.  You buy them for growth, you buy them for maybe dominance in a given industry or a given area, geographic area, or you buy them to get quality people.  But you have to have some reason to really buy somebody else's problems because I don't care how, how good they, they say it is, there's always something under that rock.  And so I just haven't found the kind of match that we weren't dealing with in our own internal growth.  And we had people, we attract good people.  So that wasn't a particular concern.  Now as I go forward with so much changing on the Internet and what have you, there, there's a whole new direction that, that chemical distribution and maybe all kinds of sales oriented firms will be, will be facing.  And so we're looking more now to partner with in joint venture relationships, perhaps even more than trying to buy something or be bought.
Speaker 1: Okay, also there might be a--okay, okay, right, okay--that'll be bought, be bought.
Speaker 2: Well, I mean that's always an option.  Someone could, in our case at Mays Chemical, it'd be a little difficult because we're pretty large.  And--but there are ways that it could be a management buyout or, or whatever.  But it'd be unlikely somebody outside, particularly would, would, would step in to buy us, although anything is possible in this consolidation age where the multi-billion dollar companies are buying up each other and so forth.  So you never rule anything out.  That's not something we're looking at particularly, but--cause we think there's still some growth that we have and we just have to maybe partner up with a couple of companies that make sense to give us access to some different markets that, that might be more lucrative.
Story_ID: 624614
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is not--is this an industry where other minorities have been able to excel, or are you the really only king in the mountain.  The only one [unclear] eaten up?
Speaker 2: Well I guess the way I would respond to that in the top 100 chemical distributors, we're number 16.  There may be three other minorities, we're larger than all three put together.  So if you look across the country, the chemical distributors, quality chemical distributors are minority--that are minority would be under 25 million in annual revenues.  And some of them have been around as long as we have.
Speaker 1: And one thing I wanted to ask as I was, I was reading an article about the whole Tier One and there's been this controversy in the whole, you know, minority business community about what actually counts as a minority company and the whole Tier One.  And I just wanted to have your viewpoint about that.
Speaker 2: Well I'm on the Board of the National Minority Purchasing Council where they have stressed the, the fact of trying to reduce ownership, or allowing ownership to reduce below 51 percent, which has been the real controversy across the, the country in recent, in recent months.  And that vote was taken and there was allowed that you could be still considered a minority controlled company if in fact your ownership were less than 51 percent, but certain other criteria had to be in place along the way.  And I, I felt there were enough safeguards in there that, that organizations would not be--a front organization could easily be detected if that, if that were the case.  And minority companies in order to, to really grow, have got to have access to the, to the capital markets.  And that may mean raising capital either through venture capital or through stock, through public offerings.  And you're not gonna maintain 50 plus percent and, and be able to, to deal with raising significant amounts of capital.  So when we look at Tier One/Tier Two kind of relationships, Mays Chemical is both a Tier One in certain instances and a Tier Two.  The area that we have the most controversy over is being a quote, small disadvantaged business.  Because the definition of disadvantaged is if the principal has a net worth outside of the company and home of 650 thousand dollars.  Well you can--I think you can see pretty quickly nobody's gonna give you a multi-million dollar contract if the net worth that you have is less than, than the contract.  So you, you almost shoot yourself in the foot when you talk about only dealing with disadvantaged businesses, and Mays Chemical has not considered itself to be disadvantaged for quite some time cause Bill Mays is not disadvantaged.  Now Bill Mays happens to be African American, therefore Mays Chemical is a minority controlled business because we have control, I have control of, of more than 51 percent.  So that's just fact.  But--and in our industry, we're not dominant because SBA [Small Business Administration] uses employees in the chemical industry as the dominant factor.  And when you're dealing with Dow and DuPont and these major multi-billion dollar companies, 500 employees is considered--if you're under 500 employees, you're, you're considered small.
Story_ID: 624615
Speaker 1: But then let me ask you this.  Do you think that Mays Chemical, would you consider it not relevant now to have--I don't want to say set asides, but you know programs that, you know, give disadvantaged--
Speaker 2: Well Mays Chemical has never been a participant in those set aside programs to the extent that they are available.  We were never part of the 8(a) set aside program.  So we do very little governmental business, it probably constitutes--do nothing with the federal government, maybe on occasion, an order here or there.  Even very little from the municipal standpoint, although we do several million dollars with the City of Chicago [Illinois] Waste Water Treatment.  But that's a historical something that goes back.  We don't do anything with the City of Indianapolis [Indiana] or the water treatment here, very little.  So I think our dependence has really been geared toward corporate America, and our business is with the--basically with the Fortune 100 companies.  And so if you look at Mays Chemical's roster of, of customers, what you will find is that it reads like a who's who out of the Fortune top 100.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 624616
Speaker 1: You--do you have viewpoints that about--I mean I'd like to have your views about minorities and business and where you think things can go.  I mean it wasn't--you know you have people like--what is he, Ebony [Magazine]--John Johnson.  Would you--he built his business both dealing intersection between the corporate community and the black community, and you know churches and things--
Speaker 2: Well I think you look at a John H. Johnson a little different.  He came up in an era, I mean in the '30's [1930's] where segregation was rampant and discrimination was pretty widely viewed.  You contrast, and I'd say he was an old school entrepreneur that built the business the old fashion way.  You look at the new entrepreneurs and you see totally different, and by new you take someone like a Bob Johnson of BET [Black Entertainment Television], or even an Alfred Liggins [HistoryMaker] who is taking Radio One with a storm across the country, and he's a young black Wharton MBA [Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that is in his 30's, mid-30's.  And he's just masterminded a 1.2 billion dollar purchase of radio properties.  Well just getting access to that kind of capital to have public offerings to be able to raise that kind of money and to have bank debt, was just unheard of in the Johnny Johnson [John H. Johnson] days.  I mean Ebony and, and those older entrepreneurs, Gardner [Edward George Gardner, HistoryMaker] at Soft Sheen, they just didn't have access to, to that kind of capital.  So access to capital is still very much a problem, whether you're a minority or majority, and you have to have that access in some kind of fashion.  Now in our case, we get a lot of it through bank debt and internal growth.  But if we were gonna make a major acquisition, there's only so much debt that you can carry realistically.  And that's why I say we would probably look at some kind of joint venture as opposed to some kind of purchase.
Story_ID: 624617
Speaker 1: And do you think--what do you feel about the future of blacks in business?  I mean you know Jesse Jackson [Reverend Jesse Jackson, HistoryMaker] has made, recently made business calling card and you know--
Speaker 2: Thank goodness Jesse [Jackson] finally got past the Civil Rights Movement and got into the economic rights because you know after you got through the political part and you got the vote, we, we still never got to the economics.  And that's what really--that's what really runs this country.  That's what capitalism is all about.  I think that blacks have a, have a great future in business provided that they look at themselves first as businesspeople, not as minorities.  And that they've got to excel in business and they've got to do the same things that any other businessperson has got to do, that is they've got to have competitive prices, they've got to have excellent service, they've got to have quality people.  So if they do, if they do that, if anyone does that, then they have as good a chance as anything to, to, to excel and to survive and do very well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what if--do you think it's equally important for there to be blacks in the corporate structure for minority business like yours to succeed?
Speaker 2: Well I, I think that certainly you would think that there would be some empathy from the, the blacks in corporate America.  That has not proven to be the case, particularly.  I mean I've seen it both ways where our worst enemy is black in the corporate, in a corporation.  It's only been relatively recent that there have been blacks of some power that could make a difference in the corporation as far as getting, getting business or making something happen and, and, and not happen.  I think about our folks at--well our beer companies are a good example, where there are blacks in each one of them that, that carry significant weight and can make something happen.  Whether it's a John Jacobs [John E. Jacob] at Anheuser [Anheuser-Busch], or one of the other folks at, at Miller [Miller Brewing Company].  So I think that, that to the extent that you can utilize minorities in the corporate, in the corporate throne, that's great.  But you're still gonna have the same problems.  You've got to have quality products and people and competitive prices and the whole bit.  They can't do--they, they can't sell at a higher price and inferior products.
Story_ID: 624618
Speaker 1: Now what do you think--were you part of that DreamMakers?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, I wanted to--the only reason I ask is, okay.  What--it could be DreamMakers, it could be you know, Black Enterprise.  But what, what do you think--those, those gatherings have often brought the, you know the titans, or the, you know, the 100 together.  And tell me why you think gatherings like that are important?
Speaker 2: Well of course it depends on the perspective.  Now if you happen to be at Northern Trust and you look at where is another source of potential dollars that we could get from interest or we could get from investments, then the black market is something that--black consumers is something that's certainly under tapped.  So to the extent that you can be a matchmaker and pull together folks that want to invest in minority companies and allow those minorities companies to grow, then it's just good business.  I mean the same reason that a General Motors recognizes black folks buy Cadillacs, then it makes sense to have black Cadillac dealers.  I mean it just does, that's just good, good business.  I, I think that the BE 100 [Black Enterprise 100] situation, Black Enterprise has a little different approach.  Theirs I think is not only do you bring the titans together, but you also bring the, as I'll call them the wannabes, the new entrepreneurs, the ones that are striving to be, because it's a revenue source for black enterprise too.  I mean I'm not doubting that there is some philanthropic motives behind what Earl Graves [HistoryMakers] does, but I think let's be real about it.  If you can get a few hundred people to pay you three, four hundred dollars for a conference and the attraction is the BE 100 Black Enterprise 100 among other things, then you, you, you got a new source of revenues there.
Story_ID: 624619
Speaker 1: What do you most admire be--besides your--I mean I know you've been very modest.  But [unclear] who do you admire?  Everyone has, you know people who they consider significant.  What--who do you--
Speaker 2: I, I've always been impressed with, with Johnny Johnson [John H. Johnson].  I mean because he built something at a time when it wasn't, when it wasn't really feasible to do.  I, I think and Ed Gardner [Edward Gardner, HistoryMaker] is a, is a very positive kind of individual, what he tried to do with, with Soft Sheen, what he did do with, with, with Soft Sheen.  Comer Cottrell [HistoryMaker] out at Pro-Line who just recently sold.  I mean these are old line entrepreneurs that had to work like heck to get, to get up there.  I look at a Bob Johnson at BET [Black Entertainment Television] and, and I think he's got the, the future just in front of him.  I think he's got so many ideas and so many positive things he can deal with, that when I look at success, I see a, a Bob Johnson to take a company public and then take it back private.  I, I wish him well on his latest venture into the airlines industry.  That isn't something I would wanna do, but again he's, he's doing that.  And I think that when I look at, at Cathy Hughes [HistoryMaker] who had dreams with Radio One, and to instill those dreams in her son and, and Alfred Liggins [HistoryMaker] who has indicated--just dealt with this billion dollar buy-out of Clear Channel Radio properties.  So I've gotten different, different kinds of, of entrepreneurs that I look up to say that in their own right they've been very successful and, and influential in, in kind of shaping some of the things that I do.
Story_ID: 624620
Speaker 1: Do you have any views on blacks, black businesses and them selling out?  You know there's a lot of--in the community and that it's like, you know, Burrell Advertising--[unclear] Soft Sheen.
Speaker 2: Well that's the, the way of the world.  No, no more than, than if you lose a major corporate headquarters in Indianapolis [Indiana], we bemoan that the same, the same way.  And that's, that's just unfortunately or fortunately, the way of the world.  And there's gonna be consolidations, there's gonna be mergers.  I mean Central Indiana Newspaper just sold out, which the Star was owned by the Pulliam family here in Indianapolis forever.  And yet they--somebody made a business decision and I suppose for 2.8 billion dollars I could care less what somebody else felt.  The, the people, the family, the trust that owns the controlling parts stands to benefit.  And somebody felt that was in the best interest of the shareholders and ultimately that's, that's the kind of decision that you make.  Now having said that, one of the things that I did when I made the decision with my partner to sell our media properties, our radio properties, I made it very clear that I could have sold them to a majority company headquartered here in Indianapolis, or some other majority company.  But I made it very clear that if I could come anywhere close to the money, I would prefer to sell to a black owned media conglomerate.  And there were a couple that, that had substantial resources to be able to do that.  That's not always the case in, in, in industry.  And I think that to the extent that we can develop stronger minority companies who are the acquirers rather than the acquirees, we're better off.  I can't begrudge--even [unclear] at Uniworld.  I mean he finally, he held on.  But if you're gonna go up against multi-billion dollar giants, even at a couple hundred million dollars or whatever, you're gonna have to have more oomph.  So it doesn't surprise me that we see more and more of these companies selling to majority companies.  And I think that the ethnic hair care is a perfect example, that industry is a perfect example of where they did not come together and create a larger entity and each one of them wanted to do their own thing.  And so as the saying goes, united we, we stand, divided we fall.
Story_ID: 624621
Speaker 1: So where do you think--where do you see in the black community that will be able to create true sort of institutions, or do you think that's even important?
Speaker 2: Well I, I--obviously the most segregated places is the church.  And if done right, I think the church is a formidable institution, even from a business standpoint if you, if you can kind of get some of the business principals in--involved in, in usage and churches.  You, you look at black financial institutions and you wanna know why they don't thrive, it's because we don't put any money in them.  I mean and so it takes capital to, to deal.  I don't know as we go forward whether I'm so concerned about black institutions, per se.  I think I'm concerned about successful institutions that may have the kind of commitment to blacks and other minorities, but that doesn't necessarily mean that it has to be black institutions.
Speaker 1: And do you have any thoughts about what is needed in the black community for, you know, it's positive future?  I mean this--you know I mean--
Speaker 2: Well I really don't have any, any thoughts.  I think we need to strengthen the family.  I'm the--organizations that I spend more time with now, like the National Urban League, have a commitment not only to some form of civil rights, but trying to deal with looking at education.  Because if there's anything that, that will make the difference in the future success, it's going to be education.  And we have tended in the minority community maybe not to put as much emphasis recently on that.  And we've got to get back to the, to the fact that achievement matters and that we've gotta have kids that are excelling and moving on in higher education and doing what is necessary to, to, to scholastically stand out.
Story_ID: 624622
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now which, which investment outside of you know, the chemical companies that you've acquired, would you consider most significant or most--you're most proud of?
Speaker 2: Well I think that you would probably want me to say the Indianapolis Recorder.
Speaker 1: No, no, I don't--
Speaker 2: But I will come back to that a second.  I think the one that I'm most proud of is the investment that I made in the media side, in the radio side from start to finish in seven years.  And sold at a substantial, substantial profit.  But yet was still able to sell it to someone who would, who would be black and also maintain local ownership, local control as far as operating.  So I think that that would be a, a very significant investment and activity that I was involved with over the last seven years.  The Indianapolis Record is certainly very positive.  It's very, very well run, not by me, but by my niece, Carolene [Mays] runs it.  And she has for the last three years I guess.  And I bought that paper in 1990 because I really felt that without the kind of business acumen and just sheer finances put into the paper, it would never have survived to 1995 and it's hundredth anniversary.  And so I, I think that to commemorate that, the Indianapolis Recorder, I wanted to do a little documentary which, which we did so that it would be kind of incorporated for the--for posterity sake.  And so I, I think that that was, was significant.  It's not from a financial standpoint as significant as other media, but it never will, and that's not the, the basis under which is--it was, it was bought.  I think that there are other businesses that I am a part of, construction and, and whatever that are doing quite well.  I think the--again the key is teaming up with partners, partners that you can trust, whether black or white, man or woman, and some will work out and some won't.  And you just have to, to work through that to where you, you get the right people, the right chemistry and you try to instill the kind of business practices that will allow those outside investments to thrive.
Story_ID: 624623
Speaker 1: Now how do you know that you can trust someone?
Speaker 2: You don't.  You don't know.  It, it--all you can do is, is look for the qualities and the characteristics and how they've operated businesses, and how you have a personal gut feel.  I think I've been incredibly lucky.  The partners that I've had have been for the most part honest and aboveboard.  They may occasionally forget that there are two of us and tend to take a, a little more viewpoint on their side.  But when, when called to their attention, they tend to--the pendulum tends to swing back.  So I--and I, I found that it's not race related.  I mean I found that, that the partners that I have that have been non-minority have been as positive to me and as beneficial as those who happen to be minority.
Story_ID: 624624
Speaker 1: Well we certainly talk about, when you talk about outside investments, I think that one of the benefits of having a successful company like Mays Chemical [Company], it has allowed me to make investments outside in, in a variety of areas.  And generally what I lean toward if you look at areas that, that tend to generate the kind of revenues and kind of profits, recreation is certainly an area that I, that I lean toward because people will pay for their, for their recreation.  And so I look at golf courses.  So my partner and I have ownership and, and run three different golf courses here in Indianapolis in addition to building a 700 single family home 18 hole golf course residence in Hamilton County [Indiana], which is one of the fastest growing areas in--certainly in Indiana, but probably in the Midwest.  So another partner and I own part, own boat sales, which is a boat company.  And again, recreation.  We deal with high end kind of boats, the kind that you would call yachts, probably in the 250 up range, although we have some smaller ones.  So you look at the investment opportunities and there are others that are smaller, not necessarily because I wanna do them, or because I think they're gonna be super successful, but because they help other entrepreneurs who need just kind of a, a boost up along the way.  I think most recently an investment that we made was I--my partner out of Washington [D.C.] that we, we talked about earlier in the picture and I own controlling interest in the TGI Fridays Restaurant at the airport here.  And by the same token, we tried the same thing in Washington and were not successful.  We had a small part of that restaurant, TGI Fridays Restaurant at Washington National [Ronald Reagan National Airport, Arlington, Virginia] and that--we couldn't make that one work.  But just because you have a failure or something, a disappointment, doesn't mean that you stop, you, you pick up the pieces and go on to the next, to the next project.
Speaker 2: Now who manages these various investments and who--because they're not, you know it's not chemical and some people can say you get stretched, but who manages them?  And also who considers them?  I mean you have obviously--
Speaker 1: Right, well that's--both of those are good questions.  The management--one of the reasons I think they work is that the management is really--the operating management is really held with my partners, whoever I'm partnering with.  We don't have conflicts about that operation because they know that, that I am dependent on them to run it, and that's where to an extent the honesty and trust comes in.  So I don't even play golf, let alone run a golf course.  I, I go occasionally out on a boat, but only because my partner parks one out at, at my home and changes it out every year.  My kids and, and friends use it more than I do.  So I think that, that the running is, is done by my partners and that means that there's very little conflict with, with me.  As far as management, again, I think that from an internal viewpoint, I have a person on staff, Matt Murphy, who I brought--recruited from the banking world.  He was a banker for probably 15 years.  And I brought him in to Mays Chemical basically to manage my outside business investments because they were getting kind of sprawling and needed to, to be fine tuned and looked upon a little more professionally and a little more critically.  And probably as we go forward, I will be doing maybe less in just sheer numbers cause I think I actually own parts of fifteen, sixteen businesses.  And I, I think that it makes more sense as I get up in age a little bit, to begin to, to look at those.  And, and that was another reason for selling off the media side, the electronic media, because the offer I felt was good.  So if the offers are good then maybe it makes sense to begin to liquefy and push, push those resources into a different form.
Story_ID: 624625
Speaker 1: Okay.  We've talked a lot about the, the business side of, of Bill Mays.  You had mentioned early on in the interview about the philanthropic side, and how that whole leaning came from your mother [Joy J. Mays].  And I would just like you to talk about your philanthropy.
Speaker 2: Well I, I think that when I talk about, again when I go back to the, to the days of Cummins Engine Company and James Joseph, the whole idea of, of giving back to the community is very, very significant to me and, and Mays Chemical has as a corporate policy, five percent of our pre-tax profit goes into charitable contributions.  And we're talking about a couple hundred thousand dollars a year, at least, plus my person philanthropy, another fifty thousand.  So a quarter of a million dollars a year pretty consistently for the last seven or eight years.  I, I think that we set up a family foundation and we'll fund that with, with some degree of, of money and stock.  I, I think that early on my involvement with United Way was very significant.  And I, I had set up the Minority Key Club here in Indianapolis [Indiana], which was a leadership giving at a thousand dollars or more.  I think on an annual basis, that leadership club that's now been around for ten, 12 years, gives upwards to a half million dollars just from the minority giving at a thousand dollars above.  So I think that when you look at the whole aspect of, of philanthropy, I look at how it's changing, but also how it's needed.  And I say it's changing because corporations are, are tending to be more focused in their philanthropy.  They're not just giving restricted, unrestricted kind of monies.  They're, they're giving more monies that, that go toward a certain cause or a general direction.  You see a lot of naming opportunities with the various football and basketball stadiums and arenas.  And so I, I think that there is a change, but philanthropy is certainly needed.  And in the minority community, philanthropy--a lot has been focused on the church.  And that's fine, but we have to get beyond the church and build other institutions that, that will carry on and, and deal with other aspects of, of life besides religion.
Story_ID: 624626
Speaker 1: You say that substance is more important than color.  What do you mean by that?
Speaker 2: Well I, I guess I have friends that are black, white, that--Hispanic, whatever.  And so I don't judge people by their, by their sex, by their race.  I judge them by their--I guess the true thing by the content of their character, what they are really all about.  So the fact that someone may have even a different sexual persuasion doesn't particularly alarm me.  And the same thing with the commitment to employment.  We believe at Mays Chemical in giving someone a chance.  So someone could have been incarcerated.  We have people that have been incarcerated for years that--in fact we have hired, and they're excellent employees.  And they are dedicated and loyal.  And maybe it's because their, their options are--they feel would be limited, I don't know.  But we certainly wanna give them a chance and we just wanna judge their--based on, on what they are now, not what they might have been in the past.
Story_ID: 624627
Speaker 1: Okay.  You say also that no great city is going to stay great very long without dealing with the minority economic development situation.  What do you mean by that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, that's absolutely right.  If we look at the trends over time, particularly of our inner cities, they are--our larger communities, they are becoming more and more minority concentrated and the economic base is, is more and more significant.  And what corporate America has got to learn to deal with is how do you, how do you handle this change.  How your recourses are devoted.  Where are your political bases.  Because again, as is more concentration of minorities, there's gonna be more voting concentration, and certainly the ability to, to get minorities into economic positions exist.  So I think that all of it is intertwined.  And I, I believe very strongly that, that urban centers, communities, have to come to grips with the minority element.  And they have to deal with economic development from a minority perspective because that's the last frontier, if you will, of, of the future of this country.
Story_ID: 624628
Speaker 1: And you also say know your limitations, realize what you can and cannot do.  What do--how do you--
Speaker 2: Well I think we touched on that a little bit when I indicated that, that in the past minority entrepreneurs did not want to surround themselves with talent that maybe would, would outshine them.  I think that one of the, one of the areas that I pride myself in is recognizing that there's some things I do well and there's some things I don't do very well.  And that you need to admit that there are things you don't do well and strengthen those and surround yourself with people that are not just yes people, but people that will tell you the truth even when you don't wanna hear it.  And you just have to look in the mirror and be able to say well that's right; I made a mistake on that; I screwed that up.  Because in the final analysis, the company is Mays Chemical.  It has Bill Mays' name on it and it's mine for better or for worse.  And if I'm going to--I don't have to prove that I'm in charge.  And I think that's another fault that so many folks have, is that they have to always prove that they, they have the last word and they can make the decisions.
Story_ID: 624629
Speaker 1: What--do you think anything about being a chemist, having come from you know, I mean having coming from that background has had a part in your success?
Speaker 2: Well sure it has a part in it.  I mean running a chemical company--
Speaker 1: You know but I know, but I'm even thinking you learn how to mix things up [unclear].
Speaker 2: Well, right a winning, winning combination.  Well that's certainly a part of it.  But I think the, the other thing is that you learn that science is colorblind too.  And that you, you tend to look at the elements and you tend to look at the, the compounds and they are the, the same, they don't change.  And so if you mix H20 you're gonna get water.  And that really doesn't, doesn't change.  So I think that from the standpoint of just systematically putting in place, you learn that in chemistry, that there are building blocks and so you systematically build on the foundation.  And if you've got a weak foundation, you're gonna have a very crumbling, crumbling building.  And I think that that I learned very early on.
Story_ID: 624630
Speaker 1: And your father [Theodore C. Mays].  How do you think your father would say if he could see you?
Speaker 2: I think he'd say he was very proud.  I think he could--he would say that it was no less than he expected.  I think he would say that, that he knows that I will continue to be successful and continue to do the right, the right things from a philanthropic standpoint, and that, that he's very proud to, to have me as a, as a son.
Speaker 1: And do you think that we have seen the last of what Bill Mays is going to be doing?  You're still very young.
Speaker 2: Now not in the, in the mid-50's, I don't think I'd call that, call that so young.  I think that what, what will happen as we go forward, we will solidify and I think kind of deal with maybe a, a fewer number of ventures, but maybe more spectacular, maybe hooking up, partnering up with, with others to do some, some bigger things.  I, I don't, I don't think I have anything more to prove.  I, I am--I've been successful.  I'm financially secure.  My kids are financially secure; they have their own lives.  So I, I think from that perspective, I'm okay.  I don't have any more mountains to climb.  So now I think a lot of what I'm doing is looking at ways to give back, and that's not just monetarily, but in programs, in putting my name or putting my resources or my whatever, power, influence, behind certain causes and trying to make those--do more for, for humanity.
Story_ID: 624631
Speaker 1: Okay and then that leads me into legacy question.  What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I suppose that, that Bill Mays was a very successful businessperson who gave back to the, to community and to the society.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there anything else you'd want to say?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess, I guess I've said an awful lot.  I, I think that all I, all I will say is that there's still a lot of opportunity out there for young, young entrepreneurs, young black entrepreneurs to be successful.  And it's a different, different world today with the Internet and, and it's a much faster pace.  But I think that there's still a lot of room at the top; it's not crowded at all.  I'll be the first to say that.
Story_ID: 624632
Speaker 1: Okay.  What's up on the screen at the current time is William G. Mays.  It's a photograph of me back just--not very long ago.  Maybe in late 1999.
Speaker 2: That's a photo of Bill Mays back in high school.  Probably in my senior year of high school.
Speaker 1: [unclear] younger than that.
Speaker 2: I think that was--well I was--probably have been 17 back there but that looks like that was taken in photography class and I had photography class as a senior.
Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: Okay that was the early, early days of Mays Chemical, so that would have been in 1980, '81 [1981].  So that's, looks like Bill Mays back at that point in time. OFF CAMERA VOICE:  It's on the, on the back of it first trade show.
Speaker 1: That would probably be the, the National Minority Supply Development--the Purchasing Council as we call it.  And that trade show probably would have been in Indiana in April of 1980.
Speaker 2: That's about the same, in that first five year time period.  So that was again that's William G. Mays in, in that '80 [1980], early '80's [1980's] time period in my office.
Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: That's another one, a picture of William G. Mays.
Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: I was trying to see when exactly that might have--it might have been.
Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: Okay now we're moving on up.  This would be in the--probably in the early '90's [1990's].  That's my, my office, and that's William G. Mays on the phone.  And so we're talking early '90's [1990's] as we moved into new headquarters at that time on 89th Street.
Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: That's in 19--probably '84 [1984] when I received the Center for Leadership Development Entrepreneur of the Year Award.
Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: So that's William G. Mays and the former recipient of the award was W. Henry, William, Bill Henry.  And the presenter is W. T. Ray.  He's a prominent former Chairman of the Board of Midwest National Bank.
Speaker 1: Now what, what--
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty four [1984].
Speaker 1: [Unclear].
Speaker 2: From--to my right in the picture is the former winner Bill Henry, who held--ran several McDonald's and then the older gentleman on my left in the picture would be W. T. Ray., who was the former Chairman of the Board of Midwest National Bank, which was the black bank that was sold later in the, in that decade.
Speaker 1: Okay that is my wife Rose and I were in--we were all at General Motors, General Motors Supplier of the Year Award Program, and I believe this particular one, cause we've been to several.  But I believe this particular one was in Mexico, in Mexico City.  And that would have been in the mid-90's [1990's].
Speaker 2: [unclear] honorary doctorate.
Speaker 1: Yes, that's--to my right in the picture is Dr. Harry Day who was my undergraduate advisor in the Department of Chemistry at Indiana University.  And to my left in that picture is, is Myles Brand, who is the President of Indiana University, and this is the bestowing of the honorary Doctor of Science degree which occurred in May of 2000.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: That is a picture of William G. Mays as I am in my role as co-chairing the Coca Cola Circle City Classic event.  One of the largest gatherings of African Americans in the--certainly in the State of Indiana and probably in the, in the Midwest.  It's a festive program.  That happens to be a parade that occurs each, each year as part of this Circle City Classic game, which is between historical black university or colleges football.  And it occurs the first weekend in October.  So this was probably in the last couple of years--October of probably '95-six-seven [1995-1996-1997].
Speaker 2: Do you have any of your daughters or any of your parents?
Speaker 1: Other than those you see around.  Yeah, that's what, that's what he was--Diane was looking for.  This picture.  Yeah this is the, the Kappa.  Yeah, that's a picture, a group picture of the past recipients of the Elder Watson Diggs Award, which is the second highest award given in Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity.  And on the far right in the white suit is Arthur L. Carter, Sr.  And next to him is Henry Bennett, Sr., who is deceased at this point, then W. G. Mays and then the other individual is a undergraduate I believe award winner as opposed to an Elder Watson Diggs winner.  He won--the Guy L. Grant Award which is given to undergraduates.
Story_ID: 624633
Speaker 1: Okay that's a picture of William G. Mays and his family on a cruise as we go each year between Christmas and New Year's.  Standing immediately next to, to me is my wife Rose and next to her is our older daughter Heather, and our younger daughter Christian.  And this was probably maybe four years ago, so it probably was in '96 [1996] or so that we took that particular cruise, we go each year, so that just happened to be that particular--
Speaker 2: That particular picture was as you could imagine, at my 50th anniversary.  My 50th birthday I guess I should say, a surprise party given to me, given in 1995, which would be my 50th birthday.  Looks like that--I'm trying to see who that is behind, looks like that's my wife Rose behind, barely seen.
Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: Okay, that's a, a picture of, of me walking down the aisle with my older daughter Heather at her marriage in June of 1998.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE:  Her name's June?
Speaker 2: No the wedding was in, Heather, Heather Mays.  Yeah Heather Wood now.  But she got married in June a year ago, so June of 1999.  She's just celebrating her one year anniversary a couple weeks, well a few weeks ago.  It was the end of June of 1999.
Speaker 1: Again this is interesting, another picture of, of me in my role as co-chairman of the Coca Cola Circle City Classic, which is in--done in conjunction with Indiana Black Expo.  And that picture was taken when I was addressing the audience at the RCA Dome where the football game is held.  And generally we have a sellout crowd of something over 55,000 people to come to watch this football game the first weekend in October.  So I was just giving greetings and welcome.
Speaker 2: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a picture of--and there's a little glare on that, of my mom, Joy J. Mays, and three of her, her grandkids, my two daughters Heather who is there on the left.  In the center is my nephew Robert Carbon Mays who now lives and works in Dallas.  And Christian Mays, my younger daughter.  And this was probably taken around my mom's 75th birthday, so that would have been probably ten years ago.  So we're looking at 19--somewhere around 1990.  Maybe a little earlier than that cause it doesn't look like Heather is, Heather looks like she's still in high school there.
Speaker 2: Now she's the one who you just walked down the aisle.
Speaker 1: That's correct.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of Representative Julia Carson on her second inauguration in--I guess this was actually done in January of 1998.  And she was elected, and this was her second term.  And this was taken on the steps of the Capitol in Washington, DC [District of Columbia].
Speaker 1: [OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION]
Speaker 2: This picture was taken a year ago, maybe 1998, probably 1999, in, in New Orleans I believe, or maybe Houston.  And the gentleman on the left is Russ Benito, who is the, the lead person in the Corporate Plus Program.  And the lady on my left is Harriet Michel, who is President of the National Minority Supplier Development Council.  The Corporate Plus Program is designated for minority suppliers who have--who can do business on a national basis.  And we have a, a pin that--just as a memento of that, and that was when I received my pin to join that elite group.  There's probably--maybe 100 minority companies across the country that now are in the Corporate Plus Program.  I was one of the first 20 to go in.
Speaker 1: The National Minority Supplier Development Council.  It's called the NMSDC.
Speaker 2: This was--I was featured on the Journal cover of Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity's Journal, and that would have been I believe in 1987 with--it's called the Top Entrepreneurs in Kappa.  And on my--down on the left is the head of Soft Sheen that was one of the--Earl Gardner was his.
Speaker 1: Ed Gardner
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ed Gardner, yeah.  Saying Earl.  Ed Gardner, head of Soft Sheen and the other gentleman is Percy Sutton of Sutton Industries.  It runs radio properties in New York.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA VOICE: What year was that?
Speaker 2: This would have been in 1987 I believe when that was featured.
