Story_ID: 124729
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Geraldine McCullough, that's G-E-R-A-L-D-I-N-E, M-C-C-U-L-L-O-U-G-H.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And can you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Uh-uh (laughter); it's in your portfolio (laughter).  I don't really wanna go down that trip, but we'll say I'm here, alive, and well (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm a sculptor. I'm an artist, and--basically a sculptor; but in a sense, I hope I'm sorta like a renaissance person in that I'm not in one track because I do paintings and jewelry; that's why I'm dressed like this now--showing all my jewels (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's your own work?
Speaker 2: That's my own work, that's my own belt (laughter).  So you see, I'm, I'm like a Christmas tree (laughter), just jingling all over.
Speaker 1: And, ma'am, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the 20th of March, '03' [2003].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: The most magnificent (laughter) studio in Oak Park, Illinois.
Speaker 1: All right.  And this is your studio.
Speaker 2: And it is called The McCullough Studio, and you're most welcome (laughter).
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Story_ID: 124730
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five People Magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask you--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and the first one is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food; gee, whiz--well, right off the bat, fried chicken--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but not greasy; not thick-battered like you get commercially, but southern fried--real southern fried chicken; I love that--Especially wings.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did, but I was told not to wear it--red (laughter).  No red, no white, no black (laughter).
Speaker 1: I see.  Now, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Most definitely May, because it's like you have something to look forward to, and I so love summer and--so you can anticipate it.  It's almost like looking for the Fourth of July, and then it sort of beginning--that's the apex; it's beginning to curve and go down, and when you get into September, it's beautiful 'cause it's sadness to it--a bleakness for the winter, especially March (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's one of the best answers I've had--heard yet.  Now, can you tell me if you have a favorite vacation destination or not?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I'll say favorite in the sense that I've been there quite a few times, and it's up at Cape Cod [Massachusetts].  And my son has a place there; he lives in Boston [Massachusetts], but you go up there and it's, it's just wonderful and peaceful and has a boat and we go out--out on the ocean to Martha's Vineyard and such as that.  And so I go every summer and stay about two--two weeks or so.  The next best would be to go up to Taos, and to the Indian reservations.
Speaker 1: New Mexico?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I spend some time there.  I had hoped to go on a dig, but it didn't turn out that way.  But we did visit the Pueblos and the Zunis and enjoyed that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So--but especially if I had to choose, it would be the Cape.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying, ma'am?
Speaker 2: Emm-hmm. The dao that is spoken is not the dao.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 124731
Speaker 1: Can you tell us something about your family history?  And I don't mean give us the whole history of the family right now; I mean how far can you trace your family back?
Speaker 2: I would say only to the great, great--to my great grandfather on one side.  And on the other side, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Now, your great grandfather that you can trace, what can you tell us about him, you know; are there any stories that have passed down about him?
Speaker 2: Not as much as my grandfather who--as my, as my mother tells it, in Alabama he just sort of appeared, you know; not like spiritual, but just came in speaking very fluently, and a great orator, and he belonged to the--I'm sad--I was gonna say the Mystic Knights of the sea --kidding (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Amos and Andy, right?  (Laughter)
Speaker 2: You can delete that (laughter).
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Seriously, he was a Mason, and he traveled all through the south, and so there he met my grandmother.  And he had set up a newspaper publishing company, and he was a good friend of Booker T. Washington, and my cousin has some of the--(OUTSIDE TRAFFIC NOISES). And my cousin Amy--
Speaker 1: All right now, let's go back a little bit because we may have lost some of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Okay.  I was saying that he was a Mason, and travelled a lot, then he settled in--I think it was Selma, Alabama.
Speaker 1: And you said he was a friend of Booker T. Washington?
Speaker 2: Yes, and they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Jesse C. Duke, and he had a newspaper which he published, and so he was publishing these various articles and discussions with Booker T. Washington who--he had some reservations about his, his theory, and so this was quite a nice conversation, and my cousin is [HM] Amy Billingsley and was married to Andy [Andrew] Billingsley, and they wrote "Black Families in White America," and so she did a lot of research on my grandfather.  But, anyway, there in Selma, they resented what he was writing, and they came after him, the Ku Klux Klans, and my--this is the way my mother tells it (laughter), that they dressed him like a lady and got him out and--because the mob lynch was--the lynching mob was around.  So he did escape and he went to Pine Bluff, Arkansas (DOG BARKING).
Story_ID: 124732
Speaker 1: Well, we're talking about my grandfather, and I thought he was really a remarkable man in that he was very independent, an independent thinker, and he had correspondence with Booker T. Washington and, as I said before, he was high in the Masons, so he did a lot of oratory.  So anyway, whatever he did or said wasn't liked there in Selma [Alabama], so they came to see that he didn't talk anymore, we'll say.  So my grandmother dressed him up like a lady and they got him out of Selma, and he went to--ended up in Pine Bluff, Arkansas.  Now, in Pine Bluff, he was treated very well, and that's where my mother was born, and they had a very comfortable life, even with help (laughter).  And it's surprising how that changed.  So he did an awful lot of publishing there, and I'm awfully glad that Amy has some of those copies.
Speaker 2: Now, let me just offer this now.  It doesn't trigger anything but, you know, Pine Bluff, Arkansas, that's the home of Arkansas--one of the schools--it's a black school--University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff--the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff is there; that's a black school.  Now, I don't know if they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--It was named something else.
Speaker 2: What was it?
Speaker 1: I can't remember.
Speaker 2: Yeah, University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff.  And there also was a strong Masonic tradition coming out of Arkansas--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 124733
Speaker 1: Well, my grandfather and mother--grandmother had five children, and one of the children drowned.  But they saw to it that all of the children graduated from college, and to say that my mother graduated from college way back then was quite a feat; she was sent to Charlotte [North Carolina]--I think it's called Benidus (ph.).  Anyway, to me, it was called Scotia; she called it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Barber-Scotia [College]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, she's in Pine Bluff, so that was a far-away trip for her at the time; but she majored in education.  But the one that I'm really proud of is my uncle, Charles S. Duke, who's a Harvard graduate and majoring in architecture and mathematics.  So--my mother, in the meantime--this is kinda (unclear)--was a school teacher, so she went into the underworld (laughter); she went back in the boondocks and ran into this family that were both white and black, like very fair either way.  And she met--so she was teaching school.
Speaker 2: Where was she teaching at?  I mean what state?
Speaker 1: It was--it's called now Mason County.  It's Kingston, Arkansas; it's where--like the folk singer; what's his name?  I can't remember now--Johnny Cash.  Anyway, so she was there and--where there were great farmers--and met my father, and his father was quite a, a man, and owned thousands of acres of land, and he was white and his wife was African-American and Indian so it was--the reason I'm saying this--to my mother--was just the whole community of such a beautiful people, you know, 'cause of this mixture of African-American, Irish, and--what else were there?  Anyway--and Indian; so, she met my father.  In the meantime, my uncle has graduated from Harvard [University, Boston, Massachusetts], and then quite a few years later, they had a son who died--childbirth or something, and another one, then finally my sister.  Anyway, when he saw that his sister was in this Godforsaken place, he thought, but it was really a prosperous place but not really that heavy on the intellectuals side.  And so he asked if he she would come up to Chicago [Illinois] where he then was one of the city architects, and so she did, and that's how we came up to Arkansas and--with four of us then.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So--
Story_ID: 124734
Speaker 1: Uncle Charles [S. Duke] was really quite a person because they were beginning to build the subway, and there was a--they didn't have computers, and it was a mathematical problem, so he was asked if he would volunteer to stay in--like his bedroom or some room in his house, and nobody could come in--and for three days--'cause nobody could figure it out--figure there has to be a mistake.  And for three days, his food was taken to him and--because any interruption, you'd start it all over again.  He solved it, and my aunt was happy about it.  Also, he had a lot to do with the water systems and the cribs out in Chicago--the cribs off in the lake--he had a lot to do with designing the cribs, as well as the Michigan Avenue Bridge.  And my mother would take us out and--"That's your uncle, you know" (laughter).
Speaker 2: The bridges over the Chicago River there on Michigan--that one?
Speaker 1: The Michigan Avenue Bridge, he had somethin' to do with it.
Speaker 2: The one that raises up and--right there by the Tribune Towers?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And for a long time, his name was on it, plus other names.
Speaker 2: Is it still on there?
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: Well, what happened?
Speaker 1: Beats me (laughter).  At the time, I wasn't that impressed, you know, kids--so--
Story_ID: 124735
Speaker 1: Which I digress for a minute because my mother was quite strict and very much on education and such as that.  And we couldn't always play with all the kids, and we--on Saturdays, she would get us all dressed up and march us down to the Field Museum every day; I mean every week (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Every Saturday?
Speaker 1: --every Saturday; all the other kids are goin' to the show, and we never got to go.  But, we did secure that--just--but--to the end.  I knew every part of the Field Museum [of Natural History], so when I began to attend the Art Institute of Chicago, a lot of our research was over there.  And my friend and I would walk from the Art Institute to the Field Museum, and we would--oh, we're studying Tibetan culture or something, and we'd come in and she--and my friend would be lookin' around, "Well, where shall we go?"  So I always said, "Oh it's upstairs."  I knew every inch of that (unclear) (laughter).  So it turned out to be very good--
Speaker 2: Very useful.
Speaker 1: --but I did not share that at the time.
Speaker 2: All right.
Story_ID: 124736
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna to try to--I'm gonna--I need to ask you about your mother first--your mother, then your father; and I'm gonna ask you about your childhood.  But can you give us the name of your mother and spell it for us, and give us her date of birth?
Speaker 2: I really don't know it; she, she died when she was ninety-seven years old, so she's been dead for a while.
Speaker 1: So you don't know her exact date of birth?
Speaker 2: I could get it, I'm sure; and I should remember it 'cause it wasn't that long ago, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Can you approximate it for us?
Speaker 2: I would say it was--I would say now she'd be--if she was still alive, she would be about 108 or somethin' like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so 18--the mid-1890's she was born, I guess?
Speaker 2: yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And you said she was born in--
Speaker 2: Pine Bluff.
Speaker 1: Pine Bluff, Arkansas, all right.  And tell us something about her.  What kind of person was your mother, and what is she like?  You told us some things already, but we always this.
Speaker 2: Well, she had all of these children, and I'm 5'2; my mother was 4'11.  But, as I said, she'd bundle us all up and we'd be spic and span goin' to the Field Museum or goin' to the Navy Pier or some--someplace like that.  And like if it was a crowd (laughter), she--I'm gonna be so embarrassed--"Excuse me, excuse me," and pull all of us right in, into the (unclear) at this Lincoln Park Zoo there all around.  She would worm our way with all these little ducklins behind her, and get up there.  And she said, "Children, now these are the hippopotami (ph.) (laughter). She was always real proper; and I always used to tease her about it later.  When I was a little kid, I wasn't all--it wasn't that funny.  But she was a very good teacher, and she taught in the public schools for a while; but usually she was havin' more--I was having more siblings (laughter).
Speaker 1: How many siblings do you have?
Speaker 2: I have five now--I mean five including me; I have two brothers and two sisters.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Those that survive now, or are there--were there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--They're all--all of us are alive, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, it's five and--can you name 'em and tell us where you fall in the order?
Speaker 2: I can name 'em (laughter).  My older sister--Now, as I said before, there were two before who died before we came to Chicago [Illinois].  My older sister is Hazel Colleymore (ph.), then me, then Gladys Davis, and my brother, Dr. Nathaniel Hamilton, then Charles Hamilton.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--all right, so--all right, so your maiden name was Hamilton?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, tell us some more about your mother.  What are some of the other memories of your mother?
Speaker 2: Well, as I said, she was always like a teacher, although she was a very good mother, but strict; and I emphasize that because she was so small.  She wore a size four and a-half or five shoe but she was just a bundle of energy, and into everything, belonged to every club like, and people would always come to her and always, there was somebody at our house that she would help, you know?  And they could stay there until it was--whatever problem--
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, until--she would--they would come for her--to her for advice, and if people who lived in Arkansas wanted to come up and she was--my father would say, "Come up," even though we had all these children.  They were welcome 'til they got on their feet.  Also, she was quite a religious person.
Speaker 1: Did she belong to a particular denomination?
Speaker 2: Yes, she was Baptist, and very influential.  And our church was Bethesda Baptist Church.
Story_ID: 124737
Speaker 1: Well tell us about your father.  Can you give us his name and spell it for us, and his date of birth.
Speaker 2: I'm not too good on that.  Whatever mother's was, I think he was two years younger than my mother.  He was a gentle man and, and quite tall--
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Hugh, H-U-G-H--Hugh Hamilton, and--
Speaker 1: He was tall, you said?
Speaker 2: Yeah, believe it or not, and--
Speaker 1: How tall?  Do you know how tall he was?
Speaker 2: To me he was a giant, but I think he was only six feet one (laughter).  I can remember braggin' at school, and girls said, "Wow, how tall is your father?"  "Oh, he's seven feet" (laughter) to the older kids, and they were laughin' at me but--anyway, he was very, very gentle--not very assertive.  And--look for advice--was my, my mother; or she would give advice whether you wanted it or not (laughter), and you didn't object (unclear).  But I can't say that he was ever harsh to anybody--to a fault (laughter), to some extent--it was--I think so.
Speaker 1: So, maybe too nice.
Speaker 2: Yes, I think so; always trying to please.
Speaker 1: Now, what was his background?  Did he--I mean did he go to college, too, or--
Speaker 2: No, no.  He was back there in Kingston, Arkansas--a Mason (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--So he's that family you had described--from that family.
Speaker 2: So he maybe had gone to eighth grade or so, maybe not, but mother tutored him until he was able to get a high school diploma.  I can't stand ignorance (laughter).  Oh, she was a character; if you knew her, you would love her.  She was just a little spitfire.
Story_ID: 124738
Speaker 1: Now, what was your father's occupation?  What did he do?
Speaker 2: Well, when he was young and all, he was a farmer, and when he came to Chicago, he was employed by Commonwealth Edison Company.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what did he do for Commonwealth Edison?
Speaker 2: I don't know; it was not an important job, but it made a good living.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because like--he didn't really have that much of a background but, but he was a very good farmer (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, Commonwealth Edison pays pretty well, traditionally.
Speaker 2: Well, for people around our neighborhood, it was pretty good job; but as to what he actually did, I don't know--something to do with boilers or something.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just--hear that.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now--so you said he was almost too nice--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and do you have any stories about him being too nice?
Speaker 2: Not any that I would talk about.  He was just really nice--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but once or twice he would get angry, you know, and I would do--you would really walk the chalk line (laughter) because that didn't happen that often, but if he really got angry, that would be it.
Story_ID: 124739
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, I want you to reflect back and give us some idea of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up.  Now, did you grow up here in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, basically.  Maybe I was about four years old when I came up here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were born in Pine Bluff [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)--I was born in Mason County.
Speaker 1: Mason County, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: I was in the boonies (laughter)--
Speaker 1: All right, all right.
Speaker 2: --that's why my uncle wanted to get us out (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And when you came to Chicago--I'm sorry; where did you live in Chicago when you all lived here?
Speaker 2: We had a very nice apartment on--at 725 East 50th Street, and we lived on the third floor, and that was an experience.  And I used to always dream that a bull would run up the back stairs, you know, 'cause--I'm tryin' to transfer the cattle from the south, and somethin' outta be runnin' up these stairs (laughter), and that scared me to death (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's a strange thought (laughter).
Speaker 2: I wrote a story about it later, when I was taking some courses in creative writing, of this little kid lookin' over the banisters and thinkin' this bull--who was no bulls around (laughter)--I must have been afraid of bulls down there, and one of 'em had followed me, I guess.  But anyway--
Speaker 1: So you thought one would run up the back stairs and get you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I could always dream it (unclear).  So, now, with my sculpture, you'll see I have horns on most of this.
Story_ID: 124740
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, tell us about some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in that neighborhood.
Speaker 2: I don't remember any offensive odors.
Speaker 1: Any pleasant odors?
Speaker 2: Yes, I remember cantaloupe.  I always liked to smell them, you know, after they were cut.  And a lotta times, when we would have cherry ice cream, it was to me like rain hitting dusty--rain pelting down on dust--cherry ice cream (laughter).
Speaker 1: How so?  (unclear) connection (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I don't know (laughter), but that's what I would think.  And you think it's--next time you eat some cherry ice cream, kinda think about a, a rain shower, and you'll see what I mean.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, what are some of the other sights of--what are some of the other sights of the neighborhood?  What did they look like?
Speaker 2: Well, it was an integration neighborhood, and the story I told you I wrote about was--we had moved in, and then many people--whites--moved out, and I remember standin' on the third floor by the banisters watchin' car loads of, of trucks coming by where people were moving, and then African-Americans moved in.  That's what I remember.
Speaker 1: Did you see a lot from the third floor?
Speaker 2: Sure (laughter); you could see all around.  And in front of--looking out of our front window, it was then Xavier--kinda like the college, Xavier College here.
Speaker 1: Saint Xavier?
Speaker 2: Saint Xavier, yeah.
Speaker 1: It was on 50th side there?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--It was on 50th and Cottage, and so we would look right down into their campus, and we would see the nuns and the students there, and then they--after, after I, I left that area, I came back again, it was all gone.  It was so sad 'cause they had--it was a big fence around it--a brick wall around it, and a lot of shrubbery.
Speaker 1: That's--50th and Cottage Grove, that's--I'm trying to think of what's there.  I know--is it a Hales Franciscan near there right now--Hales Franciscan High School?
Speaker 2: It might be now; I have no idea what it is now.  I remember going by, and that big brick fence is down, and also the, the campus was different; it was no campus, hardly--kinda disappointed to see that.  I hadn't been back for many years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about the sounds of the neighborhood?  Did they have any particular sounds that you remember?
Speaker 2: Maybe street cars.  Oh, yes, the Hucksters--going down the alley.  Like one would say, like, "Oh-Lee-I-Lee" (ph.), or something like that.  I asked my mother, "What was he saying?"  He was saying, "Old rags and iron" (laughter).  I didn't--I--put it all together.  They would tease me about that.  So I remember that.  And--also, I remember the smell of the ice people, icemen, and the tongs.  And we would get up on the back of it--it's--and it was real damp-smelling there where the ice melts; ice was melting.  That was a nice smell.
Story_ID: 124741
Speaker 1: Okay now.  Now, what kind of a little girl were you when you were growing up?  I mean what did you like, and what were you interested in?
Speaker 2: Well, I--I was interested in--in getting more attention; it was just too many kids-so much noise, to me, though I loved them all. but I would think of what would it be to, to be only--be the only child and not have to split everything you get.  Get a candy bar, gotta cut up every little part of it (laughter); selfish, maybe, I know, but in a way, it made me a little more independent.  I was a little different; a very--kinda defiant, to some extent.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you pass your time pretty much, when you were a little kid?
Speaker 2: According to my age, you know.  Like I remember the girl on the second floor had a cigar box and--maybe this is weird--well, anyway--and in it would cut out paper dolls, and then she would draw paper dolls but, you know, they wouldn't play--play with me too much, so I started copying out of magazines, you know, and I was doin' 'em better than she was (laughter), and we became friends.
Speaker 1: So you were drawing your own paper dolls?
Speaker 2: --Hadn't thought of that.
Speaker 1: Is this when you started to draw and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was--I was mimicking what she was doin' and in many cases it would look like that's wrong, you know (laughter), 'cause I was maybe about 9 or 10 years old.  A lotta games we played--mumbo (ph.) peg (ph.), jacks, goin' in a vacant lot, catchin' bugs, puttin' 'em in the jars.
Speaker 1: Did you do a lotta drawing when you were coming up--or making things?
Speaker 2: Yes, and back to my uncle again; he would always come over--he came over a lot, but on Christmas, he would come over with gifts for all of us, each individual child, and he gave me a book called Stepping Stones to Art, and I loved it--kept it with--just coloring (laughter)--just a coloring book, really--'til it was worn out, and that I was--after that, I really began to become very interested in art.
Speaker 1: Now, did you--did your mother ever take you to the Art Institute?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes, yeah.  But she would often say, "Well, it would be better if you didn't draw so much and would get a better mark in math" (laughter).
Speaker 1: So did you draw in class?
Speaker 2: Doodled.  Over there, you will see I have this habit of doodling, and even in the organizations that I'm in, I'm like a Madame DeFarge you know, knittin'?  Doodling all over (laughter), paper all (unclear); I get home, I can't read--I can't read a thing, but I just have this compulsion, and now, most of my sculptures start there--with a doodle.  And it's like--there would be two types of working, one would be a creative aspect, and the other would be a conscious organization space, we'll say, or an unconscious; and this--a doodle is really an unconscious organization of space.  It's like if you see a, a little hole in your desk at school, you'll start expanding that hole; you'll start exploring it and going into the hole.  And around the phone booth, you'll see all sorts of doodles.  I used to just be interested in even a person who had no idea of being an artist, but what their doodles would look like, you know; and in many cases, they were, I found, very geometric, you know, like triangles and stuff.
Story_ID: 124742
Speaker 1: Tell me, how did you--where did you go to school, and--
Speaker 2: I graduated from the Art Institute of Chicago (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I'm talking about grade school.
Speaker 2: Oh--Willard School, which I understand now is torn down, in Hyde Park, which was so very--academically very high standards, I understand, and then to the Art Institute.
Speaker 1: Now, you went to the Art Institute while you were in grade school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did; after those little scholarships, I was so big, I thought, to go on the El [Elevated train] by myself and get off right by the Art Institute, and I was just so impressed to come in; they were havin'--the first time I went, they were having slides, and it was in Fullerton Hall, and to sit there--and the first time I saw a Van Gogh on this big screen, and it just grew, you know.  It was like I was sittin' in the enchanted world, and that was when I was in grammar school.  They gave two people a little student scholarship; we'd go down Saturday a half--half day.  And that's--by then, I was sure that's what I wanted to be.  And I then went to the Art Institute and bundled up my little drawings to see what was what.  I was accepted--
Speaker 1: Oh, now wait, we're goin' too fast; we still got quite--we're goin' too fast.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Ma'am, I wanna take you back to grade school again.
Speaker 2: There's nothin' much to remember about that Willard school; I hated it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did you have--were there any good teachers there that you liked?
Speaker 2: Well, there was one teacher (laughter), and her name was Mrs. Zelzer (ph.), or was it Zelder, Selder, and she taught us a song (laughter) in German, but the school was almost a hundred percent African-American, and we learned this song; I, I even remember it but I can't carry a tune so I won't embarrass myself.  But the words were, "All the birds have come again, come again to greet us."  It was like (GERMAN LANGUAGE SPOKEN) (laughter).  And I have German friends, and I started goin' down and make--this is digress--down in Mexico and we were talking about it, and they were--they are from Germany, and they said, "Oh, Gerri sing it."  And when I started singin' this song, they cracked up (laughter).  I just--the words were just by rote (unclear); I remember. So--.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 124743
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about high school.  Now, where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: Hyde Park.
Speaker 1: Okay, Hyde Park High School [Chicago, Illinois]; and how did you like Hyde Park High School?
Speaker 2: Well, not that much.  I would have rather have been able to go to DuSable [High School] (laughter), but my mother didn't like that idea.
Speaker 1: Was DuSable closer to where you lived actually, then?
Speaker 2: Half-and-half, you know.  As I, you know, I said I lived on 50th Street so--and Hyde Park might, might have been a little bit further away, but it was a better, better environment and education, but socially it was not for me, it was not at all.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: It wasn't like--the--there weren't that many blacks going there, and we weren't in, in any of the social activities.  I did get on the swim team and I did--you can see I over-weighed (laughter)--I'm always over-weighting academics, but I graduated well; but I was--and we had field hockey and I liked that.  And after about the second year in high school--and I took all the hard courses I could, but I had to take the regular academic work, I got on the school staff as a cartoonist (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-School yearbook staff?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that was fun.  That part I liked.  But so far as how everybody has high school memories, I don't have that.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--I guess there's a limit in social life.
Speaker 2: Right, and where they had the senior prom, we weren't encouraged to go.
Speaker 1: Did any black students go, that you know of?
Speaker 2: If they did, they didn't get in.
Speaker 1: So it was a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--'Cause I heard a lotta boys--black boys came out and were beatin' on doors (laughter); police came (laughter), and--no, it was not a very--very nice high school experience for me when--though I didn't know it--that much then, but now when I look back on it, and all the fun the kids would have socially.  We had our own social activities, you know, in our own little way.
Speaker 1: Did you have a--did you--did the black students form some kind of a group to have social activities at Hyde Park themselves?
Speaker 2: No.  We got outta that school and fast, and went home (laughter) where our friends were (laughter), and then we had a nice time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your social activities were in the black community, back in the neighborhood--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and not around the school zone.
Story_ID: 124744
Speaker 1: Now, did you have--did church provide some kind of a social outlet for you on some level?
Speaker 2: No (laughter).  It was there but--I, I've had a problem with religion.  As I said, my mother's very religious, and we went to every Sunday school, church, BYPU [Baptist Young People Union] (laughter)--that's what I grew up with.  After I married, I became an Episcopalian but--
Speaker 1: Now, how did you--what kind of problems did you have with religion?
Speaker 2: A very deep--later, if I can go up later, to answer that question.  Going to the Art Institute [of Chicago], we had--required each semester to take so much history of art and--which I loved, and it began to dawn on me that every civilization had a religion of some sort, whether you liked it or not, you know?  And one, to me, was as good as the other.  So after getting my master's, taking--and along with my courses I took at the University of Chicago, and after that, on my own, I took courses in comparative religions 'cause it deeply worried me, and I (unclear), I came in without an answer (laughter).  I think I'll go out without an answer as a moving finger writes.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, that's cryptic enough (laughter).  But, you know, a lotta people don't talk about that but, you know, and--for some reason, but, you know, I think that--I mean not everybody is drawn to the religion they're raised in, you know?  So--
Speaker 2: I, I just feel that--I guess you have to make up your own mind, you know, when it's right and when it's wrong, and what's an honorable thing to do, what isn't, and I really am not too comfortable in this position of saying because there's certain parts of the religion that worried me.  I would--
Speaker 1: What parts in particular?
Speaker 2: Like, "I am a jealous God."  I worried about that.  I would think that someone who could do all of these many things wouldn't be jealous, you know?  They were all, they were it, they were moving this whole universe, and I'm gonna worry about (laughter) being jealous?  I, I can see my mother sittin' over there actually (laughter) shakin' her finger at me right now (laughter).  "You're just showing off now."  I can hear her (laughter).  So, anyway, I had to resolve that; and it seemed like the three basic religions are the, the largest number of people in these religions who would be the Buddhists, the Muslims Mohammads, Muslims--Islamic is the word I'm looking for, and Christian.  And I think that the Bible has been interpreted incorrectly, in the sense of--the other part that I didn't like is imposing your religion on somebody else; you don't have a right to do that.  A person should be able to think about, and go about his religion--very personal way.  But think of how many wars and how many lives have been lost because the crusaders were gonna (laughter) go down there and beat the slop out of you if you didn't become a Christian (laughter), and they would just--I can almost think of a parallel, but I won't mention it.  But--
Speaker 1: Think of today's headlines, I guess.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)--but, but don't turn on your TV (laughter); you'll see deja vu (laughter) all over again.
Story_ID: 124745
Speaker 1: Did you--was it Baptist church--I know a Baptist church does some proselytizing and pushing, you know, I guess--and then--was your church like a very (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--All I can say is I doodled through the whole thing (laughter); it didn't make a big impression--no.
Speaker 1: As a youth--what I was getting at when I first asked the question is that--because of--the school didn't offer a lot of social activities for you to create a recognition in--
Speaker 2: Emm-hmm (ph.).
Speaker 1: --now, I wondered if that might not have come from the church because the church does--they place certain responsibilities in the hands of youth to develop on some level, usually (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I, I, I see where you're coming from, but our church was sort of sophisticated; we didn't, I didn't hear the gospel singing which was--might have interested me, you know?  But it was so prim and proper.
Speaker 1: A different kind of Baptist church (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--And little hymns that didn't--anyway, I didn't feel too comfortable.
Story_ID: 124746
Speaker 1: So, did you have any teachers who were--who served as kind of a mentor for you at Hyde Park [High School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I had an art teacher that kinda encouraged me, but didn't go out of the way to do it.
Speaker 1: Well, she did her job, I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-They had like a, the whole school was involved in havin' like a carnival, and I was pretty good in art, you know, so she said I would have a little booth and could draw people, you know, and so--anyway, she said that I would have to be dressed like a, a gypsy, or something like that, and my mother said, "Is anybody else dressin' like that?"  And I says, "I don't think so, I says, "'cause I'm gonna be drawing."  My mother went bouncin' up to that school (laughter), had a round out (unclear).  "I don't think she'll be involved in your carnival this year."  I was glad she did 'cause I was embarrassed to be sittin' up there like a ole dummy.  But she wouldn't let anything get, get by her.
Speaker 1: So she, she defended you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, she was up there in no time when she heard about it.
Story_ID: 124747
Speaker 1: So, well, when you were a senior then in high school, did you know where you were gonna go to college?
Speaker 2: The [School of the] Art Institute [of Chicago] or bust (laughter).  To me, that was the highest--and it was true because the Art Institute has been one of the leading art institutions in America, and to have it right here in this city, I couldn't think of anything better; and I still don't, except maybe for the Rhode Island School of Design or someplace.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what was your experience like at the Art Institute?
Speaker 2: Glorious (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Inaudible response).
Speaker 2: Glorious, in a sense.  I wanted to--to go, but I had just gotten married, and--
Speaker 1: Because you got married right outta high school?
Speaker 2: No, three years after I was out.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you hadn't started Art Institute yet.
Speaker 2: I couldn't afford it--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --so I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--When did you graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: A long time ago (laughter); you're not gon' get me (laughter); as my son would say, in the medieval times (laughter)--long enough to not be able to work.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: (Unclear)
Speaker 1: But in-between those three years, I had a very nice time (laughter) being away from Hyde Park (laughter) and finding there were boys in the world (laughter).  So, anyway--
Speaker 2: So you found the right one and got married, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But that was a whole another ballgame in that I was living in Chicago [Illinois], and my sister had married and lived in Maywood, and I met him visiting my sister in Maywood [Illinois].  So my whole life changed.
Speaker 2: So you moved to Maywood?
Speaker 1: Emm-hmm (ph.).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Well, I moved; he was already there (laughter).
Story_ID: 124748
Speaker 1: And so I worked a little, and I saved up a little money and did a lot of drawings and took 'em to the [School of the] Art Institute [of Chicago] to see if I could get accepted--said yeah you can get in, I was happy about that.  And I was, oooh, older than the kids there, and so I was extremely good student; I mean--focused, and the first year I received the Excellent Student of the--what do they call it--basic excellence; I got the Award for Basic Excellence, so that encouraged me that--going back--you know, these kids just came outta college and I didn't, and I was present; I did that well, and so I got the John Dine--Standecker Scholarship for General Excellence; they'll pay me tuition for one year, then after that, I continue to get a memorial scholarship right (unclear) straight through.
Speaker 2: That helps to make it a wonderful experience, doesn't it?
Speaker 1: Yeah; it was great.  It was like going back to the day when I walked in that snowy day and saw a big--on this big screen a Van Gogh; it was so in my mind, and the whole experience at the Art Institute was a piece-a-cake; it was--I was good in everything.  And I needed that encouragement 'cause I didn't really seem to fit in--I thought.
Speaker 2: So that was a confirming experience for you.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, who were some of your teachers at the Art Institute that you remember?
Speaker 1: Well, especially was a (unclear)--that was--what's the name of this?  Mr. Rickman (ph.) Vale (ph.) Smith--Oh, God; I remember the history of our teacher--Oh, Kathleen  Blackshear (who wrote (unclear) Art and History--somethin'--anyway, she wrote (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Kathleen Blackshear?  (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Blackshear--something.  Art of the Western World or something; she was very--the devil's beating his wife (laughter).
Speaker 2: Sunshine and rain, yeah.
Speaker 1: She was a very interesting teacher and, like I was saying about-
Speaker 2: (INTERRUPTION WITH PHONE RINGING).
Speaker 1: All right, we were talking about your teachers at the Art Institute.
Speaker 2: Yeah--Liffendahl (ph.), that was his name.  And my painting--figure drawing painting that I got an award was Felix Roovelough (ph.)--'bout all I can remember.  I remember the names of others, but I didn't have them as a teacher.
Speaker 1: Now, what did you enjoy the most at the Art Institute--what courses or what activities?
Speaker 2: Well, painting; I majored in painting.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when I graduated, I knew I was the world's best painter (laughter).  The world didn't think it anyway (laughter). It was quite a turnaround; that's how I--in a sense backed into sculpture after I'd graduated.
Story_ID: 124749
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what did you do when you graduated?  Did you--what did you do with--
Speaker 2: Well, I majored in art education, so I took the exam, public school, and I got in--I passed the test and got into the school system, and I taught for a while at Phillips High School in Maywood [Illinois].  That was quite an experience.
Speaker 1: Now, what was Phillips like then?
Speaker 2: Like it is now (laughter).
Speaker 1: For people that don't know, now, I mean, it's--
Speaker 2: Well, it was not the best high school academically, as opposed to Hyde Park, but they had the best track team and, and the best basketball team, and I have students who we still correspond; I never had any trouble with any student.  In fact, little boys walking to the El with some colors (laughter) in high school--no trouble--wonderful; most of 'em lived in the projects, but they were fine students.
Speaker 1: That's good.
Story_ID: 124750
Speaker 1: So now, how did you become a sculptor?
Speaker 2: Well, my paintings began to get third-dimensional and I started doing little tiny sculptures.  I have a friend that lived in St. Charles of Aurora [Illinois]; we had met at a camp I used to go to all the time, Silver Pines Camp, and they had--and she was an artist, a painter, and we were up at camp together.  I--we both had taught in their craft shop, and so she invited me out to meet this scout that was going around looking at various works to come out and have--had all my little paintings together.  And I had been working on these little soldered sculptures--just fascinated with it, but the solder had acid in it, and all my fingers--I had little patches on each finger (laughter); acid just would not get--anyway, I took three of these little--just pick--I was almost outta the door when I went back and got them, and so the scout was there and I showed him the works. Said, "All right." I said, "And also I have these little--three little pieces of sculpture."  "Hey, we'll take all you have."  It was a Proctor Mons- Proctor Munson museum [Munson Williams Proctor Arts Institute] in Ithaca, New York.  And for a while, I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you spell that?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I can't hardly say it (laughter); you embarrass me (laughter).  But that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It begins with a P, right?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: It starts with a P at least, right?
Speaker 2: Proc- that part I know--Proctor--Will--it's three--
Speaker 1: Proctor or something.
Speaker 2: Proctor Williams.  But it's a very well-known art institute in Ithaca, New York.
Story_ID: 124751
Speaker 1: So that really gave me the boost; but I'd graduated from college, then started experimenting with some sculpture, and it--and you might introduce like my husband, because when I went to the Art Institute--told you that I was married, and he was very supportive, and he encouraged me.  In fact, when he came home from work, and all my fingers were--little Band-Aids on each finger and I'm still weldin'--ridiculous, it's getting worse--so he was a master welder--said, "How about me teachin' you how to weld?"  I said, "Okay, I'll try it."  and so he got me all the equipment, you know, that you need to weld, and so--at first when I turn on that torch, it would just pop, you know, and scare you; so anyway, I got over that.  And so--when we go in there, I'll show you; it's a little cross, like a crucifix--that was the first thing that we did.  And there was just some bars laying around, and twisted them over, and he would take an old screwdriver and hold it down and I would weld it (laughter), and that's the way I learned how to weld.  So then, I got so I didn't want him to tell me anything 'cause he would make it smooth and I wanted it lumpy, you know.  So he said, "okay."  So he'd call from work and I'd be working in the basement--in our house basement.  He said, "How you doin'?"  I said, "Oh, this thing is popping," and he said, "Well, lay the torch down and go over and read the gage."  And I'd read it and he said, "Come back and tell me."  I said, "Okay."  "Now pick the torch up; go and turn it off" (laughter).  And then he told me, said, "Don't do anything 'til I get home" (laughter).  Oh, he was a great guy.  So that's how I started; from then on, it was like openin' a new door, a new world.  And for a long time, I didn't paint anymore, but eventually, I got back to it, starting with my doodles and stuff.
Story_ID: 124752
Speaker 1: So now you do both, then?  You sculpt a lot, and paint, too?
Speaker 2: Yeah but, but I would consider myself a sculptor, and the other is just a by-product that I like to do.
Speaker 1: Now, what are your favorite materials?
Speaker 2: Well, the sheet copper, sheet brass; then, the other is working in wax, and I started liking that by the--well, by this time, I was teaching at Dominican University, and I chaired the department there.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  It makes some noise when that (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh; and then when I was asked to--you know, in the, the street fairs--I was teaching at--it was Rosary College then, it's Dominican University now--and--at one of the art fairs here in Oak Park [Illinois].  I was one of the judges going around; I saw this guy and he had oh, this fascinated--little rings and little sculptures no larger than this, and so I insisted that he get a prize because they were just so beautiful and--you remember I was tellin' you about the friends that were artists that live in--lived in St. Charles, in Geneva [Wisconsin]?  I went out there 'cause they had--would always have a October Fest and have--they were artists and they'd sell things very nice, and who was there but this guy that I had fought to win the prize, and his name is Lee Peck and he's one of the best well-known jewelers, and teaches at DeKalb--Northern (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Northern Illinois?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And we've been very good friends every since, but that was so funny that just out of the whole slew of things, his was just unique--just much better; and he's so modest about it.  But he is--his work is on the page of the front cover of many jewelry books and, and, and there I met him at the Art Fair in Oak Park (laughter), and then again in Geneva.
Speaker 1: So what kind of a wax does he use?
Speaker 2: Well, there different types of wax; there's a red colored wax that we usually use for jewelry or--if you want it pliable, and then if you want to carve something out of the wax, you use a very hard, dark blue wax--
Speaker 1: Emm-hmm (ph.).
Speaker 2: --and so--then I asked him if he would be interested to come to my school and, and teach a course in jewelry on Saturday.  Said, "Yeah," so came out and--boy, the Saturday was a big day; everybody wanted to get in.  So we had a very nice jewelry class; and I and my side-kick, we would make pieces (laughter), you know 'cause we were learning like the students, and supervising them, so I got a lot of jewelry made--learned how to make jewelry.  And that's how that came about.
Story_ID: 124753
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how long did you teach school before you started to--I mean, at some point you stopped teaching school, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Became a full-time artist.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Not that you weren't a full-time artist before, but earning your living (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I know what you're saying; after my husband died--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I--I wasn't--
Speaker 1: When (ph.) was (ph.) that?
Speaker 2: Eighty-Eight [1988]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: August the 19th.
Speaker 1: So you taught school--did you teach at Phillips all that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, I only taught at Phillips a short while; I was at Rosary College, yeah. (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--At Rosary College [now Dominican University] until--
Speaker 2: For nineteen, twenty years.
Story_ID: 124754
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I don't know if I'm jumping--well, I've gotta go back to '65' [1965] and this incident with the Widener Gold Medal; so you gotta tell me about that.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, that was a--that was working on three different things in my basement; one was called the Phoenix, and one was called a Moment; it's like a moment of decision--a still problem--problems with this religious thing; and the other one--what was that?  Oh, it was called Black Knight Rides a Unicorn.  So, I worked on the Phoenix and got it finished before the--workin' on all three, and Lester [McCullough, her husband] somewhere or another read about this--a show at Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts, so he said, "Well, why don't we take pictures of this and send it to the--send in three slides," or something.  No, "You can take all four sides of it" (unclear); and he sent 'em in and then I got a telegram saying--no, you got a letter saying you were accepted--from your slides--and the slides were returned.  Then you have to present the piece, and we created, we created it down in the basement (laughter) and, you know, like the boat--we couldn't get it out the door of the basement (laughter); and we had flood lights on it, turnin' it upside down (unclear).  So it went there, and I was just tickled--pleased that it was accepted.  And then right before Christmas, I got a telegram saying I had won the, the Gold Medal; I was so floored, and that's good and bad because your first piece you win the top sculpture award with [Alberto] Giacometti (laughter) and Stuart Davis; and somebody else was in it--as a fluke (laughter), so--and Time Magazine--yeah--had a picture of the piece and said, "One flew over the transit--debutante flies over the transit."  So I had a lot to live up to.  I think I see it--to do well.
Speaker 1: So--but at the time, did they know that you were a black woman?
Speaker 2: No way to know; sculpture stands there by itself.
Speaker 1: Now, after they found out, was there--how did they accept it?
Speaker 2: No, I was invited out there.
Speaker 1: This is 1965, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No, it was no problem at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, I was invited to New York and--in fact, what it was was a phenomenon of I'm curiosity-like, so I got a lotta publicity.
Speaker 1: I know when we researched this, every time we typed your name, we got like the Widener Gold Medal, you know; it must have been five pages just citing this on various Black History calendars, on the websites--"Geraldine McCullough wins Widener Gold Medal--in 1965."
Speaker 2: Right; it was quite a coup, you know?  Because those people that I mentioned have the old article over there that was in Time Magazine--like Giacometti; I mean names like that (laughter).  So, that's the way that went.
Speaker 1: So did that--that--I suppose that provided a boost for your career.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, right; very much so, very much so--and a lot to live up to when, in your life, you only had one finished and two unfinished pieces to your name (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you only had these three?
Speaker 2: Only big piece I had ever done.
Story_ID: 124755
Speaker 1: What did the Phoenix symbolize to you?  I mean I--we can't show it right here, but we can--I guess we'll show a image of it later, but what--what was the theme of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, the, the, the whole story of the Phoenix was exciting to me that a bird could put himself on a funeral pyre, and then be able to fly away--that was the Phoenix.
Speaker 1: So, did you--I mean--so, that was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Chinese myth.
Speaker 1: So, just that basic myth, or did you mean more by it than what's implied in the myth, or--
Speaker 2: Well, I, I was just intrigued with the essence of this big bird flying away and, if you had time, you could go to Maywood, Illinois in their park; it's a huge, big Phoenix Rising, and that was because, to me, Maywood [Illinois] was much like the Phoenix; it began to deteriorate, and now it's building itself back again--the new buildings was--and at one time, they had the Can Company--started at Fifth Avenue and went to 15th.  Everybody lived out there worked for the Can Company, and once the, the Can Company went out of business, they tore it all down; it was like six blocks, and so when they started rebuilding and not letting the city die--the village die--to me it was like the Phoenix; it grew to be a bigger and brighter bird.
Story_ID: 124756
Speaker 1: Tell me now, what other themes have inspired art work from you?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess at Sepik River [in Papua New Guinea]. Let's see--
Speaker 1: And why that, why that particular one--Sepik River?  I know we discussed it before we started taping, but--
Speaker 2: Oh, well, I had almost all I could take with western art--of four years of it at the Art Institute, and very, very little with oceanic art or, or with in quote, primitive, art which I might object to.  And there were other ends of art; Aztec, Mayan; we had a little two sentences like, but everything on, on the Baroque--Baroque, I meant on the western concept of, of art where they had began to make things very realistic.  I just thought it (unclear) (laughter). And they--at first, like with children, man began to--when they started to illustrate paint, it was a flat second-dimensional, and then as we all know, painting-wise not sculpture, because Greeks and the Romans had done that.  But their religion was that God was a perfect looking human being, you know, and all the proportions they had set out, the beauty had to be this tall and that way, this and that.  And then I'd look at Benin art; that would be so powerful, you know, African art and Mayans. How they could tell a story, the symbolism; and then I started reading and found that art is not reality, it has its own reality; it's like a dream, it isn't there and it is there.
Story_ID: 124757
Speaker 1: When you dream, you can smell and breathe the air--I was thinking of that when you asked me what was the smells, because, because in a dream you do all of--everyday things only queer; you can just fly and you can just do it forever--the dream determines. But when you wake up (laughter), it's gone; it's in another dimension, but you lived to breathe again, you know.  So--(unclear) (laughter); what were we talking about?
Speaker 2: Well, we--you know--I was talk--asking you about themes, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Oh, yeah.  So, that was--perhaps, hopefully, my answer to that, that people should not expect art to be like in the lived-in world; it's like it's in its own essence; it's, it's, it's a unique--a phenomenon of one's statement, and when you say, "Ooh, that's so realistic," you know, it's kinda insulting (laughter), 'cause many people can copy; to be able to copy something doesn't mean you're any great talent, you just have a good technical skill, and that's the--my estimation that--where art is, and if people begin to remember, you can do anything.  Like in a dream, as long as it evoked some feeling to you who see it, or if you see a painting, you can look at it in a canvas--jut canvas with some paint on it, then when you look at it, it might be like a Rothko, like it's so big and they're so many big colors that if you stood near it, you could fall into it, you know?  And you have to realize that this is a power of the art; you turn it on, you turn it off; it isn't really, really there.  It's like Chong-Chu sitting under the tree and went to sleep, and when he woke up, he didn't know whether he was Chong-Chu or the butterfly (laughter), you know?  When he was sleep, he dreamed about the butterfly--that he was a butterfly; woke up, "Am I Chong-Chu or am I the butterfly?"  (Laughter).
Story_ID: 124758
Speaker 1: Tell me, what--I guess we were talking about themes, but where do you draw your inspiration for--I mean, for most of your work in the--are there particular things that inspire you more than others?
Speaker 2: Sorta like it gets re-occurring ideas, and you wanna explore them or, like I keep saying over and again that doodling is really the basis of most of my work.  In fact, I just finished a piece Friday, got it off; it started as, as a doodle.  I could hand it to you.  It's a little doodle that I did and turned it into --(unclear).
Speaker 1: You were saying earlier that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--You see the positive and the negatives (unclear).
Speaker 1: You were saying earlier that doodling is like letting loose the unconscious mind--
Speaker 2: Conscious.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It's really unconscious organization of space; an intuitive organization of space.  And another way of wording would be a conscious organization of space.  You set out and you decide you're gonna do a certain thing and, and you, you do it--like the Hudson River Valley painters; they went out and they're gonna paint the Hudson River Valley, and they did it very well.  By the same token, you get somebody like Paul Clay or--what was the guy's name?  Oh, okay, Alexander Calder (PHONE RINGING).
Speaker 1: Ma'am, we were talking about the unconscious and conscious organization of space--
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, like I say, if you're working like from a doodle point of view, or just going and scribbling on something, that gives you some reason to explorin' more, and pulls things in and push 'em back--positive and negative space is all of that.  Then another might be if you have a model, if it's sitting there and you're drawing it, it's a conscious organization of space; and I don't see one is better than the other, but to me it's, it's more conscious.  I mean it's easier for me to have it uncon--you know, it's easier for it to not be organized--not a conscious organization of space.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 124759
Speaker 1: So, do you ever have an occasion where you have a model that you do something different with it that hasn't been done before, you know, in another kinda way--where you have something in front of you but you--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, you can--in fact, many of my projects in the theater drawing class would be to take areas up and push it back, darken it, pull it out until the fear actually is--abstract cube is in--it disappears (laughter), but it still is there and it's been moved.
Speaker 1: Now you--you've got facility--you can--you know, most of your work is what we call abstract work, right--I suppose, right?
Speaker 2: Sort of--I don't, I don't know what category to put me in (laughter).  Every time I think it's one category, it's another 'cause I don't think in terms of categories, you know; not like [Paul] Cezanne or [unclear] would be (laughter), working on a theory of something--just sorta grows like topsy (ph.) (laughter).
Speaker 1: But you have the ability to create, you know, realism if you wanted to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, yeah, like with the [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] sculpture, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Well, we haven't discussed this on tape yet, but you created a sculpture of Dr. Martin Luther King that adorns--I hate to say adorns, but stands in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--In front of their new library, which is across the street from the State Capital.
Speaker 1: In Illinois.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in Springfield; and I was asked to do a sculpture of Dr. King, and to do it as realistically as I could because they wanted it not like an art object, more as a learning instrument, and students could come there and even feel and touch him, and think in terms of--realize how he physically looked; they needed that.  That's what I tried to do, which is like--like I said, like my finger painting, I can do that, but (laughter) I don't get the satisfaction of creating something--starting with something and going from something step-by-step like going into a room and seeing a door, and opening that and into another room.  There's a door that's closed so you just keep going 'til you know you, you finished; you know when to stop, but you didn't know what room you were goin' in when you opened the door.
Speaker 1: That's more exciting than creating--just trying to duplicate nature with a--
Speaker 2: tickin' camera (laughter); easy clickin'; he'll tell you about that (laughter); he really got realism there.  However, today, they have another series of art which is called pseudo realism, which is really quite fascinating because it's done so realistically 'til every little hair shows like--every little eyebrow, so it's like pseudo--it's like over-done, you know, and Thaddus (ph.) means to do that.
Speaker 1: There's an artist called Close (ph.) that does that, actually--
Speaker 2: Emm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --he does close-ups of people's faces.
Story_ID: 124760
Speaker 1: Do you--I mean--so do you consider what you're doing making physical representations and ideas or, or--not ideas, but dreams or, or--
Speaker 2: I really don't stop to think about it; just seems like--like something that seems that's the right way to do it, you know, and you just follow that.
Speaker 1: So it is what it is, really, in a lotta ways.
Speaker 2: I wished I could get up and show you my doodles; you'd crack up laughin' (laughter).  I have to sit at club meetin' like this 'cause they think I'm takin' notes, I'm doodlin' (laughter).  So finally, the lady sittin' next to me says, "Hey, look, why don't you start on a good sheet of paper and not (unclear) the minutes?  I'd be willin' to buy it from you," you know.  But to me, I was just doodling, you know?  I got bored.  Or, like Madame DeFarge, as I said before, you know?  She could tell you all about the war 'cause she knitted it into, into some symbolism for her--for herself, which brings out another point.  I had this other friend that lives in Aurora [Illinois] and her, her husband was a psychoanalysis--I think that's what you call it, and he was analyzing paintings 'til she stopped painting; she couldn't paint anymore.
Speaker 1: Now, do you ever think about what you've painted to a point where you are trying to decode what you meant by something?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)--I'm gonna stay clear of that (laughter).
Speaker 1: You don't wanna end up like (unclear).
Speaker 2: No.  Whatever's there will be (laughter).
Story_ID: 124761
Speaker 1: So when you're at a gallery show and people walk up to you and ask you, "Well, what does this mean?" you know, what do you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--You mean if I took a class to the Art Institute [of Chicago], what does this mean?
Speaker 1: If you had an exhibition out, for instance; you've got a work someplace and you're there for some reason (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, and my work is being exhibited (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, and they walk up to you and say, "Well, what does this mean?  What did you mean by that?"
Speaker 2: Yeah, I hear that all the time, you know; and of course my answer's always, "Well, what do you think it is?"  (Laughter).  "Well, I see a little rabbit here."  You got it.
Speaker 1: Bingo.
Speaker 2: That's it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, your work--there's abstract art and then there's abstract art in a way, and if I may be so bold as to try to offer this, but in some work, it seems like it could have occurred in nature almost, you know, without any, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, there's a spontaneity to it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--There's not much--
Speaker 2: Control.
Speaker 1: --art--artifice or not--there's not much--yeah, there's not much done to it, you know, and--but it's on display anyway.  And then there's some, I mean--I think your work looks like art; I mean it looks like somebody took their time and actually did something, you know, but--if you know what I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, I, I understand (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--And there are works that appear (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Right.  In other words you mean something that really seems to look like by chance--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --and then capitalize on that; but usually you'll find that's a person who knows how to manipulate a canvas like pouring on the Jansen (ph.), and then just pours it on the canvas, but he tilts it and it runs together, and he knows what he's, what he's doing, and it comes out very--very impressive, like they're fascinated with color and space. I--I always say that the amount of time is not that important; when people come in and they see my work, the first thing they usually say is, "How long did you take to do it?"
Speaker 1: And what do you tell them?
Speaker 2: "Well, I don't know--I forgot.  I started it, I looked outta the window up there, and then it was finished; I don't know what happened in-between, (unclear)"--something like that.  But seriously, when I was teaching, this friend of mine who's Chinese and Hawaiian, we were buddies, and so she--one of the Chinese artists was comin' through from Copenhagen and he had been invited to paint there, you know, a series of paintings, so she invited him over and we had him for a week, and he would do brush paintings for the kids, you know; and I'm saying all this to say, in terms of time.  So one of my students he drew like a horse--fierce--very quickly, and with just so few brush strokes, and so I asked him, "How did you learn to paint that like that?  How long did it take?"  So he said, "Forty years."
Speaker 1: So, that's a, that's a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Do you see what I'm saying?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-- Yeah, a hidden equation that people don't see, you know--right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Xiao Li (ph.); he was a great guy.
Story_ID: 124762
Speaker 1: So, do you think there's such a thing as a--there was a debate in the '60's [1960s] I know, about whether there's such a thing as a black aesthetic or not.  Was there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, I've been bombarded with that--
Speaker 1: Emm-hmm.
Speaker 2: --and this is my answer, and it doesn't, doesn't mean it's right.  But I believe that an artist has to create from his environment--how he can be an abstract painter or a representational painter, and I don't think that the race has that much to do with it, but because of the background and the environment, he's going to see things a little different than a Norwegian person living in the same community is going--that has to come out.
Speaker 1: Now, does it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Now, it doesn't have anything to do with subject matter.
Speaker 1: Now, does it come out in your work do you think?
Speaker 2: I don't think--though, I think so, maybe.
Speaker 1: I guess based on what you just said (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I don't know.
Speaker 1: --the answer would be yes, I guess, but the proper question would be in what ways is it--does it come out?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  First of all, I, I have quite a--affinity with, like I said, the primitive sculpture; like it, it's so much more meaningful to me--and Oriental, or Hinduism, you know? like (unclear) freeze a whole lotta things, and everything is compacted in that.  So I like--I would choose to, to work like that rather than just copyin' something.  But back to my friend--about--Oh, I was telling you about the forty years it took him to learn.  So it doesn't matter really how long it took you; what does matter is whether it worked or not.  You could be paintin' forever (laughter) and, and nothing happens, or you could do a brush drawing in five minutes, so time in the essence is not an important thing; what's important is what the end result is, I would think.
Story_ID: 124763
Speaker 1: All right.  We were talking about the other black women sculptors, and you are one of the very, very few, I suppose, engaged in this; is that helpful to be one of the few?
Speaker 2: Well, in a way, I guess it would; I never thought of it, but it's less competition (laughter), that's for sure.  But I don't know (unclear).  You see, one thing about art is that you are not there; you don't have to speak for your art like if you were a singer or a dancer.  You'd have to be there and you'd be dancing or singing, so they would know what you were (laughter), but with art, it's there by itself, has to speak for itself.
Speaker 1: So, are you saying that most of the time, when you exhibit somewhere, you know, you're not there--I mean to--just for a--opening or something, and that's it?
Speaker 2: What did you say, 'cause I--maybe I misunderstood you.
Speaker 1: Well, I know when you're at a opening of a show or something, then you probably--they ask you to talk (unclear), right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Most of the time, you're not around, right?
Speaker 2: Right--speaks for itself, and it's, it's, it's better if you don't speak about it unless they ask.  I like the piece over there; that's Echo (ph.) for--I speak about that one where I don't usually about others, necessarily, because that's something that I wanted to make a statement about, and I was telling you the various aspects of the piece.
Speaker 1: What are they?  I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--You remember (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--We weren't on camera then, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--this is for someone else, actually.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, when you're thinkin' about the whole of things, and man has this insatiable urge to know, you know, who am I?  Where am I going?  And what not; and they are--that's the human nature, I would say, of all peoples; and because of that, they start alone and they lead a partner, and then they meet a cluster, clan, group, city--whatever; and then on top of that, it's whatever super-human clus--super-being that they invent, and begin to worship it.  It's the same--it's the same samsara, like a wheel that goes around; they're all--all much the same, they're all lookin' for a pattern for people to get along with one another or to make things easier or clustered together for protection, for enjoyment.  That's just the way human nature is, and that's what I tried to put, but they still all have feet of clay (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and it starts all over, like a wheel.
Story_ID: 124764
Speaker 1: What about the business of art?  I was gonna ask you about the art business; I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I am about the worst business person you have ever ran into.  Work like the devil to do something, then embarrassed to say what I think it's worth (laughter), you know, because maybe it isn't--but that's, that's why it's good to have--be in a gallery, and that's the gallery owner's responsibility--to judge the value of the work, and see that the artist gets it--and her or his percentage of it 'cause it's hard to say, "Well, I think it should be"--saying to yourself, "I think it oughta be $15.00 but maybe it's not that good; I'll say five," you know; that's the math that doesn't make much sense, except some artists are endowed with business ability and they really get somewhere (laughter) (unclear), and they don't pull any punches about it.  I was speakin' of my, my problem.
Speaker 1: So you don't think you're a very good business person in terms of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I know I'm not (laughter); I wouldn't even pretend to be it.
Speaker 1: Well, you seem to be pretty successful; you got a nice studio here and--got cheese and crackers over here.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  Right, I--but it's just like I'm backed up on it, I guess.  No, I really am not good at that; I wished I was, then again I, I don't.  It's almost like mercenary, you know?
Speaker 1: Have you ever been really surprised at how much something that you sculpted sold for?
Speaker 2: Right, right (laughter).  Hell, I didn't say a mumblin' word (laughter) except, "Oh, thank you."  Right.  And then I find out other people are gettin' that all the time, you know?  But I'm not a good business person.
Story_ID: 124765
Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts about how the government supports art?  I know the National Endowment for the Arts has been under attack by certain politicians because of what they consider to be offensive art produced with government money, and so forth, but--
Speaker 2: Well, now you asked two questions.
Speaker 1: Well, yeah.
Speaker 2: I'm on the Fine Arts Commission for the Village, one of five persons, and we're subsidized to some extent, but like that little blue shirt that I showed you when you came in, the meeting was last night, that's why it's, it's clear in my mind.  They were telling things that they in Oak Park have done to help the artists, and it helped subsidize and help, but I don't think the government puts--you know, if you build a buildin' that is government controlled, you have to pay--you have to have an artist work, and they get 10 percent of the total of the buildin', and it took a long time for that to come into law that artists were being cheated where the architect is businessman or business-minded person, although very creative no doubt.  But they know how much they're gonna have to pay for bricks and mortar and stuff--and workers.  So it's a different time, they have a different perspective, but wasn't nobody to speak to artists.  Now, all of a sudden, I know two young people who are majoring in law and, and, and their emphasis will be on creative business--creative cases, I'm tryin' to say, which would be art--like they are being trained, but it was timing; it's time has come where artists should be able to get a fair shake.  Usually, you think of the artist up in the gallery starving but still painting, and that's what they've set up, so they expect that, but we shouldn't expect it; we should get what's due us.  But I'm not much fighting for it (laughter); I just won't do no more work for it (laughter).
Story_ID: 124766
Speaker 1: Do you have a special bond with some of the black women that are in sculpture right now? Do you all--
Speaker 2: No, I don't.  They aren't very near me in the first place; and I have a very dear friend who is not African-American, lives three blocks over, who's a sculptor, and we're really very good friends.  She's an interesting person and her name is Margot McMahon Burke; her father was Franklin McMahon, the artist-illustrator.  But anyway, she's a sculptor and she has--her house is over on Harvey Ave--no, Tinley, maybe; it's two blocks over.  And she has a complete house, and in back of it instead of a--is another house that has a fairly high ceiling, and like a loading dock door; it was built by a photographer, so she heard about it and bought it, so she's got a, a very nice sculpture studio.  But she's the only sculptor female that, that I even know close.  So I'm sure if they were near, we'd be friendly like with Margot McMahon.
Story_ID: 124767
Speaker 1: How important do you think training is for an artist?  Do you think that someone could--do you think it makes a lot of difference if a--if an artist, you know, goes to the Art Institute or just starts creating art and--I mean can it--are there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--That's a big question to answer because like--in the living room I have a book by Pippin--I mean a collection of Pippin's work.
Speaker 1: Horace Pippin, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and one of Taylo, T-A-Y-L-O; they're both untrained artists who had the need--like with Pippin, his work is mainly on shirt--the, the cardboards (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Cardboards?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And what he did with it is just amazing, and he had an exhibit.  He, he lives--he lives right out of Delaware in Chester, I think it is--between Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and Delaware.
Speaker 1: Chester, Pennsylvania?
Speaker 2: Yeah; I know that well because my niece lives in Old Castle, Delaware, and they have a museum there; there's a--has a lotta Pippin's fruit in it, as well as Andrew Wyatt, 'cause--quite different but--and his work is sorta like secret where it's strong, it's good; he has a innate sense of design.  So, how can I make a statement that you have to go to the Art Institute or the Rhode Island School of Design, you know?  I can't tell you, I can't answer that.  For me, I felt better in learning more about, about art and about past art and present art, and reading articles on the phenomena of art--try to understand it.  I often wonder, what if I never went to, to school, what would I be able to do?--you know.  Would I be able to make interesting needle work or something, you know?  Or would I just abandon it--abandon trying; I don't know, but I rather suspect--it started so early in my life that whether I went to the [School of the] Art Institute [of Chicago] or not, enough books (laughter)--exhibits to start teachin' myself--a lot less expensive (laughter).  So--but the answer to your question is I don't know.
Story_ID: 124768
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what advice would you give the young people that wanted to be--that want to be artists, or do you think that it's necessary to give 'em any advice?
Speaker 2: Well, I will tell you, there's a big renaissance in art due to the computer, and there are things that are, that are being done with a computer that are really remarkable--like to see it every day on television--what you can sit down.  Again, like the last question, I don't have answers in it either.  Whether you would then be dependent on pushing a button to do your art, I don't know the answer; I just know it's here, and we might as well look at it (laughter) and find out whether it's probably just--is gonna pose a problem somewhere along the line.  Because it has to be that man's innate ability has not been captured yet, and what they would do innately in art, I don't know if a computer could ever do that.
Story_ID: 124769
Speaker 1: How many of your works have been--are public art now--in public spaces in cities or towns?  Very many?  I mean I don't expect you to count 'em, but have there been quite a few that have been used as public art pieces?
Speaker 2: What do you mean 'public art'?  I'm not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Public art is like something in the Town Square like the Picasso in Daley Plaza or the sculptures that are now poppin' up in front of police stations (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I'm a commissioner (laughter), and nobody else can do what I'm supposed to be doing (laughter).  No, but I didn't understand you.  Yes, I have three--three pieces--public art.
Speaker 1: Where are they?
Speaker 2: Well, one is in Lake Geneva--I mean in Geneva, on the Fox River, and it's quite big; it's twenty-seven feet tall.
Speaker 1: In the town?  In (unclear) in the town?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's right near the Mill Race Inn, if you've ever been there; right across the street from the Mill Race Inn.  And then the piece that I hope you guys look at, which is out on the corner, and that's called (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Oak Park, I think.
Speaker 2: --The Pathfinder (ph.)--then a real big Phoenix Rising is in Maywood.  Oh, then there's a piece in Berkeley (laughter), and a piece in Atlanta [Georgia]--in a library at Atlanta called A Tribute to Youth.
Speaker 1: So it's in the Atlanta Public Library, or is it at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--In the--in a, in a public library--a commission piece.
Speaker 1: Was it Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] piece that--
Speaker 2: Hmm?
Speaker 1: The Dr. King piece for the Springfield (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, I forgot about that (laughter), yeah.  I forget about it 'cause it's like a little somethin' I (unclear).  Well, yes, I (unclear).
Speaker 1: You don't like working on a public art (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh, I like working on public art pieces; I don't necessarily like to be bound by what I can do and can't do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you find the Dr. King piece a little too restrictive in terms of what they wanted you to do?
Speaker 2: Well, to some extent, though I loved the ability and the responsibility to do it, and was met with success and that made me happy.
Story_ID: 124770
Speaker 1: Okay now, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: The black community here in Oak Park [Illinois], in the city (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--It could be (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--in the United States--where?  (Laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--all that (laughter).
Speaker 2: So, let's state it again so I'll (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Okay, well, what are your--and we ask this of everybody.  Now, what are your hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: Well, right now, I am worried about every community (laughter) with this war hanging over my head.  I think we're in a world of trouble, and it's just too bad; I don't think beyond that, and I think that young people coming along aren't given a fair shake, you know, but they're gonna grow up with the kind of values to--we seem to be getting--that we can invade somebody.  No matter how good or bad they are, we have no right to go in like Father [Jacques] Marquette (laughter), gettin' up there and sayin', "Listen children, I am your father" (laughter).  So, I lament for all of us; unless we straighten out our relationship with each other and have to live together on this earth in a peaceful sort of way--we have all sorts of inventions and all sorts of ways of doing things much easier and much faster, and plenty to eat and this and that, and still we can't get along with anybody; it doesn't make any sense.
Story_ID: 124771
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite piece of sculpture, of all your pieces?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have two favorites (laughter); one is Ancestral Parade, and the other was--one is called the Crescent--that I don't own anymore.  It was like takin'--the Crescent, which many people felt that was sort of an Islamic sign which of course, to me, was like the horns on--that they put on top of the houses in Central Africa.
Story_ID: 124772
Speaker 1: At this point--I know you're still working, but what would you consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, as Big Bill Broonzy said (laughter), he'll say, "I done been here and gone, and I've left somethin' here" (laughter).  "I made my mark so I'm workin' the sand."
Story_ID: 124773
Speaker 1: And, this is the last question, I guess; it's different from legacy, but how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As I said (laughter), could have been here and gone (laughter).  I don't know; it would be interesting to come back and see, you know?  Maybe they say Geraldine Who?  (Laughter)--or maybe it would be--Geraldine; who knows?  I won't know, but I do hope that it will mean something to my, my family, you know.  I'm very close to my family, and very proud of 'em; proud of my son.  Did I mention him?
Speaker 1: You did in the beginning, but go ahead.
Speaker 2: He--he's Assistant Dean in the Department of Criminal Justice at Northeastern University.
Speaker 1: In Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Emm-hmm (ph.).  And his wife is a guidance counselor in a little wealthy suburb near them; but she's a writer, and it's a group of six of them, women, that got together, and they've been writing and producing their own work.  And she was invited to China with the women's thing--the last women's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Women's conference?
Speaker 2: Conference.
Speaker 1: International Women's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah.  And also to the one that was in Africa in Kenya.  And then I have two grandchildren, a girl--Kimberly, who graduated from college; she's a biochemist, and a son--a grandson, who just graduated from college just very recently, and he is a--he works a machine in the hospital that helps to regulate the heart, so he's like on call; only been outta college a year, and he has this red phone, and if he gets a call, he's--maybe he's in Boston--no, he's in New York; he lives in Long Island.  They'll call him and he might be in Denver [Colorado], and he works with the doctor.  And I was there Christmas, and he had been--came right in from Cincinnati [Ohio], and he had been working with the doctor for eight hours on a patient with a heart--heart condition.  Kim is a biochemist, and she works for Biotech and she's got quite a nice office; I went there and I went to--the whole building is like sealed off; they got (laughter) all sorts of experiments.  My son says all she does is cut up little mice in it, anyway (laughter).  So I came in and had to put on my little white coat and he said, "Okay, it's over here," into this big lab, and I walked in and all of a sudden just--things started ringing, and it's an invisible line and you're not--you can't--you know, it's like a beam, you don't see it; and she hadn't shut it off and I broke, broke the beam.  But she was doing some research on eczema--eczema--that it was a--it well may be a cancerous growth.  In fact, that's what--they both do very interesting things as youngsters--very (unclear); it's just a great little family, I think.  I'm proud of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you very much.
Story_ID: 124774
Speaker 1: The first one is Hazel Collymore (ph.), her sister, and then a picture of myself, then my brother, Nathaniel Hamilton, and then Gladys Davis who's also my sister.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  When was this taken?
Speaker 1: Hmm; must have been last summer.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, great.  Next?  Starting on the left?
Speaker 1: That's my mother and father, Hugh Hamilton and Esther Duke Hamilton, and that's them years later and they had a big celebration at their house.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Do you have any idea how many years, like what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--(Unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Nineteen Sixty-Two [1962].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next?  How about this one?
Speaker 1: Well, this is up at Cape Cod, and the first one is--in the back is--I don't know, I can't see her too well.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Can you see through the (unclear)--
Speaker 1: I wish--oh-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Does that help?
Speaker 1: Uh-uh, I should get my glasses.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  You can go get 'em if you wanna; we'll pause for you.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is Phyllis, and this is Butch who is my nephew-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --and my sister Hazel again, and then that's Eadon (ph.), and the little one is Nicholas, and then next to him is Shonnie (ph.) Collymore and her brother Ira (ph.) Collymore, then Marlene James.  Now, Marlene is Hazel's daughter; and in the forefront is--we call him Butch--is Everett Collymore, and the center one is my granddaughter, Kimberlyn (ph.).  Oh, and the little girl there--I missed her.  Oh, no; I think they are James--I think the, the daughter,  Marlene James, is her (unclear)-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: --grandmother.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, very good.  Next?
Speaker 1: Oh, Lordy; this was taken last summer, right here in the gallery (ph.); it's a hodge-podge.  Well, as you see, I had--that other must have been taken the same time that I had on the same (unclear) dress (laughter), so let's start at the bottom; it's Gladys Davis, my sister Hazel Collymore, then myself, my brother (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous)--Nathaniel (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Nathaniel Hamilton, and his granddaughter, whose name is Tyler; then on the second row is Gladys' son, and his name is Russell Davis; then the middle person is a good friend of mine who was visiting me and why we had the party, and she's Gwendolyn Mollison (ph.) from Silver Springs; I really--the other one is a guest--I'm not sure, but the next person is Chuck's oldest daughter, and Chuck is standing behind her; that's the girl with the longer hair with the guy behind her, and her mother--I can't remember her mother's name.  Then, the lady with the dark sunglasses on is Joanne Hamilton--was married to my brother; next to her is a striped shirt--that's her son--their son, and his name also is Nate--Nathaniel, and we call him Natey.  Behind him is his brother Huey.
Speaker 2: I think all their names are there at the bottom.
Speaker 1: Yeah, looks like it is, right.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next?
Speaker 1: I think they're all there.
Speaker 2: And that's Carla; that's Marlene's daughter--that's Hazel's granddaughter, my sister. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next?
Speaker 1: That was when I was at Dominican University, and this is a ceramic class and I was teachin' a student how to work the wheel.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  What year would this have been?
Speaker 1: It must have been '80' [1980]; somewhere between '85' [1985] and '88' [1988].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Seeing the wheel makes me think of a--
Speaker 1: And that's me in my office at Dominican, and that's my very good friend who is from Hawaii, and she's a nun (laughter), and her name is Sister Kia (ph.), and she went back to Hawaii; I went to visit her--a very interesting lady.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  What year was this taken?
Speaker 1: I don't know; it was during the time I was at Rosary--one of those little parties we get together on.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Would you be able to give us the spelling of your friend's name?
Speaker 1: Actually, her name, her real name, is Mila (ph.)--Mila, M-I-L-L-A.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Last name is Derby, D-E-R-B-Y-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: --but she is a nun, and she's called Sister Kia, C-H-I-A.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, great.  How about this one?
Speaker 1: Oh, here we were havin' mono-prints, and that's me in the shop.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  That's a different shop; that's not this shop.
Speaker 1: Emm-emm (ph.), I was doin' a Malcom X picture with that big X on it (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.  What year would this have been?
Speaker 1: Oh, I tell you--it all runs together.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Do you think it was in the '60's [1960s], '70's [1970s]?
Speaker 1: I would say between '70's [1970s] and '80's [1980s]-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: --that's when we started--we got our press.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay; and where was this studio located?
Speaker 1: At Dominican University.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, that's Dominican; okay, great.  Okay; that gives us a caption.  Next?
Speaker 1: Oh, that's my husband Lester and me, and that's in the house that we had on Chicago Avenue in Oak Park, and that is a tie-dye behind (unclear)-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --and a light behind the tie-dye.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Cool.
Speaker 1: And that's part of our living room-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: --before we moved here.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: That's my mom--little bitty--we call her Miss Esther P. Hamilton (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: She was the one I've spoken about, and there she had come to the opening of an exhibit of mine on Lake--on the Fox Lake in Geneva where I did the very tall sculpture-twenty-seven feet.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Right.  Next?
Speaker 1: That's the same time she was out; it was a horrible day to be having an opening of a sculpture 'cause it was pouring down rain (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  No, it doesn't look like.  Okay, next?
Speaker 1: That's again at the college--university, and that's one of the teachers; I don't remember her name.  Ruth--Ruth somebody or other.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next up?
Speaker 1: That's me and my husband who had--who was very, very ill at, at the time, but I had a show and he, he came over to it, and died within two months after that.
Speaker 2: Emm.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  What year would this have been?
Speaker 2: Had to--he died in '88' [1988], so I guess that was '86' [1986].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Okay, next photo?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's the same thing again in the (unclear).  That's my brother--by the way, he's a dentist; and my sister Gladys and my other sister Hazel.  Behind it is a big triptych that was purchased by University of Illinois at 95th Street.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  So, going from left to right, it would be Gladys?
Speaker 2: Gladys, Nathaniel, me and Hazel.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, great; thanks.  Next?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Well, that's Loraine (ph.)-[HM] Lerone Bennett; I'm not sure of the lady (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--That's (unclear).  Isn't that [HM] Val Gray that's Val Gray Ward.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know who that is.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and-- (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Freddy Prince (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, he looks like it, doesn't he?  (Laughter).  He used to work for me and I can't remember his name.
Speaker 1: That's the great Val Gray Ward (unclear). (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Unidentified, then; okay.
Speaker 2: That's a pensive mood, I guess (laughter); worried about the world's condition.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next?
Speaker 2: That's--lookin' out the window at--from my office.
Speaker 1: That's--oh, goodness!  Oh, heavens!  Lord, my little nephew and I can't think of his name.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  No problem.
Speaker 1: Oh--well, I was--this was--I'm a member of the Links (ph.), and each year we give sort of a--somethin' for the kids, so this is a bunch of youngsters who came in and we had a little project going for them.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  What a group you've got there.
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  What year was this, about?
Speaker 1: Oh, Lord, I should (simultaneous)-- (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous)--Just guess--decade.  Sixties [1960s]?
Speaker 2: Looks like '60's [1960s] to me.
Speaker 1: Probably; probably they have children of their own by now.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.  Okay, next?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's, that's the other little boy's brother; his name is Eadon (ph.) Collymore.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next?
Speaker 2: Now, that's a piece that is in the lobby of the Johnson Buildin' downtown--Ebony Buildin', in the foyer.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Name of the piece?
Speaker 2: The Oracle.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  When was--what date, do you know?  When was that--
Speaker 2: I would say the, the '70's [1970s]; it's a old, old picture.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next?
Speaker 2: That was the unveiling of my sculpture; it's called the Pathfinder, and you see all the festive things there--the balloons and all; it's covered with a canvas for the opening, you know, and it sits in a wading pond and there--where the circle is there in the back, that's where three big jets of water would come up.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, and where is this, though?
Speaker 2: Right on the corner of Lombard and (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous)--Oh, this is the one?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Gotcha, okay--in Oak Park.
Speaker 2: Emm-hmm (ph.).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.  Next?
Speaker 2: That's just a piece right back here where I'm working with plaster, hopeful of one day getting it cast, but looks like that's not gonna happen, so every time I get mad, I go and work on it (laughter)-
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --and beat it up a little more (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  What you got here?
Speaker 2: That's called the Burning Bush, and it's made of brass, sheet copper, and then braised copper, and I get the color by heating the--by takin' a certain drill--a sander, and sanding the metal before I start working on it, and as soon as I start at the bottom, the metal turns red, so that's called the Burning Bush.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, great.  Next?
Speaker 2: Those are figures in wax of a basketball game.  I had a commission to do it; that was really quite a while ago, I'd say about eight years ago.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next?
Speaker 2: This is some of my more recent work; it is a wall-hanging rack--have various types of mixed media, and it's red yarn--polyester reds and bald (ph.) and then braised (ph.) sheet metal around it.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right, next?
Speaker 2: That was when we were working on the big piece that we talked about, the Pathfinder, and that was done right in here, in this studio.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I got claws poking in the photo here.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next?
Speaker 2: That's the same piece.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  No, I meant Larry; you're done.  I got the shot, I just need Larry to put the next one up.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Down in Springfield, and that's--at the time Secretary of State George Ryan, who was the Master of Ceremony at that occasion, and the letter that you see behind it was from him.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, tell us about this one.
Speaker 1: Well, it, it's like a parade that marches by; when it's bright in there, you're coming--it's very clear, it's solidified; you see it in detail.  As it goes away, you see almost like squinting of the eye; you don't see it at all, and that's why I called it Ancestral Parade because it, it's meaningful to me in terms of some of the African influences in the piece.
Speaker 2: About what year is it that you created this one?
Speaker 1: Does it say down there?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  It tells the dimensions and the media, and the name, but it doesn't tell the year, although I think we can--Larry, don't take it way yet, but I think that we would be able to look in a different part of the catalog for that and find out when--but don't take it away yet.  Okay, remove the piece.  And if you wanna look up the year, you can look up the year.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Well, that's a picture of a sculpture of Dr. Martin Luther King, and that's me beside it; you can see somewhat of the size, and then next to--you can't see, but on the other side of the pedestal, there's another pedestal that says, "I Have A Dream," and it has something from his speech, and it was-
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: --quite an honor.  The bottom one, you see the sculpture as it really is.  Now below it, that's very spiritual essence-
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Hang on one second; I just now went to the bottom photo.
Speaker 2: --yeah, where on the cover of the brochure is, like a little poster, is a picture of my Crescent Tower, and I have been very interested in the shape of the Crescent, and I think you see a repeat of the sculpture that we did in Schenectady, New York, and I think it tells the date; it was in '90' [1990]--'98' [1998], 1998.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Now, Larry, just flip to the cover; let me look at the cover and get the date off there, and that actually, is a pretty good (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Ninety-Nine [1999], I'm sorry--1999.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, very good.  Okay, go ahead please.
Speaker 2: That's called Echo Five, and I, I've been doing a series of experiments, and this is the fifth of the series.  And it's welded--welded sheet copper--sheet brass and a rather decorative--but symbolic because I'm always talking about the feet--
Speaker 1: Emm-hmm (ph.).
Speaker 2: --and the feet brings it into the (unclear) a real situation--identifiable.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Well--that's a large piece, too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's pretty big.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, great.  Thank you.
