Story_ID: 670255
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson, and I'm the interviewer and Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  And I want you to start out--we slate the interview first; and then we ask these favorites and we'll get started.  But I'd like to have you start out by stating and spelling your name and your, your date of birth.
Speaker 2: Okay, my name is Carl McCall; I usually go by [HistoryMaker] H. Carl McCall. I was born in October 17, 1935.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is the 19th of, of June 2014 [sic. June 18, 2014].
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Boston, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your occupation?
Speaker 2: At the present time I serve as the chairman of the board of the State University of New York [State University of New York System].
Speaker 1: Okay but would you consider yourself if you, your governor--I don't know if you call--well you've been a politician and a civic leader (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I've, I've been many things; I've been in politics. I've been a banker--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --I've been an educator--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --I've had a very, varied career (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Career.
Story_ID: 670256
Speaker 1: Okay, so we ask favorite questions.  I'd like to know your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) My favorite food, I like chicken--particularly fried chicken.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I like the spring because it, you know, winters are tough sometimes here in New York, and spring is a time when things start to bloom.  And things change, and we get, get ready for summer, so spring is lovely.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is green.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: My favorite place I--we have a house in Dutchess County, New York, about eighty something miles north of New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My favorite phrase?
Speaker 1: Or saying?
Speaker 2: My favorite saying is: keep hope alive (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's nice, okay.
Story_ID: 670257
Speaker 1: So we're gonna start out, and I want to ask you, first about your father and I know he left but can you tell, tell us about him?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Herman McCall he was born in Waycross, Georgia; he came to New- to Boston, Massachusetts I'm not sure of the date.  But he was a waiter on the New- what was then the New Haven Railroad [New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad].  And he was on a run between Boston and Washington [D.C.], and he did that for a number of years.  And then when the whole railroad industry changed, and people started flying to places like Washington and New York [New York] he lost his job.  He went to New York to find another job, and I was about eleven years old at the time and we never saw him since then.
Speaker 1: Waycross, Georgia, lot of people are from--you know, that's where [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis is from (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Ossie Davis.  Ossie Davis I--once came out to endorse me in an election, and he started talking about his--the fact that he was from Waycross.  And I told him, I said, "My father was from Waycross." So he's the only other person I've ever met from Waycross, Georgia.
Story_ID: 670258
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your mother, so can you give her name?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Caroleasa Ray [Caroleasa Ray McCall] her--she was born in Boston, [Massachusetts] her mother's name was Mamie Ray, she was from Richmond, Virginia.  So I traced on my mother's side I traced all of my--our folks back to Virginia, the Richmond area.  My mother was born I think in 1911, and in Boston she went to high school in Boston and she and my father [Herman McCall] were married.  And my mother raised me and five sisters all by herself.  She was a remarkable woman she worked very hard, and the amazing thing about my mother was her commitment to education.  She had gone to high school in commercial, in homemaking I think were her, were her majors in high school.  And she had this commitment to education, and that's what she drilled in us that no matter what you have to get a good education.  She had this phrase, she said, you know, "Education," she said, "it's like a sledgehammer it can knock down any obstacle anybody ever puts in front of you."  And I've always remembered that and that's certainly been true for me education has made the difference.  So she worked hard we--things were bad after my father left there wasn't any money, and we were on welfare.  My mother did little jobs on the side I don't think she was supposed to but, you know, she had to take care of her family.  And she really looked after us made sure we went to church and made sure that we really paid attention to our education.
Speaker 1: So what--can you, how far back did you say you knew your--the background on, on your mother's side?  I know you said you can trace it to Virginia but do you know the migration?
Speaker 2: Not really I just knew my grandmother I knew her well, and she also, like my mother, had this interest and commitment to education.  And she used to talk about Richmond she used to talk about her mother, her mother had been a slave.  And she talked about how her mother worked for a family in Virginia, and her mother used to sleep on the floor at the, at the foot of the bed of this person that owned her right.  And she talked about her family but she said that from the time she was a little girl she knew she wanted to get out of the South.  And she wanted to come north, and she left with other members of her family and came to Boston.  And she always talked about what a great feat that was to get out of the South and come to a city that was more open, more liberal.  And where she felt her family could get good jobs, could get an education.  So that was very important, and she passed that on to my, to my mother.
Story_ID: 670259
Speaker 1: How many children in the family?
Speaker 2: In my family?
Speaker 1: In your fa- I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, there were six of us myself and five younger sisters I was the oldest, the only boy, and five sisters.  I was not spoiled but I--that was the family, they were all very supportive.  They are all still alive, and we have good relationships with them now.
Speaker 1: So you, so you weren't spoiled but did they all look up to you?
Speaker 2: I, I think they did, they did--they were all very supportive and continued to be.  They were supportive when we were growing up together.  They were very support supportive when I got involved in public service.  Every time I ran for office they would come from wherever and go out and, you know, campaign with me, so we've had a very good close relationship all these years.
Story_ID: 670260
Speaker 1: So what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: My earliest memory of growing up is, is being loved.  Being supported that my family, my mother [Caroleasa Ray McCall], my father [Herman McCall], while he was there my grandmother [Mamie Ray], my grandfather [Calvin Ray], we all lived in the same street [in Boston, Massachusetts].  And at one time we all lived in the same building.  I had aunts and uncles, and everybody was supportive.  I guess my main memory of growing up is that I lived in this community of people around me who was supporting me and encouraging me.  And I always felt very much that I had this, this support network.
Story_ID: 670261
Speaker 1: And it went beyond my family, I mean, one of the things that I think about growing up is that I was fortunate in a sense.  That I lived in a community of African American people who came from all--had--were all of very different stations in life.  But we all live together we all went to the same church.  On my very street although we lived in an apartment building, and we were poor we were on welfare but across the street was a dentist.  Up at the corner, there was a very prominent lawyer.  There was a judge, there was school teachers, there were people who worked in the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service].  I mean, I had this support network we were all together supporting one another.  Church was very important to me, at my church there were very distinguished people who I'd gone to colleges.  Many of them to our colleges historically black colleges [HBCUs] and from the day I went to that school, to that church.  They talk to me about going to college.  And in fact when I got into high school because I was doing well they were competing.  I remember one fella name Wade McCree [Wade H. McCree], who had gone to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] and he insisted that I'm going to go to Fisk.  And then there were another fella who said, "No you've gotta go to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]."  I mean they were competing in terms of, you know, where I should go to school.  But I had that kind of support, and they supported me, you know, when I went to high school.  The high school that I went to Roxbury Memorial High School [Boston, Massachusetts], they had three courses.  They had a course in printing which was kind of an industrial program.  They had a--which was sort of a manual arts program printing then they had a commercial program, and they had a college program.  And most of the African Americans in that school were in the manual arts program.  So when I showed up, they wanted to put me in this program.  And I didn't know the difference but the folks in the church did and they went over to the school and said, "No we want him to go--be in the college preparatory program."  They insisted on that I did get in that program and, of course, that's why I was able to get the background, you know, and educational support to go to a first rate college.  So I had that kind of support right there in the neighborhood right there in the community.  When I graduated from high school, there was a man by the name of Matthew Bullock [Matthew W. Bullock], a very distinguished lawyer in Boston [Massachusetts].  Who had graduated from Dartmouth College [Hanover, New Hampshire] had been an All-American football player at Dartmouth College.  And he interceded he said, "You should go to Dartmouth and don't worry if you go the Dartmouth, I can make sure you will get financial aid."  And, you know, and this was somebody who lived on the same street and he did intercede for me.  When I was admitted, and he made sure that I got a good scholarship from Dartmouth, and he was involved in a foundation and that foundation gave me additional money.  And all through college and graduate school I had that support and it never cost me a penny.  I had a completely free education at Dartmouth and the University of Edinburgh [Edinburgh, Scotland].  And then when I went to seminary Andover Newton Theological School [Newton Centre, Massachusetts], it was all paid for.
Speaker 2: You know, I--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: --I, so you're talking about the village really?
Speaker 1: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know, you had a tremendous village (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, sure.
Speaker 2: --back then especially in the community, people would find that child in the community and raise them up.
Story_ID: 670262
Speaker 1: I'd like to take us back though into the, you know, the, the young years, and I wanna know what street you were, you know, living on?
Speaker 2: No, sure, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And also what sights, smells, and sounds remind you of your childhood (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, sure okay.  All right.  Well, I lived on Harold Street in Boston [Massachusetts] most black folks lived in Roxbury. And that was--there were kind of two communities in Boston the South End and Roxbury.  Roxbury was seen as they used to refer to that as up the hill.  In some ways that was supposed to be a better place to live at that time than the South End.  We just happen to live there and as I said on my street we had people like Matthew Bullock [Matthew W. Bullock] that I mention.  And other professional people, working class people, and a church in that community St. Mark Congregational Church [Boston, Massachusetts] was the place where most of the better educated professional people went to that church.  And I happen to go to that church.  And there was a park, I remember Monroe Park [Boston, Massachusetts], which was on Howard Street not far from my house.  And that's where we'd all come together to play, and it's where I started playing basketball, football. But it was a place where, you know, families came and sat outside on benches and children ran and, you know, through the park.  Used the equipment at the park those slides and seesaws.  And I remember from my early experience of interacting with other children was at that particular park.  And that's something I remember that was always a good place to go, a good safe place, too, to go.
Speaker 1: And so what, what I want to hear sounds and I want to hear smells I've heard sites?
Speaker 2: Sounds well, you know, it was a noisy neighborhood.  I mean, it was low buildings I--we lived in a three story building, you know, there was some traffic up and down the street during the day.  But it was generally not a terribly, not terribly noisy but it was certainly what you would think of today as an urban community.  It was quiet in the evening, quiet, and the evening people sat out on their stoops in front of the stairs in front of their buildings.  And everybody, you know, talks to everybody else there was a lot of interaction it was a good feeling of being in this neighborhood.  And the, the smells I guess the smells were mostly on Sunday because that's when people came back from church.  And it was Sunday dinner there was the chicken frying, there was the fish, there were good smells of, of a variety of foods.  Every now and then my [maternal] grandfather [Calvin Ray] when he was alive he was from North Carolina and he used to cook chitterlings and there was certainly a smell from that (laughter).  Throughout the whole, whole building, we lived on the third floor he lived on the second floor we always knew, you know, when he was cooking.  So, you know, it was a neighborhood where, you know, you, you knew what everybody else was doing, you knew what they were having for dinner you know when.  And Sunday was a time when there were smells of a variety of food permeating the air, but there was a good feeling, you know. It was good. It meant that you were gonna have something good to eat.
Story_ID: 670263
Speaker 1: Were you--so Sunday's were as St. Mark Congregational Church [Boston, Massachusetts] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, first I'd go in the morning to Sunday school, started out when I was very young.  And then Sunday school used to go to their Vacation Bible School every summer.  And some remarkable people used to run that some very, very nice members of the church very supportive. Frances Perkins was a woman that I remember who used to run the Vacation Bible School.  And then after, after Sunday school there was the church service.  The minister of our church Samuel Laviscount he was from Antigua.  And he graduated from Howard University [Washington, D.C.], a very dynamic person very supportive of me; wonderful preacher.  And then as I got older we spent more time in church.  Because after the service in the evening was the young people's fellowship.  I got to, you know, interact with other young people from--we were all from the same community.  We'd come together and, and have various programs, we use to travel, we used to go to other churches and meet people.  So, that was very important part of my life and very important part of the community.
Speaker 1: So what song reminds you of, you know, church back then? Is there a particular hymn or--?
Speaker 2: I don't remember one. For whatever reason sometimes I just remember singing in church.  I don't remember, I, I'm one thing I'm not musical that's one thing.  I've never really been able--back when we were in school, I couldn't sing I couldn't carry a tune.  And in school sometimes we had these--everybody in class use to sing together.  The ch- the teachers use to send me on errands (laughter) get out of the class so I wouldn't spoil the song.  I'm just--I like to listen to music but I, I'm just not musical.
Story_ID: 670264
Speaker 1: So what were you like as a young boy, though?
Speaker 2: I think people thought I was a polite young man. I think that's something my mother [Caroleasa Ray McCall] and grandmother [Mamie Ray] drilled in me: to be respectful, to be polite.  And I, I think I paid a lot of attention to that.  I paid a lot of attention to not so much wanting to be liked, but wanting to be thought of as somebody who was, you know, a polite and kind.  I, I, you know, I got into some scrapes with people, you know, every now and then.  But in general I think I was kind of a mild person.  I think other kids although they were--they had the same traits they thought I was kind of bookish.  That I like to go to the library and which was another important thing in our community.  That there was the library where we didn't have books at home we could go to the library and read books.  We could take books out, and so people thought of me as being kind of bookish.  But at the same time I was athletic, particularly I played football and I play basketball both in high school [Roxbury Memorial High School, Boston, Massachusetts].  I played football and broke my leg and therefore couldn't play football anymore, but I continued to play basketball in, in high school and, and in college [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire].
Story_ID: 670265
Speaker 1: So what was your elementary school, do you--the name do you remember the name?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to the David A Ellis Elementary School [Boston, Massachusetts], and I had a teacher Ms. Levy [ph.], who was my first grade teacher remember her well.  And it was an integrated--now that's one thing I want to point out that when I grew up in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts].  Roxbury was a community that had a sizable African American community and was becoming more so, but it previously had been a Jewish community.  And there was still a considerable amount of Jewish people, and when in fact I went to school our classes well, it was about half and half.  And that was good in a sense that maybe some of the parents of the black students weren't as organized and weren't able to sort of make demands on their school system. But the other parents did the Jewish parents did.  And so we benefited from that, that we had active people from the community who were really concerned about the quality of our education.  I always thought I had a very good education from the very beginning.  I, I, so I started the David A. Ellis school; in fact I an interesting experience my mother [Caroleasa Ray McCall] took me to school the very first day for kindergarten.  She took me to school and put me in a--and I was enrolled in a class.  And so for the first week she used to take me to school and then after that I went with some other children from my neighborhood who we all walked together. And I passed another class, and I looked in there and I said, "I like that class."  So I just went in there and they--teacher said, "What are you doing here?"  And I said, "I want to go to school."  And so she signed me up and I--so my mother that day came to pick me up.  And she went to the first class, and I wasn't there and nobody knew where I was.  And I was enrolled in a different class because I just felt that's where I wanted to be.  And they were very accommodating they kept me in that class rather than in the original class.  And I went from there to the middle school it was called the Henry Lee Higginson [Henry L. Higginson Elementary School, Boston, Massachusetts] that was the next level that was very close to the first school.  And again a very integrated school and then when I went to Roxbury Memorial High School [Boston, Massachusetts] very integrated, in fact, it was overwhelmingly white Jewish students.  In fact in my graduating class there were only about maybe fifteen African American students. All the rest of the students were white at that time.
Story_ID: 670266
Speaker 1: Now is, is--at this time is, is the black population concentrated in, in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] or not?
Speaker 2: It's, it was divided between Roxbury and the South End [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay, I see.  I see, okay.  Now the, the other question I have is, are you an A student all the way through or what's, what's happening grade wise (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  I was an A, B student all the way through I mean I worked at it, as I said I own my own I went to the library.   I had this encouragement from my mother [Caroleasa Ray McCall].  My mother's encouragement was there, no details I mean, she didn't necessarily sit down and read with me.  So I mean, I kind of got that at school, you know on my own.  But I mean, she made sure that I spent time doing that.  So I, I was a good student, and that's why with the encouragement I got from others, you know, when I did apply to college, I had a good record.  Not only a record with respect to my grades but participation. I was the president of my senior class.  I was the editor of the yearbook when I was in high school [Roxbury Memorial High School, Boston, Massachusetts].  So those are the kind of things that colleges found appealing.  And so I've, you know, that's why I was able to be eligible for the--for admission and for the scholarship assistance that I got.
Speaker 1: So 'cause really you graduated in 1954 right, so that's?
Speaker 2: From high school in '54 [1954] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) From high school.
Speaker 2: And college [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] in '58 [1958] that's right.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 670267
Speaker 1: So I, I have one other question about, you know, at the--that time period.  And that is, you know, your father [Herman McCall] leaves the family at eleven.  Do you feel the obligation to be the man in the house after he leaves (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I did.
Speaker 1: Was that a traumatic 'cause--that would've been a traumatic period?
Speaker 2: It was a very dramatic period. It's a very depressing period for me, again the support I had was real good.  My mother [Caroleasa Ray McCall], you know, kept us all together.  And, and I think we always even though--I mean, you know, we didn't know we were poor.  I mean I found out that I was poor and came from a deprived neighborhood when I got to college [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] and took sociology (laughter).  You know, I never felt deprived in any way.  I, I--when my father left I know that, you know, traumatically and emotionally that was a very difficult situation.  You know, feeling abandoned but at the same time I didn't feel that it was gonna have, you know, material impact.  We still have something to eat we had a place to live, so the impact was more emotional than then otherwise.
Speaker 1: Why did he leave, it got too much (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I think I got to see him many years later when I came to New York [New York].  When I came to New York he was living in New York he had another family in New York.  He came to see me, he was very apologetic.  And he lost his job; it was all he could say that he lost his job, and he didn't know how to take care of his family.  And I--and he said this was--that, you know, he knew that if he left and that was has something to do with the, with the way the welfare system worked.  He knew that if he left we would be supported.  Whereas he felt as long as he was there and not working there wasn't any support.  So I mean, that might be his, you know, way of justification and is his excuse but whatever.  But I, you know, so once I came to New York and did meet him we really did not establish much of a relationship.  And I, probably the entire time I was in New York while he was alive, I probably saw him maybe three times.  And then I didn't even know that he passed away; I heard about it later.  I ran into a, a--woman when I got involved in politics in New York I joined a political club.  And it was a very active woman in the political club who said she knew my father very well.  So she used to tell me more about my father than I heard from anybody else.
Story_ID: 670268
Speaker 1: Now what--did, did you--were there any racist experiences that you had growing up?  Or was it not--I mean, 'cause we're talking about, you know Boston [Massachusetts] in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, between 1935 and 19--you know '54 [1954], you know '54 [1954].  And so I'm just wondering what was Boston like in that period?  What was the race relationships like?
Speaker 2: I think race relationships were good at that time as I said this was a changing neighborhood just about half Jewish and half African American.  We all got along well it seemed but those of us in the black community, you know, we stayed to ourselves.  My own neighborhood was pretty much all black. The church it was black, the community center that I went to was black.  But the schools weren't the schools were very integrated, and I think that was important that we had these relationships from a early time.  Although there were only twelve or fifteen maybe African Americans in my class in high school [Roxbury Memorial High School, Boston, Massachusetts], I was still elected president.  Mainly from, you know, support in fact I had a vice president a fellow by the name of Bob Cohen [Robert Cohen], who was Jewish.  And we ran for president and vice president and the reason I selected Bob Cohen, his father was a printer.  And so he printed literature for us to pass out when we ran for office.  And we, we won our team won and on our basketball team, the football team, and everything we did was very integrated.  So I--the racial tension, you know, at the neighborhood level.  And in terms of education although I will say this, I did not have an African American teacher until my last year in high school. Freddie Gumbs [ph.] was a phys ed [physical education] teacher so the first time I saw an African American teacher was by the time I was I think a junior in high school.  So, you know, I--we can look back on that and say well obviously there were problems, you know, in terms of the inability of people to move into the education system.  But that would--there were no overt clashes or no overt sense of racism but pretty much because we stayed in our community, and people stayed in theirs.  So I don't remember any experiences of outright racism during my whole, you know, early years in, into high school.
Speaker 1: How about interaction with, you know, 'cause Boston is very Irish (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, sure.
Speaker 1: Yeah, any or was there much interaction?
Speaker 2: Not really that interest--I said in the part of the city where we lived it was mostly Jewish.  Irish lived in--and we used to go to play basketball, South Boston was very--I, Boston had, you know, enclaves and South Boston was Irish.  We used to go there to play basketball they'd come to Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] to play.  And there were never any no issues or clashes the South End of Boston, the North End rather was Italian, and then there were East Boston [Boston, Massachusetts], which was Italian.  We used to go there, and there were really no incidents.  Boston later as you know, had some very serious racial divisions.  But during the period when I was there that was not the case, or at least it was n- it was not overt.
Story_ID: 670269
Speaker 1: You also had mentioned that Ed Brooke [HistoryMaker Edward Brooke] was in your (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, oh yeah, that's one of the things again in my church.  When I was in at, at St. Mark Congregational Church [Boston, Massachusetts], Ed Brooke was a lawyer who had just come back from the [U.S. military] service had gone to Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  And he was active in, in my, in, in my church. In fact he taught Sunday school.  And I got to know him and then when I was in high school [Roxbury Memorial High School, Boston, Massachusetts], and he got involved in politics.  In my first political campaign was Ed Brooke ran for state representative, and this was interesting the state representative, who represented us was Jewish.  And, and he was, he was--his name was Green [ph.], and he was blind.  And I went to hear him speak once when Ed Brooke ran against him.  He was the first African American to run for--in a state representative from that area.  And Green came to the meeting and made the point that, you know, he didn't see any differences between black people and white people because he was blind.  As far (laughter) as he was concerned everybody was the same.  And he had been for many years the representative and continued to be.  Ed Brooke lost that race for state representative.  And, of course, he went on to a very distinguished career after that but was always again another mentor very supportive.  And I got to know him even better later on.  I lived across the road from him at Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] and continued to have a relationship with him.
Story_ID: 670270
Speaker 1: But let me, you know, I guess the first sign I saw of racism was when I got out of college and came back to Boston [Massachusetts] I needed a job.  I needed a job for sure I had been in ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] in college, and I had to go do [U.S.] military service, but I wasn't gonna go until I guess like February.  So, from September to February I had to find a job.  So I decided that I would like to teach that was something when I was in high school [Roxbury Memorial High School, Boston, Massachusetts] and in college I always thought about being a teacher.  So I said I'm gonna teach for this summer months before I went away.  So I went downtown to the Boston School Committee and met and went in for an interview in the office where they did teacher placement.  And there was a woman, Ms. Fitzgerald [ph.], I remember her well she was in charge of placement.  And I walked in, and I said, "Ms. Fitzgerald, I'd, I'd like to teach."  She said, "Where did you go to school?"  I told her, "I just graduated from Dartmouth College [Hanover, New Hampshire]."  And she looked at me and said, "You're just what we need for Jamaica Plain High School [Boston, Massachusetts]. You're big, and you can keep order."  And that's all, two hours later I was in Jamaica Plain High School teaching English, history, and commercial geography.  And, and so that said a lot to me about the school system [Boston Public Schools] and about, you know, and, of course, the point was Jamaica Plain High School was changing. It was becoming predominantly African American, and as far as this woman who's in charge of placement you need somebody who could keep order and that's how I got to teach.
Speaker 2: Yeah, one other question so, what are the--is Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], Dorchester [Boston, Massachusetts], and Jamaica Plain--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --all--are they the same demographic at that time, 'cause they're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: At that time they were not the same the--Roxbury as I said was Jewish becoming African American. Jamaica Plain was Irish and was--and blacks were moving out of Roxbury into Jamaica Plain.  But the major movement was into Dorchester.  Dorchester had been predominantly Jewish and as things changed in Roxbury, blacks then spilled over in, into Dorchester.  And, and in fact blacks from the South End [Boston, Massachusetts] really kind of moved right up Blue Hill Avenue into Dorchester.  So Dorchester changed more rapidly than Roxbury; and I think that rapid change led to some tensions and, and some difficulties in Dorchester, whereas Roxbury had remained fairly stable.
Story_ID: 670271
Speaker 1: Now in high school [Roxbury Memorial High School, Boston, Massachusetts], you're very active (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: You know, with different--so between the sports and the--
Speaker 2: Govern- student government.
Speaker 1: Government, okay.  What are you thinking you want to be at that point, cause--?
Speaker 2: At that point, I think I was thinking about being a teacher.  Because again I liked to, you know, I liked educa- I like books; I like reading, and I liked the atmosphere, of being in a classroom.  Teachers have all been very important to me as I said that Ms. Levy [ph.] and Ms. Owens [ph.] and a man named Mr. Minton [ph.] they were people I really remembered.  Who really took an interest or at least I felt they were taking a real personal interest in me.  And so, I saw how teachers had, had a very profound positive impact on me.  And I felt I wanted to do that for other kids.  So I thought of myself, I thought to be a teacher although I majored in government, I thought.  Also, I had this idea about government I wanted to know how government worked.  But I really wanted to be a teacher, and that's why I applied for that job as, you know, to teach when I first got out of college [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hamsphire].
Story_ID: 670272
Speaker 1: Now Matthew Bullock [Matthew W. Bullock] when it came to college--so were you looking--I know he is the one who introduced you to Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Dart- yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, he had gone there right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So what--and he had been a big influence from sort of the beginning right?
Speaker 2: That's right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you're going off to--so what other colleges are you looking at or is it that he takes you there and--?
Speaker 2: Well here's what I did.  I, I mean, I knew I wanted to go to college, and I had another of very influential mentor supporter by the name of Reverend Michael Haynes [Michael E. Haynes].  He was very active and eventually became the pastor of Twelfth Baptist Church.  A very significant church in Boston [Massachusetts].  And he is still alive and still very--somebody that I'm in touch with, and he was very encouraging.  And he said to me, "You really need to reach out and find out about colleges and make a choice."  So one day I went to the library, and I got a, a catalog, you know, colleges in the United States whatever and I went through and just picked out colleges all over the country.  And I sent postcards, I went and bought postcards and sent postcards to probably thirty colleges and just said, "Would you please send me information about admission et cetera--," and I got all these catalogs.  I ended up with this--I mean, every day my mother [Caroleasa Ray McCall] said, "Where are these things coming from?"  I was getting in the mail a catalog from some college.  So I got catalogs from about thirty colleges, and I use the leaf through them and look at them and see what I thought of them.  And so then I applied probably to about fifteen colleges I just went through the process of applying.  Dartmouth was one because I had been encouraged, but through what I'd heard from people in church,  I applied to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].  I applied Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]to, I, I applied to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], I, you know, I just went down the list and sent in applications.  And then--but then when I get to the point of being serious about getting recommendations et cetera, I probably then narrowed it down to about six schools.  And I applied to six schools and Dartmouth being one of them.  And they--an interesting thing happened too, one school that I didn't apply to there was--we had a guidance counselor in high school.  Mr. Barnes [ph.] and so this is the person you supposed to go to talk to about going to college.  So I went to talk to Mr. Barnes but I told him what I had already done.  He thought that was amazing that I had already made these contacts on my own.  And then and at that time I--that was my senior year I guess maybe the end of my junior year.  And then he said to me, "Have you ever thought about going to Boston College [Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts]?"  I said, "No."  He said, "Well that's my school."  He said, "We've never sent anybody from Roxbury Memorial High.  Boston, how would you like to go to Boston College?"  It's in Boston, I thought about it, and he took me out there for an interview.  And then he even found out that in order to make--send in my application I needed to send in a fifty dollar fee with the application.  And he gave me a check for the fifty dollars, and he really decided that he was really going to do something special.  For the first time, he was gonna send an African American kid from Roxbury Memorial High School [Boston, Massachusetts] to his college, to Boston College.  And I was admitted I was given a scholarship.  However, the scholarship did not cover residence.  I would still have to live at home, and I very much wanted to get out of Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts]. I wanted to live in a dormitory.  I want to live on a campus and so when I was admitted at Boston College and also at Dartmouth, I went to Mr. Barnes and said, "You know, I really appreciate what you've done, but I'm going to Dartmouth."  And he, he understood he said, "I can understand," and he said, "You should get out of town."  And, and so I, I didn't go to Boston College but again he really went out of his way to make it possible for me to go.  And he thought that was very important that, for--to send somebody from Roxbury to Boston College.
Speaker 1: Well that, and that was a difficult decision sometimes when everyone's trying to help you and I (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, and to turn people down in a sense that's right people were very, you know, vested in me my going to a particular school.  But the important thing is that they all wanted me to go to college.  They all made it clear to me that I could go to college, and that I should go to college.  I mean, that, so that was sort of the driving force, and that was so important.
Story_ID: 670273
Speaker 1: What I'm curious about, in the thirty schools where--were they located all over the place (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All over the country, that's right.
Speaker 1: And so why d- I hear HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities] but I didn't hear the Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and--?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I, I applied to Harvard, I applied to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut].  I don't think I completed the process at Harvard again (laughter). This is terrible.  Harvard was too close, here I'm working to get away.
Speaker 1: You wanted to get away?
Speaker 2: So I, I and I applied to--I met someone along the way once from Michigan State [Michigan State College of Agriculture and Applied Science; Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan].  I applied to Michigan State, so it was a very eclectic collection of, of colleges.  Just based on, you know, whatever I read in the and then whatever I saw in their catalogs so, so that it just looks good.
Speaker 1: So what did Matthew Bullock [Matthew W. Bullock] what did he tell you about Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire], what you would expect there because he would've been, you know, at least twenty something--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --or if not more older than you?
Speaker 2: And he was, what he just told me it was a good school and of course I heard more about it and it had a good rep.  But the thing that it sold me on Dartmouth was that I went there and when I went there it was the typical college, you know, it was the ivy covered buildings.  It was a nice little community.  And I've felt this was a, you know, good place to be.  And let me tell you how I get in, though.  I got in because of affirmative action. Let me tell you what happened.  Up 'til that time, Dartmouth had a policy of admitting four black students a year.  Most of them came from Washington, D.C.  So that was their policy, four black students a year.  So you think about that and, you know, that here's an Ivy League school that says there're only four black people in the whole country who are qualified to come.  The year I applied they doubled the quota (laughter) to eight.  So I got in because of, you know, so they went--so this was the first time that Dartmouth had ever admitted eight black students into one class.
Speaker 1: And how is it because, you know, it's in New Hampshire?
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: You know, and it's an all, all-male school at that point.
Speaker 2: All male at that time, in New Hampshire--well that was what was good about it.  There was a bonding though I mean we were all stuck up in this little town, and we got along.  I joined a fraternity [Gamma Delta Chi Fraternity] that had been all white prior to that.  I was very much accepted. I was a leader in student government.  I was appointed by my--elected really to important government position.  My senior year I was part of the Greek organization called Palaeopitus which was the sort of executive committee of the top students and the top government leaders in the in the college.  So, you know, we all got along quite well.  I still have relationships, you know, with people that I went to Dartmouth with both the African American students but many of the white student.  And whenever I ran for office, I got a lot of financial support from people I went to school with, so it was a pretty, it was a very good relationship.  I, I remember one incident where my first year when I went home for Christ- I got an invitation from some young woman in Wellesley, Massachusetts.  She was having a Christmas party, and she was a, she was a student at Wellesley [Wellesley College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] at the time, and she lived in Wellesley.  And she was going to have this party, and she just went through the Dartmouth directory.  And she invited all of the Dartmouth students who lived in, in Boston [Massachusetts], and I got this invitation I wasn't particularly interested.  So this young man a fellow came to see me, and he said, you know, "I understand you got an invitation to So and So's party."  And I said, "Yes," and he said, "So you're going?"  And I said, "Oh yeah I think I'll go."  He said, "Well, you know, you really may not be comfortable." I said, "What do you mean not comfortable?"  "Well you know it's just that there're gonna be mostly all white folks, and I mean we just think maybe you shouldn't come because you, you might not be comfortable."  So I said, "Oh I'm coming.  I think I'll be com- maybe you might be uncomfortable." Well you, you know what happened.  This this woman (laughter) I was--had no intention of going, she canceled the party because she thought I was coming.  So, you know, those little incidents happened along the way.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But basically it was a very good experience, got al- everybody got along very well.  And again as I said because we were, you know, we were all kind of confined to this small community, and you had to get along with people.  It worked out very well.
Story_ID: 670274
Speaker 1: And I'm fascinated with this period of time, you know, those who are going to college in this mid-'50s [1950s] period (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, sure.
Speaker 1: Before, you know, about the experiences before, you know, the onslaught of our generation.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: You know, sort of coming to those institutions and what it was sort of like at that point.  Now, you know what I wanted to ask you about this fraternity.  Because we had, you know, when I saw that you had gone Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] I was thinking of my interview with, with Dick Fairley, you know, [HistoryMaker] Richard Fairley.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: He was a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was a senior when I was a freshman.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: He was ahead of you.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so he was saying, you know, that he got the first asked by, I think it's Sigma, Sigma Pi [sic.], Sigma Chi [Sigma Chi Fraternity]?  And then, but the, but the Jewish fraternity, you know, then he had this embarrassing experience where they, you know, said, maybe it's not best that--you know.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Join, or, or they had to go local.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: You know if he had joined.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that, that was, there was, that was a big issue when I got to Dartmouth, and it was across the country that fraternities were under pressure.  And although the local chapters wanted to admit black students, the national wouldn't allow it, and eventually Dartmouth did not allow fraternity who had those national clauses.  But that the time I was there many of the fraternities did not take black students, but the fraternities that did they were two Jewish fraternity.  TEP [Tau Epsilon Phi Fraternity] and I forgot the other one.
Speaker 1: He said Tau Epsilon and then Pi Lambda [Pi Lambda Phi Fraternity] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Pi Lambda that's right.
Speaker 1: And then there was Gamma Rho he said.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So most of the black students were in the Jewish fraternities.  There was a fraternity that I joined called Gamma Delta Chi [Gamma Delta Chi Fraternity], which was a local fraternity and he did not have a national affiliation.  They had admitted a black student, Tommy Young [ph.] from Virginia, but he didn't stay; he left.  So I was then--I was able to join Gamma Delta Chi. And, and, you know, was accepted because I was, well actually Tommy was first.  So I was really the second black student to be admitted to that particular fraternity, but they did not have any national clause to exclude.  Although up until then they had not accepted black student.
Speaker 1: Now in the fraternity you had your own house. Was that at the point was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They had a--I, yes, each fraternity had its own house.  And Gamma Delta Chi had a beautiful building and, and again everything was, you know, I was very active.  I didn't live at the fraternity.  I continue to live at the dormitory but, you know, I did all my social activities were at the fraternity.
Speaker 1: Okay, and would you eat at the fraternity or just that the cafeteria (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we ate at the regular cafeteria.
Speaker 1: Cafeteria okay.  He also talked about people playing bid whist, and, you know, bid whist games.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But you don't--and you know he said getting the haircut, was there was one barbershop that they were only weren't so crazy about.
Speaker 2: That's right, that was the, the biggest difficulty at Dartmouth was getting a haircut--that was the problem (laughter).  There was one place where you could go but this guy wasn't very good so, you know, I used to have to wait until I came home [Boston, Massachusetts] for a weekend to get a haircut.
Story_ID: 670275
Speaker 1: Now how often were you coming home?
Speaker 2: Not often, not often.  I, you know, maybe, maybe only once or twice a semester.  I mean, other than the regular vacation, but I might come down for the weekend and of course, you know, socially there wasn't much to do, it was an all-male school.  So first of all I used to so--for social activities we went to other schools in the area Smith College [Northampton, Massachusetts].  I had a, a relationship for a long time with a young woman at Skidmore College [Saratoga Springs, New York] and we used to go to Skidmore.  But every now and then particularly then there was a large influx of, of black students at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] particularly coming from the South.  And so there was a very active social fraternity, sorority life at Boston University and so myself and other black students every now and then we would you know go to Boston [Massachusetts] for social activities.
Speaker 1: And then what, what are you doing on, in during summer while you're in school (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: And how are you--?
Speaker 2: Let me get back to this minister that I mentioned by the name of Reverend Michael Haynes [Michael E. Haynes].  When I was, I guess maybe a junior in high school [Roxbury Memorial High School, Boston, Massachusetts] Reverend Haynes--I was at a community center.  And he came and met me and said I mean, he kind of followed black students in terms of those who seem to be doing well in school.  So he knew about me, his brother Vincent Haynes [C. Vincent Haynes] used to work for the Guardian which was Boston--was it the Guardian or the Boston I think.  It was the Boston Chronicle, a, a black newspaper.  And he use to cover sports, so I was in town playing basketball this fellow Vincent Haynes used to write stories about, you know, my sports athletic activities.  So Michael Haynes found out about me, and he came looking for me.  And he was the program director at a black camp called Breezy Meadows, which is a camp that a lot of students--black kids went to some went to Atwater [Camp Atwater, North Brookfield, Massachusetts] others went to Breezy Meadows.  And Breezy Meadows was run by the Robert Gould Shaw House in the South End [Boston, Massachusetts], which was a very good community center.  So Michael Haynes said, "I want you to come to work at the Breezy Meadows camp as a counselor."  So I think I started out my first year as a junior counselor.  And so every year from through my last two years of high school and all four years in college [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] I worked in the summer and Breezy Meadows Camp [Holliston, Massachusetts].  At the point where by the time we got in college, I was the head counselor and the director.  So I spent all of my summers there and, you know, I was able to save money because I was paid as a counselor, not a lot, but I was paid.  But the fact was that I, you know, didn't have to spend any money because I was, you know, taken care of at the camp.  So at the end of every year I had some extra money.
Story_ID: 670276
Speaker 1: So how are you handling the two worlds, you know, the school world and the Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], home world?  How are you (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Or is that because, you know, school was a time of, you know, you know, you're learning, you're on your own for the first time.  So, but you're changing really--
Speaker 2: Sure, yeah.
Speaker 1: --during this period of time I would assume?
Speaker 2: Changing but again, they were, they were very good environments as I said.  The high school environment [at Roxbury Memorial High School, Boston, Massachusetts] was very good because I still have my family, I had this support network in the community and in the church.  And the school although, you know, was still, I guess when I was in high school was predominantly Jewish, but we got along very well.  And in college [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire], it was again a very warm friendly environment supportive environment.  So I guess I really came out of those experiences with and since the that people can get along that I, I had very few examples of as I said of any outright racism.  I felt always accepted.  I felt always too, I guess this was important I also felt that I could compete with anybody.  I never felt in any way inferior or not equal, you know, because from the beginning I'm dealing with people who are white.  And I'm doing exactly what they're doing.  My grades are as good or better than theirs.  I could play basketball as well or better than that, I mean so I didn't come out with any sense of,  you know, boy I've got a make up in any way.  Now I learned later (laughter) things were quite different.  But, but I think that sense of confidence that I gained in, in high school and in college.  And the sense of, of being able to relate to people who ever they are, from whatever background.  I mean that was a very important thing for me I think for the rest of my life that I, I had that feeling.
Speaker 1: Well that's, that's a plus to come up like that. You know, because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It is and I'm, I'm sure for a lot of, as you well know for many folks, you know, haven't had that kind of experience.  But it was always a very positive situation where I felt I was just like everybody else that--that I went to school with.
Story_ID: 670277
Speaker 1: So what are you, what are you hearing about because this is, you know, the year you graduate from high school [Roxbury Memorial High School, Boston, Massachusetts] is Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: Are you aware or are you still really you're not aware of all these--?
Speaker 2: All of these things that are going on in the South.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And segregated schools are--
Speaker 1: You're not really aware.
Speaker 2: I'm not aware of it.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: Something I learned--
Speaker 1: Later.
Speaker 2: --in sociology classes.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --is and learn later, you know, through the media, but that was not, had not been part of my experience.
Speaker 1: Thought so.  So graduation day your mother [Caroleasa Ray McCall] comes up, your family comes up.
Speaker 2: Yes.  A big day for big, big day for us. My mother comes to--my aunt and uncle drove her up; she was there for the, for the commencement. I was a marshal in the commencement ceremony.  And, you know, this was the big day it happened I actually now was a college graduate from what we considered to be a very good college [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire].  And go do whatever you want to do.  And I felt like I've been successful here I never had felt, felt I could be successful during the next phase it was all kind of waiting for me.
Speaker 1: That's just won- that's wonderful.  So this, so 'cause I really think a lot of times this narrative gets lost.  I mean really, you know, the narrative picks up later during the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 670278
Speaker 1: So you, you talk about you know teaching at Jamaica Plains [Jamaica Plains High School, Boston, Massachusetts], you know, high school, so you did that and--oh, the other thing, that's right: you, I think you taught for six months.
Speaker 2: That's all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Roughly yes.
Speaker 1: But then you, you were part of R- ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps].
Speaker 2: Just for again for only six months.  At that time, the whole [U.S.] military situation was such that although when you sign up for ROTC they said you had to do two years.  But they really didn't need a big armed force at that time.  So I was an officer in the [U.S.] Army for, for six months.  And then I experienced my first racism.  I really found out about the rest of the world because when I was--had to go into the Army I was sent to Fort Benning, Georgia to the officer school, I commissioned second lieutenant.  And what happened is it was time to go I think it was February.  And I got on a plane for the first time of my life and flew to, I don't know I guess to Albany, Georgia.  And on the plane I met another fellow who was also on his way.  He was white, he was a graduate of Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], and so the two of us happened to sit next to one another on the plane.  We get to Georgia, and we got there rather late.  I--well late maybe ten or eleven o'clock, and we got a bus from the airport to the town to outside of Fort Benning.  And when we got there the last bus left and so we couldn't get a bus out to the base until the next morning.  So we were just stuck in, in this town.  So the two of us walked into the bus station. Now here I am, never been in the South, never experienced any kind of discrimination, we walk into this bus terminal.  And it's was very nice, clean and empty.  And there's a man behind the counter and the two of us, myself and my friend from Yale we go up to the counter and order coffee.  I ordered tea, and the man looked at me, "What you doing here?"  Now here I am an officer in my uniform and he, he looks at me he says, "What are you doing here?  You know you can't do this?"  I said, "Can't do what?"  "You can't eat here."  "Why not?"  I mean it was just like (laughter) this idea of don't, you know, who you are and I've never experienced anything like that.  So he said, "If you want something go out back." Now as I said this was a very clean nice empty bus station.  I went out back, and it was another little, like a shed attached to it and in there were all black folks sitting down, laying on the floor.  And this window opened, and the same fellow who was at the counter now opens a window that goes into this other section of the bus terminal.  And he said, "Okay now what do you want?"  And that was the first time that I ever experienced segregation. I mean, I mean I just didn't know anything like that happened, but there it was.  And I had to sit out on a bench in front of the bus station and wait for a bus until six o'clock in the morning.  And this other fella, oh he was very, you know, upset, and, "Now this is terrible."  I said, (gesture) I was--you know so, I, you know, had heard about it to some extent but this was my first experience.
Speaker 1: To experience it is a whole different, separate thing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --so--
Story_ID: 670279
Speaker 1: When you--is that the beginning of your thoughts of what you wanted to sort of do, or you know, or the social activism.  Because you, I just want to know so you, you teach first six month, you're in the ROT- you do the Fort Benning [Georgia] for six months and then you decide to go on to graduate school?
Speaker 2: I did, but let me tell you what happened when I got to the base.  Because I guess it did spur activism because I said I mean, you know, is that I have to do something about this.  So I get to the base, and, and I show up with this fellow from Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and the two of us show up.  And the--we were living in this building and two people to a room.  So we walk in, and there's somebody at the desk to sign us up and we both said we like the room together. And the man the person said, "Oh no, no we assigned you to a room." I said, "But why, you know, why can't we be assigned?" And he said, "No."  So I, again I didn't make anything of it.  I go up to my room, and there's a black fellow there.  And I then find out as we got together that night for dinner there were like in this particular cohort of, of new officers there were maybe tweleve of us out of maybe two hundred.  And the twelve of us were all put in the same room, you know, we're rooming together.  So I kind of noted it and thought that was strange.  And so after the first week we had a, we had a reception for the general, a commandant of Fort Benning.  And he said, you know, gave this little speech in said, "You know, if there are ever any issues or concerns you can always come and talk to me about it.  I'd be glad to talk to you, we're, we're here to make everybody happy and to make this productive."  So after he spoke people got in line, and they were just talking to him.  So I went up to him, and I said, "By the way general I'm a little concerned that--," you know, and I told him about the experience.  "That I've showed up with one fellow, and they told me I had, you know, couldn't room with him.  And it looks like you got all of the black soldiers together.  Why is that?"  Well, he said, I said, he said, "Well, you know, this--officer this is the South, things are different."  I said, Yes, but I thought the [U.S.] Army was integrated?"  "Yes, Harry Truman [President Harry S. Truman] did integrate the Army but in the South we still do things our way."  And so he said, I said, "Well I just think that this is contrary to what you are saying is the policy."  He said, "Well lieutenant if you don't like it, you know, you can always write to your congressmen about it."  And I said, "I think I will."  He said, "Really?"  He said, "Where are you from?" I said, "I'm from Boston [Massachuestts]."  And I knew the congressman.  It was a man named Curtis [Laurence Curtis].  I said he--, "Congressman Curtis, oh well you write Congressman Curtis."  And I said, "No, I think I'd like to write to Congressman Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.]."  And he just stopped, "He's not your congressman."  I said, "He is my congressman, and I think I would like to write him and tell him about the policy you have here or the, the fact that you're not following Army policy."  "Well, you just, let me tell you I mean, I'm--my Jeep driver is black," (laughter).  "You don't have to, you know, things here are okay, and it is the South."  So he said, "Well if you really want to talk about this you could come see me."  So I went to see him I made an appointment, he talked to me, and he tried to give me this whole story about how things were different in the South and they're trying to change.  I said, "Well I just don't think it's happening fast enough.  And I really think Congressman Powell would like to know about this, and I'm here as an officer in, in Fort Benning, and I, you know, and you have a segregated policy with respect to housing."  And he said, "Well maybe we should change."  Two weeks later he put out a directive and said that from now on people will be assigned to rooms based on their own choices; and policy changed.
Story_ID: 670280
Speaker 1: --I remember (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In fact you have maybe--are you a combination of New York [New York] and Boston [Massachusetts]; you still have the--?
Speaker 1: Probably so, every now and then people tell me they hear the Boston accent.
Speaker 2: Boston, I hear--um-hm, I hear it.
Speaker 1: I--funny that the first or second weekend we were there we all went to Tougaloo [Mississippi].  I guess--was it Tougaloo (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tougaloo?
Speaker 1: What would be closest to Alba- to Albany, Georgia?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Maybe Tuskegee [Alabama] no we went to Tuskegee went to Tuskegee for a weekend and, of course, we're soldiers.  And we're going to Tuskegee, and we're going to meet these coeds of course.  So we go into the rec hall or wherever people hung out, and I remember we're meeting these, these young women.  And, and, you know, these guys were introduced, "I'm So and So from Virginia State [Virginia State College; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia].  I'm So and So from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  I'm So and So from Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]."  "Where are you from honey?" I said, "I'm from Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire]."  "Where's that," (laughter)? It was a--like, you know, "Who are you," (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That had no street cred (laughter)?
Speaker 1: That's right not at all, yeah; you're from where?
Speaker 2: It's like they had never heard of that (laughter).
Speaker 1: It was a--quite an experience, so (laughter).
Speaker 2: So now after that time that's what I'm wondering is that when you decide to go--are there plans for graduate school, I mean (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Plans for graduate school, yeah.
Speaker 2: Like how long do you take--of between--is it?
Speaker 1: It was only six or so I was through with my [U.S.] military service by August.  So I'm ready now to go to graduate school in September.
Speaker 2: Had you already applied?
Speaker 1: I, I started applying soon after I got to Fort Benning [Georgia] I started thinking about it, and I was torn.  In fact, I spent three months at South--at, in, at Fort Benning.  Then the next three months they sent me up to Fort Devens, which is outside of Boston [Massachusetts].  So I was really back into Boston almost and that's when I started talking to people thinking about what I wanted to do.
Speaker 2: And you were thinking you wanted to go which--?
Speaker 1: I was torn. I was thinking about going into teaching and getting a degree in education.  I was thinking about going to law school.  And again I thought about going to Boston College Law School [Newton Centre, Massachusetts].  And I thought about University of Chicago Law School [Chicago, Illinois], and I thought about seminary.  I thought about going into the ministry, but I was very clear about the ministry as a platform for involvement, participation, community activity.  I didn't see myself being a pastor of a church, but I thought the religious credential.  And the church as a base for political and social activism was a place I wanted to be, and that's why I then decided to go to seminary.
Speaker 2: You know, I think that there's an important shift here.  I don't mean to be--you know, because at this generation, you know, lots of people went to--I mean seminary (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 2: But I don't think people go into seminary now with the same--
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: --thoughts.  But, you know, it just sort of struck me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 670281
Speaker 1: So you go, and you go to--you start at Andover [Andover Newton Theological School, Newton Centre, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: I started Andover Newton, which is a seminary for two denominations.  Congregational, which I was at the time which is now United Church of Christ and Baptist and it was local.  And so I went there for one year, and I decided I wanted to really, I really then thought of myself as really wanting to, to really be a more concentrated shall I say, scholar.  I really wanted to kind of really spend time just sort of thinking and developing my own thoughts.  And, and reading about theology and about philosophy and other subjects in depth.  And so I saw this opportunity to go to University of Edinburgh, in Scotland [Edinburgh, Scotland].  And I, I mean it was, it was then the place where most Protestant thought was developed in Switzerland or Germany and translated in, Scotland.  And there will was some very prominent theologian in Scotland by the name of John Baillie and some others and so I really wanted to have that kind of intellectual experience.  And I also thought of Scotland as a place somewhat like Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] that's kind of isolate it's not a lot to do except study (laughter).  And so I went to--I spent--and again I called my friend Matthew Bullock [Matthew W. Bullock], and he arranged to give me a scholarship assistance.  And I went to University of Edinburgh for a year.  But and it, and it worked because the place was cold the people were cold the food was terrible, but I studied.  And I really--it was just a good experience, good intellectual experience.
Speaker 1: But this is--that's your first time outside the country?
Speaker 2: I'm from--first time outside the country that's right.
Speaker 1: And what--how does that change though to that exposure, you know, outside I mean that's like (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well it's two ways it changed just thinking it was interaction with people from all over the world.  University of Scotland, I mean, University of Edinburgh was, you know, a global school with people from all over particularly from the English Commonwealth of Nations.  A lot of people, Africa, India, so that was a good experience, it's meaning interacting from people from other places other cultures and just Scotland itself.  As, you know, of very conservative, rigid, very cold place.  But I also, you know, we had a long spring vacation and I--there was another couple there from the United States.  And we traveled throughout Europe, so I did the typical Europe tour.  We got in a little Volkswagen, and we drove--went across to England.  We went to Belgium; we went to Germany.  We went to Italy; we went to France.  So it was a, you know, very good experience and new experience for me in terms of again meeting people from different places, different cultures.  So it was a very broadening kind of experience.
Story_ID: 670282
Speaker 1: Now what are you--when was the, the--is there a, a consistency even when you get to seminary [Andover Newton Theological School, Newton Centre, Massachusetts]?  Is there a consistency in the doctrine that you've been taught since you were young in the Congregational church (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah.  And there, there a very clear philosophy, religious doctrine of liberalism that, that's church religion is a liberating experience.  And let me tell you about the liberating experience it goes beyond that.  I was always impressed with the first convocation that I attended as a freshman at Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire].  And John Dickey [John Sloan Dickey] who was the president at Dartmouth at the time talked about the liberal arts as the liberating arts.  And that always stuck with me that education, liberal education frees you.  It's liberating in the sense that it gets you to think openly.  And to be very open in terms of relations with people and not to be rigid.  To be able to, to look at things and, and define pragmatic solutions but always with sort of a ethical overlay.  That you find a way to do things that are pragmatic and effective but they're ethical.  And that sort of stayed with me that concept.  And that was sort of an underlying concept of Protestant thought as I saw it at the time.  And so there was that consistent idea that I had about what a liberated person with a liberal arts devotee--how they should behave.
Story_ID: 670283
Speaker 1: Then you come back and then do you, you go into the--you become ordained?
Speaker 2: Ordained, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you said that that's what you weren't originally (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well no I didn't mind.  I wanted to be ordained, but I did not want to go work in the church.
Speaker 1: The church okay, you didn't wanna be a pastor, okay.
Speaker 2: And let me tell you what I did when I got back to Andover Newton [Andover Newton Theological School, Newton Centre, Massachusetts] for my third and final year we had to do projects.  And Andover Newton specifically had a project of students spending their time working in hospitals in terms of dealing with people counseling people, who were ill, et cetera.  Well, I didn't want to do that so what I want--I suggested to the school that I do something different.  And it was to be involved in reaching out to people in the community who were not necessarily attracted to churches, but to use the church base to get people involved in social issues.  So as I pointed out earlier Dorchester [Boston, Massachusetts] was changing.  Dorchester was changing more radically than Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] had changed.  And it was now becoming predominantly black particularly one section of Roxbury.  And although people had moved in institutions hadn't moved in to support them.  And there were very few church activities they're very through community activities.  So I convinced the people of Andover Newton that for my third year and as an experience for me and other students, we should go open up what would basically be a mission in Rox- in Dorchester.  And the school liked the idea, and they liked the training opportunities.  There're some professors there who really thought--including a professor by the name of Harvey Cox, who was a very prominent theologian, social activist.  And he supported this project and gave us money, and we went and we, we opened the storefront in Roxbury, in Dorchester rather.  And, you know, that's all they had in those in those communities there were storefront churches.  So we opened a storefront but--and it was called the Blue Hill Protestant Center [Boston, Massachusetts].  And it was a place where we brought in kids for tutoring and programs after school.  And we took them on trips and we dealt--worked with parents.  And we interacted with schools to help the kids--many who were just coming into the community to find the right school.  And so I ended up with about twenty students from Andover Newton as part of the staff.  And working in that community providing a variety of programs and services, so it was kind of a unique ministry.  And as a result of that we got a lot of support from other churches.  And I think that I gained something of a reputation within at least my own denomination for this kind of outreach, and that's what led me to receive an offer to come to New York [New York].
Story_ID: 670284
Speaker 1: Now when you--is this when you meet Calvin Pressley [HistoryMaker Reverend Calvin O. Pressley], or when (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yep.
Speaker 1: --or when you come to New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: What happen is one day when I'm, I, I after I started this program my third--senior year at Andover Newton [Andover Newton Theological School, Newton Centre, Massachusetts].  And I stayed on after graduation to run this program full-time.  So, I was the full-time director of this program bringing students in as a training experience for them in the urban ministry.  And I did that for one more year after graduation.  At the end of that year one day I got a telephone call from a fellow by the name of Dr. David Barry [David W. Barry] the head of New York City Mission Society.  New York City Mission Society was the oldest charity in New York.  Had a very good reputation had programs in Harlem [New York, New York] and in Brooklyn [New York] and had a very, very well known community center called Minisink Townhouse in Harlem. They had a summer camp [Camp Minisink, Dover Plains, New York], it was very well known.  So this was an entity with a very good reputation with a of lot staff people.  And so I got this call, and I came to New York and what New York City Mission Society was doing they're working with a group of ministers in Brooklyn.  Some very prominent ministers Gardner Taylor [HistoryMaker Reverend Gardner Taylor], Sandy Ray [Sandy F. Ray], Milton Galamison, Reverend Bill Jones.  And what was happening is that these ministers were feeling pressured to be more involved in the community.  They had built up big churches, and they spent a lot of time, you know, taking care of their church activities and their people.  But again they were feeling some pressure because of what was happening in the South in terms of the whole Civil Rights Movement, Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] activities.  And they felt that they ought to be doing more in the community.  And what they wanted was somebody to help organize them and help them do community outreach and community involvement.  And so, they had New York City Mission Society had received a gra- a grant from a group called the--a foundation called the Taconic Foundation which had been very supportive of the Civil Rights Movement.  And so they gave the grant to the New York City Mission Society to hire a community organizer, who would come and work with the churches in Bedford-Stuyvesant [Brooklyn, New York].  And I went to New York, and that's the job that they offered meBelfast13.35.  And when I got there the very first week they had a retreat for their staff, and I met Reverend Calvin Pressley, who was also working for the New York City Mission Society.  And he was placed in the church that they operated in, in the Fort Greene section in Brooklyn called the Church of the Open Door.  And I, I met him the first week I was in New York, and we became fast friends from there.  But we had an interesting experience, so I'm now in Brooklyn (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What year is this now?
Speaker 2: This would be 1964, I'm now in Brooklyn never been to New York before.  And I'm the community organizer, and I'm supposed to work with all of these churches to help them get involved in the community.  And I've been there now about two weeks, and there's an incident.  The--there's another active group at that time civil rights group called CORE [Congress of Racial Equality].  They had a Brooklyn chapter that was quite active in the community activity dealing with civil right issues.  And at that time the State University of New York [State University of New York System] was being supported.  And Nelson--Governor Nelson Rockefeller had really made a commitment to build up the State University of New York.  New York, since we had so many good private schools never had a strong state university system.  But Nelson Rockefeller was changing that, and he was developing what is now the State University of New York.  One of their components was the medical school in Brooklyn called downstate medical school [SUNY Downstate College of Medicine] and hospital [SUNY Downstate Medical Center].  And it was in right in the edge of Bedford-Stuyvesant in the Crown Heights area [Brooklyn, New York].  And there was a major construction project underway there.  And the Brooklyn CORE folks realized they were not hiring blacks or Puerto Ricans workers.  So this was a major project spending millions of dollars in the black community without any black participation.  So the people from CORE were out there picketing every day.  And, of course, they picketed, and nothing changed, so they made an appeal to the ministers to come and get involved with them.  And trying to put pressure on the state to include blacks and Puerto Ricans; and, you know, this was the whole era where unions weren't providing membership or, or jobs for, for, for minority folks.
Story_ID: 670285
Speaker 1: So my job--I'm the community organizer, I've been there two weeks.  And I called up some of these ministers together and told them about this appeal from Brooklyn CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] and would they participate and they said they would.  So they came out the next day, and we picketed all day we walked around with signs.  And and, you know, nothing happened we went back the second day nothing happened.  So that night we had a big meeting a rally, people from the community at the at the Bethany Baptist Church [Brooklyn, New York].  And we decided that we had to be a little more aggressive.  Had to something different and we kind of thought about taking a lesson from when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and I was doing--the South.  So the next morning we went out there and rather than picketing we set down in the street.  And blocked the construction entrance to the construction site and wouldn't let trucks or workers in shut down the site all together.  Became a big issue in New York [New York] with a lot of publicity two hudred people were arrested mostly ministers.  So sixty or seventy of the most prominent black ministers in Brooklyn [New York] were arrested, and that got a lot of attention.  And then we had rallies et cetera after that, and one of the ministers Dr. Sandy Ray [Sandy F. Ray] from Cornerstone Baptist Church [Brooklyn, New York] was a very significant Republican.  And close to Governor Rockefeller [Nelson Rockefeller] so he called Governor Rockefeller and told Dr. Rock- Governor Rockefeller, you know, he'd try to find a way to solve this problem (laughter).  So Rockefeller said, "Well why don't you come talk to me, bring some of the ministers we'll find, we'll see if we can work something out."  So the minister said to me, "You put together a plan or something that we can bring to Governor Rockefeller."  And so here I am. I've been in New York about two weeks.  And now I'm going to meet with Governor Rockefeller to try to tell him how to solve this situation in Brooklyn. And interesting, Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] comes in somebody on his staff did a little homework to find out who was coming and who was this Reverend McCall [HistoryMaker H. Carl McCall], who was leading this delegation to come.  And told Governor Rockefeller that I had gone to Dartmouth, Rockefeller was a Dartmouth graduate.  So we and I got there Rockefeller says, "You went to Dartmouth?"  And I said, "Yes." And, you know, he said, "Well I hope you can help us." And I said to, "I'll try governor."  And we put forward a plan that the governor accepted.  We formed a group called JOB [ph.].  And we worked out a situation whereby a certain number of people would be hired at this downstate medical center.  But we set up a office at Bethany Baptist Church where job opportunities would be given to us by the state employment service.  And we would get a certain number of jobs in Brooklyn that we could then give to people in Brooklyn who would, you know, we would be able to place them in jobs.  So it was a very effective program, and it was a good result that came out of the demonstration.  And it kind of help my own reputation as this, you know, this new guy in town who was able to organize this major demonstration.  But then to be able to move it to this point where there was some concrete results that came from it interesting fast forward.  I am now the chairman of the board of the State University of New York [State University of New York System] and downstate medical center (laughter).  Is, you know, one of our major facilities where I now, you know, spend a lot of time.  But, so that experience was, you know, very helpful to kind of establish me in Brooklyn, and therefore in New York.
Story_ID: 670286
Speaker 1: A lot was going on with Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York]--there was a lot of focus there, and so I wanna just understand and my time frames may be off a little bit, but you held that position.  You worked there how long two years was it about?
Speaker 2: I, I was work two years for New York City Mission Society in in, in Brooklyn [New York] that's right.
Speaker 1: Now at this point and time is Franklin Thomas [HistoryMaker Franklin A. Thomas] is he in, in Bed-Stuy working around that time?  Is that--am I or are my years off?
Speaker 2: No, your year's right.  So here's how we segue into the whole Franklin Thomas development.  After the two years in Brooklyn, I pointed out that I got there because this very liberal foundation.  That the Taconic Foundation, which was headed by a man by the name of Stephen Currier because they had continued to be supportive of the program.  And, and were pleased with the results, and I got to know them personally.  So after the two years in Brooklyn they offered me a position as a--on the foundation as a staff person at the foundation.  But with the understanding that I was gonna work for the foundation and be supported by the foundation but that I would continue to be involved in various activities in the community.  And at that time we had a big political development in New York [New York] that John Lindsay was elected mayor.  He was the first Republican mayor in a long time very liberal Republican, however.  And he came with an idea of really revamping government in New York.  And he brought two significant people to New York from New Haven [Connecticut], a fellow by the name of Ed- Edward Logue [Edward J. Logue], who had done some major urban renewal community physical development in the City of New Haven and a fellow by the name of Michael Sviridoff [Mitchell Sviridoff], who was a former labor leader who had developed a whole series of social services in New Haven.  So John Lindsay brought them to New York to develop what was going to be a major urban development effort under Ed Logue.  And a social development effort under Michael Sviridoff.  And the Taconic Foundation gave them money, gave the city gave John Lindsay money to hire these people to develop these plans.  And since I worked for the foundation I was kind of assigned to participate in these projects.  So I was able to be involved with Mayor Lindsay and with these people he had brought in to develop a whole new set of social services.  And particularly I focused on with Mike Sviridoff on developing what is what had become the human resources administration in New York [New York City Human Resources Administration/Department of Social Services].  And it was an I--effort to put all social services under one umbrella.  Workforce development, educational programs all social programs, to make sure that they're coordinated and related to provide a variety of human services to people.  At that same time, Senator Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] then had made this commitment to develop a major social service entity called the restoration corporation [Bedford-Stuyvesant Restoration Corporation] in Brooklyn and hired Frank Thomas to, to run that.  So this was a major new development that's just like human resources administration coordinated array of human services.  And so we worked with Franklin Thomas around that around the development of human resources.  Around the development of restoration corporation at the same time we were working on developing this new citywide human resources integrated services.
Story_ID: 670287
Speaker 1: You went in then to the--you went into the city government then for three years (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Then, then what happened during my time at the Taconic Foundation, one of the things we developed was a group called the council against poverty [New York City Council Against Poverty] which was an agency which would then dispensing the money under Johnson's [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] War on Poverty.  The community development funds and this agency determined how those funds would be allocated around the city.  And while I'm working for the Taconic Foundation, but I've become the chairman of the kind of volunteer job but took up almost full time as the head of this council against poverty.  So I'm involved citywide now in, in developing programs and dispersing the funds.  And this was a very chaotic time because we were putting money into communities that never had money before and never had services before.  And remember the whole anti-poverty program was, was based on this concept of maximum feasible participation by, by the poor by poor people.  So we had a lot of people who what never had the experience of running things or, or really, you know, administering programs and using public money.  And so it was--we had a difficult time because we were both training people, at the same time giving them resources to provide services in their community but it was a very (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What, well you didn't then have the--there wasn't infrastructure in the community, and you didn't--there weren't systems in place?
Speaker 2: There weren't systems, I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we were in the process of developing that's what we were doing, and we put in place a lot of institutions and organizations that still exist within the community.
Speaker 1: So what, what were some of those because the--I wanna ask that question; then I want to ask who are the other major players (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: --around you?
Speaker 2: Well some of those for instance in, in Harlem [New York, New York] there was a group called HARYOU-ACT [Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited - Associated Community Teams].  Dr. Kenneth Clark put that together which was a major community development activity in Harlem.  On the Lower East Side [New York, New York], there was a group called Mobilization for Youth.  Every community had some kind of organization and umbrella organization that received money that it would then dispense to even then other block groups and other entities in the community.  And so a number of new communities' surface entities developed but they developed from the bottom up.  From the community coming together on what we found, is there were existing small entities in the community sort of struggling and now for the first time they would have resources to do more.
Speaker 1: So were the churches still maintained and involved (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Churches was still very much involved in that process, and that's one of the things that I was able to do because of my past associations with churches in Brooklyn [New York] is to bring churches into that and let them become part of the--these social services at Brooklyn--
Speaker 1: But you're young still, I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you're, you're of age, but you're in your late twenties or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right..
Speaker 1: --or early thirties.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 670288
Speaker 1: And so who--so is, is, who's at the Urban League [Urban League of Greater New York; New York Urban League] at this (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At the time a fellow by the name of Joe Allen [Alexander J. Allen] is the director of the Urban League. Whitney Young is the national director.  And Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] had not yet come to New York [New York] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Come, right.
Speaker 2: But let me tell you how I met Vernon.  When I got to the Taconic Foundation my first assignment as I said, they were major supporters of the Civil Rights Movement, civil rights activities.  And they were funding a Voter Education Project throughout the South, had one in Atlanta [Georgia] run by Vernon Jordan.  So since this was a major grantee of the Taconic Foundation my first assignment was to go down and meet Vernon Jordan and to kind of do I guess an evaluation of this program.  And I went to Atlanta and never been there before met Vernon spent some time with him and obviously the program was very good.  And the foundation continued to support him.  And then as, you know, then he came to New York first with the United Negro College Fund [UNCF] and then the Urban League [National Urban League].  But at that time Whitney Young was head of the Urban League.
Speaker 1: Right, now was, was the other per- was Dick Parsons [HistoryMaker Richard Parsons] with Rockefeller's [Nelson Rockefeller] staff at that point (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: Or had he not joined, that's later when Rockefeller goes--?
Speaker 2: He come, he's come back.  At that time, Rockefeller's major staff person was a fellow a minister by the name of Wyatt Walker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker], who had been Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] number one lieutenant.  He left, and he had just come to New York and he was, first he was at Abyssinian Baptist Church filling in for Adam Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] and then he started his own.  He went to another church Canaan, Canaan Baptist Church [Canaan Baptist Church of Christ, New York, New York]; and he actually joined Rockefeller staff, and so he represented Rockefeller at that time.
Story_ID: 670289
Speaker 1: And then what about Opportunities International [sic.], are they?
Speaker 2: OIC?
Speaker 1: Yeah is OIC is--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Dr. Leo- is he's active at that, because--
Speaker 2: Yeah, at this time one of the more--one of the programs that was getting a lot of attention was Dr. Leon Sullivan, opportunity industrial center [Opportunities Industrialization Centers].  And they had a very interesting concept, and that was they Reverend Leon's Sullivan very dynamic pastor in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And he started a program by reaching out to businesses and convincing them that it was in their interest to hire more minority.  However, the issue was that was the people had to be trained for some of the jobs that were available.  But the concept they had was that they would identify a number of jobs that would be made available to people from the community.  And OIC would train people for those jobs.  So the good thing about it was when OIC recruited you, and you went through the training program.  You knew that there were going to be a job at the other end because a lot of the previous programs didn't do that.  People went, they got training, and they weren't getting training for--getting trained for the kinds of skills that businesses needed.  So there was the interaction with the business and OIC so that the people were being trained for real jobs.  And given the skills that were needed for those particular jobs.  So, the OIC was active around the country but they didn't have an operation in New York City [New York, New York].  And Leon Sullivan called a minister in Brooklyn [New York], Milton Galamison and said, "I'd like to come to New York."  And so Milton Galamison, Reverend Jones [Bill Jones], couple other ministers met with Calvin Pressley [HistoryMaker Reverend Calvin O. Pressley] and myself.  And because I was able to say if we could put this together in New York the Taconic Foundation would provide some of the seed money to get it started.  Because it would be government money for the training program but something we needed help to get it started.  So the Taconic Foundation made a commitment and so then therefore I was able to be in the beginning and the formation of the OIC program in New York City.  And we got Calvin Pressley to leave mission society [New York City Mission Society, New York, New York] and the Church of the Open Door [Brooklyn, New York] to run OIC, and it became really probably the most effective OIC program in--in the country.
Story_ID: 670290
Speaker 1: Within the Congregational church, they had a division of higher education that supported the black colleges [HBCUs] that were associated with United Church--Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana], Tougaloo [Tougaloo College, Tougaloo, Mississippi] what were the other ones (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There are quite a few.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there are quite a few that were--
Speaker 2: Were Congregation--
Speaker 1: --that were started by the Congregational church and continue to get support from, from then what was the Congregational church then the United Church of Christ, you know.
Speaker 2: But, but when do you become aware of that history do you--?
Speaker 1: Oh even--I'll tell you when I mean, early on particularly I guess when I was in seminary because I was in a, a Congregational school [Andover Newton Theological School, Newton Centre, Massachusetts].  But one of the things I remember every year at St. Mark Church [St. Mark Congregational Church, Boston, Massachusetts], Dr. Laviscount [Samuel Laviscount] would bring in a president from one of those colleges.  And so we had people, you know, coming to speak I remember Dr. Mays [Benjamin Mays] spoke once and others.  So we had that interaction got to see those people and got to hear about those colleges.  And as I said at St. Mark Church, you know, there were so many people who had graduated from historically black colleges.  But the church was very proud of its role and, and promoted that a lot.  And raised money every year so, and I was quite aware.
Speaker 2: I was just wondering (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 2: --you know, but in seminary definitely you start understanding--
Speaker 1: That's right, yeah.
Story_ID: 670291
Speaker 1: So this--I mean, you're really catapulted, I mean you hit New York [New York] hard--strong and hard, I mean, you know (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I was very fortunate that I--when I came to New York that I had a position that had a lot of visibility and had connections with a lot of very influential people.  And I guess, you know, people are asking a lot why I left Boston [Massachusetts].  And I left Boston because I knew it too well I mean, I, I really felt that if I stayed in Boston I'd be pigeonholed.  That, you know, that there were--it was already kind of determined what you would do.  And where you would end up in the hierarchy.  Whereas to come to New York it's wide open it's true you're an outsider but there are advantages to being an outsider because you're not bound by certain kinds of restrictions and traditions.  You can, come and do your own thing without being--filling sort of, you know, preprogrammed.
Speaker 1: You know, I, I've come to believe this--yeah I was thinking about that with Boston.  Boston, Boston doesn't have the size of the minority black community (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it doesn't yet that's right.
Speaker 1: So you can't, you know, there's not gonna be any, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah all well yeah, you don't have--that won't be base.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But like, of course, the Governor Deval [HistoryMaker Deval L. Patrick] has shown you can develop a different base.  But you don't start with that base in, within the African American community where in New York you always have that base as a starting point.
Story_ID: 670292
Speaker 1: So what are you learning about--'cause this is a time--now there are a lot of resources (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, that's right.
Speaker 1: I mean you have a lot of monetary resources coming.
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: So money is not the, the issue, now.  I, you know, you keep--you were talking about the Taconic Foundation but where's the Ford Foundation [New York, New York] on issues like that.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: And what other foundations are there versus government funding?
Speaker 2: Sure, Sure yes.  At that time, the Taconic Foundation was a very progressive foundational leader.  But the Ford Foundation was quite active as well at that time too.  And, in fact, Michael Sviridoff [Mitchell Sviridoff] the person that I mentioned who headed up the human resources administration [New York City Human Resources Administration/Department of Social Services] then went to the Ford Foundation.  And, and soon after that Frank Thomas [HistoryMaker Franklin A. Thomas] left restoration [Bedford-Stuyvesant Restoration Corporation, New York, New York] and came to the Ford.  The Ford Foundation was really out front in terms of providing money for this kind of community organization, community development.  And their grants were quite helpful to us and people in other cities in terms of prolonging this concept of community organization by bringing the community people into the mainstream--making decisions about the kinds of human services and how they should be delivered.
Story_ID: 670293
Speaker 1: Now I just want to know your--so now you come in, and you work with  the mission and then you go to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah city mission society [New York City Mission Society, New York, New York], um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the Taconic Foundation, and then you go, and your're deputy administrator, is that the right order?
Speaker 2: Yes, and well along the way the first thing I did in terms of public--I took this volunteer job as chairman of the New York City Council Against Poverty.
Speaker 1: Okay, first.
Speaker 2: Which was part of the Lindsay administration that's first and I and that itself was part of the human resources administration [New York City Human Resources Administration/Department of Social Services].  Then I moved up to be a deputy administrator in human resources administration, which is the overarching, agency coordinating, and delivering social services across the city.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what are you learning about--now who's mayor at this time?
Speaker 2: John, John Lindsay is mayor.
Speaker 1: This is the mayor during that whole time?
Speaker 2: During that time.
Speaker 1: So he, he represents what I ca- he represents liberal Republicans (unclear)?
Speaker 2: And then he becomes a Democrat actually.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  Oh that's right--during that time? No later, later, yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No after he leaves office then he becomes a Democrat, that's right.
Story_ID: 670294
Speaker 1: This is the thing: I have a gap in your timeline between 1969, 1975.  So I'm wondering why I have that, that gap; I know, but that's what I'm just--
Speaker 2: Okay, what happened when I left human resources administration [New York City Human Resources Administration/Department of Social Services], I was doing some consulting on my own.  I got involved with Percy Sutton in, in--we formed a company in communications and we, we purchased the Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News].  And I became the chairman of the editorial board.   And we formed Inner City Broadcasting company [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation] which was the first black on a radio station in New York [New York].  And I was the first president of Inner City Broadcasting.  Percy Sutton and I raised money to buy the first black own station in New York, and I work with that for--
Speaker 1: I didn't--okay I'm very aware of that, that history.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: But, I wanted--how do you remember your first meeting with Percy Sutton?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And how you came to know him?
Speaker 2: Well I, I was working with--for John Lindsay and Lindsay.
Speaker 1: In the cit- in the city?
Speaker 2: Yes, in the city.  First helping to develop the human resources administration then when he appointed me to be chairman of the council against poverty [New York City Council Against Poverty].  At that time, Percy Sutton was the borough president and sort of the reigning black politician in the city.  And he called me one day and said I understand--and what happened was as a Republican John Lindsay was not dependent on nor was he pulling people from the normal Democratic organization and apparatus.  You know, he was bringing in people from, from other places.  And so, you know, I was recruited because I had this relationship with the Taconic Foundation, and I'd worked in Brooklyn [New York].  So I didn't come through the normal route.  But Percy Sutton called me one day to remind me of that (laughter) he calls me.  He was the borough president he said, "Well, you know, you're in the Lindsay administration."  There weren't a lot of African Americans in the administration.  He says, "You ought to make some contact in your own community, and you ought to get involved politically."  And so he invited me to join his political club and, and, you know, he became a political mentor.  And that led to our, our business relationship.  But he would--he came to me and said, "Look, you know, you, you got a nice position but you really need to have a community base."  And he made that possible for me to join his club.  And, and he in his other political people in Harlem [New York, New York] like Charlie Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel], [HistoryMaker] Basil Paterson, and David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins], they all supported me, but it was because of Percy.  He--Percy introduce me to all of them and basically said this is somebody we are to support this is somebody who we need to bring people like this into our political club, and he did.
Speaker 1: So what are you learning when you joined that club because it's, you know--?
Speaker 2: Well, what I learned that Percy was right that if you really wanted to move forward you had to have a political base.  It was nice that I had this connection with the mayor and with Michael Sviridoff [Mitchell Sviridoff] and but you just really had to have a base in your own community that people would respect you.  In the larger community if you could--if it was seen that you had, had that base.  And I learned that was the more--and another thing that I learn was that politics was important.  Then all of these social things that I was trying to do improve education.  Improve housing, improve social services but the ultimate decisions about whether those things were gonna work were gonna be political decisions because our financial, financial allocations came from political decisions.  And political--the funds would go to those places that had the best political organization.  So I, I learned about the importance of politics.  And I think that's why I then ended up my next step was to get involved politically.  And to run for office because I learned that that lesson from Percy and Basil, and Charlie Rangel and David Dinkins.
Story_ID: 670295
Speaker 1: Did he ever test you at the beginning I mean, sort of, you know, just to see--?
Speaker 2: Oh very much so continually (laughter) you know, tested me, reminded me, that look my allegiance has to be back to that community.  And my ability to move forward and really to be effective would depend upon the strength of that community and or organization.
Speaker 1: So that brought you into Harlem (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That brought me into Harlem [New York, New York], yes.
Speaker 1: Into Harlem, okay.
Speaker 2: And what happened then after spending some time with Percy [Percy Sutton] and the development of the Inner City Broadcasting [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation] and the Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News].  I ran for office and again because of Percy and what happened is there were one of the main positions in Harlem was the state senate [New York State Senate], and we had some very (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you mind me interrupting because I just wanna I mean because those two institutions were extremely important, and I would like you to talk about what his vision was for that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, and what that involved--
Speaker 2: Sure, sure.
Speaker 1: --even being able to purchase the Amsterdam News--
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, okay.
Speaker 1: --and who was it purchased from and then the, the--
Speaker 2: Well Percy made it clear though although he was in politics he really understood the importance of communications.  And he felt that again you had to have a communication vehicle that you have influence over because it would make a difference.  And there were two major vehicles that who--through which we communicated with the black community.  And one was the Amsterdam News which was in the newspaper I guess it been around at that time for about ninety years.  It was owned by a very prominent physician name C.B. Powell.  And it was fairly conservative but it really was popular because at that time other media didn't pay much attention to the, to the black community.  So the Amsterdam News was important, and it had not always been supportive of Percy as he was moving up politically.  In fact, they opposed him many times.  So he thought that it was important that he could have some influence in that newspaper.  Not just to help him but to help others that it should really be much more progressive. And should be helping those folks who were involved in the political process who were progressive and were trying to move forward.  And so, he decided he wanted to buy the paper. First he tried to start a newspaper of his own, and that was difficult to be competitive.  And Dr. Powell was--had indicated that he was interested.  And at one time I had talked to Dr. Powell about buying the paper.  I had some contacts with again people that I knew from Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire], who were involved in the financial community.  I talked to them about helping me to raise money to buy the paper.  So Percy knew about that, and so he brought me in and so together we went out and raised money.  So he thought that was very important as a political tool to have a publication that, that is supportive.  So we bought the Amsterdam News.  By the same token, he realized the importance of electronic media and the, the radio.
Story_ID: 670296
Speaker 1: And again, WLIB [WLIB Radio, New York, New York] and then WLIB--WBLS [WBLS Radio, New York, New York] were the major and the only at that time really stations that were really serving the black community.  And, and it was mostly music it wasn't a lot of news it wasn't a lot of information.  And Percy [Percy Sutton] felt we had to change that, that could be a very important--another important asset in terms of promoting the political and social agenda of the black community.  And so at that time the station was under a lot of pressure people were picketing.  And people were, you know, criticizing the station for not really doing any more than just playing a lot of music.  And that they ought to be doing more in terms of public information.  And so, the person who owned the station did indicate to Percy he'd be willing to sell. And so, Percy and I and others got together and went out and raised money and bought the station and formed Inner City Broadcasting [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation], which really became a company with multiple stations around the country.  Sadly it had, you know, it's falling apart.  But at the same time I mean I still think we need it but there's been a major change in terms of how the rest of the media covers the black community.  So that, that is being some--that's been a good thing.  But at that time there wasn't anybody else doing it so he--you had to have the prints, you had to have the electronic media.  And Percy really moved in and, and really concentrated on that.  And when he left office, you know, he did that full-time and really built it into a national organization.
Speaker 2: Right, and then that was when there were tax certificates too that you could man up and do those purchases (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's right you could do the purchases because there was a real federal commitment.  Which there isn't one now to really bring in more minority ownership into electronic media.
Speaker 2: So then talk about you're--but that period of time you're learning a lot about Harlem [New York, New York], you're learning about business (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Business that's right.
Speaker 2: You're learning about civic, I mean--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --engagement in a different level and he was a visionary.
Speaker 1: No question about it I mean, the fact that he understood the importance of communication.  The importance of, of being involved as an entrepreneur, being involved, you know, in ownership, of facilities and businesses.  So, he was--he left politics and really devoted himself to that.  And helped a lot of other people along the way and his, his vision and his involvement was international.  He had some activities and some programs and was an investor in various projects in Africa; so he was quite an extraordinary man.
Story_ID: 670297
Speaker 1: So you, so talk about the run for office then, so (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, as I said by joining the club and being involved with Percy [Percy Sutton] and Charlie Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel] and others.  One of the things that I focused on was voter registration that we still had a situation where we have low participation.  In the political process because a lot of people were eligible but didn't vote.  And because a lot of them didn't see the need.  So I ran with the help of several major unions particularly District Council 37 they had a very progressive leader at the time name Victor Gotbaum.  And he financed various projects that I organized to register voters.  That we did it in Brooklyn [New York], and we did in Harlem [New York, New York], and then we did it citywide.  And so that was quite effective in terms of helping a lot a local officials by broadening their base.  Of bringing new people into communities because they now had some more black folders in those communities.  And so having had that involvement there was an opportunity in Harlem.  Harlem had always had a distinguished group of people who represented that community in the state senate [New York State Senate].  Constance Baker Motley and then [HistoryMaker] Basil Paterson and then when Basil Paterson left the state senate to run for lieutenant governor with a man name Arthur Goldberg.  They lost, but Basil Paterson was the first black to run and be nominated to run for statewide office as lieutenant governor.  And so that seat was open. And it was then a fellow by the name of Sidney von Luther [Sidney A. von Luther] who did not come from Harlem because the seat--the interesting thing about that senate seat was that it encompassed not only Harlem.  But a good portion of the West Side, which was liberal whites mostly Jewish.  And therefore the person in that seat had to be able to appeal to both the black community in Harlem and the white community on the West Side.  And people like Constance Baker Motley and people like Basil Paterson did that.  So when Basil left this fellow, von Luther won.  He did not have a relationship with Percy and Charlie Rangel and David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins], the people in Harlem.  So they wanted a candidate who could, who could appeal to both communities.  And they reached out to me because I was in the enviable position.  And I had this political base and operated in Harlem but I lived on the West Side.  So I had the, you know, contacts with people on the West Side, and therefore they felt like I could appeal to both communities and I did.  And so they supported me to run for the state senate then against an incumbent, and I won.  And I spent three terms in the state senate representing that community.  And I think this was very good for my career in politics going forward.  That I started out a community where I had to be--take positions that went beyond the particular concerns in the black community.  But there were concerns that really involved a broader constituency.  And that's something that Percy pointed out to me from the very beginning that that was important.  That's what he was able to do as borough president, and he told me that, that was important for me too.  Not just to have a black constituency but to have a larger constituency.  And that's why people from Harlem, Harlem became the dominant political force in, in New York [New York]. It got more attention than others because you had people there.  And the same thing with Charlie Rangel, you know, his congressional district wasn't just Harlem. There is the West Side as well.  And that's different from people say from Brooklyn who--some very good politicians but they only had a black base.  And they only identified with the black base whereas the people from Harlem were identified with a larger base.
Speaker 1: You know, I, I don't always think of that politically but that makes sense, so you were on the Upper West side right?  The Upper West Side, okay (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Upper West Side, that's right, um-hm.
Story_ID: 670298
Speaker 1: What are you learning in that time period about elected office?  And, and the issues that are present at that point in time, 'cause we're in the, the late the--we're in the, the late '70s [1970s], right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This would be I was in the '75 [1975] to '80 [1980] right. Well what I learned it confirmed what I, what I believed and that you can make a difference.  That you know, you're there where budgets are developed.  Where decisions are made about financial allocations that it, it is an important place to be.  You can have some significant influence, and it's tough and it's difficult.  And the New York legislature [New York State Legislature] is a very interesting body because, you know, we're talking about the diversity of New York.  And so you have people from Upstate New York, who doesn't have a great interest in issues in the city.  And but yet issues that affect the city are going to be decided in Albany [New York] by people from outside the city.  And that that's a problem and when I joined the legislature, it was during New York City financial crisis.  And New York [New York] was on the brink of bankruptcy.  And it had to be bailed out by the state.  And I was very much a part of that effort in the state senate [New York State Senate] to convince legislators from the rest of the state to help, you know, New York through this very difficult financial period.
Speaker 1: Now is, is New York like Chicago [Illinois] in that, you know, there's a big difference 'cause New Yorkers don't necessarily know better, so they don't understand what the rest of the state is?
Speaker 2: And, and it goes both ways.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And that, that's one of the things that I was able to point out to people.  Is that just as the people from Upstate New York don't really have an appreciation and understanding of the needs of New York.  People from New York don't understand and appreciate the issues for people upstate.  And one of the things I did early on was to go into other communities in Upstate New York.  And to simply just show up there was a big thing, you know, they've never seen, you know, an African American politician from New York City, you know.  So I, I had a friend who represented a senate district upstate.  And he used to take me to the meetings of the of the Grange [National Grange of the Order of Patrons of Husbandry], which is the group, you know, of farming, association of farmers.  And I used to going talk to them about how we depend on them because they provide food products that come to New York. But they were dependent on us because we provided the revenue that helps their, their products and their industries in Upstate New York.  Then I, you know, was able to talk about our interdependence and, you know, they hadn't seen that before.  They hadn't heard that kind of message before.
Story_ID: 670299
Speaker 1: So how large is the, the state senate [New York State Senate] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The state senate at that time had I think sixty members.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you have a house?  You have the house, there's a senate and a, no?
Speaker 2: Yeah there are two, yes.
Speaker 1: There are two.
Speaker 2: We have a (unclear) we have a senate and assembly [New York State Assembly].
Speaker 1: Oh an assembly?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yes and assembly sorry.
Speaker 2: Yes and the assembly was Democratic, and the senate was Republican.  So although I was in the senate, you know, I was in the minority in the senate.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how many African Americans were in the--?
Speaker 2: At that time it I guess there were maybe when I first went there, there might have been maybe six out of the sixty.
Speaker 1: Okay, six out of the sixty?
Speaker 2: Sixty in the senate.
Speaker 1: In the senate?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And how about the--?
Speaker 2: Much more in the assembly.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: Many, many more in the assembly.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: There are smaller districts.
Speaker 1: I see, okay.
Speaker 2: And there were there were people from outside of New York [New York], Arthur Eve from Buffalo [New York].  And people from Westchester [Westchester County, New York] so it wasn't just--whereas the senate, the only senators at the time were all from New York City.
Speaker 1: So but this point you're, you enjoy being a politician?
Speaker 2: I'm enjoying being a politician.  It's difficult I didn't like the fact that you have to raise money.  I didn't like the fact that I had to spend two or three days a week in Albany [New York] away from home.  I didn't always like the fact that, you know, you had such demands from the community, and people wanted you to be there.  But people want you to show up and, you know, your life is not your own.  They're people who sit down every day and decide where you're gonna go.  And it was difficult but rewarding because I think I was able to fulfill this belief I had that this is the place where you can, in fact, make a difference.
Speaker 1: And it was a building ground for the rest of your career so--?
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Speaker 1: Okay so, I--so, after that so you, you get elected twice?
Speaker 2: Three times actually, um-hm, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Three times, I mean a total of three times, two more times.
Story_ID: 670300
Speaker 1: And then, what happens at that point?
Speaker 2: At that point I, I felt that I--my opportunities were limited.  I felt that, you know, being in the minority in the senate [New York State Senate] you were you're just limited in what you, what you could do.  And that, that wasn't going to change because I didn't see the possibility of Democrats taking over the senate for a long time.  And I figured that's something I hadn't done yet and this I never had except for my travels I never really hadn't an international experience.  And I'd like to--and I wanted to do something that would expose me to the international community.  So I called my friend Charlie Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel], and I said, "Charlie, you know, maybe it's time for me to do something else.  How about the possibility of being an ambassador of some African country."  So, right away Charlie Rangel sent me to Washington [D.C.] to meet with a fellow who was--at that time Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] was president.  And there was a fellow named Louie Martin [Louis E. Martin] from Detroit [Michigan], who was a major political, national political figure.  And he was the major main black person in the White House.  And his job was to recruit black folks and a few other things.  So Charlie sent me to see him, and I just happened to show up to see him as you remember Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] had been the ambassador at the United Nations.  And because of some difficulty around his meeting with Palestinians he left the job.  And Donald McHenry [Donald F. McHenry] moved up to become the chief ambassador and what people didn't know there were four people with the title of ambassador at the United Nations.  There's the chief representative, and then there were three deputies, all with the title of ambassador so, Donald McHenry had one of those positions. When he then took Andy Young's place as the chief representative, his spot was open.  Just so happen when I went to meet with Louie Martin they were looking for someone to fill that spot.  And since I was from New York [New York] and knew New York and had Charlie Rangel's support, Louie Martin said, "How would you like to be the ambassador of the--United Nations?"  That's how I got that job, so I spent two years there, and it was the last three years of the Carter administration.  I got to travel a lot I got to meet a lot of interesting people like it that time there was a young person from Ghana.  At the UN by the name of Kofi Annan, who later, you know, became the secretary general.  But it was a very good, rewarding, broadening experience in terms of the people I met and the contacts I'd developed and the places that I was able to travel to.
Story_ID: 670301
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now you were married at the time, during all of this time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I was yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, to your first wife [Cecilia McCall] okay.   And your daughter [Marci McCall] had been born, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay so, so you then after you leave how do you get to WNET [WNET-TV, New York, New York] 'cause that's--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when I, when I left the--when Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] was not elected I had to leave.  And I spent a little time trying to figure out what I was going to do.  And somebody reached out to me, and there was a position at WNET which was the public television station.  And they needed somebody to quite frankly they were looking for more minority representation.  And they wanted somebody to be a vice president to help them in development and help develop programs for--that would reach the minority community.  And I just thought that was an interesting opportunity.  And I went there, and I guess I was there less than a year; I just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --you know, felt this was interesting, but not really--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --(laughter) what I wanted to do.
Story_ID: 670302
Speaker 1: But then this--so you--soon you're launching a run for lieutenant, you know, lieutenant gov- (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Again I get a call from Percy [Percy Sutton] and a fellow named Arthur Eve from Upstate New York, and they say, "Look we've got a race coming up.  And, and we've got people running. We got this fellow Mario Cuomo running for governor, and we ought to have somebody run for lieutenant governor."  And so Percy said, "You should do this."  And, you know, as I said when I was in the senate [New York State Senate], I started making contacts in Upstate New York and other communities.  So I was--they encouraged me, and I said I would do it, and I ran for lieutenant governor.  And I did not win but did well particularly in Upstate New York, which was really surprising.  Because again I was, you know, the people in Upstate New York never really had any African American come and talk to them and spend time and, and appeal to them.  And it, and it worked very well, and it helped me for, for again for the future which sort of again a building block.  I didn't know that I was gonna have a chance to run later, but you know, I, it, it worked out quite well that I made a lot of contacts that were helpful when I then ran later for comptroller.
Story_ID: 670303
Speaker 1: But out of that, even though you're not successful in your run, does--is that the time that you get appointed.  Or it's a little later as the New, New York commissioner on human rights?
Speaker 2: Yes, so what happened since I had run, and I had helped Mario Cuomo win because I brought out more black voters who then voted for Cuomo.  So, when he became governor he then appointed me to a state position as the commissioner of the division of human rights.  Which I found to be not a very effective organization it didn't have a lot of money.  It didn't have a lot of support I did stay there for almost two years.  But it was, it was not very rewarding and like before if I've was doing something didn't work I would try something else.  And at that point I decided just like earlier I decided I wanted to go to the United Nations because I wanted to have an international experience.  The one thing I had not done except what I did with Percy [Percy Sutton] in terms of our companies I'd never been in Corporate America.  I never had an opportunity to work for a major corporation and so when I decided to leave human resources administration I decided that's what I wanted to do.  I wanted to work for a major corporation particularly one that had international reach.  And through a friend I get to meet the president of at that time Citibank [Citibank, N.A.] a man by the name of John Reed [John S. Reed] and they offered me a job.  And, and I went to work for Citibank first I ran--was involved in their retail business just to kinda learn the business.  And then I became their major lobbyist in, across the states. I worked in--I lobbied for them to help them with their government relations programs in a variety of states around the country--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --including New York.
Story_ID: 670304
Speaker 1: Now you also at this, don't--you get, you meet, and you are married then to Joyce Brown [HistoryMaker Joyce F. Brown], right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --at that point (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Yes. And I had that you actually met her--this is before you go to Citi- Citibank [Citibank, N.A.] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I met her when I was at the UN [United Nations].
Speaker 2: Oh, at the UN?
Speaker 1: I had just become divorced at that time when I was at the UN.
Speaker 2: Okay, because I think she said you met at a black and Puerto Rican cauc--
Speaker 1: Yes, I went to--every year I used to go to Washington [D.C.] for the black and Puerto Rican caucus [New York State Association of Black and Puerto Rican Legislators, Inc.].  And I went that year I guess it was 1980.  I was an ambassador United Nations, I had just been divorced; and I went there and met her at a reception.  And found out that we lived about three blocks away from rather in the West Side [New York, New York], but I did not know her at that time.  She was then in higher education at one of our community colleges, Borough of Manhattan Community College [New York, New York].  She was then the director of research at that college.
Speaker 2: Okay. So the early part of your--I mean, your marriage really you're in Cor- you're a corporate executive at this point?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Story_ID: 670305
Speaker 1: Who's at the bank [Citibank, N.A.] at this point, and (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A fellow by the name of John Reed [John S. Reed].
Speaker 1: John Reed.
Speaker 2: Was the president of the bank, and he's the one that I met who hired me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so but you're learning.  You're learning this--are you doing--what part of the bank are you in?
Speaker 2: Well to--I started out in the retail business part of the bank where we were--I was overseeing our branch operations.  Throughout New York City [New York, New York] where people were making loans and providing other services and housing and so forth.  So I was learning the financial part of it but then I went on to something where I felt more comfortable which was the government relations.  Where again, I was relating to government agencies trying to promote the--at that time the bank was involved in expansionist mode.  And it was moving out of New York into other states.  And in order to do that they had to get the support of the either the legislature or the governor or some regulatory body in those states.  So I was involved in that effort of helping them to move and open their operations in other states around the country.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what are you learning about banking at the point 'cause this time this is the time well at the beginning point we, you know, you joined when still I think in the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] years, I think and--
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right.
Speaker 1: --and inflation is high, but then we enter into a time when it's, you know, so.
Speaker 2: That's good.  Well, what I learned I learned about the financial system.  How it works how banks work, and I learned about, you know, some of the details of financing.  Again which helped me later but the fact is that, you know, this was something new to me.  I had been involved in the business in Inner City [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation] and with the Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News] but this was high finance it was international finance.  It was relating to, you know, people who had a lot of experience and were doing very big deals.  And so, I was able to learn about finance and about investments; and that was very important in terms of the next move I made.
Story_ID: 670306
Speaker 1: And this is the time also that I'm thinking--let's see, 1980, oh yes 'cause people, there are a lot of, of African Americans coming into the, the finance--investment banking (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Investment banking in terms of municipal finance business.  There a lot of people who were really pioneers in terms of getting--trying to convince communities.  And municipalities to--municipalities who were looking for money.  And where they were finding that was in bonds by floating municipal bonds.  And banks, in particular Citibank [Citibank, N.A.] was very active in going out selling their services to do municipal financing through their bonds.  And so it was--brought in a lot of people who came into investment banking particularly on the municipal finance side.  And you had that formation of some major black company such as [HistoryMaker] Bernard Beal and Chris Williams [HistoryMaker Christopher Williams] and some other people.  Travers Bell was kind of a pioneer in that, in that field.
Speaker 1: Right, I just wanted to draw attention to that.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right.
Speaker 1: And then even I think Maynard Jackson played some major (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Maynard Jackson after he left he, he formed a major firm. That's right he was quite active.
Story_ID: 670307
Speaker 1: Do you itch at some point then to get back?  Or do you think you would have stayed there for the rest of, you know, your, your time 'cause (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, good question.  I'm not sure I would I would, I liked it and the good and there was something else about it that was very good.  That when I got involved in the political side in terms of the government relations they--the bank [Citibank, N.A.] encouraged me to be involved still in the community.  And an interesting opportunity came along that was very important and, and the bank supported it. David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] became mayor.  And as mayor, one of the very important positions he had to fill was the president of the board of education [New York City Board of Education; New York City Department of Education].  That is to set policy for the, for the New York City school system, which was the largest in the country.  And that--there was a board of education made up of seven members.  One appointed by the mayor and that, and that person usually gets elected by the others to be the president.  So one day David Dinkins called me and said he needed a new person to be the president of the board of education.  So again way back my interest in education and teaching I saw this as an interesting opportunity.  And the bank saw it as an opportunity for them to provide some service to the city.  So I took that job, and I was continued to be employed by the bank because this was another volunteer job.  But I was really spending at least half of my time serving as president of the board of education, and I did that for two years.
Story_ID: 670308
Speaker 1: Can you tell me, had, did you find from the time that you first came to New York [New York] and working in the community how mu- what was the change that you saw (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: --and in the educational system, just because, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --during your career you're touching things at different points?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  Well, what I saw first of all with that there was a much greater openness and more participation by a minority at every level.  I--we, we were seeing people elected more people elected to the legislature [New York State Legislature], more people elected to the city council [New York City Council].  You had not only, you know, Percy Sutton as the borough president but you eventually had, you know, [HistoryMaker] Helen Marshall another black borough president.  Percy was replaced by another black borough--Virginia Fields [HistoryMaker C. Virginia Fields] as borough president.  David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins], you know, and so just the fact you just now had him a black mayor.  I mean, that was the biggest change that, that took place in New York that, you know, the first time.  You have a black mayor where the number of people in his cabinet who were black.  So, it had been a great openness of very big change across the board, and it was happening, you know, rare modifications everywhere.  The very fact that David once he was, you know, mayor I wasn't the first, but he had another person as the president of board of education [New York City Board of Education; New York City Department of Education].  And it's just, you know, that was new.  So you just had black people in important positions not only in the public sector but in the private sector as well because people in the private sector new that they wanted to do business with the city. They had to have people in, you know, minority people in their enterprise, so it was a very big change underway.
Speaker 1: And so what, you know, I hear in, in some of the things you were quoted during the time that you said, you know, that you were talking about, what kind of experience were the kids having--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --you know, that we don't need just the minority to the workforce, we need a qualified well trained workforce.  So was all--on what kind of training are the kids, you know, getting?
Speaker 2: Sure, what are we preparing them for, what are we doing to motivate them, to train them, to educate them for the world in which they're going to be involved?  Hopefully to be involved as responsible contributing citizens.  So my emphasis was on the quality of the education.  And what are we doing in terms of what kind of teachers do we have?  How would we, how will we evaluate teacher performance and, and how are we looking at outcome?  Not just a matter of how many kids we have in schools but what are they learning?  And what can we show that, that has, you know, enrich them while they have this experience?  I also was committed to changing the nature of the teaching force that we had to have more of the minority teachers and at all levels.  You know, as I said I remember my own experience I never saw an African American teacher until my junior year in school [at Roxbury Memorial High School, Boston, Massachusetts].  Well, we had to change that--we had to make sure kids saw role models as teachers and as principals and as supervisors in the school system.
Story_ID: 670309
Speaker 1: So but then people came calling, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm. Then I had this interesting opportunity where there--a very important position as comptroller of the State of New York became open.  Because the person who been there for some twenty-seven years I think resigned and given the fact that he resigned--
Speaker 1: That's Edward?
Speaker 2: Ed Regan [Edward V. Regan].
Speaker 1: Regan.
Speaker 2: When there's an opening such as that, the legislature [New York State Legislature] determines who the next person will be to fill out that term.  And it happens with a joint meeting of the legislature but the assembly people dominate that because they are more of them.  There are a hundred and fifty assembly people and only sixty senators and the assembly [New York State Assembly] had a lot of minority candidates members rather.  They had a lot of members from New York City [New York, New York], so it was clear that if you had a lot of support in the assembly.  You could get that position, and what I had as advantages now I have been in banking.  And the comptroller's position is a very important financial position.  So therefore I had the financial experience and I'd been in the legislature so I had the legislative experience they knew me so I had government experience.  I had already run statewide for lieutenant governor, and I'd done well in Upstate New York.  So it--I, I think I had a lot of advantages, and it worked that there two bodies met. And I had the overwhelming support of people in the assembly, and I became comptroller.  And that's a very interesting job the comptroller of New York is a very powerful position because of the variety of those responsibilities.  The comptroller of New York is the chief financial officer of the state.  Is the chief auditor of the state and significantly the comptroller is the sole trustee of the state pension fund [New York State Common Retirement Fund] which provides pension and benefits to over a million public employees.  And what that job entails is, is managing this portfolio of, of funds.  And investing those funds for the retirement system.  When I took over that position we were the second largest and still are.  Second largest public pension fund in the country second to California.  And when I took over the pension fund we had some $69 billion in assets.  And when I left nine years later it had grown to $120 billion in assets.  So while I was able to significantly grow the pension fund and to be a very good steward of those considerable responsibilities because they were so important to people who are in public service, who needs those resources, you know, when they retire, were able to increase the benefits to retirees while I was there.  So that was a very exciting, difficult, demanding job, but I, I really enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 670310
Speaker 1: Well, a couple of things I'd like--so you really filled out the, his term, Regan's [Edward V. Regan] term?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then after that--
Speaker 1: Then you had to?
Speaker 2: --I was elected twice then on my own.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I was elected for--two times by a very significant margin.  And by the way with the appointment and then the election I was the first African American elected to a statewide position.  We'd never had it we'd have people, we had people like [HistoryMaker] Basil Paterson who ran, but I was the first to be elected to a statewide position.  And to a position which was somewhat unusual in terms of, you know, the chief fiscal officer of the state and the person responsible for managing this very considerable pension fund [New York State Common Retirement Fund].
Speaker 1: But there's another thing that also happens because, you know, Mayor Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins], you know, loses and he's, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: His ratings go down for, you know, a couple--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He had those incidents.
Speaker 2: And not only that the Democratic Party--when I was, you know, I was appointed in 1964 I ran.  And when I ran every other Democrat lost.  I was the only Democrat elected successfully in 1964.
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-four [1994].
Speaker 2: In 1994 and therefore, you know, I was--then I for the next eight years I had to deal with the Republican leadership.  And all the other positions particularly the governor's position.
Speaker 1: You know, but the other thing that I think also is the case is that the attention, your power, you become really powerful because there's no other--it's not like, you have a black mayor and comptroller, you know, you really become the new, the new attention grabber and it's national.
Speaker 2: That's right.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Because people are knocking at your door I think from all over (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The world.  Because we invested with the companies all over the world.  But the with the pension system portfolio that size you have to in fact--the key to managing pension funds of this size is diversification.  You got to put your money in a lot of different places.  And which I did, and I was able to put a lot of it into minority firms.  Firms run by minorities and women I--the fact that I had the sole discretion I could do that because I thought that was important.  And there were a lot of people who were very good who didn't have an opportunity before.  And a lot of firms that I invested in are now doing quite well because I had that confidence in them, invested in them back during that time.
Speaker 1: Well it's huge--really important because you sort of created some businesses--
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: --and opportunities, and open doors is the future.
Speaker 2: And also brought in at the staff level people to, to manage that pension fund.  Some of my key managers in my office who did that were, were minorities who, people who had not had that opportunity in the past.
Story_ID: 670311
Speaker 1: Now the, the thing, what did you learn about running a political campaign, you know, in 1994?  I mean you had--or was it e- was it because you had so much support?  I mean that's what I'm just sort of wondering (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --was there anything or was it relatively easy?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't easy it was difficult because obviously as I said we never had an African American elected statewide.  Just running the statewide election is quite of task in terms of the size of New York.  The diversity of New York the expanse of it I mean, you know, you have to get around.  We have sixty-two separate counties in New York.  You have to go all of those counties.  You have to develop the support in all of those counties.  And you have to develop support across the board. You can't just have a New York [New York] base.  You've gotta be able to do well in big cities like Buffalo [New York] and Syracuse [New York] and Rochester [New York] but the little towns and villages.  You really have to get out.  You have to raise a lot of money which is the most difficult thing about the job.  You do it--I guess my first--when I ran in '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-four [1994].
Speaker 2: Ninety-four [1994], in 1994, I had to raise about $8 million to run a statewide campaign.  And that's difficult and it's particularly difficult for--when running for comptroller.  Although you understand, I understand the importance--a lot of don't really understand the office and what it does.  It's not like being governor or lieutenant governor comptroller, they know it's got something to do with their money.  But they're not sure, you know, what else is involved in the office, although it's quite an important office.
Story_ID: 670312
Speaker 1: The other thing just address--so there was Herbert London you remember in your (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: In 1994 he doesn't want--you have a very hotly contested elec-?
Speaker 2: It was a very difficult election in, in '94 [1994]. The Republicans put up a very popular conservative candidate.  Who had run four years earlier for governor and had done quite well.  And they needed him and his party he represented the conservative party which is a considerable third party in New York.  And he had a lot of money, and he had a lot of financial experience.  And, you know, it was a very tough race but we won by, by a good--and given the fact that all the other Democrats lost that made it difficult for me, so they didn't help me.  I really had to do--well I, you know, I got more votes than any other Democrat.  So I really--it just made it that much more difficult, and I just had to have a very good organization in order to do that.
Speaker 1: 'Cause he wasn't even wanting to concede, you know, he was, right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's true he held onto the very end.
Speaker 1: 'Til the very end, um-hm, saying he was gonna challenge it.
Story_ID: 670313
Speaker 1: The thing is, so your staff, you're managing about twenty-five hundred people (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: You know, as you were talking about you're the auditor and Giuliani [Rudy Giuliani] is now the one who has come in.
Speaker 2: He's the mayor.
Speaker 1: As the mayor and he gonna clean up all of Dink- you know, Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] becomes the whipping post.  You know, (unclear) was--and so what do you--you go audit, you know, as part of your audit so what happens?
Speaker 2: Well my job was on the every municipality.  Any place public money spent, I'm responsible for going in auditing to make sure that money is being spent well.  And of course, New York City [New York, New York] is one of the municipalities that I had to audit.  So we put together our audit plan as we audit as this office had always had done.  And we decided to do several audits in New York City.  And Mayor Giuliani said, "You can't do it." He absolutely said, "You cannot audit New York City."  And we said, "Why?" And he said, "Because your audits are gonna be political."  Well, I hadn't done any audits (laughter) so why did he think they were going to be political?  But this was part of his style.  He had a very closed style.  He didn't like people looking in to see what he was doing.  But I mean this was absolutely observed this is never happened before and never happened in any of the municipality where the head of the municipality said, the comptroller can't audit.  And we had to actually go to court we had as we go to court.  And it took almost a year and a half to allow us to do what we were supposed to do by virtue of the Constitution.  We went to the state supreme court [Supreme Court of the State of New York], we won.  We went to the appellate division, Giuliani challenged us again, and we won with the unanimous vote from the appellate division and then had to go to the court of appeals [New York Court of Appeals], the state's highest court, simply to affirm my ability to audit New York City and we did win, we did audits. Once we did them, the mayor didn't find them, or no one else found them to be political.  They were good audits, but it was just the whole pattern with Giuliani.  During the whole time, he was mayor during a number of crises and issues that affected both the city and the state, the mayor refused to meet with me.  You know, I am the comptroller of the State of New York, the highest elected minority official in the state and the mayor simply said that he would meet with me to talk about important issues.  Issues that were important to him I mean, I'm, I'm in Albany [New York] as an advocate for the city.  And the mayor of the city doesn't want to meet with me.  So it tells a lot about him.
Speaker 1: So he doing-the other thing--well is the reason that he knew your relationship with Dinkins was that, was that the problem?
Speaker 2: I, I can, I can't I don't know what his problem was (laughter).  I mean well, he had a problem with minorities I mean he did not have a good record.  He did not have minorities in his administration he made no effort to relate to the minority community.  So, and far as he was concerned I was just a member of that community and why should he deal with me although I happened to be the state comptroller.
Speaker 1: So what is his relationship with the governor [George Pataki], you know (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At that time he had a fairly good--they were both Republicans.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And he had a fairly good relationship with the governor; and in this particular dispute I had with the governor, the governor supported me.
Story_ID: 670314
Speaker 1: So, in 1998 you ran against Bruce Blake- Blakeman [Bruce Blakeman] as the, but there was no competition, right (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No competition after that, that's right.
Speaker 1: But, you know, but the interesting thing is that the attorney general it becomes the new attorney general, so it goes from (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eliot Spitzer.
Speaker 1: Right, Eliot Spitzer. Who had come into your--who had come into things also.  I mean later come into--so what--let's see but George Pataki wait a minute, 1998--no the governor--oh the ticket is okay, Peter Vallone [Peter Vallone, Sr.] is on the ticket.  But, but the governor but this really in, in New York it has been more of a history of, of Republican?
Speaker 2: It's been mixed I mean, Rockefeller [Nelson Rockefeller] has been the governor for a long time.  Then you did have Cuomo [Mario Cuomo] for three terms.  And then you had a Republican for three terms after that.  And now we have a Democrat [Andrew Cuomo], so it's been, it's been kind of mixed.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But, but Republicans have always controlled the senate [New York State Senate], so they always had a very significant role in state government.
Speaker 1: All the time.
Speaker 2: For just a brief two year period when David Paterson [HistoryMaker David A. Paterson] became the leader in the senate.
Story_ID: 670315
Speaker 1: But the smaller firms and that was really where most of the minority firms were.  They just don't have the bandwidth to kind of compete (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To compete.
Speaker 1: --with the big ones.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And (unclear)--and the same thing in media, you know, with the con- consolidations in the media you had New York One [NY1].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Wasn't it, was--not New York One.
Speaker 2: Radio One.
Speaker 1: Radio One and--
Speaker 2: And you have Inter City [Inner City Broadcasting Corporation].
Speaker 1: And, you know, Inner City and Sheridan [Sheridan Broadcasting Network].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And all that, you know, but, but one state started consolidation.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The smaller ones just couldn't compete.
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, that's where--I mean there was just an apocalypse in the media.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: You know, but in the, in the case of--you also have what's happening in blacks in Corporate American is shrinking so, you know, so anyway we'll see what happens maybe it's not all doom and gloom.
Speaker 1: Well, I mean it's not--but it's been difficult.
Speaker 2: So I'll keep hoping that it's not doom and gloom.  Okay.  Okay, so I want (pause)--okay, okay.  So I want to--and so we're in 1998, and you decided not to seek reelection now why?
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, because I've done it, it was a good job.  I, I enjoyed it but, you know, just like any industry you're in you want to go to the top.  And the top job in terms of New York is the governor's job.  And so I thought I had an opportunity to do that when I looked at the fact that as I said before I was the only Democrat, who was elected in '94 [1994].  I had now been elected twice with very good margins.  And I had a lot of encouragement from people throughout the state and therefore I thought that was a combination that I could put together.  And that I would have a chance.  I knew it would be difficult the governor was popular the governor was well funded.  And, therefore, you know, I thought I had an opportunity.  And I did not believe I was going to have a difficult primary because I knew that if I had a difficult primary I have to spend a lot of money in the primary.  And it would be therefore I'd have less money for, for a general election.
Speaker 2: But are you telling me in 1998 you have your eye on the governorship?  But you're gonna start planning--
Speaker 1: Planning that's right.
Speaker 2: --because really we have the New York Stock Exchange [New York, New York], I mean the governor's it, you know, now Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton], they say that you, not that--
Speaker 1: What happened was when--
Speaker 2: 'Cause I okay, I thought you were wanting to seek election to U.S. Senate, and you and you, okay.
Speaker 1: No, Well I, I thought about the Senate, Pat Moynihan [Daniel Patrick Moynihan] was the senator, it was obvious he was going to retire.  And when he retired he mentioned that he thought I should run, and he thought that at that time there was no blacks in the Senate.  And he thought I had a possibility to do that.  I did think about it, and then Mrs. Clinton came along and I still felt I had a very good possibility because I was, you know, had a statewide constituency.  But again I just thought about where I could have the most, most impact.  And it occurred to me to go, in the Senate would be nice.  I would go in without, without seniority and, you know, more than a hundred senators.  But being governor I thought I could really have much more impact because I'd be the person in charge of making major decisions for the 18 million people in New York's State.  So I just felt that was a--that made a lot more sense for, for me.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: So I supported Mrs. Clinton, and I focused on running for governor.
Story_ID: 670316
Speaker 1: So the next thing, I mean at what point are you elected to the board of the New York Stock Exchange [New York, New York] (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well what happened is that as--when I--while I'm comptroller, and I guess about 1997.  I was asked to join the board I was the first public official to ever be elected to the board.  But given the fact that I was doing business with all the major members of the stock exchange and one of the major investors.  Over, at that time over $100 billion I'm investing in the stock exchange, I was invited to join the board.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this, I mean, this also in the black I mean in the black community I mean period, you know, is viewed as huge.  Because you're the only public official, you know, as the member of the twenty-six member board but it's--
Speaker 2: At the time there was one other African American on the board.  Cliff Wharton [HistoryMaker Clifton R. Wharton, Jr.] was on the board from some of the time that I was there.  And he had been the head of TIAA-CREF [Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association of America - College Retirement Equities Fund, New York, New York], which is a major pension fund.  He'd been president of Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] and the state university [State University of New York System].  So he was a very--and from Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] (laughter)?  I knew his family from way back when I was growing up in Roxbury.  I didn't know him then, but I went to school with two of his brothers.  So Cliff Wharton has always, also been a terrific mentor supporter of mine.
Speaker 1: I love him too, yeah he's not been well recently.
Story_ID: 670317
Speaker 1: I want you to talk about what happens here, you know, during this time period because you find yourself in the eye--you know, you and others, but you--in the eye of the storm.
Speaker 2: The storm was when I got on the board the head of it was a fellow named Richard Grasso who had been there for thirty something years and had really helped the stock exchange [New York Stock Exchange, New York, New York] grow.  Had a very good reputation is the major exchange in the world.  And, however, the internal governance, there were some problems.  And there were some problems with his compensation, and it got to the point where we realized that over the years he had amassed a lot of money in a pension fund for himself. People on the board had not been paying attention and didn't know what kind of benefits he had accrued.  And when he tried to use those benefits to take money out prior to his retirement we discovered it was about $120 million.  And it was a big division on the board where, where in terms of whether--he was entitled to that money.  And whether he was entitled to take it at that particular time, and the board was divided on that issue.  And the division within the board was such that and there was so much attention.  That was a time when there were so many other cases of greed on Wall Street.  Eliot Spitzer was the attorney general, he was somebody that was pointing out.  And there was just this public outcry about the greed of Wall Street.  People really abusing their, their authority and consumers investors not getting the kind of attention that they, that they should have.  And so all this focus on the stock exchange because it was such an important entity.  And so, it divided the board and ultimately it came to the point where it was such a distraction because of all of this attention that it was clear to some of us that Dick Grasso should not stay because of the distraction that had been 'caused.  And I joined with others and we asked for his resignation.  He resigned, and there were lawsuits from him and his supporters.  Eliot Spitzer got involved and, and brought charges against a couple of members of the board.  And it was just a very messy situation. I ended up being the person really as the lead director at that time of the stock exchange.  And what I was able to do was to bring the board back together.  And to bring in an interim and the person we brought in as interim is John Reed [John S. Reed], who remember hired me when I went to Citibank [Citibank, N.A.].  John Reed had now retired from Citibank and was really didn't have any major responsibility some of us thought he would be a good person to take the stock exchange through this process.  Through this rebuilding process reached out, hired John Reed and at that time I left because we now have somebody in place who could run it and, you know, I just thought there was no room for me in terms of bringing in people to moving forward.  And that's how it got resolved and the lawsuits all went away.  It was clear that no one had done anything wrong. And, a, a lot of other people left, and the stock exchange is now a very viable institution.
Speaker 1: So he ended up getting his compensation package, I think, I think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He got it, he got it, yeah.
Speaker 1: After years that he ended up that it was a legal thing, but it was a lot of money.
Speaker 2: It was a lot of money, and that's what the problem seems to be, a lot of money.  But the real issue was a lack of oversight by the board over the years of not paying attention to how those benefits were being accumulated.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Because he got bonuses and the bonuses became part of his pension benefits they made--some people felt they should not have.  But it was a lack of oversight. This is a board with some very influential people.  All of the major titans of Wall Street were on that board but they weren't paying attention to how the place was being run.  And how his finances were being managed.
Speaker 1: Well we would see that then in 2008.  I mean then, you know, we had the meltdown of everything so.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So I--so you then--but that's it was a whole media frenzy.
Speaker 2: Oh it was very much so, that's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean, it was the--really I mean, you were constantly in the news.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know, people were trying to figure out what's sort of going on.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were blaming people and no I didn't have any charges brought against me like some people did.  But it was a very difficult situation but we got through it and I want to take credit for getting us through it. I was able to pull people together.  And they selected me to be the lead director during this period.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And I was involved in reaching out to, to John Reed, who was just the right person to come in and--
Speaker 1: That's wond- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and move forward.
Story_ID: 670318
Speaker 1: This, you know this is the same year that September 11th [September 11, 2001] happens, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --later in the year which causes a lot of you know other issues.
Speaker 2: Oh, terrible pain and financial dislocation in New York [New York] and it affected us at the pension system although we recovered very quickly and in fact at a time when the stock exchange [New York Stock Exchange, New York, New York] was and our economy was faltering.  I invested several billion dollars back into the stock exchange to, to lift up their fortunes at the time.
Story_ID: 670319
Speaker 1: So let's talk about your, your, you know, your run for, for governor then.  Okay, so who--talk about who you're running against?  And, and how many other--at this point we had, had Wilder. I'm just trying to think who--what other governor runs had there been because you always have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, when Doug Wilder [HistoryMaker L. Douglas Wilder] was the first African American elected as governor in Virginia.  The other people that run there were people who had been elected as lieutenant governor in Colorado and in California.  Tom Bradley, the former mayor of Los Angeles [California], ran for governor a very close race in California.  But he lost, so that was the most significant race after, after the Wilder race.  Tom Bradley, there were--he had a lot of support.  Had done a very good job as mayor of Los Angeles and it looked like he was gonna win.  And all the polls had him winning, and it tells you something about polling in terms of whether people are honest.  Because if you really looked at the polls a lot of people said to the pollsters is that they were gonna vote for Tom Bradley obviously did not.  So that, that was a signal that maybe it wasn't gonna be possible to run and win in a big state like California and New York. But I felt that given the fact that I had already, you know, been elected twice and that have favorable ratings in terms of what I had done as comptroller.  I thought it was worth taking on that challenge, and it would have a lot of impact if I had that job.  And the race got underway with the primary which was really the most difficult part of the race.  I was challenged in the primary although I had considerable support. Andrew Cuomo who was the son of the former governor Mario Cuomo, had been very involved in his father's campaign.  And his father's administration so therefore he was well known and had a lot of support in the state.  But at this time Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] had had appointed him secretary of HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development].  So he was a cabinet official had a good reputation for what he'd done at HUD.  So he comes back home to run, and that's a very tough situation that Andrew Cuomo was all of the things that I had mentioned in terms of his father and his influence in the state.  Had been able to raise a lot of money particularly from people in Washington [D.C.] and so it looked like it was gonna be very tough, but I felt that I could do it.
Story_ID: 670320
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So who do you assemble on your team?  And, you know, do you have--I mean, in these instances do the--'cause I remember when people were--black mayors were running and a lot of times then they would gather around, you know, others?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: But who do you assemble on your--
Speaker 2: Well I, I had a very good team and first of all I started out always with my base.  I had just about every minority elected official in the state supporting me.  I had elected officials from outside of the state.  One of our big supporters was Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown], who was then a speaker in California. I had other people like Mayor Daley [Richard M. Daley] from, from Illinois.  I had a lot--from Chicago [Illinois]; I had a lot of people around the country who were supporting me.  But a very strong base in New York but and in addition to all of the minority elected officials.  I had all the major official white elected officials, the speaker of the assembly, Shelly Silver [Sheldon Silver] was supporting me, Eliot Spitzer was supporting me; he was then the attorney general.  So I had considerable support which I thought would convince Andrew Cuomo you know, that he couldn't win, but he ran anyway.
Speaker 1: But did anyone try to stop him from running?
Speaker 2: Sure, some people tried to stop him from running. Charlie Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel] for instance who would have supported him to become head of HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development].  The Clintons [Hillary Rodham Clinton and President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] initially were neutral but in the end they supported me.  So this was a tough race, and we had to spend a lot of money we had to spend over $12 million in that race.  And near the end it was very clear that I had a considerable lead over Andrew Cuomo.  But I'd already spent $12 million and the last week of the race he pulled out, he conceded.  And because we had had such overwhelming support that he was not able to overcome.  But the fact is he forced me to spend $12 million which meant that when I went into the general election, the governor, Pataki [George Pataki] who didn't have a primary had $40 million.  And it was very difficult then to raise additional money, and he outspent me and he beat me.
Speaker 1: Was there ever any discussion with Cuomo after that about, you know, what, what had happened?  I mean, I guess it's over but at that point, you know, why he had done what he had done.  And, and then how is the black community feeling (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah well, it's an interesting point.  After that race, we talked a little bit, and there was a lot of political of course, you know, analysis and in a sense was that this would hurt him in the future with the black community.  And the reason he ran is he thought he could win.  You know, he thought that being the son of the former governor [Mario Cuomo], he thought that having been the secretary of HUD that, you know, he just had a lot of the advantages.  And the fact that he was able to raise considerable money and at that time by the way to he was married to Kerry Kennedy.  So he had the support of the whole Kennedy operation which was surprising but, you know, he was a relative at that point.  So, you know, you had Ted Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy] and coming into the campaign for him you had the Kennedys raising money for him.  So, you know, he thought that--and Kerry Kennedy herself who's a very dynamic person was out campaigning, his wife.  So he thought that, that, you know, was a considerable asset; and it was, but it wasn't enough.
Story_ID: 670321
Speaker 1: And then you also had another handicap in the case of the DNC chairman [Democratic National Committee] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: --you know, Terry McAuliffe. Can we talk about that (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Terry well, you know, given the fact that I had been a big supporter of the party.  And had done a lot in terms of helping the party and raising money for the party.  I expected the support of the party and it didn't come through.  I--and Terry McAuliffe got embarrassed by it and the very end he showed up with, you know, some money, but he really didn't give us the support we thought we deserved from the party they just weren't there.
Speaker 1: So those things--would you have done anything differently?  I mean, you couldn't control Cuomo [Andrew Cuomo] but if you on hindsight is there anything you would've done differently because I meant--for Pataki [George Pataki] spending $38.5 million and you spent $13.9 and what is it Golisano, Golisano?
Speaker 2: Golisano that's another thing that you had in the race. One of the things that I thought I could do because I had done well upstate in the past,  I thought and Pataki wasn't particularly popular in Upstate New York because their economy was in such bad shape.  I had hoped to be able to pick up a lot of support upstate.  But Tom Golisano, a very wealthy, you know, a billionaire from Upstate New York, he ran as well on the independent line and conservative line. So he got those upstate votes that I would have--I had been counting on but with him in the race he--and with the--he picked up all of those disaffected upstate Republicans who were not gonna vote for Pataki, but I could've had them if he hadn't been in the race, so that was a major factor.
Speaker 1: Do you think--so you think that factor plus what about the letters, you know, the six--do you think that helped things go 'cause (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no.
Speaker 1: Oh no, the letters, the sixty-one--okay, Pataki okay, okay.  Okay.  So you, so it was really because he was the three it helped--it siphoned off voters?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right.
Speaker 1: 'Cause those three way campaigns are often hard.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah and he and he siphoned off just the votes that I really believe I could've had.
Story_ID: 670322
Speaker 1: What are you thinking about politics at this point?  You know, because one--I mean, first of all, I think we--I don't mean to say that, jump in but money becomes, you know, major, major money.  This is, you know, at one point in time eight million, twelve [million dollars], that would be a lot of money and we're seeing, you know, now double digits--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --in the millions, but what did--what were you--?
Speaker 2: As I think back on politics in my own experience with it I think it is still terribly important.  I'm distressed that a lot of people don't want to do don't want to be in it a lot of good people and the reasons why are very, very upsetting.  It's all about money.  It takes a lot of money and people who have the ability to raise money or put money--for instance look what we've had in New York City [New York, New York].  Mike Bloomberg [Michael Bloomberg], you know, who's able to spend $100 million of his own money to be mayor.  I won't say he's a bad man but the fact is without $100 million he never would've been mayor.  Now how can you compete against that somebody who can just write a check for hundred million dollars and say I'm running?  So that that is a big issue and even if you can put in your own money the fact that you have to spend so much time just raising money.  And most people don't give you money unless they want something (laughter), you know.  So this terrible pressure in terms of satisfying the donors.  The other thing about politics today is, is the media approach to it that the media is just so terribly what should I say, nasty at times.  They seem to only look for the negatives if they came find them some of them make them up.  And now, you know, you're not just talking about the regular media, you've got the bloggers.  And the people involved in social media and that has an impact on the mainline media because they now feel they've got to compete with these competitors.  And therefore they all go to the lowest, you know, denominator.  Everybody tries to out, you know, be more negative than everybody else. If one newspaper is negative, other, the newspapers other television--then they gotta be negative as well.  So it's just a very, very toxic environment, and it's just difficult to really get in it and feel good about what you're doing.  That's, and now I say that I don't want to discourage other people.  But it's, it's, you know, I've learned a lot from it. I got a lot out of it. I would do--I don't have any regrets about it but I do regret what it has become.
Speaker 1: Now some people said that you were too nice.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, that's true (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know, that that you wouldn't take on the fight in that way.
Speaker 2: Well I tried to take on the fight in my own way.  I don't want to; I don't want to take on the fight by going out telling lies about people and distorting someone's record.  I want to take on the fight by being positive and talking about what I can do, what needs to be done.  I talked about what my opponents did--I mean look I wasn't nice with Andrew Cuomo. That's why I won (laughter) you know.  So, you know, you have--but you can't, you can't, you know, sort of abandon your own principles just because you are in politics.  I mean, you know, there's some things that some people thought I should've done that just were--I thought were not proper, not ethical, not appropriate. And so I wouldn't do it, and I think you have to stand by your own principles.
Story_ID: 670323
Speaker 1: You would--really I mean at this point public, political office is off the board?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I'm out here supporting others. I mean there're other young people coming along.  We got some good up and coming people in New York.  People like a fellow named Hakeem Jeffries who's a new congressman from, from Brooklyn [New York].  There's a very good female congressperson in Brooklyn, Yvette Clarke.  I mean, we've got some good young people coming along and I, I try to help them.  We have a mayor in Buffalo [New York] by the name of Byron Brown, who could possibly be a governor of New York State. I support him.  So I try to help pass on my experience to others.
Speaker 1: You think it's positive too--why has there been no--more focused though nationally on the U.S. Senate I mean--?
Speaker 2: Well because, you know, each--you have to look at each state.  I mean, they're possibly, you know, are there possibilities in, in a given state for someone to run for the Senate?  And I think a lot of people feel that the Senate is a nice place to go and argue (laughter), but you don't get a lot done, you know, you have to be there for so long to have any kind of, of, you know, seniority.  And, and right now, Washington [D.C.], there's so much gridlock, nobody feels that they're doing anything productive so it's not a very appealing place.
Story_ID: 670324
Speaker 1: Let's talk about what happens then you--now and I don't know, I think at this point then you're, you're starting to join.   You've been--are invited to join some corporate boards like--?
Speaker 2: Yes when I, I left office I, I joined corporate boards like Tyco International, New Plan realty company [New Plan Excel Realty Trust, Inc.]. I, I'm on the board of Ariel Investments, a minority owned very successful investment firm in Chicago [Illinois].  So I, I do that--I do some consulting and I continue as I said to be in public service in other ways.  I'm supporting other candidates I get involved in higher education.  I get to chair a group called the Council on Public Higher Education, bringing together a lot of unions and other groups that are interested in public education.  So I stay involved, and I, you know, I'm still willing looking for other ways to provide public service.
Speaker 1: And you also--now you still have Convent Capital?
Speaker 2: Capital that was just the consulting firm that I used if I did business with anybody.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And then the other thing I want Tag Entertainment you also joined right?
Speaker 2: That was a board that was involved in making investments in the, in the motion pictures.  I stayed with the board for a short time--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I wasn't particularly interested (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.
Story_ID: 670325
Speaker 1: So let's talk about where you are now.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, sure.  Well, let me tell you how I got here.  Having--had the relationship with Andrew Cuomo I--he is now running for governor.  But prior to that I, I--when Eliot Spitzer became governor, he asked me what I'd like to do.  If I like to do anything in state government I didn't want a job, but given the interests I have always had in education and now higher education because I've been involved with the conference of higher education organizations, I thought a good place to provide service was on the board of the State University of New York [State University of New York System] because it was such an important institution.  So Eliot Spitzer and I had a discussion and he and I told him I was interested.  So I was elected as a member of the board of the State University and I did that during Eliot Spitzer's tenure which as, you know, was short lived.  And then I continued in that position with David Paterson [HistoryMaker David A. Paterson] when, when he was governor.  And then when Andrew Cuomo became governor the issue arose and you had referred to it earlier of his relationship with the African American community.  Given the fact that, you know, he had run against me and but a lot of people felt that that had been harmful to me.  And therefore there was a concern about his, his support now that he was running for governor.  And people tried to make an issue out of the fact that he was planning to run against David Paterson.  And, you know, this was gonna be a pattern on his part of taking on black elected officials and they thought the campaign would be very, a very racially divisive campaign.  And I came out publicly and said, "We can't look at it that way. If Andrew Cuomo wants to run I think we ought to look at his record.  We ought to look at his record with respect to any opponent, and we shouldn't look at it from a point of view of believing it's going to be racially divisive."  It didn't have to be that I did not believe that Andrew Cuomo ran against me because I was black.  I thought Andrew Cuomo ran against me because he thought he could win.  So, I, you know, I thought it was important to kind of have people get over that issue and not have a campaign that had these racial overtones, and I said so publicly.  So as, you know, David Paterson backed out, decided not to run; Andrew Cuomo did become governor.
Story_ID: 670326
Speaker 1: And when he [Andrew Cuomo] became governor, we had a talk about what I might do, and I wanted to continue providing leadership at the state university.  I'll tell you why: the state university is the largest public higher education institution in the country.  It's a system; we have sixty-four campuses across the State of New York.  We have thirty community colleges, we have four year comprehensive colleges.  We have research institutions like Stony Brook [Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York] and University of Buffalo [State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York].  We have a very good community college like the one where my wife [HistoryMaker Joyce F. Brown] is the president, FIT, the Fashion Institute [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York].  So it's really an important enterprise with 460,000 students that we educate across the state.  About 260,000 employees, it's a very important institution.  And what I tried to point out to Andrew Cuomo was that the biggest problem and he knew this, that he had was how he could improve the New York state economy.  See in New York we have two economies, the downstate economy, which has financial services and is very robust and the upstate economy that's really very very weak.  And so we have these two economies and something has to be done to improve the upstate economy.  And one of the things that I said to Andrew Cuomo is that, the State University of New York [State University of New York System] could be a platform for improving the economy because in all of these upstate communities we have colleges.  And those colleges are now the economic drivers in those communities.  We employ people we purchase goods and services.  So if he invest in our colleges throughout the state that could provide jobs economic opportunity and economic growth.  And he bought it, and I became chairman of the State University of New York.  And we have been able to really grow, do well the governor has invested, has been--in us, provided a lot of support.  For instance we now have a program called Start-Up New York [Start-UP NY] where if a business that wants to come into the state or someone wants to start a business they develop a relationship with one of our colleges and a relationship should be, could be that the people in those colleges the faculty could do research for the business.  We could provide space for the business, we could have our students serve as interns in that business.  If a business forms that kind of relationship that business will pay no state corporate taxes for ten years, and all of the employees in that business will pay no state personal taxes for ten years.  So we've been attracting a lot of businesses to come into our communities where we have our colleges to develop relationships with those colleges, provide jobs in that community.  So we have really become an economic engine for economic growth in, in the state.  So that's a partnership that I've developed with the governor, and our colleges are doing very well, our students are doing very well, and we are just a very important institution in this, in this state; and I'm pleased to be able to devote the time that I devote to it as the chairman.
Story_ID: 670327
Speaker 1: So is--the program [Start-Up NY] that you're talking about, is that a program that was legislatively passed or that you were able (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, the governor [Andrew Cuomo] and I took it to the legislature [New York State Legislature].  The legislature passed it because there had to be--there was gonna be a financial impact because it meant that we'll be getting--if we're giving these tax breaks to people.  That means there will be less income coming in for taxes.  But it's an investment because we think it will, it will lead to other income that these businesses will, will generate.
Story_ID: 670328
Speaker 1: Now you've spoken about online learning and the significance there so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: --I would like to know what are the key things that you would like to see happen under your leadership.
Speaker 2: One, I want to see I want to see this economic development activity continue to, to really make sure the colleges provide stimulus for economic activity.  I want to see our--as a higher education institution today we have to pay a lot of attention to the educational pipeline to what's happening in K through twelve [kindergarten through twelfth grade].  Because what is happening is that we are now getting students who come in from the public schools with diplomas but they're not college ready.  Right now in New York State we have a very good graduation rate from high school, about 70 percent.  But the latest statistics show us that only about 21 percent of the kids who graduating from high school in New York are prepare for college.  So at SUNY, the State University [State University of New York System], we're now spending about $80 million a year on remediation.  Teaching these kids the skills that they didn't get in school.  And we've gotta do that because I, you know, we've got to get who graduates from our high schools, and they haven't been prepared that's not their fault.  So we've got to make up for that, and we have to also take some ownership of this problem.  Because in New York we train about 40 percent of our teachers who teach in our public schools.  So we've gotta do a better job at teacher education to make sure we're sending in teachers who are equipped to provide the education that these kids need so that they're prepared to come to college.  So that's something then, you know, it's a big task but we can't ignore what is happening in terms of the K through twelve system because we depend on that system for our students.  I want to see us expand our activities where there's back to online learning.  We have a program called our Open SUNY in over the next four years we want to enroll about another hundred thousand students that are online.  Just think of the possibility of using technology to reach out to a lot of people who wouldn't think about going to school.  Or can't afford to come to school or don't know how to do--how to relate to our schools.  And we think a robust, effective online program can really expand our reach in our ability to educate a lot more people.  So those are some of the things that I want to see happen.  I want to see us really measure the success of students.  Not just how we make sure we can recruit students and make sure they graduate but we want them to be successful when they leave.  But we want to take responsibility for that to prepare them for the real world.  The real work, the real work opportunities professional and otherwise that they have.  We have to have more of our students proficient in the STEM fields: science, technology, and math, economics [sic. science, technology, engineering and mathematics].  We've got to prepare people for that because these are the kind of skills that the workplaces are now demanding.  And we gotta make sure all students are being prepared for that.  But as we focus on stem and, and, you know, technical issues we can't forget about the humanities and arts.  We have to I--instead of STEM I like to talk about STEAM to put an, A in for the arts.  We can't forget about that but we gotta provide that kind of balanced education for our students.
Speaker 1: Okay, and now your tenure, how long will it be, do you know?
Speaker 2: Well I, I was appointed originally six years ago.  And my term just ended--will just, will end on the 30th of June this year.  But the governor [Andrew Cuomo] has just re-nominated me for another six year term.
Story_ID: 670329
Speaker 1: I, just this one question, then I want to go on to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: --some philosophical questions.  You know, the--right now there's a new mayor [Bill de Blasio] and he's been very, he's been, you know, up at the state government.  And, and he, he's been, you know, talking about taxing the rich to, to, you know, to fund public school education.  What are your feeling- and how much are you collaborating maybe with that because a lot of the issues you're talking about are beginning at the public school (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah sure.  Well, we're collaborating, one of the, the person who runs our system is the chancellor.  We appointed chancellor we have a very dynamic and in energetic, effective chancellor by the name of Nancy Zimpher [Nancy L. Zimpher].  And she, in particular, has had, is relating to the new chancellor of the public school system and, you know.
Speaker 1: Carmen.
Speaker 2: Carmen Farina we really want to have a good collaborative relationship with, with her.  I know the mayor, we've worked together before.  I think that the mayor is, you know, he's still new.  I think the mayor could have handled the situation around his demand for more money for pre-K [pre-kindergarten] which is very important.  And important to us and I think he's right about the fact that we give kids an earlier start with educational experience they have the possibility of doing well a greater possibility of doing well.  And he wanted to do it by taxing rich people. I can understand that but when he found an alternative and that the governor [Andrew Cuomo] said, "Okay I'll fund it, let's not tax people."  Because the governor is very concerned as I am if we tax wealthy people they might leave New York.  So I think we have an appropriate tax system at the present time.  I don't think people want to see more taxes and the government didn't so he said he would find it. When he did that, I think the mayor should've claimed victory.  Said, "Okay I've got the money," that's more important that he has the money then where it came from, so that's the lesson I think the mayor has learned.  I think the mayor knows that in order to do a lot of things that he wants to do in New York City [New York, New York] he needs the support of the state and the support of the governor.  So that relationship is improving, and I think that's important.
Story_ID: 670330
Speaker 1: So I, I want to ask you 'cause this is, this city you've been an active member in for now fifty--
Speaker 2: Fifty something.
Speaker 1: --fifty something years and I wanted you to talk about the changes in that community both positive and negative.  We've--you've talked on the political side.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But you came in really on the, you know, the ground--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --dealing with, you know, very--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --close in the community with a hands on approach.  I just want you to talk about that and then--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, first of all, there's no place with greater opportunities than New York [New York].  I mean, you can come here with some wild dreams and see them realized.  And it happens every day that this is a place of great opportunity.  If you work hard if you're prepared and if you're willing to really take on the city and understand it and, and have an appreciation for the resources we have. And the diverse group of people we have.  So there's just no place like New York for getting ahead and making it but you gotta really work hard.  And it's very competitive, gotta be up on your game at the top of your game every single day.  So if you want that kind of life New York is the place to be.  We've seen some incredible changes mostly positive I mean in terms of minority participation at every level.  We've had a minority mayor.  We've had minorities in major political positions.  But even when we haven't had minorities we've had influence.  I think we had a very bad period when Giuliani [Rudy Giuliani] was mayor because we had no influence; he didn't pay attention.  Michael Bloomberg paid attention, I think it's no question Bill de Blasio will pay attention.  But the fact that we were making our gains in, in not just in politics but in business and in other enterprises as well.  I think the media gives better coverage now to things that happen in the black community, not just the negative things.  But I think at the other problems is in New York you've got really two classes.  You've got the, well what some people say the 99 percent and the 1 percent, this is where it is.  And the people at the very top economically here has had tremendous growth.  And the people at the bottom and in the middle even (laughter) and that's the real problem the middle class is shrinking.  And the middle class benefits and opportunities that were here once seem to be going away.  There's not the kind of growth of economic progress the old growth of economic activity and participation at the middle class, and most of it is at the very top.  And this, so this disparity that's, that's the most troubling thing about New York at the present time.  And, and because of that, because there's are so many people who are doing well that drives up--it's like it's almost impossible to live.  Now at first it was Manhattan [New York], the real estate values is just through the roof.  But that's expanding in other places and, Brooklyn [New York], Queens [New York]--it's just very expensive.  And I am, and I'm afraid that's gonna drive away middle class people who we need.  That people find it very difficult to afford to live in New York at the present time.  That people to make it are making it if they have two incomes in a family.
Story_ID: 670331
Speaker 1: So you--since you've lived through this period of time, do you--have you been reflective about what mistakes were made along the way?  And I mean have you had times--so what do you have thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I, I think the mistakes that have been made along the way is there's been a neglect of the middle class.  And neglect of investments and understanding of what the needs are that we just can't keep pouring money and making--giving benefits to people at the very top.  We've gotta think about people who are in the middle and at the bottom.  I, I just think that there's been just too much emphasis on making sure that the people who are comfortable get more comfortable.  And not enough attention to the people who are being--feeling marginalized.  I think a mistake has been made in terms of, you know, not demanding more accountability for the educational system.  We have put a lot of money in and we spend more money on public education than anybody else per pupil.  But the fact is we're not demanding from teachers, the unions that represent them, the kind of accountability that we should demand for the investment we're making.
Story_ID: 670332
Speaker 1: The other thing, this is a sort of diversion, but you are an Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] and you're also Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And the Boule is really I mean doctor--they've been very supportive of us over the years (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, really? Oh, good.
Speaker 1: And I would like to I mean that was, you know, when I met on the Vineyard [Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts] that was, you know, they were directing me to people--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --to, to be interviewed.  So I'm just pleased that you've sat.   But I want to ask you about the, the importance of both organizations can you--?
Speaker 2: Sure, will I think they are both important but may be less than in the past.  I think the reason is at one time they were more important because they were the only outlet for minority professionals.  So the Boule was something you belong to a fraternity like Alpha or Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity]. And therefore you, your charitable activities and other social activities were carried out through that institution.  Today diversity--I mean it's that, you know, that people have other outlets and other ways to be helpful.  And other ways to give money, you know, black people now make political donations.  And they, you know, donate to various charities.  So the institutions--the people in these organizations are really being pulled to do things through other channels, and they are.  And they're being effective, so I think it's not, and I think their role has changed.  But I don't think it's a bad thing because I think of the lessons we've learned.  And the traditions and values that we developed as members of these black organizations, we've carried those values into other institutions.  And I think we're helping to encourage other institutions to be investors and, and participants in our community, so I think that's a good thing.
Speaker 1: So you--but you should talk about what the value was at the time and why they were necessary?
Speaker 2: Oh they were necessary because that's it, that's all we had. We only had black organizations to provide support to black--to the black community.  Now we can join a foundation or we can join a corporation and to be part of the corporation's charitable giving or the corporation's foundation.  So we're bringing those values of commitment to the community into other channels, and that I think is a good thing.
Story_ID: 670333
Speaker 1: And specifically the black community you've alluded to some of it but you're speaking in a larger context.  I want to direct this--direct t- just to the black community.  The black community that, you know, you came out of well actually you didn't come out, you know, but you know get my point.  So what are your hopes and concerns for that community?
Speaker 2: Well, my well let me, you know, I did talk about the black community I grew up in how homogeneous it was.  And how connected it was and how supportive it was that community doesn't exist anymore.  The black professionals and, and others who lived on my street [in Boston, Massachusetts] could live anywhere else.  Those people now can live wherever they want.  And so we've left a lot of people behind who only see negative models.  And, and they don't, and they don't get any support, positive support from those negative models like I got from the people in my community.  That worries me and, you know, some of us have tried to give back.  Some of us do mentoring and other ways of reaching back.  But that doesn't happen enough, and so I see almost a disintegration of that black village that was important to me and it was important to others and it just doesn't exist.  So we got to find new ways of reaching back and being models and being contributors and investors into the communities that we left.
Story_ID: 670334
Speaker 1: What do you think the legacy of your generation, when all is said and done?  What do you think people will say of your generation of--?
Speaker 2: I think that what they'll say is we were very energetic we were very ambitious.  We really broke barriers, and we demonstrated that we could do anything others can do.  We showed we've demonstrated that we can be president. We can be mayor, we can be governor.  We can be the head of Time Warner [Time Warner, Inc.].  We can be the head of American Express [American Express Company], we can do a lot of things that have never been done before and we can do them and do them well.  And I think that's the legacy but we haven't done enough to bring others along with us.  And we haven't developed the mechanisms for other people to climb up the ladder that we were able to ascend.
Speaker 1: So the work is still--
Speaker 2: There's more to be done (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Still to be done.
Story_ID: 670335
Speaker 1: And then what, what do you want as your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy I hope is one of that I've tried.  That I have tried to move forward and to demonstrate that somebody who looks like me can do anything anybody else can do.  But that I also didn't abandon my commitment and my caring for people who started where I started.  And having yet had the opportunities that I have had.  And that's why I am now committed to education, particularly higher education.  And using the resources of higher education to reach back into the K through twelve system [kindergarten through twelfth grade].  I've, you know, I've 460,000 kids that I'm responsible for I feel in this system [State University of New York System], and I want to make sure they get the best possible education.
Speaker 1: So, Matthew Bullock [Matthew W. Bullock] did he see--when he passed away?
Speaker 2: Oh, maybe twenty years now [sic.].
Speaker 1: Twenty, so he didn't see all of your success?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: But he saw, he saw a good amount of that.
Speaker 2: He did.
Speaker 1: And you said that Michael Haynes [Michael E. Haynes] is still alive (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Michael Haynes is still alive I'm still in touch and I still appreciate his support and he knows that.
Story_ID: 670336
Speaker 1: And then just one, one last--but do you ever, do you ever think of yourself as, as the little boy that was there in, you know, Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts].  Going to St. was it St. (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) St. Mark Congregational Church [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: St. Mark Congregational Church, could he have envisioned where the path your life has taken?
Speaker 2: No, I think the little boy who went to St. Mark Congregational Church and played in Monroe Park [Boston, Massachusetts] thought he was gonna be--go someplace, wasn't sure where.  But I think the little boy knew that if he wanted to go anywhere he had to work hard right from that point.  Had to be very committed to his own education and had to care about people and had to care about how he treated other people, what other people thought of him.  And somewhere along the way he realized that that was what was gonna make the difference.
