Story_ID: 635276
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Tell us a little bit about this picture (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, these pictures I received recently of my great-grandparents who, very candidly, I didn't know their names.  And I assume that's where my name came from, Cornelius Moore, Sr., who was my father's father--grandfather, and his wife, Mary Moore, who was my great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: These are the two women that supported me through my older years.  The one on the left is Aunt Sarah [Sarah Leverette] who was my mother's brother's wife, and the one on the right is my mother's oldest sister, Aunt Eunice [Eunice Leverette (ph.)].  Aunt Sarah on the left gave me money to go to law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This picture was taken in 1973 or so.  I was in Cuba on a trade mission.  You see I had on my Cuban hat.  It's a trade mission of the Minneapolis chamber of commerce [Minneapolis Regional Chamber of Commerce].  We met with Fidel Castro there.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And, you said the year, right?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-three [1973], I think it is.  It may have been--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: And that picture, of course, is with General Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell].  We both served on the board of trustees at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] for a while, and he was in Minneapolis [Minnesota] for something.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Two thousand--6/13/2000 [June 13, 2000]?
Speaker 2: Yep, um-hm.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Wasn't that your daughter's birthday?
Speaker 2: Is it?  That's one of them, yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  June 13th?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And that's a picture of me in my office.  They did an article on me in one of the magazines about my watch collection.  In fact, it's the same watch I've got on today.
Speaker 1: And this is our wedding picture, Wenda [HistoryMaker Wenda Weekes Moore] and I got married in June of 1965, June 27th.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: From General Powell to General Mills [General Mills Inc.].
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I was a commodore of the Aquatennial [Minneapolis Aquatennial] which is a summer festival in Minneapolis in 1998, but this was on the front page of one of the magazines we do at work, in 2003, but there's a long story with me in the white jacket.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, remember to get that story later.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then this is--
Speaker 2: Is there a picture in here?
Speaker 1: Well, the picture is just the same picture in the front, yeah, but it's just the first time I'd ever gotten a copy of the family reunion.  I saw that--it had that in your questions.  I never knew we had family reunions.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Well, if you have a copy that you could give us--
Speaker 1: You could send it back.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: I don't know much more.  It's not a whole lot in there.
Speaker 2: We have an archives box where this kind of material (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, just send it back.  I mean it's the only one.  Somebody sent it to me.  One of my cousins or somebody.
Speaker 2: Did you find some, were there some Boule pictures?
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a box of them around here.  Give me a second.  But this was taken (unclear), I don't know where that was taken, but that's, I was grand sire of the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity].  I don't know where.  It wasn't in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Does it say anything on the back of it?  I don't know.
Speaker 2: It might be on the back, yep, at the bottom, let's see--
Speaker 1: First guy in Chicago--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) Chicago.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but he did a lot of photography.  In fact, this box--
Speaker 2: That's recent, I know.
Speaker 1: These are just various pictures we took when I was, that's with him and Danny Davis [HistoryMaker Danny K. Davis] in Chicago.  It was John Rogers [HistoryMaker John Rogers, Sr.], I don't care much about him--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) We'll skip him.
Speaker 1: He just, he didn't know when the (unclear) was going on.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Do you want to get any of those, Larry [Larry Crowe]?
Speaker 1: You (unclear) if you wanted him.  I don't know.  They're just pictures of the--
Speaker 2: I'm just thinking the best ones you think.
Speaker 1: We just happened to be in Chicago, and I've got a, you know, like she said, I should have--some beautiful voice, there, Danny Davis.
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: Yes, he does, he does, yeah.
Speaker 2: And this is Charles Teamer [HistoryMaker Charles Teamer, Sr.] on the right.  And he was the grand sire, preceding me, from New Orleans [Louisiana], and his sister (unclear); a very nice man.
Speaker 1: I interviewed him.
Speaker 2: Did you do him?
Speaker 1: I think so.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: And this is the oldest living grand sire of the Boule.  He's from Xenia, Ohio.
Speaker 2: Xenia, that's right outside of Dayton [Ohio].
Speaker 1: He's a lawyer.  I can't call his name right now, Matt something [ph.].
Speaker 2: And here I am with, the guy in the middle is Joe Moore [ph.] who was the sire archon of the Chicago, and on the right is Congressman Danny Davis--is it congressman, Danny Davis.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is at the Adler atrium where the Adler--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, Adler Planetarium.
Speaker 2: --in Chicago.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Danny Davis, the congressman on the right, Joe Moore, sire archon of the Chicago Boule, (unclear) Boule, at the Adler Planetarium in Chicago.
Speaker 1: So did you just move the mic?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.  I can do 'em right quick.  The gentleman to my left is the oldest living grand sire archon from Ohio--
Speaker 1: Xenia.
Speaker 2: Xenia, Ohio.  And this is Charles Teamer, who, the grand sire that preceded me.  And he's from New Orleans, Louisiana, Charles Teamer.
Story_ID: 635277
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interview today for The HistoryMakers archive.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Cornell Leverette Moore, C-O-R-N-E-L-L, L-E-V-E-R-E-T-T-E, Moore, M-O-O-R-E.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 18, 1939, Tignall, Wilkes County, Georgia.  That's W-I-L-K-E-S.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Attorney at law.
Speaker 1: All right, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Today is January 15th, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in, outside of Minneapolis, Minnesota in Edina, Minnesota at my home.
Story_ID: 635278
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm up.
Speaker 2: Fine (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food would be--I don't know what it would be 'cause I eat everything.  Of course, fried chicken, but you're not supposed to talk about that.  But I eat something most people don't like.  I like calf's liver.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think my favorite color is probably blue. It's neutral.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I like all year, but I like the fall.  I like to dress, so I don't like it too hot, so, and I don't like to sweat.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, we go to Savannah, Georgia a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I have a phrase that goes something like this: if you don't ask anybody for anything, you don't really owe them anything.  And the other one is my mother [Luetta Leverette Moore] used to say: let me see the back of your hand some time instead of always seeing your hands outreached.
Story_ID: 635279
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Jesse Moore] side separately--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --you know. So we're gonna start with your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Luetta Thedosa Leverette [Luetta Leverette Moore], and L-U-E-T-T-A, T-H-E-D-O-S-A, and Leverette is L-E-V-E-R-E-T-T-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I really don't know.  I saw those in your questions.  I don't know either parents' side.  I can roughly tell you how old they would be today.  My mother would be about ninety--I'm seventy-two, so she'd be about ninety-two.  And my dad would be about ninety-five.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I'm thinking she was born in 1922.
Speaker 2: Something like that I think, yeah.
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Wilkes County also.
Speaker 1: Okay. Wilkes County, Georgia.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, tell me, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what kind of work do they do and--
Speaker 2: Well, very unfortunately, I don't know a lot about either side.  For some reason, we weren't a lot into the history of those before us.  But I do know that my mother's family lived in what we call middle Georgia, Wilkes County, Lincoln County [Georgia], around Washington, Georgia, and around that area.  My understanding is that all of my relatives were agrarian.  They were farmers.  No one had any education much to speak of other than basic grade school education.  My mother did finish high school.  My mother was the youngest of a number of children, of two families, of course.  My father--my grandfather had been married before.  And his wife, so he had two or three children, Uncle Lonnie [Lonnie Leverette] and Uncle Reamie [Reamie Leverette (ph.)].  I know that much.  And then my mother's mother had with my father--my grandfather, Aunt Eunice [Eunice Leverette (ph.)], Aunt Elise [Elise Leverette Richmond], Aunt Ramona [Ramona Leverette (ph.)] and my mother and Uncle Leonard [Leonard Leverette].  So I think there were probably seven children on my mother's side.  Aunt--I'll start from the bottom up, from the top down.  Uncle Lonnie came to Minneapolis [Minnesota] in 1920s, right after World War I [WWI].  Uncle Reamie, was just a little younger than that.  They both were in World War I, and he ended up in New York City [New York, New York].  Uncle Lonnie came to Minneapolis, Uncle Reamie went to New York after World War I.  And they both had been to Savannah State [Georgia State Industrial College for Colored Youth; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia], I think, for one year maybe of college.  Aunt Eunice was the oldest child in the second set.  And she came to Minneapolis, as I showed in that picture.  Then Aunt Elise who lived in Richmond, Virginia where I went to college [at Virginia Union University] and then Aunt Ramona who I didn't know at all--she died, I think before I was born.  And then my mother met my father when he was there for the conservation CCC, Civilian Conservation Corps.  And he learned to cut hair and lay bricks as a young man.  It was like a peace, not a Peace Corps, but a Job Corps kind of a deal.  And they all lived in, as I said, in middle Georgia.
Story_ID: 635280
Speaker 1: Uncle Lonnie [Moore's maternal uncle, Lonnie Leverette] came to, came to Minnesota by way of South Dakota.  After World War I [WWI], he was there when black people could not participate in the war really, but he could take care of the horses.  And this young white fellow from South Dakota suggested to him that he come to South Dakota with him and they would run a stable.  Uncle Lonnie had nothing else to do so he went to a place in South Dakota.  I'll think of the name of it in a minute.  It was the last point on the railroad, and they ran this stable.  My uncle owned 10 percent.  The young white fellow owned 10 and the father of the young white fellow owned 80 percent.  Well, after a while, they were so successful, the 80 percent owner suggested to my uncle that he should take a woman 'cause it'd be good for business out there in South Dakota.  Uncle Lonnie said, "Well, no, I don't really need anything."  He says, "Well, come up for dinner tonight--," and I just visualize this.  That thing, the land yarn that hangs out over the barn that you haul hay up on, I just visualize this.  Uncle Lonnie never cursed so what I'm about to tell you is the only curse word he ever said to me.  He said, he went up there, and they were having dinner, and the old man said, "I got something for you."  And they drew up this woman and plopped her on the floor.  Uncle Lonnie said if she didn't weigh four hundred pounds, she wasn't alive.  He said, "This is my daughter, and she's yours."  Uncle Lonnie said (laughter), "No way, Jose."  The man said, "You got to leave."  Uncle Lonnie said, "I left that bitch, and I got out of town." And he came to Minnesota and went to work on the railroad, the sleeping car porters [Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters] and became very close with A. Philip Randolph.  In fact, my uncle was vice president of the sleeping car porters.  And so that's Uncle Lonnie.  And he went on, and he always had a Cadillac, you know, and he always told me that we should stay with the sleeping car porters because that was a real good job for the future.  That's Uncle Lonnie.
Story_ID: 635281
Speaker 1: Uncle Reamie [Moore's maternal uncle, Reamie Leverette (ph.)] drove for the chairman of the board of French, Shriner shoes [French, Shriner and Urner] in New York [New York].  He lived on Boston Post Road in the Bronx [New York].  I remember that.  And when I was a little boy growing up, I always had new shoes when I was in college [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia] and high school [William James High School, Statesboro, Georgia] because the chairman of French Shriner Shoes, of course, would try on new shoes all the time.  Then he'd give them to my uncle and just, and my uncle would give 'em to us.  So, you ended up wearing the shoes whether they fit you or not.  You'd wear 'em (laughter).  So I always had crammed toes with beautiful shoes.
Speaker 2: How do you spell the name of that company?
Speaker 1: French, Shriner, S-H-R-I-N-E-R.  They're not around anymore, but it was a step above Florsheim [Florsheim Shoe Company; Florsheim Shoes, Inc.].  It was a heck of a shoe, but it was called French, Shriner.  I don't think they make them anymore, but they were made in New York, I presume.  And Uncle Reamie was his chauffeur.  And then Aunt Eunice [Eunice Leverette (ph.)] came to Minnesota 'cause Uncle Lonnie [Lonnie Leverette] had a little wife and a daughter and the wife died.  And she came to take care of his child or children.  Then the other aunt, Mrs. Richmond, Elise Richmond [Elise Leverette Richmond], lived in Richmond, Virginia, when I went to college in Richmond.  And that's another long story.  And that's the family by and large.  You know, Uncle Leonard [Leonard Leverette] went to the [U.S.] Army, and he was a, he was the highest ranked sergeant major.  And, but he smoked, and he eventually died of lung cancer.  He was in World War II [WWII] and et cetera, et cetera, and his wife, Aunt Sarah [Sarah Leverette], ended up staying in Minnesota with her brother-in-law and sister-in-law until she died.  And I took care of the two, Wenda [Moore's wife, HistoryMaker Wenda Weekes Moore] and I took care of the two aunts until they died here in the last three or four years.  So that was my family.  And that's, jumping ahead, that's how I got to Minnesota.
Story_ID: 635282
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Jesse Lamar Moore [Jesse Moore], J-E-S-S-E, L-A-M-A-R, Moore, M-O-O-R-E.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Again, I'd have to guess that he was about--he was about twenty-five years older than I am, so, and I'm seventy-two, so you have to figure the year in 1918 or something like that, I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: He died here about eight or nine years ago.
Speaker 1: And now, was he born in the same county?
Speaker 2: No, he was born in south Georgia where we ended up going down to Statesboro [Georgia] in Bulloch County, B-U-L-L-O-C-H, Statesboro is the, is the capital [sic. county seat].
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about his side of the family?
Speaker 2: Agrarian also.  As I showed in one of the pictures I showed you, my great-grandfather, which I just learned here in the last few years, his name was Cornelius Moore [Cornelius Moore, Sr.].  And I said, I assume my name came from him 'cause there was also a Cornelius Moore [Cornelius Moore, Jr.] who was my grandfather [sic.].  My grandfather was Wayne, but Cornelius, Sr., had a Cornelius, Jr., and et cetera, et cetera.  He was a slave in a little place called Brooklet, Georgia, B-R-O-O-K-L-E-T, which was also in Bulloch County.  And he was a little man.  My dad was sort of a knot, like 5'9", but very strong.  And looking at the pictures of my great--great-grandfather, he seemed to be the same kind of little guy.  And I guess he handled the horses, and he was--worked around the house.  And then at night, he would take the horses and the buggy and go out and meet the ladies.  And he met my great-grandmother, Mary Moore.  And they had about ten to twelve children, and one of whom was Wayne Moore, who was my grandfather, the father of Jesse Moore.  And they were all in, in the Statesboro, Bulloch County area.
Story_ID: 635283
Speaker 1: Are there any stories about that side that--?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, my dad, as I told you was a bricklayer and a barber, and he learned that in the p- in the CCC [Civilian Conservation Corps], but my daddy was known for not taking any guff from anybody in our little town.  In fact, we used to take rides on Sunday after church.  My dad was, instilled in me that you always ought to own something.  And fortunately or unfortunately, I've owned a lot of stuff.  And the rule was if you met somebody on a dirt road, they would get over to one side and let you go by or vice versa, black or white.  And we used to go out looking at fields after church, the one day we had some money.  We'd buy this field or that farm or what not.  My parents never owned a house.  The only house they ever owned, I bought for them before they died.  But we were out there, and this man wouldn't pull over.  So my daddy got out of the car, walked up to this gentleman and said, "Would you please move over so we can come by or we'll move so you can come by?"  And the man called him the N word and a couple other things.  And my dad tried to talk to him, and the man kept going.  So my dad came back to the car.  I was the oldest.  I was probably ten or eleven.  He went in the trunk, and he got a brick hammer and a trowel.  I don't know whether you know this or not, a trowel is just like a knife, when they do the mud.  It's little like this.  He put that behind him and put the brick hammer up his sleeve.  And he went back to talk to the man.  The man didn't wanna talk and he called him some other MFs and what not.  My daddy dropped that trowel, grabbed that brick hammer, and the man said, "What side would you like for me to move to?"  (Laughter)  That's how I remember my dad.  And everybody tells that story in Statesboro [Georgia], "Don't ever mess with Jesse Moore 'cause he'll get you."  And that was just, but he was a churchgoer, you know, liquor drinker, churchgoer, but a good man.
Story_ID: 635284
Speaker 1: How far did he go in school (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting.  My dad [Jesse Moore] went to about fourth grade.  He said that one day he was doing something in school, and the teacher chastised him one time too many.  He jumped out the window and never went back (laughter).  But I was the first in our family to graduate.  And Daddy came to my graduation and never went to another one, none of my brothers and sisters.  And we always asked Daddy why.  He said, "You heard it once, you've heard it all.  The world is yours, you can do what--be what you wanna be and keep stepping."  He says, "Plus, your mother [Luetta Leverette Moore] needs a new dress when she goes to all these graduations.  Somebody's got to keep working."  But he did go back and get his GED [General Educational Development] after we all finished.  It was a GED, GED, his high school diploma after we all went through school.  But he just said he didn't want to be the dummy in the house 'cause everybody in our house had to go to college and had to finish high school.  So he did it before he died.
Story_ID: 635285
Speaker 1: Now, what kind of personality did your mother [Luetta Leverette Moore] have?
Speaker 2: My mother was more like me.  She was a talker.  She was a talker, a socializer, a schmoozer.  She went to, finished high school.  When I went off to college, the day I went off to college, my mother drove fifty miles each way to Savannah State [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] for my first semester to see what I was taking in college, even when I went to Virginia [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia].  She got all A's, and I got Cs and some other grades 'cause I was having a good time.  And she showed me at Christmas her grades, and said, "Let me see yours."  She said, "If I can do it, boy, you can do it."  And that was the end of that.  But she drove fifty miles each way, three days a week, to go take some courses just to see what it was all about.  So she had courses as time went on, but she was a civic leader.  She was a garden lady, you know.  She was in--we didn't have fancy groups, but whatever the groups were, she was involved in them, the ladies club, I don't know, Pinochle; whatever they played.  But she was a good person.
Story_ID: 635286
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, well, my father [Jesse Moore], my father was up there working, I can just visualize.  And my mother's [Luetta Leverette Moore] a cute little girl and running around, and he was a little older.  And as I'm told that the guys were like in the [U.S. military] service.  They were learning a trade.  They were building bridges and doing conservation work.  And, of course, they'd come in and go to church and look for the girls.  And my dad said he went to church, and there was my mother.  And it was on.  And then he married her, and they moved back down south, and I was born.  I was born in Tignall [Georgia] and then we moved back to Statesboro [Georgia], which is like a hundred miles south of Tignall, Savannah [Georgia].  We're near Savannah.  And Tignall is up near, where is that university up near Ath- [University of Georgia]--near Athens [Georgia], Augusta [Georgia], that side of town.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 635287
Speaker 1: Now, can you name your brothers and sisters for us-
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and give us the order that you're--
Speaker 2: Okay, Cornell [HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore], the oldest, then the next is Joyce [Joyce Moore], who is seventy, and she's still at home, never left home.  Then Bernard [Bernard Moore] who is sixty-eight.  He happened to go to the same college I went to; then there's Kenny [Kenneth Moore], who is sixty-five, and he's, he's in Kentucky, and then there's Mike [Mike Moore], who, unfortunately, just had a massive heart attack here in the last couple of week, didn't care of himself.  But he was an ath- everybody was an athlete except me.  Mike, I'll tell you was the great athlete they tell me.  And he's a bricklayer like my dad [Jesse Moore].  And then my youngest sister, Marcia [Marcia Moore], who did live in Minnesota, followed me to Minnesota and know she lives in New Jersey.  Marcia's a teacher.  She was assistant superintendent of schools in one of the counties around here.  Mike went to Savannah State [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia] for one semester, 'cause as I said, everybody had to go to college.  They tell me he can play some football.  They said he'd tell people, "Okay, if you're ready, I'm gonna run over you."  And stories still go over about Mike the tank.  Then there was Kenny who was a basketball player.  He went to Paine College in Augusta, Georgia.  And then he dropped out and went to the [U.S. military] service, and he finished at Oklahoma State [The Oklahoma State University for Agriculture and Applied Science; Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, Oklahoma], and he's a forest ranger or at least a forest ranger type.  And then there's Bernard, who went to Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia] like I did and married, went to the service, came back and finished Virginia Union.  And he's an accountant in Chesapeake, Virginia, Virginia Beach [Virginia] area.  Then there's Joyce, who went to Paine College for one semester.  But she has epilepsy and the stress got to be too much.  So she just stayed home the rest of her life.  And so she stays in the family place in Statesboro [Georgia] now.
Story_ID: 635288
Speaker 1: You have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Oh yeah. My first memory, I mean I remember a lot of stuff, but the ones that people like, that I tell, is that I guess I was very precocious is a big word, but I was nosy, and I could read on about a sixth grade level when I was four or five years old.  And as a result, they sent me to Minnesota to go to a school for exceptional children.  It's called the University of Minnesota school for exceptional children.  When I tell this story, and I've told it in public a number of times, I call it genius school.  And they sent me up here to stay with my relatives 'cause I could go to this special school.  Well, I was there for six weeks or so.  And my Aunt Eunice [Moore's maternal aunt, Eunice Leverette (ph.)] who worked in a department store, got a call from the school asking her to come over.  So she took on her day off or lunch break, came over to the school and she found the principal sitting there, the headmaster or whatever you wanna call him.  And he started to making small talk, and Aunt Eunice said, you know, "I don't have a lot of time, son--sir," and said, "What did this little bad boy do now?" 'Cause I was kind of tough, I guess; not tough, but I just liked to mess around.  The man said--she said, "Spit it out."  The man said, "He's not a genius," (laughter).  My aunt said, "I could have told you that six weeks ago.  The little joker is just nosy."  What people did not know was my mother [Luetta Leverette Moore] was the only black substitute teacher in town [Statesboro, Georgia].  So ever since I was born, people used to talk to me like I was grown.  They give me, say your ABCs, do your numbers.  And, of course, I was cute, so all the girls, the little high school girls, they taught me to say things and read poems.  And that was what it was all about.  So that's my first memory.  But they let me stay for one year.  And so when I give speeches and I tell that story, I say, you may laugh at it, but I can tell you one thing, I went to genius school.  You never got in.  So that's my favorite story.
Speaker 1: That's an interesting story.  Now, do you have any recollections of the other children, what they--did you have any idea that they were geniuses?
Speaker 2: No. I don't think they were geniuses either.  They didn't act like geniuses (laughter).  They were just nosy, (laughter) they were just more nosy than I was.  No, the truth, I don't remember and you know, nobody ever asked me.
Speaker 1: And you were how old?
Speaker 2: Four or five.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: My birthday is in September, so that's why I always sound younger than I really am.  My birthday is September 18 so when I started school, I'm seventeen, but I turned eighteen right away and that kind of a thing.  So I was four and turning five right away.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And I came up on the train with my aunt from Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you all benefit from like free rides because of--
Speaker 2: My uncle [Lonnie Leverette], we got reduced rates.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in fare.
Speaker 2: In fact, my aunt loves to tell the story, "Now, don't tell them that you're almost five 'cause we can ride free."  And she told me--and Wenda [Moore's wife, HistoryMaker Wenda Weekes Moore] loves this story, I'd tell people, "I'm four, but I will be five tomorrow," (laughter).  Aunt Eunice said, "Shut up boy," (laughter), 'cause it's almost like I had to sit in her lap, you know, in order to get the free ride.  And so that was funny, but that's, I remember that, yeah.
Story_ID: 635289
Speaker 1: You grew up in Statesboro, Georgia (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Statesboro, Georgia, finished William James High School [Statesboro, Georgia], the Golden Bulldogs.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I don't wanna get you there yet.  So--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: Well, what we always ask is, what were some of the--well, describe where you lived and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, if you don't know you're poor, you don't know you're poor, okay.  So we lived across on the quote, unquote, the colored side of town.  We lived across town.  We lived, as I said, we never owned a house, so we lived in numerous places.  My dad [Jesse Moore] was a bricklayer, but, of course, we didn't have a brick house.  And my dad was always trying to make a little extra, so he had a barbershop and had a pool room, but we always hung with the right people.  It was only--there were no black lawyers in our town, one black doctor, no dentist.  The high class people, there were even no black postmen, they were the teachers.  And so my mother [Luetta Leverette Moore] was friendly with all the teachers because she was in, you know, this social circle and from our church and neighborhood.  But, you know, there were black stores.  I remember working in, at various stores of one kind or another as a little shop boy, bicycle runner, you know, stock, stocker, stocking the groceries and what not.  Then I remember being a shoeshine boy at my daddy's barbershops over time.  But he told me never go into a pool hall nor a--what's the other room when they, steam bath places 'cause bad things went on there.  There were women in those places, and I always wanted to go over there.  I never went in one.  So I can't shoot pool until this day, but, of course, we were big A.M.E.s [African Methodist Episcopal].  My dad was a Baptist and my mother was an A.M.E.  I became an A.M.E. because you only had to go to church twice a week [sic. month] because they had a circuit rider.  He did the first and the third Sundays in our town.  But my daddy's church, they went every Sunday even though that was closer to our house, First African Baptist [Original First African Baptist Church, Statesboro, Georgia].
Story_ID: 635290
Speaker 1: But I remember growing up with all my friends and, you know, guys, they're all dead now except me.  We p- we had our first band.  We picked cotton to save enough money to get our first instruments, and I wanted to play trumpet, I don't know why.  But I had a gap in my tooth so they suggested I play clarinet.  One of my best friends played bass drum.  One played snare drum.  Then my best friend played trumpet.  And Gary M. Douglas, Jr., he lived right behind us in the end.  And--
Speaker 2: So what style music did you play?
Speaker 1: March band.
Speaker 2: Marching band.
Speaker 1: Marching band.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is school band?
Speaker 1: School band.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's correct, okay.
Speaker 1: But remember now, we're sixth graders when we get this band and we didn't even have a football team at that point.  And Gary M. Douglas was a natural trumpet player.  He ended up being the captain of the Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] band in 1961, which is as good as you could get.  And he played with Ruth Brown, James Brown, a couple of other groups like that and ended up being a band director.  But we all wanted to be something.  We played, our first--we played our first dance in eighth grade.  We went to Vi- Vidalia, Georgia and we played Gary on trumpet, it was called, Gary Douglas and the Amazing Blazers [ph.], me--we didn't have a (unclear).  The guy with the bass drum and the one with the snare drum.  And somebody else, I can't remember who it was, somebody played the piano.  We could only play one song.  It was (makes sounds).  We played it slow, we played it fast.  But then Gary would do all the solos, and so--'cause he could play music for us that were going (makes sounds).  But that was, those were good ol' days.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's interesting.
Story_ID: 635291
Speaker 1: Where did you start school?  What was the name of your first school?
Speaker 2: William James [William James High School, Statesboro, Georgia].
Speaker 1: William James--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Wil- William James all the way through.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, so it went all the way through high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it went from elementary to, to high, graduating high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, William James.
Speaker 2: That's the Golden Bulldogs (laughter).
Speaker 1: Golden--okay.  Well, so you played music in school and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and football and basketball, all at the same time.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: You want that story?
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: Well, we played, remember I told you about my friend, Gary [Gary M. Douglas, Jr.].  He was a, was a starting center.  I was, my son [Jonathan Moore] called me the long hike center.  I can hike it for the, for the punts and what not.  And so Gary played center.  James Baldwin [ph.] who played drums, played running back.  Brother Lovett [ph.], who played bass drum, played one position.  Edward James [ph.] played clarinet.  He played quarterback.  So half our team was in the band.  So we could never receive, we had a standing home rule, we always kicked off because we had to do 'The Star Spangled Banner,' then get out of our uniforms.  So we wore football uniforms under our band uniforms.  And then we played.  And at halftime, we'd have to run and do it again.  So it was a funny thing.  Of course, we weren't very good.  But I tell my son who is an athlete that I was all city, all county and all regional.  He said, "Are you serious?"  I said, "Yeah, we were the only black high school in the city, in the county and in the region," (laughter).  "So I was all city, all county and all regional."  And then in basketball, I wasn't very good--I wasn't very good at any of 'em, but I was on the team.  And I was more of a debater.  I was president of every class in my high school.  I was president, I was governor of colored boys state.  I won the national spelling bee, colored spelling bee, and what's the other thing, current events.  And I was all state in the Georgia state band for seven straight years.  Now, the band (unclear) legit.  The band, we went up to Fort Valley State College [Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia] to the band festival.  And I heard all these kids (makes sounds).  Well, I was solo clarinet in my little high school, we were (makes sounds).  And I met this woman, who I just talked to the other day, Johnnie Booker [ph.], Johnnie--I can't remember her maiden name then.  But she was from Fort Valley [Georgia].  I said, "Can you play like that?"  She says, "No."  I said, "We're gonna try out for third clarinet.  Nobody tries out for third position in the all state band."  We made it, she and I made it every year from sixth grade to twelfth grade.  She went to Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], I went to Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia].  And we stayed in touch all these years.  And we still laugh about that, that we were both all state all those years because we never tried out for first clarinet.  I still got my clarinet in the garage (laughter).
Speaker 1: There's a strategy.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, you gotta learn to make out, you know, work with what you've got.
Story_ID: 635292
Speaker 1: When you were growing up, did you--now, you grew up during, beginning of--
Speaker 2: I finished high school [William James High School, Statesboro, Georgia] in '57 [1957] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. You were little when World War II [WWII] was going on.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't rem- remember much about the wars.  I remember a little bit about Korea [Korean War], but World War II, I don't remember anything.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in '57 [1957], the Civil Rights Movement had started--
Speaker 2: Civil rights hadn't even been started.
Speaker 1: --to crank up.  Fifty-six [1956] is the Montgomery [Montgomery Bus Boycott]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, in '57 [1957] was when the kids integrated the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia], and I still feel kind of sorry about that because I could have done that, but it took a lot of heart.  And it probably, it took a lot of gumption and a lot of intestinal fortitude which I probably didn't have to be spit on and kicked around.  I never, I never liked violence.  I was never a good fighter.  I didn't get beat up 'cause I could talk my way out of it pretty good, and I had friends.  But it just didn't appeal to me, but that was the period of time that I came along.
Speaker 1: Yeah, [HistoryMaker] Charlayne Hunter-Gault, and--
Speaker 2: Charlayne, they, they would be exactly my age.
Speaker 1: --and I can't think of the brother's name--
Speaker 2: The fella's name.
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah, two of them, a boy [Hamilton Holmes] and a girl went.
Story_ID: 635293
Speaker 1: Growing up, there's a white college in town, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Geor- it was called Georgia Teachers College [South Georgia Teachers College] in Statesboro [Georgia].  It's now called Georgia Southern University.  They won a couple national championships, 1-AA, the one just below.  In fact, they were just in the finals up here in North Dakota the other week.  But the only thing a black person could do, that was lay bricks and sweep floors.  My daddy [Jesse Moore] could lay bricks there.  You could clean up but you couldn't go there.  It was a baseball and a basketball school in those days.  They played Stetson [Stetson University, DeLand, Florida] and Belmont Abby [Belmont Abbey College, Belmont, North Carolina].  I remember all the things, but there was no--don't even think about going there.  It was a teachers college at the time anyway.  But now it's a school of twenty thousand kids.  And my old hometown which used to have one traffic light is now a booming metropolis.  Everybody's got plants there.  One of the largest Target [Target Corporation] warehouses in the world is there, Walgreens [Walgreens Company]--Wal-Mart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.] because they're close to Savannah port [Port of Savannah, Garden City, Georgia], and they're right where a couple of highways come together.  But the school is very well integrated.  I mean I met a number of black people who teach there and lots of kids--my son [Jonathan Moore] was just telling me the other day he met two or three kids from Georgia Southern, black kids, in Minnesota.  But no way for me to go.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is the days of segregation and you said that, you mentioned being the governor of colored boys--
Speaker 2: Yes, everything was colored.
Speaker 1: Everything was--
Speaker 2: White or colored.  In fact, if you ever go back, FFA is the Future Farmers of America [National FFA Organization].  We had the NFA, the New Farmers of America, just like the national bar [National Bar Association], national dental [National Dental Association].  The whites are American.  We're just nationalists.
Speaker 1: The N stands for national.
Speaker 2: National.
Speaker 1: It kind of is a pseudonym for Negro--
Speaker 2: That's sir--there you go.
Speaker 1: --in a lot of ways, yeah.
Speaker 2: Go through your whole vocabulary.  But one time I was in 4-H club camp--now, 4-H, they didn't have any difference in 4-H.  It was just 4-H.  It was colored 4-H, colored Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] and all that.  And I did them all.  I did every one, every organization (unclear) I joined.  But one time I was in 4-H club camp up near Fort Valley [Georgia], Camp John Hope [Camp John Hope FFA-FCCLA Center].  And I was at Camp John Hope, and I didn't like snakes and all that kind of stuff.  And they said, "If you wanna go into town, you can try out for the St. Louis Cardinals baseball team."  Lord, have mercy.  This was in 1954 or '55 [1955], '53 [1953], '4 [1954].  We're go into town, and I tried out for the baseball club, and I missed shagging a couple of balls, struck out twice.  And the man called me--it was a black scout and just lots of kids.  I mean it must have been a hundred kids, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen years old.  I don't know why they were even doing it.  And he called me over.  He says, "Son, he says, what's your name?"  I gave him my name, and he wrote it down.  "Where you from?"  He wrote it down.  He says, "You got a mother?"  I said, "Yes, sir."  He says, "Does she make up your bed for you?"  I said, "Yes, sir."  "Fluff your pillow up real nice?" I said, "Damn, they're gonna take my mother, too."  He said, "Tell her she ought to keep on doing it 'cause you're gonna be home for a long time," (laughter).  I said, "That's cold."  But, he said, "But I need a fella to keep track of these guys, and I'll give you five dollars."  And that's when I started.  I started keeping names for him, and I got five dollars.  The rest of the guys got nothing.  I made five dollars that day.  So the other part of that is, is that if you do what's right, good things will happen to you.  And (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. So he recognized that you were some- someone that could keep a record.
Speaker 2: Yeah that's right, he rec- maybe I had my two watches on, I don't know (laughter).
Story_ID: 635294
Speaker 1: Tell us about the two wa- watches.  We can't get out of here without talking about the two watches.
Speaker 2: Well, when I was a little boy, I used to like to dress up.  I always liked to look like the preacher.  I didn't know any black lawyers, but, anyway, I liked to dress up all the time, and, you know, 'cause I didn't really like hard work, my daddy [Jesse Moore] said.  But I always had two watches.  So Daddy said, "I want you to be the timekeeper for the crew." By then he had a crew of people working.  So it was the time you came to work and a time you got off.  So I knew I had it.  Oh, no, I got you over here.  I got you over there, and so I was always on time, and even my kids [Lynne Moore Nelson, Jonathan Moore and Meredith Moore Crosby] will tell you to this day, I always try to be on time.  And I've gotten this--I shouldn't say a love for watches, but an appreciation for time.  There's a time to be born, a time to live and a time to die.  And as I said, there's a time to hang out, but it's always something about time.  And I have really, really, really appreciated and it's grown into sort of a hobby for me, so to speak--not hobby, but for a while it was a very expensive hobby.  I think I've gotten over it now though.
Speaker 1: So you have a collection now, I'm told.
Speaker 2: Oh, I can show you if he's willing to go, I can show you boxes that are worth a lot of money, the wooden boxes they come in.  We were robbed in this house when we first moved in.  Somebody came in and stole over a million dollar's worth of watches.  It's my fault.  The house was not, the alarm wasn't on.  The safe, I have a safe, wasn't locked.  And we had some cleaning people who had access to the house, in my opinion, and I think that's--'cause they had to get--you, the safe, you passed by the safe and you haven't seen it.  They had to know it was where it is.  So.  But anyway, that's the way it is, but I've enticed a lot of my friends to buy watches now.  So I, I've become sort of a guru in the watches.  Most of those books on that table are about watches.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Magazines and what not.
Story_ID: 635295
Speaker 1: In '57 [1957] when you graduated from high school [William James High School, Statesboro, Georgia], now, were you the, were you class president?
Speaker 2: I was pres- well-
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --here's what happened.  I was class president, and they said it was against the rules to be class president and president of student government, but we were able to move the rules around a little bit.  And I was a class president, pro temp (laughter).  Somebody else was the class president.  So, but I was president of student government, was my last office in high school-
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and captain of the debate team, and all that kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1957 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen fifty-seven [1957].
Speaker 1: Did you--
Story_ID: 635296
Speaker 1: Now you're, you're in rural Georgia, but it's, it's going to be getting bigger later, but it's pretty small when you're there.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now did, did you have access to television and that sort of thing in those days?
Speaker 2: We had television but not very much, didn't have very many phones.  But we were getting better.  In fact, there was a time I went to a 4-H conference in Atlanta [Georgia] and we had to wait late at night to get the bus home.  I can't remember all the circumstances of the charter bus routes' business.  But we stayed at the Butler Street YMCA [Atlanta, Georgia].  That's where we were to meet.  And while the other guys were shooting pool, I took a nap.  When I woke up, they were all gone.  My cufflinks were gone and so was my watch.  Somebody had stolen my watch and my cufflinks.  And they forgot all about me.  And the reason when you asked the telephone, we didn't have a phone.  This was in '54-ish [1954].  And so they had to call the undertaker to go tell my parents [Luetta Leverette Moore and Jesse Moore] that I got left in Atlanta.  And everybody said, well, they should have known he wasn't on the bus 'cause the bus was quiet, but it was two or three o'clock in the morning.  And they were almost home when they realized I wasn't on the bus.  So to answer your question, we didn't have phones until, probably until I was a senior in high school [William James High School, Statesboro, Georgia] probably.  And then you had party lines.  So if you had nothing else to do, you listened to other people's conversations.  And we had one TV, a big ol' TV with a little screen, and it was not very much to watch, I don't think.  I don't remember watching very much (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 635297
Speaker 1: When you were growing up was there a lot of informa- a lot of discussion about the Civil Rights Movement or the or, or some of the plight of black folks on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not really, we had the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in town, and we had a couple of other groups of, civil, civic groups, and basically run by the ministers and the teachers couldn't do too much 'cause they worked for the city.  But I remember my mother [Luetta Leverette Moore] was not a great fan of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] because she thought he was fomenting unrest.  Things were, let it be.  But we didn't have anything--I can't remember in my conscious of any of my friends being beaten by white people or mobs or anything like that.  However, when I finished high school [William James High School, Statesboro, Georgia] and went away to college [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia], there were a number of people hung in Statesboro, Georgia in 1939 and we never heard about it.  It was called, like the Statesboro 9 [ph.], I think it was.  And I read about it, but some things, you try and forget.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And there was a song, if you ever get around to it, it's called the 'Statesboro Blues' made famous by The Allman Brothers [The Allman Brothers Band], "I got that Statesboro blues."  I never heard that until recently.  That was Blind Willie who was a black blues singer who popularized that.
Speaker 1: That's something, Blind Willie McTell.
Speaker 2: That's it, that's it, and he made 'Statesboro Blues' famous.
Speaker 1: So, the Statesboro 9.
Speaker 2: I'm almost sure the Statesboro 9 in 1939.  But they were hung, and nobody ever told us where--I mean, maybe people were, you know, let sleeping dogs lie.  The other thing I remember about civil rights though is that I have partials until this day because my mother refused to let us go to the back door of a white dentist.  So, "Just brush your teeth," and so, you know, of course, I had cavities and what not.  And I never had them taken care of until I got off to college, and then it was cheaper to pull 'em than it was to rehabilitate them.  So I call, I tell my kids [Lynne Moore Nelson, Jonathan Moore and Meredith Moore Crosby]--my kids all have beautiful teeth like my wife [HistoryMaker Wenda Weekes Moore], but I call these my civil rights teeth.  I gave 'em up for civil rights 'cause my mother said, "You're not going to somebody's back door, period, end of discussion."
Story_ID: 635298
Speaker 1: Now, were there any examples growing up of a lawyer?  I mean do you have any sense of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The only lawyer I knew was Al J. Calhoun, you know him, don't you?
Speaker 1: That's, that's--
Speaker 2: Algonquin J. Calhoun, the only black lawyer I ever knew (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, that's the lawyer on--
Speaker 2: On 'Amos 'n' Andy.'
Speaker 1: 'Amos 'n' Andy.'
Speaker 2: Yeah, I tell that to people, and I give speeches and they say, "Oh, well, what did he do?"  I say, "He was into the media."  People say, "Oh, really?" And most of the young people have no idea what I'm talking about, but you caught it.  No, I didn't know any, did not know a black lawyer.  The first black lawyer I ever had a chance to talk to was Doug Wilder [HistoryMaker L. Douglas Wilder], who was the governor of Virginia, who had gone to Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia], went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and come back to Richmond [Virginia] when I was in law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.].  Now, I might have met a black lawyer somewhere, but they wouldn't--didn't talk to me and I didn't talk to them.  But I'm sure there was somebody in Savannah [Georgia] I probably saw at some conference or something.  But Doug Wilder was the first black lawyer that I ever really talked to, man to man, mano y mano.
Story_ID: 635299
Speaker 1: When you're on the verge of graduation, did you--I mean, well--
Speaker 2: From high school [William James High School, Statesboro, Georgia]?
Speaker 1: --I didn't ask--yeah, I didn't ask you about this, but did you have any--were there any special teachers or mentors--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, in high school?
Speaker 1: Yeah, who were they?
Speaker 2: Well, Ms. Sarah Mildred Smith [Sarah Ayers Smith] was my favorite, and she just died.  She is the aunt of Debbie Allen and [HistoryMaker] Phylicia Rashad.  I used to babysit them in the summers when they came to Statesboro [Georgia].  But Mrs. Smith was my science teacher, and her husband, Smitty [Henry Smith, Jr.], was my sort of role model.  And he was a teacher also.  And he got my first job waiting tables at the country club, and showed me the ropes, how you make tips and how you serve drinks.  And by the time I finished high school, I was a bartender at the country club.  But Ms. Smith, a little lady, always told me I could be something.  And, and I tried.  She went to Johnson C. Smith University in Charlotte [North Carolina], which I'll come to later.  I end up being a trustee of the school.  But Ms. Smith was always nice, and after my mother [Luetta Leverette Moore]--or even when my mother was alive, that was the only--that was my second stop.  After I went to see my mom, I'd go see Ms. Smith.  And her sons turned out to be very nice, and she told--I think it's accomplished, and--, "If Cornell [HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore] can do it, you can do it too."  But her sons went to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], and one boy, the one I know very well, graduated summa cum laude and Phi Beta Kappa [Phi Beta Kappa Society] if they have it, went to Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts], was number one in his class. He's probably the best cardiologist in North Carolina at this time, Hank Smith [Henry Smith III].   And he joined the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] and what not, and when I initiated him into the Boule.  I'm jumping ahead, way ahead of you, of course.  But that was my favorite teacher, Ms. Smith.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in college [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia], it was Dr. Henry McQuinn [Henry J. McQuinn] who was my professor, and he always (makes sound) when he talked he (makes sound) kind of whistled, when, when he talked. And I wanted to be a doctor, of course, and--
Speaker 1: Now, now what kind of--now, wait a minute.  You're going too fast.
Story_ID: 635300
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I wanna go, back up a little bit--
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 1: --and ask you, when you were a senior in high school [William James High School, Statesboro, Georgia] then, did you know you were going to college and what kind of guidance were you getting about college (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay, I always knew I was going to college 'cause my mother [Luetta Leverette Moore] told me I was going.  And quote, unquote, I was too smart not to go, according to people.  But I wanted to go to the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota] because I'd been up here, as I told you--did I, I told you I'd been up here to live.  We jumped a little bit there, and it's my fault 'cause I ramble.  But our house burned down when I was about nine or ten years old.  And my daddy [Jesse Moore] was severely burned.  And he was burned, I don't know what the worst degree is, but he was all but burned up.  And it was just before Christmas, and he was cutting hair.  He came home that night and had to go lay bricks the next morning, threw kerosene on the fire.  The house caught on fire, and my mother jumped out of the bed with my second brother, broke her ankle.  My dad went back in the house looking for my sister who had been spending the night with her girlfriend up the street, and was trapped in the house.  His legs looked just like barbeque the rest of his life.  So my mother had a job making ten dollars a week with three or four children to support.  So my aunt said send me, the oldest boy to Minnesota.  So I came to Minnesota, stayed a year.  My dad was in the hospital for twenty-three months on his back.  They found him one day crawling down the street because he was tired of taking quarters from people in the cigar box next to his bed.  So he then went to cutting hair on a barber stool, and I came to Minnesota.  And I came back and finished.  But I always wanted to go to the University of Minnesota because I'd been up here.  So I applied, and they never answered.  Until this day, they haven't answered me.  I was Who's Who in high school, president of the student body.  I was number three in my class.  I did everything you could do, everything you could do, and they never answered.  In those days, you had to send a picture when you graduated.  You may still have to do it, but I don't know why, but I sent my picture, and I never heard from them.  August 15, 1957, I'm all packed.  They called me Joe College.  I had all the right stuff to go to college, the jacket, the briefcase.  I was gonna be a doctor, little medical kit.  August 15th, everybody is gone.  Gary Douglas [Gary M. Douglas, Jr.] is gone to Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida].  Brother Lovett [ph.] is gone to South Carolina State [South Carolina State College; South Carolina State University, Orangeburg, South Carolina].  James Brown [ph.], James Baldwin [ph.] had gone away, all my friends.  I'm still waiting 'cause Minnesota is gonna call me.  The lady down the street from me says, "Boy, what are you still doing here?  When are you leaving for college?"  I said, "I'm waiting on the University of Minnesota."  She said, "Son, it's August 15th.  If they're gonna call, they would have called you by now."  She said, "But my brother is the dean of the chaplain at Virginia Union, Dwight Jones [ph.]--," not Dwight Jones, but Reverend Jones.  I can't remember his first name now.  It'll come to me.  She called him, and he said, "The dean of the college said that if this boy is as good as you said he is, tell him to be here by next Friday."  And they gave me a full scholarship to Virginia Union.  And I arrived there in September 1957, and it changed my life.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is in Richmond, Virginia.
Speaker 2: Richmond, Virginia, Virginia Union University (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 635301
Speaker 1: I remember looking at the outline.  You've got some pretty, you've got some famous classmates--
Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, well famous to (unclear), Doug Wilder [HistoryMaker L. Douglas Wilder] went there.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Henry Marsh [HistoryMaker Henry L. Marsh, III] went there, who was the first black mayor of Richmond [Virginia].  My friend, Frank Royal [Frank S. Royal, Sr.], who was the chairman of the National Medical Association.  He and his brother are twins and they were my best friends.  Jeremiah Wright [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Jeremiah A. Wright, Jr.] was on fraternity line with me, who is infamous and famous (laughter).  What's his name, Ben Wallace, the basketball player, Charles Oakley, the basketball player, Jumpin' Jackie Jackson, who played with the Globetrotters [Harlem Globetrotters] for thirty years, was there with me.  These other kids are younger, but Jumpin' Jack was in my era.
Speaker 1: Jumpin' Jack, what was his name?
Speaker 2: Jumpin' Jackie Jackson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Played thirty years with the Globetrotters.  He could jump over the backboard at 6'4".  So--
Speaker 1: Jump over the backboard?
Speaker 2: Jump up and grab a silver dollar off the backboard and dunk it with the other hand, and dunking was illegal.  He just retired from the Trotters here in the last three or four years, and some great days, great days.  So that's where I went to school [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia], and it was just a wonderful, wonderful place.  And I learned a lot and made friends that lasts me until this day.
Speaker 1: I remember one person, I know, is the artist Murry DePillars.  Did, did you know her?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, Murry DePillars, yeah, yeah.  Oh, yeah, (unclear).  She was after my time, but I know her very well.  She ended up working at the bank, Bank of America [Bank of America Corporation].
Story_ID: 635302
Speaker 1: What was college life like at--?
Speaker 2: Well, again, I went and tried to and tried to run the joint.  But I didn't, what I didn't realize is that about half the student body was from Richmond [Virginia] or, or their environs, so they had their own little thing going.  And I lost the presidency of the freshman class by two votes.  And this girl that won it, I convinced her after dating her that it wasn't really up to her, and that she resign and that I became the president of the class.  I had a record to keep, man, (laughter).  So when you're on a roll, you can't lighten up now.  So I was president of every class, and I couldn't get 'em to change the rules to be president of the student government and the class, but I was president of student government as well and captain of the debate team, and that was my claim to fame at Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And grades were fairly good.  So, but I pledged Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] and I was a statistician and the manager for all of the, all of the teams.  So one time, I'm the manager of the tennis team, about my freshman year.  And we played across the street at something called Ashe Park [sic. Brookfield Park, Richmond, Virginia].  Arthur Ashe's father [Arthur Ashe, Sr.] was the head of colored recreation at the City of Richmond.  He'd say, "Okay, boys, you gotta stop practicing now 'cause my son is home and he needs to practice; any of you guys wanna play him?"  So this little fella out, twelve, thirteen, fourteen years old.  And he beat everybody on that tennis team just serving.  And so they finally said, "Ah, who wants to play with this little kid, little snotty nosed kid?"  So this kid looks to me and he says, "Would you like to play?"  I served my best serve at this kid.  His mother [Mattie Cordell Cunningham Ashe] called him to lunch, or dinner, and he went away.  That was Arthur Ashe.  I beat Arthur Ashe, technically.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So I tell people to this day that I beat Arthur Ashe, so Arthur Ashe now is Wimbledon champion [The Championships, Wimbledon, London, England].  He comes to Minneapolis [Minnesota].  He's got a line of clothing and all, and he heard this story 'cause I had made it bigger as the time goes by, you know.  Of course, it went all night long by the time he heard it.  And he said, "Are you the fella?"  I said, "That would be me."  He said, "Would you like to play it again?"  I said--he said, "You really didn't beat me."  I said, "I served it, you walked."  He said, "That's a tech."  I said, "Hey, I won."  He said, you--I said, "Why am I gonna play you?  I've already won."  So the story gets bigger as time goes on.  I could take all day telling it.  So that's part of my lore.  I tell people that all over the country, that I'm the guy that, the only brother that ever beat, beat Arthur Ashe, that he didn't beat later on in life.  So, that's my athletic story, and I'm sticking to it.
Story_ID: 635303
Speaker 1: Who were your teachers and mentors at Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Well, as I said, Dr. McQuinn who was my professor (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Dr. McQuinn, okay. Now, now, now it's time to talk about him.  Dr. McQuinn--
Speaker 2: Okay. Dr. Henry J. McQuinn.
Speaker 1: Henry J. McQuinn.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was passing for black as far as I'm concerned.
Speaker 1: Well, he looked--
Speaker 2: He was, if I showed you a picture, you couldn't tell.  He made--anyway, but he was my man.
Speaker 1: How do you spell his name?
Speaker 2: Henry J. McQuinn, M-C-Q-U-I-N-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, McQuinn, okay.
Speaker 2: And he comes a line--as I read about him, he was one of the first black people that went to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] to get a Ph.D. in sociology.  And he did something so well that the professor said something about black people can't study.  He said, "Who do you think just gave that outstanding paper?"  Then they knew (laughter) from then on.  But anyway, and he'd gone to Virginia Union also.  Then Mrs. Dillard [ph.]--and they're all dead now, but Dr. Proctor who was the president who, Samuel DeWitt Proctor, (unclear) famous preacher (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, now, Samuel DeWitt, he's a legendary theologian--
Speaker 2: Preacher. Oh yeah, he went to Union.  And he was the president when I first got there.  He stayed a couple of years.
Speaker 1: Now, he became the pastor of Abyssinian Baptist after--
Speaker 2: Abyssinian Baptist Church [New York, New York], yes.
Speaker 1: --Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.], right?
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.  You got it.  He was assistant director of the Peace Corps under Sargent Shriver [R. Sargent Shriver] and just a nice man, and a very down to earth man.  But those were two, and then--so those are the two that I can think of off the top of my head.
Speaker 1: That, was Wyatt Tee Walker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker] associate there at that time?
Speaker 2: Wyatt Tee Walker was a senior in, in graduate school when I was there.  But, yeah, I know Wyatt Tee.  And he, he was on the board of the university.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, that's quite a group.
Story_ID: 635304
Speaker 1: Wyatt Tee Walker [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Wyatt Tee Walker], when we interviewed him, he talked about the Richmond Improvement Association.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was sort of like the, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  That was the, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], kind of freedom thing.  That was going on when I was in college.  You know, when I was in college, now in '57 [1957], '57 [1957] to '61 [1961] was, you know, that's when we started the sit-ins, the year I was president of the student government.  But Freedom Riders started in Richmond [Virginia], with James Farmer and the whole crowd.  And they came to Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia] and shoved off from there and headed south and the buses were burned later on.  We had the sit-ins, of course, at the department stores in downtown Richmond.  But as being a student leader, we had to divide up what we did.  So some of us were in charge of getting the word out and some were in charge of getting arrested, like my roommate got arrested, but my friend, Frank [Frank S. Royal, Sr.] and I, our job was like to be the monitors and run back and try and raise money to get them out of jail.  But we saw all of that.  In fact, we were on line in the fraternity, and we had our bricks, Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity] bricks, and we were marching.  And they called the police, said, there's some brothers down there with bricks, with some Arabic, with the Arabic kind of look (unclear).  And they thought we were foreigners with bricks, gonna break out the store windows.  So they made us put our bricks down.  But it was interesting.  And that's when they had massive resistance.  And we were waiting tables at The Country Club of Virginia [Richmond, Virginia].  And the governor of Virginia [J. Lindsay Almond] was talking about us like dogs.  I mean, not to us.  We were the waiters, but about black people in general, calling us all kinds of names.  And we got all incensed.  All the college boys wanted to go up and fight, and an old seasoned waiter named Nature Boy [ph.] said, "Let me take care of this."  And that's why I'm always nice to waiters now.  You never know what happens in the kitchen.  And he served the governor, and the governor was very appreciative of what he received, not knowing what he received.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, that's a story--
Speaker 2: That you hear.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it recurs quite a bit--
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's right.
Speaker 1: --about--
Speaker 2: You get even--
Speaker 1: --the arrogance of--
Speaker 2: --don't get mad; get even.  And that's what Nature Boy did, and he served him, and the governor was happy with what he had.  He didn't know what had been in his glass.
Speaker 1: So the governor's arrogance allowed him to talk.  He had no idea who you all were.
Speaker 2: No, oh, he didn't care.
Speaker 1: He didn't care?
Speaker 2: Oh, he didn't care.  He was talking to a group of white people.  You know, it was like whatever the white improvement association or chamber of commerce, I'll call it.  I don't know.  But, you know, we made $1.75, $2 waiting tables.  It was a good thing for, you know, for us to do.  And then there were other times where we worked with caterers catering parties for all the wealthy people in Richmond.  In fact, my roommate in law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] who ended up--was my roommate, was a friend of mine in college, his dad ran a catering service in Richmond.  And we used to serve parties to the Reynolds from Reynolds Tobacco [R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company], Reynolds aluminum [Reynolds Metals Company; Reynolds Group Holdings], I think, yeah, Reynolds aluminum, and Ethel [ph.] family, all the big families in Richmond.  And they were very nice because they knew Mr. Lambert [ph.].  He was their caterer of choice, but they were very interesting, what they thought about us, you listen.  They would say things like, "We're out of whiskey, weren't you boys, you guys know where to get whiskey late at night."  "We have no clue."  "Oh, yes you do."  One twenty, another twenty, Mr. Lou Evers [ph.] would say, "Cornell [HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore], go out in the car, look under the back seat.  There's a quart of gin.  Drive around the block three times and bring it in," (laughter).  See, what it tells you is initiative.  When we were in law school--I jump ahead a lot, we used to bring whiskey back from Washington [D.C.] back to Mr. Lambert so he could store it for the parties 'cause Richmond was a state store.  We'd get it cheaper in D.C.  And we'd always bring bottles that were square because it would fit in the suitcase.  It just (gesture)--we were always thinking.  But it was, you learned a lot.  I learned about different wines.  I learned about different kinds of food.  And it was just, it was an amazing place to work.
Story_ID: 635305
Speaker 1: I worked in the, at The Valentine museum in Richmond [Virginia], which was a museum of the South.  My aunt, Mrs. Richmond, was a cleaning lady there, the head custodian.   And I'd work every Saturday at the museum, come down from school, work half day.  I'd get to work doing a couple of hours.  Then I'd take a nap or read my books 'cause I was dusting clothes and what not.  And then I would serve parties there, you know, receptions for the museum.  And we could have the leftovers.  So I'd bring a couple of my friends with me to work, my roommate or somebody.  Then we would take the jugs of apple cider or whatever you wanna call it, the punch, back to the dorm and sell it for a quarter a cup.  And the little hors d'oeuvres, we'd eat them.  We'd sell a handful of those for a quarter, 'til one night we were on the bus and two winos saw us, and we had to run with our jugs (laughter) (unclear) our own people.  But jumping ahead, my aunt used to bring my lunch and what not.  I'd take my dirty clothes and she'd wash them and bring 'em back next week to the museum.  After integration, they made my aunt the assistant curator 'cause they had to give somebody a title.  She knew more about the museum than all of them, but that's what they did.  That's the times.  Jumping way ahead of you, my friend, Frank Royal's [Frank S. Royal, Sr.] daughter now is chairman of the board of The Valentine museum.  How you like that?
Speaker 2: Now, The Valentine museum, I'm not familiar with it myself.
Speaker 1: There's, of course, the museum, the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts [Richmond, Virginia], which is the regular museum.  Then there's the Museum of the Confederacy [Richmond, Virginia] where they got all the stuff.  But The Valentine is the museum of the South and it has no lean towards Confederacy.  It's about the times and the era, and the cooking utensils and the dress and what was going on.  It's a very fine museum, and it's still very current.  And I went back after my wife [HistoryMaker Wenda Weekes Moore]--my aunt died, and they, you know, told me how much they appreciated her.  But I thought it was kind of weird.  She was the head custodian and then they make her the assistant curator.  And when they'd get new people in, they had to ask Elise [Elise Leverette Richmond], "Elise, what--?"  And she could tell 'em where everything came from, why it was there and why it was important.  But that was the beginning of my experience in fine arts and culture.
Story_ID: 635306
Speaker 1: You graduated in '61 [1961]?
Speaker 2: Sixty-one [1961], 1961 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixty-one [1961], okay. And that's, that's when the historians claim that the sit-in movement started, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we got it going then.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was rolling.  In fact, I'll segue into the next era going to law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.].  I wanted to come back to Minnesota.  Again, I still had good feelings.  I was gonna come back to Minnesota and get a graduate degree in labor relations 'cause my [maternal] uncle [Lonnie Leverette] told me about the sleeping car porters [Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters], how we needed to get into the labor movement.  Again, I didn't hear from them, but I'm not gonna hold that against them.  And I was, I didn't know what I was gonna do.  I was gonna get a degree, go to school at night and work during the day.  And I got a call that the draft board was looking for me and I'd better get to stepping.  And I remembered I had a scholarship to law school.  By now, I had forgotten the doctor stuff a long time ago.
Speaker 1: Now, what was your major in, at Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: I was socioeconomics.
Speaker 1: Socioeconomics, okay.
Speaker 2: And the reason for that is, you know, you ask good questions.  There's no such degree.  I have an A.B. in socioeconomics, not from Virginia Union.  The reason for it is, the State of Georgia would pay--remember I told you I was, I felt like a coward 'cause I didn't stay.  They paid us to leave the South to go away to school, even if we just Richmond [Virginia].  But that was outside of Georgia.  But you had to take a course that was not offered at the black, three black colleges [HBCUs], but was offered at the white schools.  So sociology, I could have gotten at Georgia [University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia], at Savannah State [Savannah State College; Savannah State University, Savannah, Georgia], Albany [Albany State College; Albany State University, Albany, Georgia] or Fort Valley [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia], so they wouldn't have paid me or education or history or that kind of stuff.  So you had to get, you had to fit it, and Virginia Union worked with me on that and created this major.  I'm really a sociology major, but they helped me create this degree, socioeconomics, an A.B.  It's not a B.A. or B.S., but an A.B. because that's what they offered at the white schools in Georgia.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: It is what it is, but see, they paid you four round trips a year--or two round trips a year, to go to school and come back Christmas and come back.  The State of Georgia would pay you the difference from Athens [Georgia] to wherever you had to go.  Let's assume it cost a hundred dollars from Statesboro [Georgia] to Richmond, but it cost seventy-five from Athens so they'd give me seventy-five dollars four times a year.  They would also reimburse you for the difference in weather, in climate.  If it was raining, not raining--I became an expert on calling Ms. Louise [ph.] who ran the state department of whatever they called it--I wish I could find what they called that.  But if you talk to guys from my era from the South, they can all tell you the same story basically.  But I would call her, I'd say, "Ms. Louise, is it snowing in Atlanta [Georgia]?"  "No, Cornell [HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore], it isn't."  "Well, I need an overcoat.  If it's raining, having a tornado, I need a raincoat and stuff."  And finally, when I finished, she said, "Boy, I am so glad to get rid of you" 'cause I worked the system.  So, now, it's time to go to law school, same deal again.
Speaker 1: Okay now, did you have aspirations to become a lawyer--
Speaker 2: No, no, no (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) or did you ever think about it?
Speaker 2: I never thought about becoming a lawyer, not until this, this thing came up where (laughter)--
Story_ID: 635307
Speaker 1: Now, you asked about being a lawyer, and I never thought about it.  I guess when I got more and more in college, I thought about being something.  But it wasn't, it was--being a lawyer was not a big deal.  I mean the, the people I knew, it was just like it was another job.  I mean I didn't know.
Speaker 2: Now, did you watch 'Perry Mason'?  Did you have any idea--
Speaker 1: Yeah, but none of that stuff really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) (unclear) thought about--
Speaker 1: No, no, I was just, I was a debater, and I was all that stuff.  But I was thinking about being a social worker.  That's about all I knew.  So, when I got this fateful call that I needed to go back to school or do something, otherwise, I was number on the draft board list.  And going way, way back, I almost shot a lady one time when I was a little boy, playing cops and robbers.  I cocked a gun and missed an old lady by that far.  And they beat me for the rest of my life in Statesboro [Georgia].  They beat me at the nursing home.  When my mother [Luetta Leverette Moore] came home--my daddy [Jesse Moore] was laying bricks out of town.  They beat me (laughter) all weekend.  And people talked about me, that I was a killer.  But it was just--I had enough sense to cock the gun.  In fact, I went back to Statesboro fifty years later, as a lawyer, and I saw this kid, and I said, "Hi, I'm Cornell Moore [HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore]."  He said, "Oh, when did you get out?"  (Laughter) I said, "What did you say?"  He said, "Oh, we know about you killed all those people."  I said, "What are you talking about?"  He said, "Oh, yeah, everybody in town knows about you."  So I said, "I'm a lawyer, jailhouse."  And I said, (laughter), I almost gave the little boy the (unclear).  But you know that's how stories grow in a little town.  But so I'm afraid of guns, number one, and I never thought much about the law.  I didn't know any lawyers.  But when the draft board thing came up, and a lady told me.  And we had a deal at Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia].  If you were president of the student government, had better than a B average, and an Omega [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], Spottswood Robinson [Spottswood William Robinson III], who was the dean of the law school at Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]--he was on (unclear) with Thurgood [Thurgood Marshall] who was a, who was not a friend of mine, but an acquaintance, he said, anybody with those recommendations, you get a shot at law school, a dean's scholarship, discretionary scholarship.  I called him on August 15th, you notice that 15th, I called on August 15th.  I was in Minnesota, and I said, "Dean Robinson," I said, "I'll take that scholarship."  He said, "Boy, you got until next Friday to get here."  So I got in a car with a guy from Minnesota.  My Aunt Sarah [Moore's maternal aunt, Sarah Leverette], one of the aunts, said, "Well, I don't have much, but here's five hundred dollars."  "Bye."  And I rode with this guy to Washington [D.C.].  The guy had no money.  I didn't know until I got in the car with him, so I had to pay him for like a Volkswagen Beetle to go back to Washington to go to law school.  I went to law school, and my aunt sent me forty-five dollars every month for my first two years of law school, out of her pension from a soldier [Leonard Leverette], dead, and her cleaning money.  My rent was thirty-five dollars a month, and I got forty-five.  I had ten bucks [dollars] a month to live on.  I lived in a basement apartment with my friend whose father I said was the caterer.  He was a year ahead of me in law school.  And we had life--that's when my life started, and I went to law school.  I had no idea, we didn't have to--I was the last class not to have to take the LSAT.  I just got in on grades, had a full scholarship the whole time.  But Howard had a deal where you could borrow five hundred dollars, up to five hundred a year for living expenses, but you had to pay it back before the next September.  So it was like a revolving loan.  And that's what I lived on.  Whatever I could make--and I'd go down to Richmond [Virginia] to cater some time with my friend and whatever other little hustles I could find around Washington.  And that's how I made it through law school.  I wasn't the best student, but I wasn't the worst.
Story_ID: 635308
Speaker 1: Now here, you're at, you're at Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] during the days when the, I guess the, the teachers were the--that civil rights generation of lawyers.
Speaker 2: That's the whole crowd, whole crowd.
Speaker 1: Spottswood Robinson [Spottswood William Robinson III] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) Spottswood Robinson was a writer.  If you ever looked at pictures, he's the guy who looks like he's white on the picture with Thurgood [Thurgood Marshall].  And some of the other people I met over time, but Thurgood would come and practice his cases in front of the law school, that they were gonna do in the [U.S.] Supreme Court.  And we could sit and watch him prepare.  We didn't remember how--I don't think at the time we really understood what was going on.  But, and we understood, but we didn't know the magnitude of what we were watching.  And we met these people, not met them, but saw them.  It was not like we were hanging out.  You know we'd, run and get some coffee or stuff like that.  But our professors were writing briefs and trying cases for the civil rights thing.  And we were in Washington [D.C.] for the March on Washington, my friend and I.  We sold programs and we got as close as from here to you, from the stage with Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], giving the speech.  We were looking at the people more than we were there watching the sermon.  The area--they were segregated still in Washington.  I remember one of the first dates I took Wenda [Moore's wife, HistoryMaker Wenda Weekes Moore] on, I was very impressed.  I went to an integrated movie, the Lux movie [Trans-Lux Theatre, Washington, D.C.] at 14th Street in Washington (background noise).  That's one of my computers I guess.  But it was just nice.  It was just a nice place to be, and at that point at Howard in 1961, we were the cream of the crop.  We had kids from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], all kinds of schools, and we had some good times, and we studied hard, and we played hard.  But we made it out.  I remember when I graduated from law school, a guy put my robe on, and he says, "We got a barter pass and a living to make.  Let's get out of here."  And we've stayed friends all these years.  He's in Tampa, Florida now.  And our law school class turned out--we started with 105, and thirty-three of us graduated 'cause they let everybody come to law school, and it was just--it was a hard row.  And they didn't give, they didn't cut anybody any slack.  You know, if you didn't sleep, you didn't sleep, and that was the way it went because you've got a job to do.  You've been given an opportunity, so go out here and make the best of it.  And that's what we did.  And they had kids from all over the country.  I mean I--almost every town I go to, I know somebody that went to law school (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So when, when you were there--
Speaker 2: Medical school, law school, dental school.
Story_ID: 635309
Speaker 1: Interestingly enough, like I think Mordecai Johnson retired, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Mordecai, when I got there Mordecai just retired.  Nabrit [James M. Nabrit, Jr.] was the president when I was there.
Speaker 1: And he was from the law school.
Speaker 2: He came from the law school.  And let's see, Mordecai was the first black president, and then Nabrit.  And so (unclear) came to law school.  I can't remember all the names now.  My mind goes when I--
Speaker 1: Was Charles Duncan [HistoryMaker Charles T. Duncan]--
Speaker 2: Charlie Duncan was a part-time teacher.  He was doing some government--
Speaker 1: Okay. Oliver Hill [HistoryMaker Oliver W. Hill], was he (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oliver Hill, I knew from Richmond [Virginia].  And that's another story I can tell you later on, but those names were all around the school, and they were always around there.  But Patricia Harris [Patricia Roberts Harris] was my professor, and in fact, my name comes from Patricia Harris.  Remember, she was secretary of HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development], secretary of housing.  She was secretary of two departments, HUD and something else.  They split something up.  I can't remember now.
Speaker 1: Health, Education and Welfare [U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services].
Speaker 2: Health, Education and Welfare.  She--and she was also ambassador to Luxembourg.  So she used to give these exams.  She was Dr. Harris 'cause she had a Ph.D. in law, and so we were doing these things.  And I kept changing my name trying to find myself.  And I was gonna (unclear).  One day I'd be C. Moore, that sounded pretty good, C.L. Moore, C. Leverette Moore, Cornell Moore, Leverette Moore, and one day I said, Ms. Harris, Professor Harris, Dr. Harris, "Where is my paper?"  She says, "Who are you?"  I said, "Excuse me?"  She says, "I'm tired of you changing your name, boy.  What is your name?"  I said, "What did I put down?"  She said, "Cornell L. Moore," and I was that until I turned seventy years old, sixty-five years old.  Then I went to [HistoryMaker] Cornell Leverette Moore, but she also had a phrase that goes like this: any way peace opposes, you said something of importance beforehand.  So don't use the word any way, unless you said something of importance beforehand.  But we had some good teachers, and they were tough.  One professor gave me a bad grade because they had to flunk somebody.  And he said I was the only one in the class could take it and come back from it.  He died of a mysterious cause at thirty-four.
Speaker 1: Who was that?
Speaker 2: His name was Mr. Woods [ph.].  He taught legal accounting.  I had nothing to do with his disappearance and what not, but (laughter), you know, the statute has run anyway now (laughter).
Speaker 1: Was there any particular teacher that was like special in any way?
Speaker 2: No, they were all sort of--Professor Harris would have been my, one of my favorite because she kind of liked the nice fellas, and then there were some--some guys were just humorous and Genis Parks [ph.], Big Red Morris [ph.].  I see them now.  They're in the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] so I see them now, and I'll tell you--when we get to that point, I'll tell you a couple of things they said about me.  But it was--some people you'd see and some of them thought you'd be something and some were surprised when you became something.  When I went to law school, there was only one recruiter that came to Howard, one.  Now, if you go to Howard University law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] now, you get more interviews than anybody in the country because they're looking for a black lawyer to join the firm and what not.  We didn't know anything about little law firm.  When--nobody we knew worked in a law firm other than some black law firm, United States Army.  And they were looking for soldiers.  They weren't looking for lawyers.  And so I go back now, and I look and I try and tell these kids.  You don't know how good you got it, 'cause we didn't know.  We were gonna be like Calhoun [Algonquin J. Calhoun], I guess or be like Thurgood [Thurgood Marshall].  That's all we knew. And by the time I came out of law school, corporations were starting to hire us.  We had government jobs.  Everybody in the government, everybody went to government and the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service].  But when I came out, one of my friends went to IBM [International Business Machines Corporation], one went to CBS.  I went to the government, treasury department [U.S. Department of the Treasury].  I was one of the first guys to go to the treasury department.  And little things.  We got out of the normal criminal jobs and the normal courtroom jobs and got more into transactions.  And that's what got us going, but it was a great deal.
Story_ID: 635310
Speaker 1: Now, before you graduated [from Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], you met your wife, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, she was a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you--can you describe how you met?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Did she describe it?  Okay, I'll tell you, I'll tell you my view.  I saw her.  She had on a green sweater--a green skirt and an orange sweater.   And I said, "Who is that?"  And my friend said, "Back off.  There's no chance.  She's from Los Angeles [California].  Her dad [Leroy Weekes] is a doctor.  Plus, she likes little short guys."  And I said, "No way."  So I put the (unclear) 'cause I was a man about town a little bit.  So I started after her, and she wouldn't give me the time of day.  I called the dorm, and she said, "Tell him I said, I'm not here--," at the hall phones.  Finally, she considered to go out with me, and I got so excited I passed out and somebody else took her home.  I had one too many.  And from then on I started following her around and gradually, she started taking my calls, and we'd go out together.  And I borrowed my aunt's car from Minnesota--my [maternal] aunt [Sarah Leverette] was having a nervous problem, breakdown.  But I borrowed her car, and I kept it for a couple of months, and I think that sort of cemented the relationship.  I could take her to the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.] to do her studying, and I had a car.  But, so and then, she went off, went back to California, and she played hard to get again.  And finally, one day--I used to call all the time.  I was a senior by now, and I called all the time.  And finally her mother [Sylvia Means Weekes] said one day, "You know, young man, you seem like a very nice young fellow, but if I were you I'd get out here because she's seeing other people.  That's why she's not home when you call, but I kind of like you."  So I show up (laughter).  Wenda [HistoryMaker Wenda Weekes Moore] said, "Who invited you?"  I said, "Your mother," (laughter).  And the rest is history.  I won her over.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's, that's a pretty good approximation of what she told.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Mine, I put a little more into it, though.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But it was fun, it was fun.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 635311
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When you're on the verge of graduation then, what were your--the government had approached you, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was, I had worked part time for the government--
Speaker 1: This is for the--
Speaker 2: Comptroller of the currency [Office of the Comptroller of the Currency].
Speaker 1: Comptroller of the currency.
Speaker 2: Yeah, comptroller of the currency, trust department [U.S. Department of the Treasury].  So I'd worked my senior year--see, first, Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] had a program where they didn't want anybody to work.  So our classes were spread out through the day so you couldn't hold a job.  We were all broke.  So we protested, and got that taken care of.  So classes, you could work in the morning or the afternoon.  So by my senior year, I could get all of my classes in the morning and work the afternoons, which worked out pretty good.  And so I shared, job shared with a guy from Georgetown [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.], a white fella from Georgetown named John Durkin [John A. Durkin].  Durkin went on to become a United States senator from New Hampshire.  But he would work days, and I'd work nights, doing the research.  I was there in that department the day John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was killed, and I saw 'em- when they lowered the flag on half staff at the White House [Washington, D.C.] out of the treasury window, not knowing what had happened at that point.  I was also there for the March on Washington.  I sold papers there.  So.
Speaker 1: So this is 1963--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was 1963.
Speaker 1: --yeah, so you went to the march in August--
Speaker 2: August of '63 [1963] and saw John F. Kennedy when he was killed; went to the White House when you could walk on the lawn of the White House, nobody bothered.  You could go over there and start a picnic on the yards, but we had had summer programs.  But anyway, so when I got out of law school--
Story_ID: 635312
Speaker 1: Let's go back to the march [March on Washington] for a minute--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --just, what, what was your--did you have a sense that, that, that it was as important as it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Historic?  No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, I was working for the government that summer.  My friend, Harry Royal [Harry W. Royal], who's the twin of Frank Royal [Frank S. Royal, Sr.], he was working there, and he was staying with me for the summer because now it's my apartment.  My roommate's gone, and I'm making a little money.  Now, it's my apartment.  So Harry and I--they closed the government down and told everybody not to come to work.  So Harry and I went down there, dressed just like this on that August day.  And somebody said, "You wanna sell magazines for the Urban League [National Urban League]?"  And so, and that was when we could move around, seventy-five cents, thirty-five cents, whatever it was.  People gave us too much money, and we walked away that day with twenty-five dollars that we'd made from just people didn't bother about getting their change.  But we wandered around.  We saw all these people.  And there were a lot of poor people there, a lot of rich people.  But we didn't know anybody.  We were just through the crowd.  We heard the speeches.  You know, the speech was supposed to be given by James Baldwin, but they couldn't trust him to give the speech.  So that's how Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] gave the great big speech, according to Malcolm X.  And I happen to have that by good authority because I have one of his records (laughter).  But anyway, we roamed around, and then we walked back home that night.  And the people got on the buses and got out of town.
Speaker 1: Now, were you impressed by the celebrities that were there?  Did you see any? [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis--
Speaker 2: No, I think we were watching people too much rather than watching the stage.
Speaker 1: And Charlton Heston--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm sure they were there, but we didn't, no, no.  What we remember and what I remember is that I remember a lot of speeches, lots of speeches.  I don't remember, and I'm not gonna lie.  I don't remember Martin Luther King speaking.  I'm sure I heard him, but I don't remember it.  And my conscious, if you push me, I would say, yes, I remember it, you know, to make a point.  But I don't really remember it.  But I do remember the people.  I do remember that they came into town and they got out.  All the white people in town were scared, no white people anywhere in Washington [D.C.].  And we walked all the way from there back up to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] because I lived around the corner from Howard and just people just walking.  There was no violence, no nothing.  And it wasn't a big deal.
Story_ID: 635313
Speaker 1: I do remember the bigger deal though is when John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was killed.  That was a big, big deal (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that was in November after that march [March on Washington].
Speaker 1: That's right.  They closed the town down.  Remember, I told you I was working part time, so I was going to work 'cause I had to get my money.  And even though it was closed, I couldn't get to the treasury department [U.S. Department of the Treasury] 'cause everything was (unclear) off because they were going to bring the president from the White House [Washington, D.C.] down in front of the treasury department, turn and go down Constitution Avenue.  And so you couldn't get across.  All at once, these two guys came and said, "Are you Cornell Moore [HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore]?"  I said, "Yes." With trench coats and they didn't have the things.  But it was [U.S.] Secret Service guys.  The comptroller of the currency could see me across the street, and he needed my research.  So he asked the treasury, all of us were T men in those days, treasury agents to go get me, and they could bring me across the street.  And he said, "I need research done on how do we close the banks without it being a national, bank holiday or scaring the heck out of the country," 'cause, you know, nobody knew who had killed John F. Kennedy.  It could have been the Communists, the world was gonna be going to hell.  But we had to close the banks, and we had to do the research.  So he had about six of us, John Durkin [John A. Durkin], myself, Tommy Quinn [Thomas H. Quinn] and all those guys who were law clerk types, young lawyers, researching this thing.  I came up with the answer of all, everybody else.  I read the paper.  I saw what happened when another president was killed, not killed, but died and didn't have a national holiday.  What they did was said, the banks don't have to open but they have to be available.  If you wanted to come pay your loan, they couldn't call you a day in default if you missed that day, and if you got a big deposit to make, somebody had to be in the bank, but the banks could be closed.  Brilliance, genius again (laughter), luck.  But that was my treasury days, and I had my little badge.  My first summer working on, I was assistance, I was a special assistant to the Secret Service agents.  And all the Secret Service agents used to do this (gesture).  You know what that is?  It's checking for your weapon.  If you ever see it, they do this to make sure they got their weapon.  My job was to burn money, but I tell my kids [Lynne Moore Nelson, Jonathan Moore and Meredith Moore Crosby] I was assistant to the Secret Service agents.  And still until this day, I'll see people who will say, you were the first black kid to work for Secret Service in a sort of agency kind of a deal.  And I see Secret Service agents, and I tell them, and they said, we heard about you.  They never heard about me, but it makes a good story.  And then I went to the comptroller of currency's office [Office of the Comptroller of the Currency] after that.  That was just straight treasurer, public debt.  And then I got into this business of being a lawyer for the treasury department.  And the rest is history (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, now--
Story_ID: 635314
Speaker 1: Tell us about why you decided to take the bar exam in Minnesota.
Speaker 2: In Minnesota?  Well, in those days when I came out, I wasn't going back to Georgia, okay.  I mean that was out.  Virginia had a little small quota on who they would take as lawyers.  The word was, they would only take two black lawyers a year, and they'd tell the (unclear), you decide who's gonna pass the exam.  Everybody can take it, but you decide.  That's what my roommate told me.  I don't know if it's true or not.  So I went--and I wasn't staying in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. D.C. never appealed to me.  I mean it was like a burial ground.  Well, you needed to have, in those days, you had to have a reason to take the bar exam.  You just couldn't say, "Well, I'm gonna go to an easy state and take the bar exam."  We called it nexus.  You had to have some connection.  So I had the relatives here, so I came to Minnesota.  And as I told you, my story, you know, this is the third leg of that stool.  I went to college [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia], graduate school--law [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.].  I always wanted to come to Minnesota.  So I came, but I was in love, and she [Moore's wife, HistoryMaker Wenda Weekes Moore] was in California.  So I had to get to California.  So the comptroller of the currency helped me get a job--those were the days when the regulators could help you.  Even though he regulated the banks, he could tell them, I've got a guy you need to hire.  And for a bank in California to hire a black kid in 1964 was extraordinary and a high priced, in a high class position.  So I took the bar in Minnesota, went back to Washington, and waited for the bar exam; took the job in California, came through Minnesota, got sworn in--
Story_ID: 635315
Speaker 1: I had a red Super Sports Impala, Chevrolet [Chevrolet Impala Super Sport], it's 1963, that I drove to California by myself, with wire spoke wheels and a spot light; didn't have a credit card.  So my Uncle Lonnie [Lonnie Leverette] loaned me his Exxon Mobil or his Standard Oil of California credit, gas credit card.  We didn't know about credit cards, but his gas card for me not to use, but for emergency.  I had five hundred dollars in two dollar bills.  So I figured a black kid and red Chevrolet with two dollar bills, if something happened, somebody would have had to see me, and I took off cross country by myself.  And I went to wherever you stop between here and there, and I stopped in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada].  A guy from law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] lived in Vegas, and I called him.  I said, "Where would you stay?"  Undoubtedly, he didn't want me to stay with him.  He wasn't a friend of mine, but just an acquaintance.  He's now dead, but anyway, he said, "Stay at the Deluxe Motel [ph.]."  I did.  The Deluxe Motel cost me twenty dollars that night.  You took a shower with your tennis shoes on, if you get my drift.  I mean it wasn't that nice of a--so I got on my little sweater my wife had brought me, my girlfriend had brought me back from Europe.  She'd been to England.  She brought me a red sweater, and my gray slacks and a white shirt--I'll never forget it, and my saddle oxfords.  And I walked down the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada].  The first hotel you hit was the Tropicana [Tropicana Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada].  And I looked in the window of the Tropicana, my eyes against the window.  And a guy said, "Come in."  "Me?  Come in there?"  He said, "Yeah, come in, if you've got some money come on in."  And in those days, I smoked a pack a month, you know, just in those days you smoked just to be cool.  And I smoked Kools.  So I smoked my Kool.  They gave me a Kool.  They gave me a drink, and I played a dollar's worth of slot machines.  The guys said, "Where are you staying?"  I said, "I'm down at the Deluxe Motel."  He says, "You could have stayed here for twenty, less than twenty dollars."  I said, "What?"  He said, "Oh, yeah, if you've got money, Vegas is open."  And that was my first trip to Vegas.  Then I drove on, onto Los Angeles [California], saw Wenda [HistoryMaker Wenda Weekes Moore], went up to San Francisco [California] with my car, found--I had found an apartment 'cause they'd flown me out for the interview [with Crocker-Citizens National Bank, San Francisco, California].
Story_ID: 635316
Speaker 1: The interview goes like this.  Mr. Emmett Solomon was the chairman of the board of Crocker-Citizens National Bank [San Francisco, California], the fourteenth largest bank in the world in 1964.  And I had done some work on a file of theirs in the [U.S.] Supreme Court--in treasury law, some underling work.  And so he said, "Would you like to be the assistant to the chairman of the board of the bank?  In the mornings, you'll come down to the train with Joe [ph.], the driver, and meet me.  And the meetings I don't wanna go to like the audit committee of the chamber of commerce or the finance committee of the museum, I don't feel like being bothered, you go and you report back to me.  And certain things I'll ask you to do around the office.  Just when we go to meetings, you'll take notes and hand me stuff."  I said, "You know, Mr. Solomon, I don't know how to say this to you, but I really don't wanna be in that job.  I want to be a management trainee."  The man said, "Are you serious?"  I said, "Yes, sir.  That's what I wanna be." 'Cause I hadn't passed the bar.  I couldn't be a lawyer.  He said, "Now, I offered you this job, and you didn't take it."  And I said, "No, sir.  That's what I wanna be, 'cause I heard of white boys being management trainees.  That's the job I took in the trust department [U.S Department of the Treasury]."  He had me sign a letter that he had offered me this big time job, and I use that in my speeches, along with my genius speech, is that if we don't tell our kids what's going on, they'll never know.  Now, they can see it on TV and all kinds of things, but there's still things they don't know.  But nobody ever told me, and people ridicule me and say, "Why do you keep telling people that stupid story?"  I said, "Because people learn by others' mistakes."  And that's a mistake that I try and tell kids all over the country.  Know something about the job before you apply for it.  So I took the job; turned out not to be very good at it (laughter) because it was with a computer and with a calculating stuff.  But I made it through the day.  I mean I made it through the training program and what not, but I could see I was going nowhere in this job, and I couldn't find another job 'cause I didn't take the California bar.  I knew I couldn't pass it.  It was too tough for me, and I had forgotten all the law I knew.  So I called the comptroller of currencies.  He said, "Come back to Washington [D.C.]."
Story_ID: 635317
Speaker 1: I went back to Washington [D.C.] at a much higher salary.  See, when I had this job in California [with Crocker-Citizens National Bank, San Francisco, California], I was making a hundred dollars a week, $5,200.  That was big money.
Speaker 2: That was pretty good at--
Speaker 1: Oh, big money.
Speaker 2: --in those days, yeah.
Speaker 1: The guys in the government made $4,800.  The guys in the law firms made $4,500 here in Minneapolis [Minnesota].  A guy I took the bar exam with told me that.  So, I go back, and now, I'm making $13,200, I've got a wife [HistoryMaker Wenda Weekes Moore] now--$13,200.  I go back to Washington.  I get me a nice apartment.  I got rid of that Chevrolet [Chevrolet Impala Super Sport].  I couldn't afford it.  I gave that back to the Chevrolet company.  But she had a free car from her daddy [Leroy Weekes], so, Dodge Dart, he gave it to her for graduation.  So we drove that thing to California--we drove it there and back out here.  And so we're doing pretty good, and my man, the comptroller of currency is crosswise with Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy], who was the attorney general.  And they were asking him to resign.  So, but he said, I'll sure have this work.  So he stacked all the regional offices with lawyers, staffed them.  And so San Francisco [California] went fast, New York [New York] went fast, you know.  Of course, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and the big cities.  There was Portland [Oregon] left, Minneapolis was left, a couple others.  And nobody knew I had passed the Minnesota bar.  So everybody said, "Where do you wanna go, Cornell [HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore]?"  Guys said, "Don't think about San Francisco, don't think about Richmond [Virginia], don't think about--," and Atlanta [Georgia] wasn't hot in those days for us.  And they said, "Somebody needs to go to Minnesota."  The price went from $13,500 to fifteen, to $17,200 before I accepted the job.  And I showed up in Minnesota and I've been here ever since.  But I came here as regional counsel for the national bank examiners.  I was in charge of all the legal work for all, for the national banks, in Wisconsin, Minnesota, North and South Dakota, the regulation side, all the rules and regulations, I was the man.  That swath, and people would come in and they wouldn't believe it.  They'd look in the office--I was twenty-six, twenty-seven years old.  I had a corner office with a yellow corduroy sofa.  I'll never forget it.  And they'd look, and they--this one guy came.  He looked, and he said, "He's colored," and left.  His name was Carl Pohlad, P-O-H-L-E-D [sic.].  You know the name now?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You see where I'm going with the story now, don't you.  So he came in, and we became friends.  And I knew things that nobody else knew.  And so the bankers would come.  I knew var- various regulations because I'd worked in Washington, and I knew the ins and outs of the rules and regulations.  So I won't say I became popular, but I became known.
Story_ID: 635318
Speaker 1: Then I started getting job offers.  And so, I took a job with a, a bank here as the first in house counsel in the Northwestern National Bank of Minneapolis [Minnesota] which is now Wells Fargo [Wells Fargo and Company].  They were the bank that bought Wells Fargo [sic.], but they took Wells Fargo's name 'cause the president of the bank wanted to move to California.  But they were the real buyer of it.  So that's how I got started in Minnesota.  I jumped way ahead of you, but that's how I got here.
Speaker 2: Well, that's not really jumping way ahead.  You gave me a detailed step by step process.
Speaker 1: And I was, I worked for a guy who was a drunk, and I just didn't wanna be associated with him.  Plus, I was tired of the government anyway.  But this guy used to drink, if you came in to see us on a matter, we'd go across the street to the hotel, and he'd say, "I'll have my usual coffee." Glass of vodka in a cup, in a coffee cup, and he'd just drink it.  Banks got smart enough.  They'd send somebody to drink with him and somebody to talk to me about the regulations.  And I thought people--I said, "They think I'm with this guy.  They think I'm a drunk."  And it just--so I said, "I'm outta here," and I went to work for the bank.  And I left.  Two or three banks offered me jobs, and so--
Speaker 2: Okay, and so you got here in '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: I think it was '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966] and--
Speaker 1: We came in the fall of '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: --and by--
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968], I'd gone to the bank.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: I stayed with the comptroller [Office of the Comptroller of the Currency] a year and a half here.  I went to the bank, and I stayed at the bank for two years 'cause again, I don't like ceilings.  When you tell me something I can't do, I gotta go, I gotta keep stepping.  And by then we'd moved from the north side of Minneapolis, from the hood, which is a good hood, but I figured it was time for me to move on.  So I found this house that I paid nineteen thousand--
Speaker 2: When was this when you (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixty-six [1966].
Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966], okay.
Speaker 1: And then '69 [1969], I decided I'm gonna move.  I moved in, in late '66 [1966], early '69 [1969] I moved. I found a house in the good part of town, right on the lakes where I'm not supposed to live, for fifty thousand.  I'm making $17,500 now.  But she [Moore's wife, HistoryMaker Wenda Weekes Moore] got all upset.  I said, "One day I'm gonna make some money."  So we bought this house.  The house I paid $18,500, I sold for $21,500 on a contract for deed.  That's when you sell it, and you hold the deed and they keep paying.  I paid so much for that house, I was embarrassed to tell anybody 'cause they would have thought that I was trying to be uppity at fifty grand [fifty thousand dollars].  And so we bought the house and we moved in, and that's the end of the story.
Story_ID: 635319
Speaker 1: Okay, 1968.  Now--
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 1: Yeah, '68 [1968] we're talking about.  So in, you were working for the Northwest National Bank [sic. Northwestern National Bank] of Minneapolis [Minnesota]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you had a big position making big money--
Speaker 2: Yes, I thought I was, yeah.
Speaker 1: A house on the lake.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All this is going on, and--
Speaker 2: I hadn't gotten the house on the lake just then.  I got the house in '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Okay, but, okay, so what--how did, I guess you liked Minnesota fairly well at that point.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, at that point I was at the bank and the bank had me doing everything.  I don't think they really understood civil rights or equal opportunity or whatever you wanna call it, but they had me joining organizations like Kiwanis [Kiwanis International] and the Citizens League [St. Paul, Minnesota], and even though I was the bank lawyer, but I was the only thing they had.  And I was an assistant vice president, which was, in those days, they didn't have a whole lot, thousands and thousands.  And so, long story short, I was in a pretty good position, especially, in the black community and in just the overall community.  So things were going pretty good, and this guy comes up to me, and he says, "What do you think about politics?"  I said, "I'm a Democrat."  He said, "Would you like to work for Hubert Humphrey?"  I said, "Doing what?"  He says, "Help him in the campaign."  I said, "Well, I can't take off time."  He says, "They're helping, the banks are helping Republicans.  They ought to do something for the Democrats."  This guy's name was Pat O'Connor [Patrick O'Connor, Sr.], and he ended up, he was Hubert Humphrey's right hand man.  He was his fundraiser and everything.  And he went to the chairman of the bank and said, "Why don't you release Cornell [HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore] to help us occasionally?"  And I started advancing for Hubert Humphrey all over the country, going, you know, going around with him and for him.  And so that was one thing I did that was very good and very fortunate.  And don't know whether Wenda [HistoryMaker Wenda Weekes Moore] told you about the baby.  When I went out to his house when the child [Moore's daughter, Lynne Moore Nelson] was born, that was in '68 [1968] and it was our anniversary.  And I opted to go to a party at, for Hubert Humphrey to announce his candidacy for president of the United States.  And I sent some roses to the house and said, "Sorry, I can't be with you but I'm there in spirit."  My mother [Luetta Leverette Moore] was there--the baby was brand new.  The baby was two weeks old.  So, I knew I was wrong.  I ducked out and caught a ride with somebody, and, you know, rather than going home, get in the car.  I came home that night.  The roses were torn up from the, you know, the note was torn up from the door to the trash can.  And there were the roses upside down.  I learned then that you have your priorities set straight.  But Hubert Humphrey heard about it, and he called.  He actually got the phone number, and he called my wife, called my house.  And my mother answered the phone.  "Hello, this is Hubert Humphrey."  My wife, my mother said, "I bet it is." (Laughter) He says, and my mother, "Is this Wenda? It is Hubert Humphrey."  So Wenda said, "Yes."  He said, "I don't know why that boy is out here.  I just saw the picture of this lovely baby, and your lovely self.  If it were me, I would be at home.  I'm gonna send him home, okay, Wenda."  And that was our Hubert Humphrey story.  So somebody gave me a ride home, and I didn't do that again.  But whenever he ran or Mondale [Walter Mondale] ran, I would be right there to help out.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you find them?  I mean Hubert Humphrey and Mondale.  In those days, you had so many high profile politicians from Minnesota--
Speaker 2: From Minnesota. Gene McCarthy.
Speaker 1: Joe McCarthy [Joseph McCarthy] back in the old days.
Speaker 2: He was from Wisconsin.
Speaker 1: Oh, Wisconsin, okay.
Speaker 2: But we had--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Eugene McCarthy--
Speaker 2: Eugene McCarthy was from here.
Speaker 1: --who came out against the war [Vietnam War] before everybody else.
Speaker 2: That's right.  And we had Robert Stassen [J. Robert Stassen] who ran for Republican twenty thousand times.
Speaker 1: Yes, Stassen, right, Harold Stassen, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so we had lots of good people here.  And it was just a great place to grow up--I mean to, to come into your own.  And people would give me opportunities.  They would allow me to do things that you couldn't do a lot of other places.
Story_ID: 635320
Speaker 1: But then after I had bought the house on the lake, and I needed to make a little bit more money, I went to the head of HR [human resources] and told him I need to make more money.  And he told me that I need to learn to live within my means.  I probably should have listened to him.  And, but I realized later on in life, that he lived around the corner from where I'd bought this new house.  And he was the senior vice president, and I was an assistant.  And I was moving a little too fast.  And I told him that I had a black daddy [Jesse Moore] in Georgia.  I didn't need a white one in Minnesota.  Then I realized he was in charge of personnel, and I'd best be looking (laugher) for another job.  The moral of that story is don't speak too fast some time.  But it worked out.  So I went to work for one of my clients, one of my customers at the bank [Northwestern National Bank, Minneapolis, Minnesota].  And that--
Speaker 2: Is that the company--
Speaker 1: Shelter Corporation of America [Shelter Corporation of America, Inc.], and I became vice president of the mortgage company.  And we were one of the hottest things on the stock market.  We were just like the dot come and being as loyal as I am, I went in at three dollars.  I rode the stock up to forty and back down to eighteen cents.  But I got a big office.  I had a car allowance.  I bought my first big Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz].  And we had our own plane.  I did financing all over the country.  I financed as much as anybody else in the country at that point, from coast to coast.  And I did that for about three or four years, and decided it was time to move on.
Story_ID: 635321
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I wanna go back to '68 [1968], now you probably wonder why I'm going back to '68 [1968].  But '68 [1968] is when, when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated while you were there (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Did, (unclear) do you remember what you were doing then--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and also Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy].  There's all this turmoil going on.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in 19--in 1968 when Martin Luther King was assassinated we had some guests at the house, Charlie Shay [ph.] and his wife, Mary [Mary Shay (ph.)], from Chicago [Illinois].  And he ended up being the regional counsel in Chicago for comptroller of the currency [Office of the Comptroller of the Currency].  And he stayed on, and he finally left and went somewhere else too.  But they were up visiting us, and none of us had any kids at that point.  But they were visiting us for that weekend.  And we were kind of nervous having them with us when all this stuff was going on because on the north side where we were living, they were staying with us, there was an eruption.  And, but we'd gone to dinner at Harry's restaurant [Harry's Cafe, Minneapolis, Minnesota] that night, which was a big time restaurant for us in those days.  And, but I remember--and then when they started rioting down on Plymouth Avenue, which was the black area of town, what today would be called the Martin Luther King Drive [sic.], but on Plymouth Avenue, that's where they were burning stuff down.  And so they asked, asked some of us young lawyers and some business people to sort of go talk.  And I remember, there was a fellow by the name of Judge Dickson.  That's his name, not his title, played fullback for the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota] the last time they won a national championship, a big ol' boy from Pennsylvania, he and I were gonna patrol the streets that night, like the MADDADS [Men Against Destruction Defending Against Drugs and Social Disorder] kind of a thing.  And I'll never forget Judge asked, "What should we wear?"  (Laughter) The man said, "Don't wear a jumpsuit, I can say that to you; look like lawyers, like you're out--supposed to be out there."  And we would patrol the streets at night trying to keep everything quiet.
Story_ID: 635322
Speaker 1: And that's when the clubs in Minneapolis [Minnesota] that were always segregated, like the Minneapolis Club [Minneapolis, Minnesota], decided they should do something.  And they allowed black members.  And the members they selected to join the club--I was too young, were like the black newspaper was sponsored by the white newspaper.  A couple of black guys worked for banks, they went in and it went down the line like that.  So they accepted three or four people, Honeywell [Honeywell International, Inc.], an engineer from Honeywell, a guy from one of the banks and the newspaper guy.  And that's the first members of the Minneapolis Club.  And that's when they made me--not made me, but suggested that I join Kiwanis [Kiwanis International], you know, which I had no interest in whatsoever.  But I went.  In fact, my picture came out in the paper upside down, you know (unclear).  Some people said, "That's what you get for joining an organization like that," and the Citizens League [St. Paul, Minnesota] and then the council on this and the council on that and this or the that and the this and that--
Speaker 2: Now, with all this success and, you know, your profile--you come here from--
Speaker 1: Nowhere (laughter).
Speaker 2: --into the city and we were talking upstairs before we started about a second wave of people coming, of black folks coming to Minneapolis.  And was there any resentment from the ones who were already here?
Speaker 1: No, because there weren't that many black lawyers.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And there, and I didn't, I wasn't bothering anybody.  Everything I did was to help everybody.  And I'm sure everybody says that, but if some black people wanted to try and start a bank, they'd come to me and ask me the question.  If they wanted to try and find out how to borrow money from the bank, they'd come to me and ask the question.  And Wenda [Moore's wife, HistoryMaker Wenda Weekes Moore], of course, she was doing her thing over here civic wise.  I didn't have any money, but people thought I did.  So they would talk to me about investments and things.  So I was a source of some information--I won't say knowledge, but some information or access to information.  And you could come to the, down to the bank [Northwestern National Bank, Minneapolis, Minnesota] and being an officer, I could show you.  You could do things you couldn't do ordinarily.  For example, we had a dining room, a private dining room.  So if you were the principal of a school or if you were something, and I could bring you up to the private dining room and have lunch, and, you know, that kind of thing.  It may not have been much, but I thought it was access that they gained.  And, then, of course, I belonged to all, the Urban League [Minneapolis Urban League, Minneapolis, Minnesota] and NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  I never did much with fraternities, but like, United Negro College Fund [UNCF], those kind of things, we got very active in those.  And so that's, I think that's what happened, and socially, I was out and about.
Story_ID: 635323
Speaker 1: Who were some of the black leaders in, in (unclear)--
Speaker 2: When I came along?
Speaker 1: --when you came along, yeah.
Speaker 2: The most impressive one, I think, was Chuck Johnson [Charles W. Johnson], who was Josie Johnson's [HistoryMaker Josie Johnson] ex-husband.  He was the first black chairman of the Urban League [Minneapolis Urban League, Minneapolis, Minnesota].  And he held meetings where he would be doing strategic planning, which I didn't even know what he was talking about, how you do things, good things he'd learned on the job, very impressive.  Mr. Cecil Newman, who was the editor of the newspapers, the black paper [Minnesota Spokesman-Recorder], and he was very, very nice man.  And then we had, started having people who had positions of quote, unquote influence in town.  There was a black architect by the name of Pete Williams [Lorenzo D. "Pete" Williams], and there was another named Jay Tyson.  So we started seeing people like that in town.  They were older than I was, but I was there as their support--not support, but I did some legal work for some of 'em on the side.  There was a black state senator by the name of Bob Lewis [B. Robert Lewis, Sr.], the only one--I think we've finally got another one [John M. Harrington] now in 2010 in the state senate [Minnesota Senate].  We had a couple of statehouse people.  So that was important to us, and then we started meeting young friends who were doctors, were coming now.  So now, what happened, when you say the second wave, in all deference to them, there were not that many professionals that came.  And the ones that came as professionals were relegated or--not relegated, but found themselves in the black community.  They were just transplanted from the South.  But those of us who came in the wave that I came, were mainstreamers.  I mean I never worked for a black business.  I worked, you know, for the mainstream of the government.  My friend, Cassius [ph.], worked in the Jewish hospital.  My other friend worked at a Methodist hospital.  I mean so we're--now, you got a different group of doctors and lawyers and whatever else you wanna call us, business people, that start doing jobs in sales, marketing, facilities, chemists.  There were some scientist types that were around, engineers.  We had one friend, the godparents of our oldest girl [Lynne Moore Nelson], my mind is going away.  But he came here, Roland [ph.], Roland, I'm trying to think of his last name in a minute.  But they came--and he'd gone to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and his wife had gone to Howard.  And they came, and he was an engineer at Honeywell [Honeywell International, Inc.] and a research engineer in acoustics, which was sort of phenomenal.  And he was Catholic, and he'd, you know--now, we're starting to get, you know, this circle is expanding.  And he never even moved in the hood.  He moved right away, right off of the country club.  And we became good friends and what not, and his kids stayed around.  And one kid became a county judge.  So now, that's the third wave, you know.  So, it was good.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And we could live, and you could live anywhere you wanted to live as I says I showed you by after my third year here, I moved right in the neighborhood, never been any disturbances, nobody moved out, you know.  So it was okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, what did you--did the attitude of the people here surprise you any or what were the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, no, because I had been here before.  I sort of knew what to expect.  And then I came, remember I came with--my situation, our situation was a little different.  We came with a support system.  I had the aunts and uncles.  My uncle had been treasurer of the church for forty years, thirty or forty years.  He ended up being treasurer of the church over fifty years before he died at 104.  So when Lonnie Leverette, oh, you're a Leverette.  That's when that Cornell Leverette [HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore] comes out, see.  Oh, you're the Leverettes from--that's okay.  And he was well known throughout the community like the council of churches [Greater Minneapolis Council of Churches, Minneapolis, Minnesota].  And he did, integrated things across town.  My [maternal] aunts [Eunice Leverette (ph.) and Sarah Leverette], of course, were good church people.  And then I started meeting people who were expanding their horizons, like Archie Givens, Sr., who reputedly was the first black millionaire in Minneapolis [Minnesota].  I ended up being his lawyer, and his son was like one of my proteges.  And his son became one of the godfathers of my son [Jonathan Moore], that kind of thing.  You know what I mean?  Henry Smith [Henry T. Smith], who's still my doctor, came here and went to Howard undergrad and immediately went into the biggest hospital group [Hennepin County Medical Center, Minneapolis, Minnesota] in town.  So by now, things are changing a little bit, and there's more and more people coming to town with advanced degrees.  And now, they're starting to join the law firms and the corporations and--as well as government.  So that's the way it worked.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: We had to keep the doors open 'cause they would try and close them, but we had to keep 'em open.
Story_ID: 635324
Speaker 1: We got you in the--you had just left the--
Speaker 2: The bank.
Speaker 1: --yeah, Northwest-
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Bank [Northwestern National Bank, Minneapolis, Minnesota], and started with the--
Speaker 2: Shelter [Shelter Corporation of America, Inc.].  And Shelter was very good because there I had more influence.  My friend, Woody, who came to Minneapolis [Minnesota] in 1969 to be the first black pilot at Northwest Airlines, who's a distant relative of my wife [HistoryMaker Wenda Weekes Moore].  I didn't know him that well, but anyway, they laid--to give an example, they laid him off from the airlines.  They were laying people on and off.  And he was looking for a job.  He's a mechanical engineer.  Before I closed a loan for somebody one time, I suggested they may wanna look at Woody as a potential employee.  And they said, "Oh, would that be a good idea?"  I said, "That would be a good idea."  So Woody got a job, and I ended up coming to the same company as a vice president.
Speaker 1: Now, what's Woody's full name?
Speaker 2: Woodson Fountain.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, oh, Woody retired.  He's retired years ago.  He was a 747 [Boeing 747] captain for Northwest Airlines, and he was from Richmond [Virginia], had gone to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], but his oldest sister was married to Wenda's uncle.  And they know of each other.  And that's how when he came to town, he found us.  And he lives around the corner now.  He's one of my partners here if he were in town and Wenda's not here, we sit around and talk like you and I are talking, all night.  And, but there's more and more that kind of stuff going on.  It's called networking, they tell me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think you might be right, you might right.
Speaker 2: We discovered that word.
Speaker 1: Okay, so we're early '80s [1980s] now, I mean '70s [1970s], I mean, yeah, in the '70s [1970s] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In '70s [1970s], in '77 [1977], things are sort of changing.  People are sort of doing things.  One thing I didn't tell you.  I went over to join the Minneapolis Athletic Club [Minneapolis, Minnesota] when I was at the bank before 1970, and they told me they didn't have any openings.  And I just saw the sign because somebody had taken me there to lunch.  A young white fellow who was working for me went over and came back, and he said, "I'm a member of the club."  So later on in life when I was in charge of something, they came over recruiting us to get people to join the club, and I reminded them that they didn't have any openings.  But in the meantime, I had joined the Minneapolis Club [Minneapolis, Minnesota], the one that the white folks had to get the black people in.  I got in on my own.  I had Mr. Dayton and Mr. Pillsbury [Philip W. Pillsbury] sign my application.  And I worked with that one for a little while.
Speaker 1: That's Dayton of Dayton Hudson [Dayton Hudson Corporation], the (unclear) stores?
Speaker 2: In those days it was Dayton Hudson.
Speaker 1: And Dayton was (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and they started Target [Target Corporation].  You know, Target came out of Dayton outside here, and the Pillsbury [Pillsbury Company, LLC], you know who that name is.  So I didn't have very much trouble, but I reminded those people that they didn't have room.  In fact, one of my friends became secretary of energy later on life.  And the company she worked for said, "Why don't you join the athletic club?"  She said, "That's the ghetto.  I wanna go to the Minneapolis Club.  That's where the little boys are."  It's now closed, so it's not a big deal.  They didn't make it.
Story_ID: 635325
Speaker 1: You went from Shetler mortgage company [sic. Shelter Corporation of America, Inc.] to Shelard National Bank [St. Louis Park, Minnesota]?
Speaker 2: Well, I started Shelard, I never worked there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, you started--okay.
Speaker 2: I was the founder of Shelard National Bank--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --one the founders, two of us.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And we started that bank.  Shelard means Shel Ward [sic. Sheldon West] and Richard Leary.  They own a development, and that's what it was called, Shelard.  And we got that bank, I was the one who did all the work on it.  And it cost us a hundred and seventy-five when everybody else was paying hundreds of thousands because we knew what to do.  And the people who were issuing the charters in Washington [D.C.] were people I'd worked for years ago, and I kept a relationship with.  So we were able to open that bank, and there were a great number of us.  And at that point, they were trying to keep banks from being owned by one person.  So there were about fifteen of us that owned it.  And I got some black people to buy stock in it.  In fact, they--I sold mine and they didn't wanna sell theirs.  They wanted to hang in there, and they ended doing good.  They had a better deal than I had.  So what happened, a couple of our guys didn't go well.  So they made us consolidate the ownership.  So I made a profit.  If I put in a hundred thousand, I got a hundred and twenty five.  So I thought I'd made a lot of money.  And so somebody else bought the bank, and then they sold it to somebody else, and now it doesn't exist, of course, as we knew it.  But that was a very good deal.
Story_ID: 635326
Speaker 1: Then I went on the board of Marquette banks [Marquette National Bank, Minneapolis, Minnesota], owned by Carl Pohlad, the guy who saw me in the room.  (Laughter) Remember (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Remember that story?
Speaker 2: Yes, all right.
Speaker 1: So Carl and I stayed friends over all those--until he died.
Speaker 2: So he remembered you after all that, I mean--
Speaker 1: Yes, he did.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: And I'll get to that story when you wanna get to that, how we got to that.
Speaker 2: Now, Marquette bank, now, this--that would be like what year?
Speaker 1: This would have in '78 [1978], '79 [1979], almost 1980.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then about 19--then I worked for myself from 1973 until 1987, roughly.  I think I might have practiced law a couple of years in between.  I did, from '74 [1974] to '77 [1977], I worked at a place called Robins, Davis and Lyons law firm [Robins Kaplan LLP, Minneapolis, Minnesota].  And that's when--it was a good sized firm.  Today it's a very big firm.  But they wanted me to be sort of their bank lawyer, business development, but they were suing everybody in town.  So I couldn't make any money.  But in the meantime, a guy came to me one day and said, "Cornell [HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore]," 'cause I was older.  Now, I'm thirty years old, thirty-five, and the guy said to me, said, "You got twenty-five grand [twenty-five thousand dollars]?"  And I said, "Why?"  He said, "See that guy sitting out there?"  And I said, "Yeah."  "He plays seventeen instruments, writes his own music.  He sings and dances, makes his own clothes.  For twenty-five grand, you can have half of his contract."  I said, "Does what?"  I said, "What's his name?"  He said, "Prince."  I said, "What's his first name?"  He said, "That's his name."  I said, "Well, first of all, Elvis [Elvis Presley] is the only person I know who has one name.  Secondly, you don't see Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis, Jr.] doing all that.  You don't see Frank Sinatra.  This is the age of specialization."  And I said, "And that color purple ain't going nowhere either.  He ain't gonna make it.  See you." Well, my kids [Lynne Moore Nelson, Jonathan Moore and Meredith Moore Crosby] until this day say, "You're the dumbest joker I've ever seen in my life."  I said, "I still don't like his music," (laughter).  But anyway, that was my Prince story, and that's become folklore around here how I didn't take Prince on.
Speaker 2: 'Cause he still lives around here, doesn't he still live here?
Speaker 1: I don't think he lives around here anymore, but he still supposedly is around here somewhere.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I haven't seen him, I've only, I've only seen him play once, and he's very entertaining, very good.
Story_ID: 635327
Speaker 1: And then I got a call in the same time because we'd made a movie called 'How the Midwest Was Won' [ph.], and I was one of the producers of it.  It never went anywhere.  It showed one time and went into the can.
Speaker 2: What was it, a documentary or a--
Speaker 1: It was a movie by friends in the banking business.  It was really, we had nothing else to do so we were gonna make us tax shelter we wrote off for having this party.  But we made a movie.  We burned down a building and the whole thing, and I was a Confederate general, who played a part in the movie until I found out I was on the wrong--it was a comedy, 'How the Midwest Was Won' on one day between 10 and 10:15 in the morning, and then it wasn't discovered anymore.  We had a lot of fun.  One of the guys that was in the movies with us is now the ambassador to Morocco, Sam Kaplan [Samuel L. Kaplan].  And so we had lots of fun making this movie, and another friend who helped me the--who we were in the movie with, was the largest Oldsmobile dealer in the country.  He just died and was one of my best friends, played tennis at his house for thirty years, every Thursday morning, this same group of guys.  That's how my world opened up for me.  I mean I--there wasn't anybody, isn't anybody in this town that I didn't know that I could not approach because I never wanted anything 'cause I always came with my hands like this.  So everybody wants like (gesture) give me, give me, give me, you know--no.  I bring--my mother [Luetta Leverette Moore] always said, "Whenever you go to visit somebody, don't have both arms the same length.  Always have something, bring something to the party."  And that's the way I operate.  I don't ask anybody for anything that I'm not willing to get for myself.  And so I, the world opened up for me, and this was my can of oysters or however you wanna say it because I gave back, I think.  I participated.  If I couldn't give back, I would try.  And anything I say to anybody, I said it to their face.  I didn't talk behind their backs.  If I said I didn't like you, I'd tell you to your face I didn't like--if I liked you, I could tell you to your face I liked you or stay away from you.  I mean that was also another tactic.  You just don't have time, don't be bothered.  But I was always available to help anybody that needed help.  So that's how I got into that business.
Story_ID: 635328
Speaker 1: And then I started representing the athletes, Carl Eller was my first one because then when they were football players, and the summer I was here waiting to go to law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], I taught Sunday school.  And these football players from the university used to come to our church 'cause that's where the girls were.  And so I got to know 'em over these years, and so I represented Carl Eller.  I represented Sudden Sam McCullum, Rodney Greer [ph.].  Most of 'em were Vikings.  And we were just, a good relationship I had with the players.  And, but in those days, it wasn't that big money.  See, the biggest salary I ever got for Carl Eller was seventy-five thousand [dollars].  The most money ever made at that point was Alan Page when he jumped ship and went to Chicago [Chicago Bears], after he'd been the most valuable player.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: They paid him two hundred and fifty thousand dollars.  And that was big money.
Speaker 2: Right, in those days.
Speaker 1: It was big money.
Speaker 2: And football players really then didn't make as much as baseball players.
Speaker 1: No, no, no, and baseball players didn't make a lot of money in those days either.  I mean you--when I came along, football player, I mean I got thirty-five thousand dollars for a running back for the Minnesota Vikings.  That's big money.  And I got him a six or seven thousand dollar bonus, and that's how we charged legal fees.  So I made three or four thousand dollars for doing that.  But I stayed true to my principles.  I represented them to the best of my ability, and that's where we went from there.  And as I was telling you earlier, that my son [Jonathan Moore] was born in 1976, and I was representing athletes.  And the Vikings signed him before he was born to a contract, which he still loves to tell people, and they gave him a football that was autographed by the Vikings--that's when they were going to Super Bowls, even by Fran Tarkenton who didn't autograph things for people.  And it was just a--it was a wonderful place to be and, you know, after game, and they would win a game, they'd have big parties.  Like Jim Marshall was known to have the parties after they won the games.  So one time, and I had this--Jim Marshall lived out here on a little road, I'll never forget it, in Bloomington [Minnesota], nice house, you know, to us, nice, modern suburban house.  And there was this guy from California was there, and this doctor I told you about, the state senator, Bob Lewis [B. Robert Lewis, Sr.], was my client.  He said, "Come on, let's go to this party.  You gotta meet these guys."  This guy was taking athletes' money and investing it in Holiday Inns because you couldn't lose.  He said I'm a Jewish accountant and a lawyer.  You can't lose with me.  My brother designs the Holiday Inns.  My mother [Luetta Leverette Moore] runs 'em, and my cousins run the restaurants.  And you can be our partner, and we have them near [U.S.] Army bases.  I mean it was a very logical thing.  He said--and if you don't know who I am, I'm the guy that broke the NBA [National Basketball Association] for the guy that went to Washington, Seattle, that he busted the union--busted the teams.  His name will come to me in a minute.  But that was his claim to fame, that he was a big time guy.  And these guys were just throwing their money at him; ended up--Carl gave him his money.  My doctor friend gave him his money.  I had to sue him to get that money back.  He just ripped these guys off real good.  So I go to California to get their money back, and we got--and, of course, you sign a confidentiality agreement.  So the rest of the guys didn't get theirs, only the ones I had.  And years later, Tom Bradley was mayor of Los Angeles [California].  It was in '76 [1976] 'cause my baby, my boy was being born.  I was still representing athletes.  I go to this concert.  Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis, Jr.] opened.  He was the opening act for Blood, Sweat and Tears at the Greek Theatre in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. Remember, he's going down by now.  Blood, Sweat and Tears coming up--
Speaker 2: I know it doesn't sound right, but--
Speaker 1: But that's right.  Trust me, and I'm telling you the truth.  So we go into the tent, and I'm with the mayor of Los Angeles.  And this guy comes up to me, all Hollywood [Los Angeles, California], you know, open collar and a lot of hair and bling, bling.  He says, "You're with the mayor?"  I said, "Yes, I am."  He says, "I'd like to get him to come out to Beverly Hills [California] to sign an autumn record for a group."  And the group's name was The Sylvers, remember that name?  They were sort of like The Jackson 5.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Sort of Mexican, Black, Hispanic.  And he said, "I'd like you and the mayor--," I said, "You don't remember me, do you?"  He says, "No, I don't."  I said, "Remember So and So?'  I made him remember the football players.  He said, "Man, get out of that racket."  He said, "I got a better racket now."  He said, "These kids cannot read nor right.  They don't even pretend they can read or write, plus, they make a million bucks [dollars] a years.  You're dealing with these football players making a hundred thousand," he said, "you can take 'em right to the cleaners."  I called him everything but a child of God.  And I said, "And the mayor has no need for you," and dismissed him.  Now, can you imagine that?  That's what he said.  And I told the mayor, and the mayor said no.  And it was just terrible.  But that's what you, those were the kind of vultures you ran into.
Story_ID: 635329
Speaker 1: And then after that I represented the American Football League [AFL], American Football League.  When they were combining 'em, they didn't wanna take certain players.  So we represented the players union [National Football League Players Association].  And we had them in court here in Minneapolis [Minnesota], and we had Rozelle [Pete Rozelle] on the stand.  We grilled Rozelle, and we won.  We got nothing.  Rozelle had a press conference at the penthouse at the Hilton Hotel (laughter).  We had our little sandwich with our players down in the cafeteria of the federal courthouse.  We won.  We had a guy named John Wooten [HistoryMaker John B. Wooten].  I don't know if you remember that name--
Speaker 2: John Wooten used to play guard for the Cleveland Browns, right.
Speaker 1: That's right.  We had, we represented Wooten versus Rozelle and the NFL [National Football League].  I did that case, and it was just wonderful.  So we got a reputation, you know, for representing black people.  And, you know, we get paid.  My friend from law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], Clarence Rogers, from Cleveland [Ohio], yeah, he was friendly.  And when the case came here, he got me and my guys to do the legal work for him.
Speaker 2: What, what year was Wooten versus Rozelle?
Speaker 1: Yeah, this would have been--I was at the law firm [Robins, Davis and Lyons; Robins Kaplan LLP, Minneapolis, Minnesota] until nine- from '74 [1974] until '78 [1978], so it was right in there.  I can't remember what the year was now.
Story_ID: 635330
Speaker 1: Yeah, you mentioned John Wooten [HistoryMaker John B. Wooten], and I, I, I just wanted to know if you worked with the, the black athletes who were trying to form their businesses in economic--
Speaker 2: No, I didn't do that.  I just represented the union [National Football League Players Association]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at that time when they did it.  My other experience with football players, I had a guy here named Johnny Ray Kimbrough [John Kimbrough], and this is all in the period '74 [1974] to '78 [1978] right in there, somewhere like that.  And Johnny Ray was the fastest man in the world at that point in football, went to St. Cloud State [St. Cloud State University, St. Cloud, Minnesota].  Somebody at church asked me to represent him.  I got a lot of little referrals 'cause they knew I was honest and what not.  And they were low end players, I mean not big names.  Johnny Ray was drafted by Buffalo [Buffalo Bills], and my tactic was, I would always go with you, you know, to see the general manager, and et cetera, et cetera.  And I'd always ask for a sweatshirt, you know, sort of that's the only thing I got out of the deal, like a little token.  We went to Buffalo [New York].  Reggie McKenzie was playing, he was a pulling guard for O.J. You got me now?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: At Orchard Park [New York].  We go out there, and I met with a guy named Ball [ph.] who was the general manager and got Johnny Ray's contract all set.  As we're walking out of the hotel, we got out of the facility going back to the hotel to go, come back to Minnesota, O.J. was walking with his crew.  And he said, "I understand you're supposed to be fast, young blood--young boy, sport."  Johnny Ray said, "Yeah, I'm pretty good."  And he says, "I understand you can run 100 and so fast?"  Johnny Ray said, "Yes, I can."  O.J. said, "Well, why don't you show us?" And his crew, "Come on, come on, Juice asked you to run, run."  The boy said, "I've got on loafers."  He said, "If you're fast, you're fast."  So Johnny Ray took, and he ran a little few steps, and, "You're all right.  When you make the team, you can run with us."  O.J. then said, "But let me show you what's more important than anything else."  He took four steps.  He said, "If you don't make the first four, you'll never get to five."  And they laughed and went on about their business.  That was my only confrontation with O.J. Simpson.  But he was, I mean these guys were idolizing him then.  You remember at Buffalo, he was the man.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, he broke Jim Brown's record, and--
Speaker 2: Yep.  But anyway, so, it turned out, to finish the story, Johnny Ray had a heart problem and never made it.  And then I got him signed with the Oakland Raiders, and they hit him, and they gave him a job and got his wife a job, and he never made it.  He, just his heart--they couldn't take a chance.  His heart would skip a beat or do something.  I don't know what it was, but those were the days, yeah--running with the big boys.
Story_ID: 635331
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, we're up to about 1980.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, so 1980, all right, we're--
Speaker 1: Seventy-eight [1978], '80 [1980].
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is, okay.  Now, you're at--by this time, you're at Marquette Golden Valley Bank [Marquette National Bank, Minneapolis, Minnesota].
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was just a director there--
Speaker 2: Director--
Speaker 1: --director at Golden, but I was working for myself.  I had a company called Lease Moore Equipment [Lease Moore Equipment, Inc., Minneapolis, Minnesota] and Leverette Leasing Co., Inc. [ph.], and I was financing stuff all over the country, and doing construction work, and whatever I could get my hands on to do.  I was tired of working for somebody else, and I was doing pretty good.  I got into this leasing business.  I figured this thing out.  It's just third party financing.  So I'm doing pretty good.  I'm leasing stuff all over the country, and I'm officing with a guy in St. Paul [Minnesota].  I had been chairman of the state personnel board, and so I met this man who owned a big construction company in Sishee [ph.].  And I told him what I had in mind, and that's when they were doing minority contracts.  He said, "Why don't you come and work with me?  If you have a company, I can maybe throw a little work your way, and, you know, we can work out the deals and what not."  So I, so then I find this leasing thing.  I said, "Forget that construction."  I'm like the boy said, there's bigger money in this.  And it was easy.  I had more than I could do (unclear).  So one day I'm standing there, and this guy comes in to the men's room.  And he says, I'm--I knew who he was.  He said, I said, "What are you doing?"  He had a big ol' overcoat on in the men's room, standing in the men's room.  He said, "I'm a little shorter."  I said, "Yeah, I can see that," and we laughed.  And I said, "You're Bob Woolley [Robert E. Woolley]."  He said, "Yeah, how do you know me?"  I said, "I heard about you."  And he started a company called Granada Royale Hometel, hotel business--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: And we were talking about Lease Moore--
Speaker 1: We talking about Lease Moore Equipment.  So I got this company, and I'm doing pretty well.  And this guy tells me his problem.  I said, "What's your problem?"  Well, Woolley had built these hotels in Arizona.  I think he had one in Iowa, basically, Arizona and one in Iowa.  And the whole concept was all suites, no tipping, free breakfast, free drinks.  And the way he'd gotten into it, well, he was a plumber, and he had to foreclose on an apartment developer, and his wife said, "What are you gonna do with this building?"  He said, "Let's make a hotel out of it," 'cause it was too far away from breakfast and et cetera, et cetera.  So it was a good concept.  So he came to Minneapolis [Minnesota], and he was gonna build one out by the airport here.  And this guy Sishee [ph.] got the contract, but he'd heard about my friend's tactics, Woolley's tactics.  He would get you started and he'd started--he'd go from linoleum to marble and say, "Don't worry, I'll take care of it later."  And when you'd get to the end of the job, he was short.  So he had to make a deal.  So Sishee said, "No, no, no, you're not gonna do that to me.  We're not changing anything until I get money in advance."  And so Woolley was telling me the situation.  I said, "Maybe I can help you."  He said, "What do you do?"  So I told him Lease Moore Equipment, little--I had a little room in the back, had a nice little office.  And so he said, "Oh, maybe I'll help you out and let you do some financing for me."  And he doesn't know I know everything I know.  So it turned out, he told me what he would do, and he would give me a mortgage on one of his properties in Phoenix [Arizona] and et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.  So I went to the bank and my bank said, "If you get the security, do it."  So Woolley and I started doing business together.  Before you know it, Woolley was into me for $15 million and now, I mean it's like every--it's sort of like, I need to put some furnaces in.  Here's some money.  Can you do this (unclear)?  It was a good business. Money was high.
Story_ID: 635332
Speaker 1: Lo and behold, I'm sitting here watching TV, not here, but in my other house.  I get a call on a Sunday on a day like today, and there's Bob Woolley [Robert E. Woolley].  Guess what he says to me?  "I didn't know you belonged to the longshoremen's union."  I said, "What do you mean?"  He said, "You charged me 25 percent."  I said, "It is not interest rate.  It is a lease calculation," (laughter).  He said, "You can call it what you wanna call it."  He said, "I'll tell you what.  If you'll cut your rates back to something reasonable, I'll give you 10, 15 percent of every deal I do."  So we made it 20 percent and away we go.  Granada Royale Hometels became Embassy Suites hotels.  That's what you see in Embassy Suites, is Bob Woolley's idea that he sold to Holiday Inns [Holiday Inn Corporation].  So we ended up with eighteen Granada Royale Hometels, three here, and we have one, two, three--four in Minneapolis [Minnesota], California, Texas, Arizona.  We're going wild.  We got the Learjet.  We got it all going on.  We got the yachts.  We got, you know, an office in Beverly Hills [California].  We knocking 'em dead.  And so Woolley and I go along, and things come and go, you know.  It'd just go up and down, up and down and so I move out of where I was to a fancier office.  And I hire staff and I move to another building and things are going real good.  And this is all during the '80s [1980s].  We're doing business all over the country.  And then things came to a screeching halt, and we sold our stuff to Holiday Inn.  Holiday Inn was managing them for us.  We thought they weren't doing us right, and so we took them back, and we called them Crown Sterling Suites at that point.  And then we finally sold them back to 'em again, and we got out the business.  This brings us now to about 1985.  The papers report that Woolley and I sold these hotels for hundreds of millions of dollars.  Nobody really knew that we probably owed hundreds of millions of dollars, but that's neither here nor there.  We did okay.
Story_ID: 635333
Speaker 1: One day, my friend calls me up and says, "I'm buying the Minnesota Twins baseball team.  Would you and your partner be interested in being my partner?"  I knew I couldn't be his partner 'cause I didn't have that kind of dough.  So I'm trying to figure, what am I gonna do?  So I called Woolley [Robert E. Woolley], and Woolley says, "What?"  I tell him.  He asked his accountants and what not, and they said, "Are you crazy?  You're gonna be a minority owner in a baseball team.  You'll never--there's nothing in it."  Well, Woolley said, "Let's try it anyway," because we were told he got in the business for almost nothing.  So we did.  We got in the business in 1985.  When Carl Pohlad bought the Minnesota Twins, Bob Woolley and I owned 45 percent of the Minnesota Twins, joint and several.  And away we go.  Well, in 1987, the Twins were in the World Series, and Woolley and I are part of the deal.  Nineteen ninety-one [1991], the Twins win the World Series.  Woolley and I are part of the deal.  This is the 1987 ring, and this is the 1991 ring, World Series rings.  I wear this one because it goes with the outfit, the dark color, and I wear this one when I wear brown.  But the funny story about this, when I got this ring, I was so happy to have it.  And so we go there to party the Twins just go to in a wheelbarrow.  And we go to this thing, and all the players wives' are there and what not.  Oh, part of the deal was that we were the silent partners.  We weren't supposed to tell anybody we owned the Twins unless they ask us.  And so very few people would ask us, and somebody asked.  But all the women have this thing around their neck.  And my wife says, "Where's mine?"  I didn't know anything about it.  So when these rings came out, I said, "Forget me."  So Wenda [HistoryMaker Wenda Weekes Moore] has hers.  Hers is cut out.  I don't think she's ever worn it, but I got her one from that time.  So we got our rings, and then as I jumped ahead of the story earlier, our house was robbed.  And these are brand new rings.  These were replacement rings.  But we went along with it, and then Pohlad started talking about selling the team and moving the team and what not, after going to the White House [Washington, D.C.] twice.  And by now, I'm too entrenched in the town.  I can't be involved in moving the team out of town.  So we backed out, and he paid us our money back, and away we went.  And that was it.
Story_ID: 635334
Speaker 1: Let me go back, back track and ask you about, now, I'm, I'm sure there are other pla- players, you know, you know, in the history of the Minnesota Twins.  But, but these were World Series, I think, were particularly important.  I mean Kirby Puckett was particularly important--
Speaker 2: Kirby Puckett, he was the man.  Kirby Puckett was the man, of course, you know, and there's other guys.  But as we said, "Touch 'em all," Kirby Puckett, "Touch 'em all, we'll see you tomorrow night when he hits the home run."  And then the one time, he climbed the wall and got it.  Kirby was the only player that knew, that asked me did I own part of the team.  They'd see me, but they didn't know why I was around.  In fact, the day they bought, we bought the team and announced it, my son [Jonathan Moore], who is now bigger than I am, was a little boy.  And he sat on Mrs. Pohlad's [Eloise O'Rourke Pohlad] knee at the ceremony because there were no more seats available.  And no one ever asked why that little boy was sitting on Ms. Pohlad's knee.  They always thought that somebody--they knew that Pohlad [Carl Pohlad] had a partner.  But they never knew it was me unless they--if they asked me--if they told me they knew, I'd say, yes.  But if they asked me, I wasn't supposed--you know, I could fudge it.  So that was the first thing.  Then we took a lap around the field, Wenda [Moore's wife, HistoryMaker Wenda Weekes Moore] and I, and my friend, Sid Kaplan [ph.], who took the bar exam with me was the only guy I studied with and I took the bar exam.  We stayed friends until this day.  His wife loved baseball and so they took a round.  So they assumed that I was there with Sidney, I guess.  Nobody ever assumed that I was the other owner of the Twin [Minnesota Twins] 'cause Woolley [Robert E. Woolley] never came around.  He lived in Arizona.  He didn't care.  See, my theory for Woolley is, he lived in Tampa [Florida] and Phoenix [Arizona], and neither one had a time.  I think Pohlad was gonna try and get us to move to one of those places--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because it took 60 percent for him to keep the team here.  He only had 55.  So he was gonna blame it on us.  That's my theory.  I've never said it publicly, but that's what I'm telling you my theory was.  But Kirby, the first trip to the White House [Washington, D.C.], I didn't go.  Woolley went.  The second trip to the White House I flew with the team--this is '91 [1991].  We're on the plane, and I'm sitting up with the owner and management up in first class.  The players had a three seater, one seat between them folded down with the wife against the window or vice versa.  And Chili Davis says, "Who's that ol' black guy up there with Pohlad?  Is that his driver?"  And that's when Kirby said, "That's Mr. C [HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore].  Look at your checks sometimes.  He signs the checks every now and then."  And said, "Don't you see? He's already got on a ring.  You haven't even gotten yours yet."  And that's when it came out, the word came out then that we had a--part ownership of the team.  And people started, you know, they'd see me at the game, they'd see in a box, but the company I worked for had a box.  So they finally just figured that's why I was there.  But I'd be in the owner's box, and I'd be in the press box, eating hot dogs with the press and all.  And it was, it was a fun time; didn't go on any trips with the team, just wasn't my thing.  And I didn't, I had a pass to any ballpark, and I'd go places, and I'd show off every now and then for my friends and say, let's go to the game, and stay for an inning or two and then leave, you know, right from the owner's box and what not.  But it was fun, it was a fun time.
Speaker 1: Well, you were around during the right time. For real, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, the only two they've got.  There're other minority owners of teams in the country, but I don't think anybody's got two World Series rings.  Somebody may have one, but I don't think anybody's got two yet.
Story_ID: 635335
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so, so this--we're about 1980--now we're in '91 [1991].
Speaker 2: Now, we're in ninety--
Speaker 1: In '91 [1991].
Speaker 2: In '91 [1991], '91-ish [1991].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And by now, I've, I worked at a securities firm.  I was general counsel of the securities firm called Miller and Schroeder Financial [Miller and Schroeder Financial, Inc., Minneapolis, Minnesota].  And things were going pretty good.  I got into a little match with the SBA [U.S. Small Business Administration], and we dogged it out.  They sued me, and I sued them, and we ended paying them what I agreed to pay 'em in the first place.  So that's a--they wasted time, and I wasted money, but that was here nor there.  The only time in the history of Minnesota, I think, that somebody was sued for less than a half million dollars and they made the front page of the paper.  And it was announced to the papers before they filed the lawsuit.  Now, you take and do what you wanna do with that one, but I think I know what happened, and I told 'em what I thought happened.  And I wouldn't back down.  I told them what they could kiss.  And I told the paper that, and I stood my ground.  And I offered them a half million dollars four years ago, and I gave it 'em four years later--three years later or whatever it was, '92 [1992] to '95 [1995].  But it was a, it was a perilous time.
Story_ID: 635336
Speaker 1: Now, tell me if I'm going too fast, but can you tell us about the election of Sharon Sayles Belton?
Speaker 2: Well, Sharon Sayles was a nice young woman I had known when she was a city council [Minneapolis City Council] lady.  I knew her 'cause she married a friend [Steven Belton], an acquaintance of mine, a young lawyer, who I'd--when I was general counsel of a law firm, I gave him some business to do.  He was in another firm.  But Sharon was always, you know, she's little--oh, you've never seen her, but she's a little woman, short in stature, but a big heart.  And she can hang right with the guys, if you have to.  And, but I believe that she was the right thing, and so, when we got together, those of us who thought we had some influence--and I lived in the city at the time, and got the votes together and raised a few dollars and pushed ahead with that.  And under her administration, I was chairman of the convention bureau.  We built a new convention center.  Then I became chairman of the public housing authority [Minneapolis Public Housing Authority] for ten or twelve years.  And that was my big civic splash, chairman of the state personnel board, chairman of the convention bureau and chairman of the housing authority.  Those were my civic obligations.  But Sharon was always a straight shooter.  She knew how to make a deal.  That's how we got the convention center done.  That's how we got Target Center [Minneapolis, Minnesota] done.  She was not afraid, you know, to put it on the line.  In fact, when we were getting ready to try and get a new baseball stadium, she and I took a tour to see baseball stadiums, went to Cleveland [Ohio].  And then we went to Denver [Colorado], just the two of us because of some of my connections, and I was chairman of the convention bureau.  And I guess, maybe the guy from the convention bureau, but I can't remember.  But we were in the dugout at the Cleveland Indians and their new stadium.  And the owner--it was a very impressive--he had a box down behind home plate, right behind home plate to look at Cleveland.  There's an apartment right behind it, the Jacob brothers [David H. Jacobs and Richard E. Jacobs].  I've never seen anything like it before in my life, before or after.  And he a full kitchen and everything.  And he asked Sharon, "Do you like to--would you like a little drink?"  So Sharon says, yes.  "What do you drink?"  She said, "Scotch."  He asked Lucille [ph.].  "Unlock the vault and bring a bottle of that scotch out."  I'd never seen it before or after, Johnnie Walker Blue Label.  I've heard of Black [Johnnie Walker Black Label] and Red [Johnnie Walker Red Label].  Blue for the sake of the scotch was $150 a bottle, and he poured Sharon, and he said, "Don't drink it too fast, Madam Mayor.  You're only getting one drink," (laughter).  So I came back, and I was gonna buy Sharon one for Christmas, $150.  I said, "Forget that."  I didn't buy it (laughter).  But I've seen her since.  Then we went from there to Denver.  We flew nonstop--I forget how we got there now, went to Denver, and we toured the state, and when we did all the things, I told Sharon, I said, "You know what?  I'm tired of these stadiums."  I said, "We've seen enough.  We're leaving tomorrow.  Let's get out of here."  She said, "No.  We've got to go to the game."  As we walked into the stadium and sat down, "The mayor of Minneapolis [Minnesota]," and they were panning for him, and as we came into the stadium, Sharon said, "No, I'm not listening to you about anything anymore."  But Sharon, I think, got the short end of the stick on this deal when she lost.  I think that we thought that Gore [Al Gore] was gonna win, and she would leave.  So our people didn't put out enough effort to make sure we kept her.  And, of course, you know what happened to the Gore thing.  And this guy slid in.  He's [R.T. Rybak] been mayor for ten years now.
Story_ID: 635337
Speaker 1: What kind of a long shot was it for Sharon [Sharon Sayles Belton] to get elected in the first place?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, well she was president--she wasn't president of the city--was she president of the city council [Minneapolis City Council]?  I don't think she was.  She might have been the majority leader.  But she'd been a city council person for a while.  It was a long shot, and they talked about her, you know.  She was a single parent at first and has a child who was immobilized or--
Speaker 1: Handicapped?
Speaker 2: Handicapped, and yeah--she was by herself a lot.  And then she married Steve [Steven Belton], and they had a couple of kids later on.  But--
Speaker 1: First, it's like the black population of--
Speaker 2: Minneapolis [Minnesota] was 20 percent and 15 percent--
Speaker 1: Fifteen percent.
Speaker 2: It wasn't enough to elect her, no.  But she was elected by the progressive Democrats in this town and us.  And plus, she'd been in--I think the powers that be, that knew her, because when she was in the city council.  And I don't think she was president of city council.  I'll have to go back and check that one of these days.  But she was a known quantity.  And she was, had a lot of good support.  She was from Minnesota, and so she had a lot of good support, and the Democrats were running pretty hard in those days.  But she did a good job for this town.  She was good for business, and she was good for the neighborhoods.  I mean she was a very good person and was welcoming, open arms.  We had a couple of--we had the national bar [National Bar Association] convention during her tier-time, National Coalition of Black Meeting Planners were here, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] was here.  And so we had some good black conventions, and so she was open arms, and I was chairman at that point.  We had the Lions [Lions Clubs International], and the Billy Grahams.  We had some good conventions, and she was always available to help out.  And when we opened a new hotel downtown, she was there to crack the champagne or to clip the ribbon, and she was a good person.  And yet and still she had heart.  And I think that child encouraged her to have heart about hard times for hard people.  And she stayed in the community until, until she could afford to, to move on.
Story_ID: 635338
Speaker 1: Now, in the late '90s [1990s], a lot of people, black people from Chicago [Illinois], and I think East St. Louis [Illinois], there's another place (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Gary, Indiana.
Speaker 1: --Gary, started coming--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --to Minneapolis [Minnesota].  Now, what were the--I know the, the, in Chicago, they knocked down the housing projects--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and gave people Section 8 vouchers, but didn't have enough housing for them.  So what are dynamics of this move and what did it mean for Minneapolis?
Speaker 2: Well, we had to tear our projects down too 'cause we had too much of a thing, and I was chairman [of the Minneapolis Public Housing Authority] during that period of time.  And we went to open vouchers.  But what it meant is that you had a large influx of people who came in town and needed heavy social services.  So, remember, we have the Lutheran Social Services [Lutheran Social Service of Minnesota] here, and they bring a lot of foreigners.  We have more Hmongs, more Vietnamese, more Somalians or Ethiopians and that was just--like you said, the second wave.  The first wave was Gary--Gary, Chicago and East Louis.  So we got the regular African Americans who were here.  Then we got the Africans who wanna be Americans come.  Then you got the Asians coming.  Then you have the Hispanics coming.  At one point, I think they said we taught 125 languages in the school system or some number like that.  And what we didn't understand about these, this melting pot, is that the Vietnamese from the mountains, the Hmongs, didn't get along with the Vietnamese from the lowland.  And if you didn't know it, and they were in the same class, they'd start fighting in class.  Then you've got the Mexicans versus the South Americans.  Then you've got the southerners versus the northerners and the blacks.  We had a real mess here for a while.  That's when it became, what did they call it, Killerapolis [sic. Murderapolis] when we had all the killings here.  These people were just shooting like it was open season.  And Sharon [Sharon Sayles Belton] was not afraid to step up and put in some touch policemen.  We had Tony Bouza, B-O-U-Z-A, who was a New York [New York] cop.  In fact, we just saw him on TV the other night.  We didn't know he was still alive.  But he came here with that New York police stuff, and he could talk to people, but he wasn't afraid to put his hand on them either--hand, being, you know, the hand of the law.  So we went through that crises for a while.  And then to offset that, of course, we had the Urban Coalition [Urban Coalition of Minneapolis, Minneapolis, Minnesota], and we had all the things, job training, and we had the summit program, Summit OICs [Summit Academy OIC, Minneapolis, Minnesota].  And then the corporations started hiring more people like the Targets [Target Corporation] and the General Mills [General Mills Inc.] and training programs.  So we worked our way through it.  But I'm gonna tell you, for a little while there, it was me versus them and them versus me.  And it wasn't a very nice place for a little while.  But people in Minnesota have a way of sort of slugging, slugging it out.  If you can make it through these winters, you can make it anywhere.  And we used to have a saying that goes, "Forty below keeps the riffraff out," but that didn't bother a lot of people.  I mean this was paradise to them.  You could get good housing.  If you wanted a good job, there's a possibility; and some schooling for your children.  And especially, when it got to the university system, they really had a good deal.
Story_ID: 635339
Speaker 1: In '95 [1995], you became a partner with Dorsey and Whitney [Dorsey and Whitney LLP, Minneapolis, Minnesota]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well, Dorsey and Whitney, well it's interesting because my daughter [Lynne Moore Nelson] was a lawyer--is a lawyer.  And she had gone to work for a medium sized firm.  And they weren't very nice to her, and I saw how they treated my daughter.  And I sort of figured if they treated my daughter that way, how are they gonna treat everybody else's daughter, if I (unclear) Mr. Big [ph.].  So I said, you know what I ought to do?  I ought to go back into practicing law with a big law firm to try and show 'em how the world ought to be.  So I got to thinking, and I was general counsel of this medium sized securities firm, making a fairly good living and kind of doing things right now.  I'm out of the baseball business.  I'm out of the hotel business.  I'm out of the Lease Moore [Lease Moore Equipment, Inc., Minneapolis, Minnesota] business.  I'm just practicing, I'm just--I'm in the securities business at this firm.  So I went to Dorsey and Whitney, and I said, "I can do something nobody else can do."  And the magic part, and a guy by the name of Tom Moe (unclear), he says, "What is it you can do, Cornell [HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore]?"  He knew me.  I said, "I can give a face to this firm that nobody else can do. I'm not being boastful, I'm just telling you 'cause I understand it, and I know the players in town.  And I happen to be black."  He says, "You know, everybody's looking for you, but they don't know you.  Nobody realized that you would take this task on of making this a better place to live and to work and to be."  I said, "Yeah, but you gotta pay me."  And so we talked about that.  And I had to get rid of the SBA [U.S. Small Business Association] thing, 'cause that was sort of hanging around.  So 1995 I go to this law firm, sixtieth largest law firm in the country, fifty, seventieth, ninetieth, whatever it is in the top hundred, been around sixty-five, seventy--it's a hundred years this year, 2012, is our hundredth anniversary.  And I said, "I can do this," and I started bringing in business.  I brought in a client who was a big power producer.  I brought in a couple of banks.  I brought some good individuals.  I brought some manufacturing companies.  I brought some distribution companies, some finance companies, and then I started attracting young lawyers, black, white, blue and green 'cause I could talk to them like a godfather.  And it's just been wonderful in our expansion.  My role in the law firm doesn't require me to work every day like everybody else does.  So I can--if you needed somebody to come and represent the firm, I'm the logical person you want to come.  If you want somebody on your committee, I'd come and do that.  If we opened a new office somewhere, and you needed somebody to go, I know the mayor of Los Angeles [California].  I know the so and so.  So I became--some people call it a rainmaker, but that's not--we call it storm chaser.  We're looking for bigger things than rain (chuckle).  So then when Walter Mondale comes back from the ambassador of Japan and the two of us team up to be the business development people.  As he used to say, he was global and I was local.  So we had a nice team.  And so the law firm has done very well.  We have somewhere in the neighborhood of five to seven hundred lawyers at any one time.  Things are not as rosy as they were in 2009, which was everybody's good year, but we've held our own.  We haven't laid off a lot of people.  We continue to hire, and we continue to hire people who are diverse.  And so I think we're doing a good job.  We represent some of the biggest companies in the world.  We're in nineteen locations around the world.  We're in Australia, we're in England.  We're in Canada.  We're in China, and we're all over this country.  And, so it works out fine.
Story_ID: 635340
Speaker 1: Are there any stories associated Dorsey and Whitney [Dorsey and Whitney LLP, Minneapolis, Minnesota] you wanna tell us, that?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  It's just, it's just hard work.  We've, we've made a big thing of recruiting minorities, and that seemed to work out.  And we've had people who don't work out.  You know, I've had some of our people that I've had to chastise or put in their place or reprimand.  It's the same thing with some white kids, older people and younger.  But the big thing about Dorsey and Whitney is our client base.  We have access to a lot of things.  And so, as a result of being at Dorsey and Whitney, I think that we're able to influence companies and businesses to do the right thing.  And, you know, we had one instance where a lady in Washington [D.C.], who I had helped, called me to tell me that she was having a problem with one of our partners.  And I--she said the lady put her finger in her face.  I said, "I'd bite it off."  And that was the end of it.  I said, "This is not a plantation.  You don't have to take that kind of stuff." Well, the woman sued the law firm and said it was racist and to prove it, she quoted me.  Then everybody's all upset.  And my philosophy has been to everybody, if you're a lawyer, why are you so afraid of being sued?  I mean that's what we do.  I've never been to court, but that's what I thought--think you ought to do.  So they were all up in arms and long story short, we got down to the end, and they called me--they went to arbitration.  And this, I confronted this young woman.  I said, "Of all the people you turned on, you turned on me?  I was trying to help you.  What I told you is what I would tell my own daughter.  Yes, I'd bite somebody who put their finger in my face, and this isn't a plantation.  Feel free to come and go.  And they can't make you stay."  And I said, "For that, I've got to turn you out."  So, she got nothing.  She couldn't prove anything.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But just, you know, you try and help people, and you try and be candid and honest.  That's why so many people do, deal in what we call double speech.  They never say anything.  That's why they can't call you brother or boy or girl.  They've got to call you mister and a grown person.  You can't be real with people anymore, and I find it very hard at my age.  I mean I have to tell you like I see it, and if you don't like it, sue me, 'cause I'm doing it for--I'm trying to be real.  I'm not being disrespectful.  Like somebody said, I said, "Honey baby."  Well, that's what we say in the South, "My man. What happening, sweetie?"  And I'd say, I'll try and change it, but I really can't.  I mean if you push me, I'll be, "Hello, how are you?"  But that's not me.  And that's not what you're paid for and that's not what you should get.   You shouldn't get this.  You should get the real genuine thing.  And if I, as I said, I don't mean any harm.  And I just, you know, "Hey, my man, what's happening?"  And if (unclear) say all I can say, "Can you explain to me your situation that you find yourself in at the moment?" I can do that too.  But you're paying for those long words.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Story_ID: 635341
Speaker 1: Let me ask you now.  Now, you're very, you're active civically here, and you're a member of a number of different boards.  You're on the--you were on the board of a law school.  I don't know if you still are.
Speaker 2: I'm not any longer, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was on the board--the boards I've been on in that arena are, the first one is Dunwoody College of Technology [Minneapolis, Minnesota].  I've been a director there for thirty-two years and just forever.  And the reason I did that one is my father's [Jesse Moore] a tradesman, and they train, they train vocational, technical people.  Now, they're giving regular degrees.  So that was my first attraction.  Plus, remember I told you about the bank, I was able to appoint me to things, but I was sort of drafted, as a result of people knowing me from my bank days and some of the big shots downtown, they asked me to do it.  And now, I've gotten to love it.  In fact, Wenda [Moore's wife, HistoryMaker Wenda Weekes Moore] and I had, gave some money, and they've named a center after us at the school, the Wenda and Cornell Moore School--I mean not school, but for intercultural affairs [Wenda W. and Cornell L. Moore Multicultural Center, Minneapolis, Minnesota], something it's called.
Speaker 1: Her department (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, we gave 'em the facility.  Then William Mitchell College of Law [St. Paul, Minnesota].  When I was working for myself, early on, I needed something else to do so I taught law school.  I taught school at William Mitchell College of Law, and I went on to become a trustee of there later on in life.  Then, of course, I went to Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia], and they asked me to be a trustee there.  And I went there, and my son went there, and my brother went there.  So that was kind of fun.  And then I went on the board of Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina].  My son in 1980--1995, I guess it was--I get my years, I get mixed up now.  But whatever year Jonathan [Jonathan Moore] was looking at colleges, and we went to Johnson C. Smith to look.  And they asked me to go on the board there and for some of the things that I knew about finances.  And I served there for fifteen years.  And I've gotten off of that.
Speaker 1: And that was the alma mater of your favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: Of my favorite teacher from high school [William James High School, Statesboro, Georgia], Ms. Smith [Sarah Ayers Smith]--
Speaker 1: Ms. Smith--
Speaker 2: --you've got a good memory, yeah.  And I, you know, and, in fact, I gave them some money in Ms. Smith's name, a little bit, and she was so proud of that before she died, the class of '41 [1941].  And that was, I thought that was a nice thing to do.  And I did it because she was really nice to me.  But then they asked me to go on the board of Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  At one time I was--for six years I served as an alumni trustee where you have to be elected by the alumni.  And I did that.  And then--
Speaker 1: Was Cheek [HistoryMaker James Cheek] the president then?
Speaker 2: I went on first--no, I was never there with Cheek.  Cheek, he left before I came on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can't remember who was on when I went.  But he, but no, I wasn't there with Cheek.  Then, I did six years of that, two three year terms.  And then I went home, and then they called me one day and said, "Would you like to be a trustee?"  I said, "Look, I'm not politicking."  And somebody said--the lady who called me, [HistoryMaker] Floretta Dukes McKenzie who was the vice chairman.  She says, "I now have the juice, if you wanna be on the board."  So I said, "Fine."  So, I've been on the board now since 2000.  I think I went on the board in 2000 this time.  And this is my last term.  Whenever this term is up, I'm resigning from there.  I'm sort of peeling 'em one by one.  But Howard has been so instrumental in our family.  Both of my daughters [Lynne Moore Nelson and Meredith Moore Crosby] went there, of course.  Wenda and everybody in her family went.  And (unclear) and all the other people I've known.  It's been a big influence in our country and our world.  And whatever I can do to help, I can.  I've done that.  And so those are my educational things that I've done and, and tried to help out.  And it's been fun, what little I--certain things I think I do well, and other things I don't.  I like the financial parts of it, like the investment and the finance committees and audit and budget and legal committees.  I don't do very well in student affairs, and academic.
Story_ID: 635342
Speaker 1: Now, what does it mean to be the commodore of the Aquatennial [Minneapolis Aquatennial]?
Speaker 2: Well, the Aquatennial is a summer, is the summer festival in Minneapolis [Minnesota].  And it's been around for sixty or seventy years.  And in the old days when there was nothing much to do in the summer.  And people--we didn't have baseball, and you didn't have a lot of stuff, and people didn't have, they didn't have cabins that far away, they'd stay in the city.  And they would have a festival celebrating the water.  And the commodore is like the king of the city.  You have a queen of the lakes, celebrating the lakes and all these surrounding communities would have little queens, summer queens, and they'd have festivals and parades.  So in 1998, someone had asked me to do it, and we'd have a queen from the Rose Bowl [Tournament of Roses], from Australia, from France, and other countries all would come.  And we'd have sister cities and it's a big summer festival.  We call it the ten best days of summer.  And it's a big deal with the Torchlight Parade [CenterPoint Energy Torchlight Parade], and they used to have grand marshals like Benny, Jack Benny or Bing Crosby or governors or presidents would be the Aquatennial grand commanders for the parade.  So then you have to go to the other cities to reciprocate, like San Antonio [Texas].  You'd go to various towns around here.  You'd go to Macon, Georgia.  I remember some of the good trips to New York [New York], the Rose Bowl.  The biggest trip, though, is going to Osaka, Japan, all expense paid trip to represent your city.  And so that was a big lure for me.  But they want you to wear a white coat and have all these emblems and things on it.  And it's polyester, and I consider myself to be a good dresser.  So I refused to wear the polyester.  Neiman Marcus was gonna do mine in linen and silk, and they had to do was let 'em put on my back, Neiman Marcus in the same color as the jacket.  So nobody would know it but them.  But everybody caught onto it, and they wouldn't let me do it.  So I wore the polyester because polyester is brighter and whiter and what not.  So we did that.  So that goes along pretty well, but on the board of Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], at that point, general, General Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] was on the board.  And somebody, Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] or somebody said, "General--," 'cause you know the board knew about it, said, "Cornell's [HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore] a five star general and look at you, you're just a four star."  So Colin Powell looked at it, and he said, "This is a costume."  I didn't say anything.  He said, "Don't ever, hear me, don't you ever wear that around me."  And I said, "Jeez, this is kind of serious."  So I came back.  I asked the office (unclear) to send a picture of me, a nice framed picture of me to General Colin Powell, to a former general from a sitting commodore, and I sent it off to him.  The next meeting at Howard, I asked him about it.  He says, "I didn't get your picture.  Don't do that."  The next time we see him, his wife was with him, he said, "Alma [HistoryMaker Alma Powell], you know Cornell."  She said, "Oh, yes, that's the young man that sent the picture to the house," (laughter).  So I got him, I got him on that.  But that was my biggest thrill.  And then I took my daughter with me to Japan, my youngest daughter [Meredith Moore Crosby], as a chaperone because the queen's mother went as a chaperone, so I didn't need to care.  And Wenda [Moore's wife, HistoryMaker Wenda Weekes Moore] couldn't go and my oldest girl [Lynne Moore Nelson] couldn't go.  So my youngest daughter was seventeen, eighteen at the time, a senior in high school.  She got a chance--she wasn't even a senior in high school.  It was 1999.  And she got a chance to go with me to Japan, and we went to Japan, to Osaka.  And then we stayed a week longer and went down to Tokyo [Japan] 'cause I had been there before.  And it was just a very nice thing.  And it made a good impression for the City of Minneapolis and the State of Minnesota, and my daughter will never forget it, that we went over there and could not speak any Japanese other than what we could read, and stayed for a full week and had a wonderful time in Japan.  So that was my biggest civic thing.
Story_ID: 635343
Speaker 1: And then, you know, I've been on all other kinds of commissions and African American Family Services [Minneapolis, Minnesota] I was on for a long time, and, of course, the Urban League [Minneapolis Urban League, Minneapolis, Minnesota] and NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and the black lawyers association and this, that and the other thing, and the church and what not.  And then I got involved with the Boule, which was Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity.  And I joined that years ago.  In fact, my father-in-law [Leroy Weekes] belonged to it in Los Angeles [California], and when we got engaged, and he basically told me it was a group that I would probably never be asked to join because of how we think of ourselves sometimes.  And he didn't mean it to be nasty.  He just meant that that's the way it was.  It was a bunch of doctors and lawyers too, I guess, but out in California, mostly doctors.  Well, I came to Minneapolis [Minnesota], and they asked me to join thirty-five years ago or so.  And so I joined and became active here and in the year 2000, 2000, we had the convention here, and I was sort of the chairman of the convention.  And I think we made a good impression on people all over the country, how well we could run a convention because by now, we've done the national bar [National Bar Association], NAACP, and I had the connections for this, that.  People asked me to run in 2004, and I took a real campaign.  In my mind, if you're gonna run for something, you run for it.  You just don't hope that somebody's gonna vote for you.  You've heard my record about high school [William James High School, Statesboro, Georgia] and college [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia], don't like to lose.  Law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], I didn't make it (laughter), I didn't make the president of anything 'cause law school, it was too many of us.  And I backed out.  I didn't wanna have my feelings hurt so I just, you know when to hold 'em and you know when to fold 'em.  So I folded.  So I went full blast for this thing for the Boule.  And I thought that what we needed to do in the Boule was to make it more inclusive, to find little Cornells and little Johnnys and little Billys who were gonna be somebody or could be somebody, and get 'em involved in it.  Then I also had another theory that our children should get to know each other because they were walking past each other, not knowing that they have something in common.  So my biggest thing is, I'll carry with me, is a group I started with the Boule called YACS, Y-A-C-S, Young Adult Career Symposium, where our children got a chance to meet each other.  And I went out and got it a hundred percent funded by outside sources.  And I told the people if I couldn't get it funded, I'd pay for it out of my pocket.  And as a result, three or four of the children who met there at our convention got married.  And I just got a note from a kid today in 20--of this year that one of the kids from two years ago got engaged.  So it served its purpose.  And they got to know each other.  My daughter who attended and my son [Jonathan Moore] met friends that they now know around the country whose parents are in Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] and in the Boule and who went to college and who did this and what not.  And it's been a good deal.  And then we raised money for Katrina [Hurricane Katrina].  I was grand sire elect, and I was responsible for raising close to a million dollars for Katrina.  And I was past president--grand sire, when comes Haiti; raised money for Haiti.  So I feel good about what we did, and we had some good conventions, and we had some good meetings.  And I think I put the fraternity in good shape financially and, and body wise or membership wise.  And one of those things that you carry to your grave with you.
Story_ID: 635344
Speaker 1: We always ask this question: what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community specifically today?
Speaker 2: Well, two things I hope to happen.  I hope that we reelect the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama].  And I hope that we learn that everybody that we elect doesn't have to do everything for you, that we have to be sort of self-propelling, and just because we've got a black president, that doesn't mean that all the black people are in charge all at once.  But we should be given a fair shot.  I believe, as I was, to quote my mother [Luetta Leverette Moore] because she's not here to dispute me, but--when I say good things, I believe that if we work together, we play together, we stick together, that this can be a better place.  I think we have to learn to help--not so much to help each other, but to encourage each other, to guide.  And I mean like I told people when we were doing the civil rights thing, everybody can't be in the ditch.  Some of us have to be on the side of the road to hail help.  And that's what I think, in today, that all of us--we can't do something for everything.  We can do something for a few people, and when you do a few good things--we're--for somebody to sit and say, I should do this.  I can't do this.  I can do two or three things and I can do those two or three things well.  But I can encourage you to do three or four and you encourage three or four.  And the next thing you know, we've done a hundred things at our little group.  That's networking.  That's working smart, as my mother used to say, you know.  There's no use in me trying to play football and baseball and basketball at my age.  I can't do it.  My mind might tell me I can do it, but my body can't.  So I've got to find something that I can do for the body politic, and make my contribution there.  And I think the second thing or the third thing we got to do is stop criticizing each other so harshly.  I mean I see these boys downtown and these girls, and I wanna go up and slap 'em.  But the only thing I can do every now and then is I can say something to 'em.  For example, I ride the light rail to the airport [Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport, Hennepin County, Minnesota].  And I ride, I go to the airport a lot.  And I dress just like this.  I usually catch the early morning train.  One morning I'm going, and I see these kids on there right after that boy [Don Imus] talked about the Rutgers basketball players [from Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey]--
Speaker 1: Oh, the nappy headed--
Speaker 2: Yeah, what was his name?  You know who I'm talking about now.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: It'll come to us in a minute.  Right after, I'm on the train and these black boys were talking to these black girls so disrespectful, I just couldn't take it.  And I looked at 'em, and, you know, they all wanna look rough.  But there were a lot of them, and I'm dressed like this.  And there was a guy sitting next to me, a black guy who was sleeping, taking a nap.  He was like a mechanic going to the airport to work.  And he said, "Man, forget it."  I said, "I can't take it."  I said, "I'm going in."  He said, "I got your back."  So I went to the back of the train.  I said, "Ladies and gentlemen, may I speak with you for a moment?"  'Yeah, what you want?"  I said, "Oh, this is kind of hostile."  I said, "I'm a minister," (laughter), "a bishop."  I said, "You should not talk to these women like this.  We just had this thing about the Rutgers girls being talked to, and why are young women taking this kind of conversation from them?"  I said, "You young fellows, you, you should be reading your books.  You don't have any books?  How are you going to school?"  "Well, sir, sir, sir," and they started backing up.  They backed to the back of the bus--to the train and started explaining themselves.  And I said, "Okay," that's when I threw the bishop on them when I turned my back.  I didn't want them to think I was a regular preacher.  And I said, "I don't expect to hear this from you anymore when I'm on the train."  And the guy, "That was a pretty good story, bishop."  I said, "I ain't no bishop," (laughter); "I'm a lawyer."  He said, "I'm glad you didn't tell them you were a lawyer."  But long story short is that I see these kids on the train now, "Hey, Rev, how you doing?"  They want somebody to talk to 'em in a respectful way.  They want somebody to 'em in a, not a kind way, but a way in which makes some sense to 'em and give them some respect.  And that's the way I always look at it with people.  And I think if you respect me and I respect you, we've got a--we'll go a long way.  And that's the way I try and do it.
Story_ID: 635345
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point in life, what--would you do anything differently though--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --first of all?
Speaker 2: A lot of things I'd do differently.  I would have kept some of those jobs I had so I wouldn't be still working at this age, whether I want to or not.  People laugh.  I said, "No, if I had known then what I know now, I could have been president of the Northwestern Bank [Northwestern National Bank, Minneapolis, Minnesota]," maybe or maybe I should have gone to work for somebody else.  But, you know, I have self-satisfaction of what I've done.  I can tell the stories, and I can go on and on about things that people have done for me and I've done for them, to me and against them, around them, back up for them.  But I would have done some things differently like that.  I think that if I had known then what I know now, about some of the people I associated with, I would have been kinder to them, nicer to 'em, or would have been nastier to 'em or meaner to 'em.  Prince, take the Prince story, maybe I should have gone and borrowed twenty-five grand [twenty-five thousand dollars] and I could have been with Prince.  But what happened a year later, the contract was wiped out.  The guy who put the money up got nothing from Prince.  The guy from A&M Records just took it, I mean so.  So some things you'd do differently, that you would do.  Oh, the other story I started to tell you about Mario Van Peebles, they came to see me, remember him?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: 'Sweet-Ass' [sic. 'Sweet Sweetback's Baadasssss Song'], 'Baadasssss!' they wanted me to do that 'cause they heard I made a movie, and I was also involved in 'Zorro, The Gay Blade' because one of our hotel partners was Mel Simon [Melvin Simon] from Indianapolis [Indiana] who was involved in it.  So Woolley [Robert E. Woolley] and I got involved in a couple of those things too, very, very small dollars, but my name appears every now and then as a, as an angel, you know, an angel investor.  So people come to me for that.  But I think a couple of hotel deals I would have tried to hold on to.  I think a couple of real estate deals I got involved in I wouldn't have gotten involved in.  Maybe I would have tried to hold on to the Twins [Minnesota Twins] longer.  I could have worked my way through that.  Maybe I should asserted myself longer, years ago, about the integration of schools.  But, you know what?  Would a, could a, should a.  I didn't do it.  I can't sit here and cry about it now.  I had a good life.  I'm seventy-two years old, health is good (gesture), you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Time's okay.
Story_ID: 635346
Speaker 1: Also, if you look back, like what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think my legacy today would be what I've done in education, in these schools that I've helped.  I mean I've seen a lot of kids get into school--I still write res- write letters of recommendation for kids.  I still like going to the college board meetings and talking to the kids and telling the kid to take the earring out.  I mean we see these kids at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], they come up to us--we have these big dinners.  And we meet with the most talented students.  And invariably, you know, we'll sit at a table (unclear), and there's a guy with three earrings, "I wanna be mayor of San Antonio [Texas]."  I said, "Well, you ain't gonna make it with those two earrings in your ear, son."  Or you go to law school, and you interview a kid, and he tells you he wants to be Johnnie Cochran and also be on the [U.S.] Supreme Court.  I said, "Those two don't really go together."  Oh, you wanna do this--and, "I wanna do criminal law and rapper," and then, "I wanna be in business for myself."  I said, "Well, look, if you're looking for a job in a law firm, the last thing they wanna hear is that you wanna leave as soon as you get in the door, after they've invested all this money in you."  I mean so the kind of things that I have experienced, like me at the bank [Crocker-Citizens National Bank, San Francisco, California], not understanding being assistant to the chairman of the board [Emmett Solomon] is more important than being a management trainee.  If I cannot impart those stories, and some benefit from 'em, what good are the stories?  The, the, the follow up to the story about the bank, the guy that took the job, in three years became head of the trust department [U.S. Department of the Treasury].  And not that I would have gotten it, but it occurred.  But I now realize, some of the things that I did, I could have done differently.  And when I tell my story to people, hopefully, they can laugh at me, but learn something from it because I'm not that proud.  I mean my wife [HistoryMaker Wenda Weekes Moore] sometimes says, "Why do you tell people these stories?"  I said, "It's no skin off my back; it happened, you know, and I'm a lot better it for it."  Now, there are deals that I could have been in that I said no to, which turned out to be good.  There are deals that I was in that were bad that I was in it.  There are things that I did--I don't think I ever hurt anybody, but I didn't do as much as I could do.  I don't think I've ever seen anybody killed or hurt because of my dereliction, but I probably could have given somebody some advice.  They shouldn't have married somebody or they shouldn't have taken that job.  But sometimes, you don't wanna get in people's business.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But all I can do is answer the questions that people ask, and I always ask this question when I finish my interviews at the law firm [Dorsey and Whitney LLP, Minneapolis, Minnesota].  And that interview goes like this.  If a person--if you as a young lawyer take a job with us and become a very good lawyer, what is it you want your tombstone to read?  And the reason I ask 'em, you need to start thinking early on in life how you want your life to come out.  It's just doesn't come out because you want it to come out.  You have to work it.  Just because you wanna be known as a philanthropist or courageous biker or what's that thing, the kick boxer, you've gotta start working on it now.  There's more to life than just being a lawyer.  And that's the way I've always looked at it.  I'm a lawyer by happenstance.  I just happened to be a lawyer 'cause the [U.S.] Army was after me and this and that other thing.  And I tried to make the best of it, but what I really wanna be is a good human being.  And when it's all said and done, I want people to come--as I said, in one of these articles, I want them to come and have a good time.  Now, everybody comes to the funeral.  I want 'em to get a watch.  But it's not--everybody can't get a good watch.  And if you're not really interested in Cornell [HistoryMaker Cornell Leverette Moore], you may not get a watch.  So we have to be interested in each other.  We have to participate, and we have to care about one another.  As my son [Jonathan Moore] said (laughter), "They won't get any watches 'cause he's keeping 'em all," (laughter).  But it's a good story to tell.
Story_ID: 635347
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your family.  We, we haven't asked that.  Tell us about your children and what they're doing?
Speaker 2: My children?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well, they're interesting.  My, I have a saying to my children, my favorite child, that's the one who's not with me (laughter).  That's when they love to say, "Oh, your favorite child--."  Well, you know, I've got the two girls and a boy [Jonathan Moore].  And I think the girls really pressured my boy.  The girl [Lynne Moore Nelson] was a lawyer who really didn't wanna be a lawyer.  I don't think she (unclear).  I didn't pressure--I didn't say anything to her about it, but I think she had some other reason for doing it.  And she doesn't like a lot of confrontation which is kind of hard, you know, if you're gonna be a lawyer.  I guess you can be--I don't confront a lot of people, but they know deep down inside I'll confront 'em if they confront me.  And she's just a stickler.  I mean she'll just--right on the money, like she sent us the email this morning, "You didn't call me to tell me you got home safely from California."  She's that kind.  It's like a little mother, 'cause she's that much older than the other kids.  The boy is my main man.  I think if you raise your hand, he would cut it off, but at the same time if I raise mine, he'll cut mine off too.  But he is like me.  He thinks he's my bodyguard.  And he's just a nice kid.  In fact, he joined the fraternity  just this year 'cause he said, "Dad, we have nothing really in common.  Why don't I join the fraternity?" 'Cause they didn't have it when he was in college.  They were off campus.  But like last night, he picked us up at the airport, and, you know, we stay in touch.  He has his own little rhythm.  And, but once you understand him, he's good to go, and if I ask him to help me do something, he'll help me.  We travel together very well.  We go to the CIAA [Central Intercollegiate Athletic Association] tournament.  Have you ever heard of that?
Speaker 1: The CIAA?
Speaker 2: The CIAA tournament.  It's Division II black colleges [HBCUs] in Virginia and North Carolina.  It's the largest tournament of its kind, two hundred thousand people descend on Charlotte [North Carolina] for the weekend.  It's a big party at Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia] and Johnson C. Smith [Johnson C. Smith University, Charlotte, North Carolina] play in the conference.  He and I've been going together for ten years, and he goes his way, and I go my way.  But we come back together, and he likes to hang with me and friends, and then he'll disappear.  The youngest girl [Meredith Moore Crosby] is, let me see.  I have to be careful how I say this.  She's a go getter.  She doesn't take any excuses.  She's well trained.  She's a go getter, and she's, she's--all the kids will call.  They talk to their mother a lot more than they talk to me.  But they all check on us.  They're all sympathetic, but they don't take any prisoners, and they don't suffer fools.  If I start acting crazy, they say, "Hey, I'm outta here."  But if I've gotta go to the hospital, I can call them and they'll take me.  I never have to go, but if I need something or if somebody messes with me, me and my boy, if we were thugs, we'd go take care of business.  And at the same time, if I need some help on doing something, mental or physical, I can count on the kids.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you've got a strong family bond.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but we don't get in each other's way.  The girls are in Chicago [Illinois], but I'm not a big--you probably, I don't know (unclear), Wenda's [Moore's wife, HistoryMaker Wenda Weekes Moore] a lot more talky, talky with the family and friends.  I could sit down here for days and not bother anybody.  But everybody thinks I'm a big talker.  I say I talk a lot, but I don't have much to say (laughter).  And I keep it to myself.  I mean I can sit down here for days, and nobody will know I'm here.
Speaker 1: Well, let's see--
Speaker 2: And most people can't figure it out.  Basically, I think I'm an introvert.  I can test as an introvert 'cause I know how to lie.  I've done it a couple of times just to tick people off, whatever I think I write the other thing down.  But I'm just--I'm like a sack.  They called--my nickname in college was Sack, in law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] was Sack because they said I fit anywhere; just throw me in a corner, and I'll just fit in.  And if you wanna be high class, if you wanna act crazy, I can act crazy, you know, not real crazy, but a little crazy.
Story_ID: 635348
Speaker 1: Do you consider yourself more of a businessman or a lawyer?
Speaker 2: Businessperson.
Speaker 1: That's what I would think.
Speaker 2: Yeah. I'm a lawyer 'cause it's (air quotes) sounds good.  In fact, my title says attorney and counselor at law.  That's what your license says.  Most lawyers don't pay any attention.  I just wanna be an attorney and I wanna be a counselor, and that's what I mostly do.  People call me for advice.  I've got a young fella now that I represent who, but why--beyond our wildest dreams, young brother, beyond--I mean nobody knows who he is.  And that's the way he wants it.  And that's why I won't tell you anymore.  But he calls me and says, "Here's what I got.  What do you think?"  And I've got lots of guys at our office [Dorsey and Whitney LLP, Minneapolis, Minnesota] doing work for him, but he knows, I can't spell law, but he knows when he calls with a question, not is this legal, but how is this gonna work out?  I'm the guy he calls for that.  And he may--and I may be wrong, but he just wants to make sure that I'm wrong.  If he says, "I think I'm gonna do business in Czechoslovakia [Czech Republic and Slovakia]. What do you think."  "Czechoslovakia?"  He said, "That's what I thought you thought, okay, thank you," you know (laughter).  I'm being facetious, but he'll ask me something, and I'll say, "I don't know about that."  He'll say, "That's what I thought."  That's a questionable transaction.  And I, and we get some more work, you know, I give some more work to somebody to do.  And it works out fine.
Story_ID: 635349
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I have neglected to ask you or that you forgot to men- mention that we need to discuss before--oh, there is something.  Wait a minute, there is something.  We go back to the family discussion, we never did really discuss on tape the CBS presence--
Speaker 2: Thing?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in your home for a period of time.  They followed you for--
Speaker 2: Yeah, in 19--and I gave a year now.  It was before '81 [1981], and I'm gonna say, Jonathan [Jonathan Moore] was born in '76 [1976], it was probably 1980, I would think, because Meredith [Meredith Moore Crosby] was born in '81 [1981], about 1980, CBS came to see us as a result of an article in 1974 on the front page of The Wall Street Journal about me.  And I'll furnish you with that.  I've got a copy at the office.  And that article was about blacks mixed in a world of whites only, and it was about we'd just started the bank [Shelard National Bank, St. Louis Park, Minnesota] and what not and what not.  But CBS sent a crew, stayed with us for seven days.  And it was for a magazine on TV called CBS magazine ['November Magazine'].  It was gonna be like a weekday '60 Minutes,' and it didn't peter out because there was nobody to watch it in the mornings on Tuesday morning or Thursday morning.  But they wanted to see what it was like in the day of the life of a family like ours.  And they were with us when we woke up in the mornings, and they were with us when we went to bed at night.  And we'd go get some ribs at night, and we'd have the thing.  Or if we had people over, we'd--some of us, not staged, but we'd ask our friends to come over, and they'd interview the head of the Urban League, the head of the this--my doctor [Henry T. Smith], my friends, about what it's like to be black in Minnesota.  What it's like to be black in America?  And it turned out to be a very, very nice show.  But the thing that my kids liked about it, the two that can remember it, is that they got a chance to see themselves on TV, not just themselves, but us as a people, not doing anything bad, not singing or dancing, not giving a speech, but just being a family.  And it was almost--and I dare not say this, it was like the Cosby family.  I mean what they saw was a family sitting down eating mac and cheese, you know, with maybe a piece of chicken on the side, but and seeing daddy getting up and getting in his car and going to work.  And so it was wonderful.  It was a wonderful thing, and people still from time to time, "I know you. I saw you on that program."  And so we've had some chances to get some exposure.  And I've been on an ad for the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] for the last couple of years.  I've been on the board of the Boy Scouts for Lord knows how long.  And I was chairman of something for them.  And there's this commercial comes on and we say, and we say the Boy Scout oath.  And you say a word or two, and I have, in God.  And I don't have my glasses on, and people say, "Didn't I see you on TV?"  And then they have to try to remember where they saw me.  And they say, "Boy Scouts, that's a good organization.  I think I'll do something or I'll get active in it or I'll put my boy in it."  I think that's the, the things that you do in life that are low key that you don't take a lot of pride in or a lot of, whatever you wanna call it, boastfulness, that people see and say, there goes just another nice person.  And that's sort of, that's what, that's how--you asked the other question, how I wanna see myself, I hope it's a big funeral because I have tried to help a lot of people, and I hope they remember me when I'm gone.
Story_ID: 635350
Speaker 1: Now, now you and your wife's [HistoryMaker Wenda Weekes Moore] careers seemed to intersect in a lot of different ways.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And is that--that's not always the case.
Speaker 2: Well, she does a lot for the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America], and I do a lot for the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America].  She does the educational things, and I do mine.  She does this philanthropy thing, I don't have any money so I just watch that, but civic things.  In fact, we made a group one time called power couples in Minneapolis [Minnesota], and I was sort of surprised 'cause it was Mr. Dayton, Mr. Pillsbury [Philip W. Pillsbury], Mr. Cargill and us, the governor and the this and that.  And it made the papers, and, you know, we've been in all these things most powerful this, most lose that, most wise this, most honest that.  I had a fella call me and he says, "If they're looking for a powerful couple some time, why don't you nominate me?"  I said, "Son, you don't nominate yourself for stuff like that.  You just don't go around and say, 'I wanna be one of the most--,'" I said, "I didn't volunteer.  Somebody said I was that."  I said, "You have to merit that kind of stuff.  You just can't have--," I just can't around nominating people for being the most powerful couples.  But you do things, and things happen.  Like this philanthropy thing that they gave us, I really was not that much in favor of it 'cause I really don't--you know, I do it, and I like the thank yous and I go on about my business.  But once you start taking awards, you have to start going to awards, if you know what I mean.  And so I don't know.
Story_ID: 635351
Speaker 1: Our last question--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I wanna be remembered as [HistoryMaker] Cornell Leverette Moore, which says it all.  That's who I am.  I don't try to be anybody else.  I don't try to be anything than what I am.  I've lived a good life and I gave a good life, and I tried to do good things, and I've tried to stop bad things.  But at the same time, I realize I can't do everything for everybody, so I do the best I can in my little circle on my little sphere of influence, I try and do the best that I can do.  And if someone asks me to do something, if I'm able to do it, I will.  If I'm not, I say I can't.  I want to be remembered as an honest person, a realist, if there's such a word as a realist.  But I wanna be real.  Now, I like my blues. I like my rum.  I like my cars.  I like my people.  I like my city [Minneapolis, Minnesota], and I like my world, and I wouldn't do anything to harm anybody if I can help it.  And I just pray that it all turns out right.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Well, thank you.  That's all I got.
