Story_ID: 10918
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Edgar Carey Lane.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Fine,  I'm Michael, M-I-C-H-A-E-L and my middle name is Bowen, B-O-W-E-N, the last name is Mitchell, M-I-T-C-H-E-L-L, Sr.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born on November the 7th, 1945, in the second floor front bedroom of 1324 Druid Hill Avenue which is the family home and delivered by the midwife who lived down at the end of the block.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Presently, I'm, I do consulting and I did management consulting, business consulting, business development.  Previously I grew up in the city and matriculated to high school and whatever.  But then went to college and was in law school, received, I have a juris doctorate degree.  And so I, in this phase of my life I'm kind of the family archivist to preserve our history.  So I do some teaching but primarily business consulting formation, getting capital in businesses and helping blacks to achieve in these very difficult times and overcome the obstacles to capital formation.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were at one time city councilman member in Baltimore [Maryland] and in the state senate?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was and I was elected to the Baltimore City Council in 1975 and served for approximately eleven years and at which point in my eleventh year I ran for the senate seat that was being vacated by my older brother, Senator Clarence Mitchell, III, and then I won that seat to the state senate.  So I've served at the local and state levels of government.
Story_ID: 10919
Speaker 1: Where are we at the present time?  And you don't have to give your exact address?
Speaker 2: Oh no I, I'm listed in the phone books.  I'm at 1014 West Lafayette Avenue, Baltimore, Maryland in West Baltimore, historic West Baltimore.  And that is something I take pride in, living here in the heart of the community.  Because unless those of us who have the ability and wherewithal to, to bring a different perspective to neighborhoods, then we're going to continually lose our neighborhoods and we're going to lose our children who live in those neighborhoods unless those of us who have "made it" to buy homes and to raise their children.  And I'm proud to say that my children were raised primarily here at this home and they've gone on to do wonderful things.
Speaker 1: Right.  Now this, you were telling us when we came in today that this home is situated across the street from a square where the 54th Massachusetts [Infantry]--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Lafayette Square, you got to understand the history of Maryland.  It bordered the District of Columbia.  And Abraham Lincoln and--was in Washington [D.C.] and the greatest fear was the ability of those people who were supervisors to the confederacy coming from Maryland to invade the United States Capitol which was a real threat.  And as you know that's what prompted President Abraham Lincoln for the first time ever to suspend the writ of habeas corpus, the right of a person to be--get out on bail or there would be some accounting for charges being placed against him.  But the--Lincoln immediately had the various union officers, [Benjamin] Butler primarily come in and to arrest the mayor of the city of Baltimore, the police commissioner and others because they were southern sympathizers and the Baltimore citizens were actually attacking and killing Union troops on their way to Washington, D.C.  So I live in an area called Lafayette Square and it was an encampment for Union troops during the Civil War.  And in fact the home that my Uncle Parren, Congressman Parren J. Mitchell lived in was the sort of headquarters for Union troops.  And there was a cupola which is a structure on the roof that gave them a vantage point of all of Baltimore and they could see as they were called The Baltimore Boys as, as they were about moving in the streets with clubs and whatever have you to attack the Union troop trains.  Troops coming from the North had to actually change railroad lines and then walk several blocks to the line that went to Washington.  It was in the course of walking those blocks that the southern sympathizers would come and, and just kill, brutalize.  And as a result the 54th Massachusetts [Infantry] in being moved south to Washington had to be held and encamped here at Lafayette Square to keep them alive.  Because the threats of seeing them as they were even stoned and pillared in Boston when they, they marched.  So this is a historic area.  And then also it's called Church Square.  There are a number of churches here, the St. James Episcopal Church, the St. Johns African Methodist Episcopal Church, the Metropolitan United Methodist Church.  So--and it's been kind of the--it, it was the area that we were forced to live in, in the, because of restrictive covenants that were legally enforced by the government that prevented blacks from moving into other areas and not until 1948 when restrictive covenants were removed by a decision of the Supreme Court were blacks able to move beyond this area.  And so that it has a special meaning to me in that it is important that those of us who agitate for change and are involved in the process live with the people who are suffering the everyday indignities of the oppressions of government and gives you a sense of that.  I'm also, have to do because of the admonitions of my late father Clarence M. Mitchell, Jr., who was born in a little alley, Stockton Alley in fact is what it's called and he was the oldest of--well second, third oldest of ten.  But he lived in a place, Stockton Alley that had no indoor plumbing, dirt streets, mud, all kinds of things.  And one day the family eventually was able to leave that, those incredible conditions and move to a place that at least had indoor plumbing but wasn't much better at the corner of Pennsylvania Avenue and Bloom Streets in West Baltimore.  And I'll never forget he told me that he as a young man about twelve or thirteen moving in there, and his next door neighbors who were also African American came and said oh here come those alley folks.  And of course used another derogatory name, but said they'll never amount to anything.  And he said as a child so hurt him.  It pierced everything within him, that simply because of his economic status that he would be relegated and be written off before he even had a chance to say hello.  And as a result he was going to show those folks what these alley folks could do.  And as a result all of his brothers and sisters were educated.  In fact, my father became director of the Washington Bureau of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], consulted with presidents and of course was the architect of major civil rights legislation starting with the 1957 Civil Rights Act, which had to deal with voting rights and bringing in the attorney, giving the attorney general the ability to come in to assist blacks.  Also, the 1961, which most people don't know about, which was really simply an extension of rights to the [U.S.] Justice Department to come in and the [U.S.] Marshal Service.  And then the historic 1964 Civil Rights Act with all of his many times and primarily Title VII, the Equal Employment Opportunity portion that he had labored so hard for.  And of course that was a sea change with public accommodations and employment in that historic legislation.  He was the architect of that and had labored long and hard as the director of the Washington bureau to achieve that.  And then I think he said his most significant victory was the 1965 voting rights act which caused the empowerment of blacks across the country that--I have a picture of him with Aaron, with Henry, Aaron Henry at the Mississippi NAACP State Conference, but actually serving in the Mississippi legislature.  And he just reveled in that because he felt that in his years in service in Congress that most of the members of Congress weren't inherently evil, that they were a kind of accommodationists and opportunists that if the votes were there you know they would go along.  And he always pointed to the fact that when the voting rights act came and Strom Thurmond got an impressionable number of blacks in South Carolina starting to register to vote, he immediately hired a black aide and then of course was--Strom Thurmond was responsible for having Judge Matthew Perry appointed as the first African American federal judge in the state of South Carolina.
Story_ID: 10920
Speaker 1: What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, well this is--we're fortunate to be sitting here on June 9th, this is 2004.  And so this is, we're, we're cutting times.  And in fact we're in the midst of the, the country's mourning, the passing of President Ronald Reagan.  And there--it's always, obviously always in death there's an attempt to magnify the image of a person.  But under our Christian-Judeo system there's always an accounting and I had a, heard a funny story that a minister told me.  Said that Ronald Reagan as he was approaching the pearly gates there, there was Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.] and, waiting for him and asking for an accounting and had been sent by St. Peter.  And of course obviously there was no admittance. But in this--to be historically not to diminish the, President Reagan's death, but to be historically accurate, to be historically accurate he did his darnedest to emasculate civil rights legislation, he did his darnedest to claim ketchup was a vegetable to keep children from eating, he ended the free lunch program under the guise of budget cutting and did an incredible emasculation of the public, this whole notion of welfare, then his attack on affirmative action as if somehow whites were disadvantaged.  And he began to play upon the fears and the concerns of people.  And he came up with some of the craziest kinds of economic propositions you know from when Congressman [David] Stockman became a person who the supply side kind of economics.  And even George [H. W.] Bush, the father during their campaign called it voodoo economics and it turned out to be because what had really resulted in a massive reduction in taxes for the rich but the burdens of government continued and therefore who do you sacrifice first but those who are most unfortunate and those who don't have the political clout and acumen to be able to challenge it, don't have the lobbyists.  So that he at most could be said would have been an amiable incompetent.  He couldn't even recognize his own secretary of the Housing and Urban Development Agency.  He continually referred to Sam [Samuel] Pierce who was the secretary and a distinguished jurist and lawyer from the great state of New York as Mayor Coleman Young you know it, in the middle cabinet meetings.  And of course the attempt to disarm everyone with these jokes and as if everything was, could be handled with his great personality as a great communicator but people were tired of the song and dance routines.  They wanted accountability.  And I might say that Congressman Parren Mitchell, my uncle, one of alley folks was there as chairman of the Congressional Black Caucus was able to keep the erosion in a number of programs from happening and they were able to take Reagan on.  But across the board though, what Reagan did caused such massive interruption to the economy.  And one of the startling things that it caused and I saw the lines to thicken so with respect to racism in this country that whites who had supported him, the air traffic controllers who suddenly lost everything they had and were willing to forgive that and teamsters, and auto workers who had lost their jobs because of Reagan's foolishness were willing to forgive all of those things even though they weren't able to support their families to keep black people from getting a second chance.  And say, and they didn't vote for [Walter] Mondale--excuse me--when the opportunity came.  So I, I respect the office of the president and I think that unfortunately Ronald Reagan did a, did his utmost and a whole cabal of conservative Republicans to dismantle government and to make it inaccessible to the, to the poor and to the dispossessed and begin to create this whole fear of persons coming from other countries.  The immigration laws just began to tighten up under Reagan that there was some, going to be some great invasion from Latinos coming to this country and others.  So we are rich because of the many cultures that came to this country.  So that, all of that to tell you about today's date.  But it is important that we keep a perspective about government.
Story_ID: 10921
Speaker 1: And my family's history and why I'm able to talk with you probably started centuries ago and I've just been able to confirm and realize that a Charles Carroll who was an Irishman, who was a Catholic, and Henry VIII decided that he needed a new wife and the Pope wouldn't bless his marriage, the King of England.  And so he left the Catholic Church, banned the cardinals and the Pope and created the Anglican church which caused Charles Carroll to come to this country.  His grandson, Charles Carroll of Carrollton was the Maryland signer of the Declaration of Independence, a very wealthy family in Maryland, own most of where Annapolis goes into most of Maryland and was the largest--.
Speaker 2: Anne Arundel County.
Speaker 1: Anne Arundel County, but it's now, it was Anne Arundel, Howard County and Carroll County.  But Howard County wasn't created until 1850.  But this Charles Carroll of Carrollton, and what was interesting he himself--his parents--Charles Carroll of Carrollton, the third Charles Carroll, at the time of his birth his parents were not married.  They didn't marry until he was fourteen and I tend to believe that that was something in his conscience although he was a major slave holder that he, he had this relationship with one of his slaves whom I don't know but who I do know the result of that because he, Charles Carroll of Carrollton acknowledged this child and his name was Daniel Carroll.  And he was born actually at the Doughoregan Manor which was the ancestral home of the Carrolls.  It's now in Ellicott City in Howard County but originally was all Anne Arundel County.  And he taught this child how, his sisters, Charles Carroll of Carrollton's sisters taught this child how to read and this Daniel Carroll married a, a, a slave by the name of Rachel.  She had received her manumission. It was recorded in 1807 but eventually was given to her at 1831.  But Charles Carroll of Carrollton gave land to this Daniel Carroll and the land records of Anne Arundel County indicate that this Daniel Carroll owned this land in Howard County in a place called Dayton, D-A-Y-T-O-N, Maryland.  And he had two sons of that union with Rachel, that was a William Carroll and a Charles Henry Carroll.  And Charles Henry Carroll was the father of my grandmother, Lillie Mae Carroll Jackson.  And so that the lineages there and--I--my grandmother had told us for years this oral history because when--she was the long time, Lillie Mae Carroll Jackson was the long time president of the Baltimore Branch of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] for approximately thirty five years and, from 1935 to 1970.  And I remember hearing her as, in her travels.  People would say Ms. Jackson, "Why do you fight the whites with a"--I remember a particular governor, Governor [Theodore] McKeldin said, "Ms. Jackson why do you fight so hard for your people?"  She said "Well it's in my blood."  She said, "My forbearers were, were, were fighting against religious persecution and came to this country and so therefore I'm fighting for my people for freedom."  But she said that jokingly but that was her oral history and she said that we had been integrated in this country long time ago.  That, that she--because of the various hues and colors of people of our race, obviously that everyone didn't remain pure in coming here from the continent of Africa.  And there was this fascination by white men with black women and they--it was, it was, not only it was used as a crutch by white men in the structure, but also used additionally as an effort to try to further oppress blacks.  In terms of 'Birth of a Nation', that movie they came out they claim has such, has such cinematic capabilities and other kinds of things, but it was a raw appeal to racism and that there, there would be some great harm to white women and, and in essence this whole basis of lynching in this country where blacks were lynched unnecessarily on mere allegations.  Well Lillie Carroll Jackson that started with that and then this Charles Henry Carroll married a young woman named Amanda Bowen, B-O-W-E-N, which is my middle name.  And she was the great granddaughter of this John Bowen and who is listed in the 1790 census of this country, the very first census in the Charlie District of Montgomery County.  And is having--my grandmother said that he was a free African who came to this country and eventually settled, came by way of England and he eventually got to Annapolis.  And he was told that if he married an African woman his children would be slaves.  And her oral history tradition was that he wanted to avoid at all costs any of his heirs being slaves that he was always free and so he purchased an English white woman bondswoman and had twenty two children by her and settled in a place called Sandy Spring, Montgomery County.  And in the 1790 census in Charlie District, there is John Bowen with his white wife Sarah but she--he's listed and his children are listed as mulatto.  There were three children at that time, two girls and a boy living with them.  And then as a result her--and so his eventual line, all of them were free.  They never became slaves.  So this Amanda Bowen married Charles Henry Carroll who was the grandson of Charles Carroll of Carrollton the sign, one of two signers of the Declaration of Independence and the founding of this country.  And married a African, her name was Amanda Bowen and so she was much younger.  She was a school teacher and had gone to teach in Howard County and, and Charles Henry Carroll in some way had helped to try to create a structure for the education of African Americans.  And, and sometimes you, you look at that because it really took a lot of power and conscience on the part of our forbearers because a lot of them could have very easily passed for white and had a much different life going to the Midwest or some place.  And, but they elected to remain black and still be interested in the education of even children, their own, not only their children but the African American children of the community.  And so my--but as a result of the union of Charles Henry Carroll and Amanda Bowen was born eight children, Lillie Mae Carroll Jackson was born as the seventh child and she always used to talk about the seventh, being born the seventh child and that she was born with a veil.  And those--.
Speaker 2: That was cryptic.
Speaker 1: --but those of you who know what a veil is and that it had a great significance.  And she did have the foresight because she was able to do incredible things which I'll further tell you about.  But she--and then also the fact that she was a seventh child because of revelations and the number seven it was great significance placed upon--that was part of her ability to draw crowds and do a number of things.  She also had finished what was called the Colored Training High School here in Baltimore City.  She played piano and sang voice and she was about to become a student teacher.  Her mother, Amanda Bowen, was a businesswoman.  Her father, Charles Henry Carroll was the largest black newspaper dealer here in the city of Baltimore.  They moved from Howard County because it was agricultural and it has been so fascinating to read the various census tracts from 1820 to 1830 to 1840, 1850, 1860 to see the Carrolls owning property but being listed as mulattos, owning you know a substantial amount of acres and then also to look at the various census tracts for the Bowens of Montgomery County.  And one of the most incredible things was to see the, the deed in 1859.  One of the Bowens given land to the Ebenezer African Methodist Episcopal Church to be formed in Sandy Spring, Maryland, in, at that time Ashton-Sandy Spring.  So Ebenezer African Methodist Church was--because again this Bowen who could obviously easily have passed as mulatto or gone some other place, felt a sense to give back to the community.  For those who might ask how did these Bowens buy any land back or the, the Carrolls by land?  And well people must remember that Maryland was one of the original colonies and when the religious elements came, the Quakers played a significant role in the founding of Maryland and were really the industrialists and the merchants.  And therefore they had a great say and they facilitated the purchase of land and, and helped free slaves.  So that prior to the Civil War in 1860 in Maryland was the largest number of freed blacks.  That's how Frederick Douglass was able to escape slavery, go to work in Baltimore City and then further escape Baltimore City and go north to continue abolitionist activities.  So that it, there was that climate, but so that religious element helped facilitate those kinds of things.  One important thing my grandmother Lillie Mae Carroll Jackson said to me and would stick to me and was further enforced by my late father, Clarence M. Mitchell, Jr. and my mother Juanita Jackson Mitchell was that service to your people is the rent you pay for your space on this earth.  How eloquent are those words?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: That there is an incredible responsibility that when you receive a superior education to give back to your community and that's why I'm living on Lafayette Avenue.
Story_ID: 10922
Speaker 1: You were talking about your father being born in the--what alley was that, Stanton?
Speaker 2: Stockton.
Speaker 1: Stockton.
Speaker 2: Stockton Alley.
Speaker 1: Stockton Alley.
Speaker 2: And it still exists today.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And you gave us something about his background.  What were his educational prospects?  Did he--was he able to go to school and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah my, my late father, Clarence Mitchell, Jr., having been the oldest of these children, three of whom died, didn't reach maturity, simply having grown up in all of these situations, Baltimore [Maryland] was known as kind of the typhoid capital and giving, living in a ghetto that had subjected people to that kind, ravages of whatever disease was around.  But he was fortunate to go to [Frederick] Douglass High School and they--two of the upper classmen at Douglass High School, one was a young strapping fellow named Thurgood Marshall and Cab Calloway who went on to prominence.  And they were very good friends and--because we were all confined in this residential ghetto my father said.  So you knew one another, you worked together, you went to school together.  The only high school to go to was Douglass High School.  And then he was fortunate to eventually, going to church and other things, he was able to go to Lincoln University in Pennsylvania which obviously is the oldest college in the country.  It was organized by the Presbyterian Church.  And in fact Julian Bond, who is chairman of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], his father was Horace Mann Bond was president there for a while.  And Julian finally recalls a lot of his activities--early years spent there.  But Lincoln, one other fascinating thing my father told us what helped form him was having left a segregated Baltimore but then go to people who were learning and my father graduated valedictorian of his class and of course his minor was Greek.  But he was a pre-medical student but he had the misfortune of graduating in 1932, the year of the Depression.  Obviously his prospects for going to medical school diminished 'cause he just did make it to college.  But during those early years he says that while he was a junior, he met of course Langston Hughes who was matriculating with Thurgood Marshall.  And then he said there was this young, strong African that said someday he was going to be in charge of his country and his name was Ben [Nnamdi] Azikiwe who became the first governor general of Nigeria.  And he was an Ibo and so that further helped shape my father.  And then he says after that group left, Thurgood, of course Ben Azikiwe, Langston Hughes and of course Robert Carter who is a federal judge in New York City and of course he was general counsel of the NAACP but also was one of the principal arguers of the 'Brown [v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas'] decision.  He was the counsel in the Kansas City case but worked at, at the Legal Defense Fund.  And he left the Legal Defense Fund when Jack Greenberg became the head of it and then became the general counsel of the NAACP proper.  But he is now federal judge in New York in senior status.  And spoke here recently but I saw him on some, several documentaries talking about 'Brown'.
Story_ID: 10923
Speaker 1: There was another young man [a classmate of his father, Clarence Mitchell] who also was so eloquent and engaged in I found a number of conversations and began to talk about how he had visions for the bringing of various entities together in, in the continent of Africa and breaking the yoke of colonialism.  You gotta remember this is 1930, '31 [1931] and on the campus of Lincoln University [Pennsylvania] who would think that the plotting for the throwing off of that British and Dutch and Belgian and French, the collective yokes that oppressed countless millions of Africans, some of those, the genesis of some of those discussions were right there.  And this young man was Kwame Nkrumah.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --who had this sense of a, a united African, group of African states and who had a sense that someday he would be the leader of his country and low and behold, he was able to throw off the shackles and became obviously the first president of Ghana.  So having been exposed to that from my father's early years you couldn't get a sense of--you had a sense of who you were that obviously you're going to know how enforced racism and segregation and what they collectively call Jim Crow. They've gotten away from that term but Jim Crow was a manifestation of all of the evils, whether it be housing, the disrespect of black women, the failure to educate black children, the residential segregation, lack of access to good health care, things of that nature are all embodied in Jim Crow. Minister [Louis] Farrakhan has a definition but I'm not so sure of the accuracy of all of those pronouncements, but it was collectively called Jim Crow, this oppression that existed that--and, and as you see it was a concerted effort to, to just try to put together everything imaginable to thwart the hopes and aspirations of Africans.  Not just starting with the Civil War but at the moment they arrived on these shores, one only take a look at the book written by the late Judge A. Leon Higginbotham and it's called 'In the Matter of Color', to know that he did a meticulous research of all of the codes in Georgia, the territory, South Carolina, Virginia and other places, the efforts to try to restrict the movement of blacks.  And we got to know that Nat Turner wasn't just the only one who rebelled prior to the Civil War and others.  There were many others who had revolts and risings throughout that history  They just didn't willy-nilly take this thing of slavery.
Story_ID: 10924
Speaker 1: I had a sense from my grandmother Lillie Mae Carroll Jackson who really was the fountain head of the continuation of the Civil Rights Movement.  It was her foresight and the reason she had such foresight as I told you about her lineage in that she had said that she was a--her classmate in high school was a young man named Carl Murphy who was, eventually became the publisher of the 'Afro American' newspapers.  And it was founded by John Murphy his father.  They were I think seven or eight brothers.  But this young Carl Murphy was quite bright.  He had finished college and had gotten a master's in German and was teaching at Howard University and then was brought back by his father to run the newspaper.  And they had--Carl Murphy and Lillie Jackson had developed quite a relationship.  They both deeply believed in freedom.  And it was a special kind of relationship because the 'Afro' served as the, kind of the PR person, was able to articulate for the masses the struggle and stayed steadfast in that truss as a public press and the heart of black press.  The 'Afro' was a national paper.  It had a Baltimore [Maryland], two editions, it had a Richmond, Virginia edition, a Washington, D.C., Philadelphia.  One point prior to New York then a national edition but it was a crusader newspaper.  And, but before that, that, that, before Lillie Carroll Jackson and Carl Murphy reunited Lillie Carroll had just graduated and was home with her mother, Amanda Bowen who had married this grandson of Charles Carroll of Carrollton and she had this Charles Carroll of Carrollton sell his farmland in Howard County and move to Baltimore City.  She said she was a teacher and she knew how to, was a business woman and they had eight children to support.  Therefore she was able to purchase property at, of all things at 1135 Druid Hill Avenue near the intersection of Druid Hill and Dolphin Streets.  It's now occupied by a senior center.  But she purchased one property and then we purchased 1138 Druid Hill Avenue--I'm sorry, 1134 and 1136 Druid Hill Avenue.  I have the deeds.  And she purchased them in, one in 1898 and the second one in 1904.  But she was quite an industrious businesswoman, Amanda Bowen.  She rented the, the upper floors to, as--well for, for a rooming house as they would call it and so that produced income.  On the basement was an ice cream parlor and kind of confectionary and that's where she did all sorts of things.  And then my great grandfather, Charles Henry Carroll would sell newspapers.  He was as my grandmother had told us, the largest African American newspaper dealer in, in the city.  And it was quite a vocal point and it seemed to be a gathering spot for people in the community.  Thereafter she having graduated, she was a member of the church called Sharp Street Memorial United Methodist Church and, which has quite a history in and of itself.
Story_ID: 10925
Speaker 1: But she [maternal grandmother, Lillie Mae Carroll Jackson] was singing on the choir and there was this, she said she looked out one night and saw this gentleman.  She thought it was a white man but he had come and was talking about movies.  His name was Kieffer, K-E-I-F-F-E-R [sic], Albert, Albert, A-L-B-E-R-T Jackson, J-A-C-K-S-O-N.  And she said he represented himself as having come from Memphis, Tennessee and Pine Bluff, Arkansas but he was a religious motion picture exhibiter because my grandmother was raised in a strict religious home.  They were old fashioned Methodists and as a result there was no drinking as she said, no smoking, no card playing, no dancing and certainly no engagement in any kind of intoxicants, strong beverages.  These were completely against the tenents that Charles Wesley establishing Methodism talked about.  She sang as she said 'The Holy City' and played it as she gave this concert at Sharp Street [Memorial United Methodist] Church [Baltimore, Maryland].  And she said my grandfather Kieffer Albert Jackson proposed to her several days after hearing her sing.  She said that she thought it was a lot of true love but later learned that he was a religious motion picture exhibiter who needed a singer and a piano player to continue his travels and going to various churches around the country in the days of silent movies.  He was showing movies at churches and movies such as [John] Bunyan's 'Pilgrim's Progress'--'The Life of Blind Barter Mass' (ph.), various scriptures and other things that were out.  He would make his own film and actually--but he proposed my grandmother said and one of the things that happened was--.
Speaker 2: Is there--I'm sorry is there a copy of any of his films still in existence?
Speaker 1: No, but some of the, the evidence of them.  In other words I have his travel books that show he--they're notebooks that he kept starting in the late, up around 1890 to--of city by city, his tours, the churches he went to, how much money he made, the movies he showed, how he made movies.  He would take pictures of people, of churches coming together or a baptism or something of that nature and then go back and show it to the church and he was able to make quite a living from that.  Well, he then proposed, and so then in 1909, Kieffer Albert Jackson married Lillie Carroll Jackson.  And she used to say he was, he was too be, too white to be colored and she was too colored to be white.  But they were husband and wife.  That some children looked like mama, some looked like papa but they were all children.  And she also had an additional philosophy as well as he that we were Americans of African descent.  She was never a Negro.  She was American of African descent that--she said that the buzzard didn't lay her and the sun didn't hatch her, that she was somebody.  And this is long before Jesse Jackson's clarion call to be somebody.  She was preaching to--that to us in the, in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s].  But getting back to their marriage, she then went on the road with this Kieffer Albert Jackson but her mother being the independent African that she was and you got to remember this is 1909 in Baltimore.  And prior to that time she had lived through a time even after the Civil War--right before the Civil War, slave catchers would regularly come to Baltimore because it was the largest concentration of free blacks and actually abduct free blacks and carry them back to try to get bounty from slave owners.  And it was quite a practice here.  And there are many instances where white Quakers lost their lives trying to prevent the taking back and abduction of, of free blacks in this city and state.  Well, Amanda Bowen you got to remember who was the great granddaughter of this African chief, John Bowen who was listed in the 1790 census, knew that none of her heirs would ever be slaves but had been told about this and the slave catchers.  And then being the kind of doting, respected mother in law that she was, she--Kieffer Albert Jackson initially met Lillie Carroll by staying at Amanda Bowen and Carroll--and Charlie Carroll's boarding house on the third floor.  And he made the mistake of leaving his suitcase open one night.  We assume it was open but I think my great grandmother might have opened it to protect, check out about who was this man who looked white was getting ready--well who was proposing to her daughter?  And my grandfather Kieffer Albert Jackson had said all along he was from Tennessee and from Arkansas but never told about his relationship to Mississippi.  And so then Amanda Bowen Carroll found a letter that he had written to his mother in Carrollton, Mississippi and a sister in Greenwood, Mississippi.  And she confronted him and refused to give her permission for the marriage.  And in fact, she had such fear of her daughter who had just been trained of going to Mississippi, you got to remember in the early teens what the whole notion of Mississippi was and what it would do going back almost into bondage and be abused by--and so she actually after the minister who was a, became a bishop in the church, Bishop Hughes, Hughes Stadium at Morgan State University is named in his honor.  But he married my grandmother and grandfather and Charles Henry Carroll gave his permission for it but Amanda Bowen didn't and actually left Sharp Street Church and Methodist Church and went around the corner and joined Bethel African Methodist Episcopal Church in protest and never went to Sharp Street again.  And it was interesting because people wonder why part of the family was at Sharp Street and the other part at Bethel.  Well that was the genesis of it.  That--this was this desire--she could not see her own child even in some small way be impacted by Jim Crow and the ravages of the racism that was still obviously really prevalent in the early 1900s because you just had 'Plessy v. Ferguson' in 1896 decided by the Supreme Court reinforcing fact that poor [Homer] Plessy, New Orleans citizen couldn't even get on a streetcar.  So this caused, this was deeply entrenched in her beliefs.  So my grandmother though married, went on the road and her children were born.  Her oldest was Virginia Kiah, K--married name was Kiah but Virginia Jackson.  She was born in Hot Springs, Arkansas--I'm sorry in East St. Louis, Illinois.  Virginia is V-I-R-G-I-N-I-A and her middle name was West, W-E-S Jackson.  She later married a gentleman by the name of Calvin L. Kiah, K-I-A-H which was an African name and he is from the eastern shore of Maryland.  But she was the oldest child, born in East St. Louis, Illinois, one of the stops in there showing religious motion pictures.  Then her next child, my mother, Juanita Elizabeth Jackson was born in Hot Springs, Arkansas and she was born there because they were showing movies but also at the time the Hot Springs would be medicinal.  My mother is expecting.  And then five years later her third daughter, Marion was born in Hot Springs and she later married a young Methodist minister named Karl Downs, D-O-W-N-S and Karl is with a K.  And I'll get to that because it was Karl Downs who married Jackie Robinson and his wife and it was Karl Downs, who was a young Methodist minister at Scott Methodist [Church] in Pasadena, California who was called by that judge late one night to try to deal with this Pepper Street Gang and this Jackie Robinson who the judge saw was just this incorrigible kid but maybe this Reverend Downs who was a Methodist minister in Pasadena who could do something with him.  And it was my uncle, Reverend Karl Downs who was the guiding light who assisted Jackie Robinson in getting into UCLA [University of California at Los Angeles] and his matriculation and continued to supporting him and actually married he and his wife, was the presiding minister.  And of course he died early.  He died in '48 [1948] of a condition we believe because in Texas, because he wasn't admitted to the hospital in the proper ward because of his race.  But it's interesting how families intersect and who would have thought that Lillie Carroll would produce such a--or that would marry somebody who would have something to cause there to be some way impacting a life.  And it goes back to the same parallels that my father [Clarence Mitchell, Jr.] said of these people--be careful of these children you see in certain circumstances who you may feel that are incorrigible, who don't have maybe all the social graces, who might not come from the nicest neighborhoods.  We've got to grab them and embrace them 'cause they're going to be our leaders.  This Jackie Robinson was the Pepper Street Gang, Congressman Parren Mitchell and Clarence Mitchell and all of them came from Stockton Alley [Baltimore, Maryland] and went on to do great things.  So that it's--we, we got to rescue these children and do whatever is necessary.  And they can't be--we can't afford the luxury of being so caught up in class.  The next thing and maybe you could take a break right here a minute, give you a breather 'cause I--.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Yeah I had just left with the birth of Marion, the third daughter of the marriage of Kieffer Albert Jackson and Lillie Mae Carroll Jackson and she was born in Hot Springs, Arkansas.  And the youngest child born Keiffer Jackson was born in Baltimore.  She came back to Baltimore to have the youngest child.
Story_ID: 10926
Speaker 1: Well, also [grandfather] Kieffer Albert Jackson was very fair and he looked white to all appearances and that's why we have a great relationship because a good many of--the rest of my family moved to Chicago [Illinois] and left Mississippi too.  Everybody wanted to get out of Mississippi.  They settled on South Indiana Avenue where most of his relatives live there in that nucleus, that community.  But Kieffer Albert Jackson found--has such a disdain and a, just a hate of the state of Mississippi and all the representatives because he as a child of nine had witnessed a trial where the black postmistress had been accused of something minor and this is after Reconstruction.  And you had a black postmistress in Carrollton, Mississippi and Greenwood [Mississippi] and whites didn't want that continue.  So they made some trumped up charges against her and her daughter and son in law.  And in the middle of the trial the [Ku Klux] Klan came in and, but on horses as he recalled and took the, the lady who drove around town with a surrey, which is the little fringes on her carriage, surrey they called it and took her, her daughter and her son and lynched them right in front of the courthouse before the trial even started.  He saw that as a child and thought that was the most horrible thing to see and said that black people were running and everything else and he witnessed this as a child.  Then he witnessed further degradation of black women and that kind of thing but he actually was a Choctaw and born in Carrollton.  And Carrollton is where all the, the large mounds of the Choctaw Nation.  And I subsequently found out he was part of the tribe called Nooknanih (ph.) and I have that spelling for you.  And it's--they were known as the people who, the intellectuals who were sort of the shaman of the, of the whole Choctaw nation.  But they were born by--simply, Nooknanih means people by the river in Choctaw language.  And he--several of his sisters and brothers and all and though some of those who just couldn't fight racism and they're lucky to be white and moved to Chicago and married white people.  And those--but he could have easily, but elected--it was interesting.  Married my grandmother because he wanted to stay true to the race in the sense that the Choctaw had been forced out of Mississippi in 1832 with the, the, the Trail of Tears.  And those who were more resourceful immediately would rather be black and be part of slavery than to be on this trail that ended up going into Oklahoma.  And of course his mother, Lizzie, was--her father was a George Pettit, P-E-T-T-I-T who was born in Carrollton, Mississippi.  But the reason he had that French last name was that, remember Mississippi was part of Louisiana territory and that the Pope at the time was a French Pope and he gave the orders that all of the Jesuits come out and list all of the Choctaw and the Cherokee and other Native American tribes and give them Christian names.  So her father was given the name George Pettit, interesting.  And then she of course eventually had my grandfather and then she then married another gentleman named Jackson who was, was more my complexion and some of his children, his, some of the brothers and sisters were the colors of the rainbow.  And one of his earliest recollections was that of him going one day with his mother working at the colonel's house in Greenwood, Mississippi.  And this colonel who was sort of a judge and you know probably a honorary colonel and he was in the kitchen--his earliest recollection he said he couldn't have been any more than three or four and he was playing on the floor and this tall white man came in.  And the next thing he knew was a boot came and kicked him as he was playing on the floor and he was looking up to see.  He thought he would see his father and this boot came and kicked him and kicked him against the wall of the kitchen and kind of bloodied his head.  And this man said, "Don't you ever bring that thing to my house again."  And we suspect that probably was his father but he then made sure that his daughters never had to work in a white man's kitchen ever again to suffer that indignity because that's where it all started, the taking advantage of black women by white men.  And, but that's, and this was in Mississippi.  He never even returned to Mississippi at the death of his older brother George Shivers, S-H-I-V-E-R-S.  That's a Choctaw name.  And he just refused.  I'll never forget in his own Mississippi drawl when in the '60s [1960s] people were flying.  He said would you ever want to fly someplace?  He said I'd like to get on a plane and not drop a bomb but he said I'd like to drop a bum on the whole state of Mississippi and wipe it out.  Because the, the kind of horrible recollections he had as a child and this kind of just killing people wholesale and how he then left there as a child.  He left Mississippi at eleven and went to work at Memphis as a, in the kitchen as a, preparing to be a waiter and then that's how he got this thing to be a, a motion picture exhibiter and he made films out of various elements, ozone, lime and things, electricity and things to, and made his own movies and actually had the Dreamland Theater in Pine Bluff, Arkansas.  And he showed religious motion pictures and he found that was his niche so he would travel to the churches and then with my grandmother [Lillie Carroll Jackson] and they would--she would sing and play the piano.
Story_ID: 10927
Speaker 1: I want to ask you a question about this because it opens a couple of keys to maybe some other history that other people tell.  Dreamland Theater [Pine Bluff, Arkansas], there was also a Dreamland Theater in Tulsa, Oklahoma in 1921 when it was destroyed in a riot owned by blacks.
Speaker 2: Right, well--.
Speaker 1: Same name.
Speaker 2: Well the reason for that is that there was a--the one in Tulsa was another branch of the Choctaw, was a relative of this [grandfather] Kieffer Albert Jackson.  And that some of those who did this thing--.
Speaker 1: Right they were Jacksons right that owned that property.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so that's what happened.  And it was interesting that there because he that--but that was his way of getting out.  And he probably did, he was before Micheaux the, you know who credited--
Speaker 1: Oscar Micheaux from Chicago, right.
Speaker 2: Well being the first one really that organized.
Speaker 1: Well there's another point to this too that the, the beverage of choice because of Prohibition in Tulsa, Oklahoma was something called Choc beer.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Made out of a root that was, that was--.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: It was a recipe that the Choctaws came up with.
Speaker 2: It was the Choctaw, that's right.
Speaker 1: Right.  Would make you tipsy, it would give, get you a buzz you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And however, he, he never imbibed.  He felt that he had to keep his wits and he just elected this and really I give him a lot of credit because he was actually arrested several times in, during World War I as a German spy because he was, had all these chemicals traveling in town and was actually put in jail several times.  And--.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you said the chemicals were used to generate electricity.
Speaker 2: To generate electricity and so that was quite an art to be able to do all of that.
Speaker 1: So almost like a battery or something that he was creating--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the creation of a homemade battery.
Speaker 2: There you go, and, and--but all of this equipment he had to lug that he would either use oxen cart early on or he would use the train and quite a bit of stuff he had to carry.  But they would go along the, stay with an area and he traveled the entire country.  But he then began to continue to do this and he had a couple of--he filmed one of the, the Joe Louis fights and that film does survive and it is now with this group at the [U.S.] Library of Congress has.  Somewhere in Ohio as a matter of fact they have a laboratory that processes old film.  And most of the films had to be thrown because of you know possibilities of explosion and flammability of that stuff it's terrible.  The--but his cameras and even the megaphone he used and I have one of this large advertisements, an oil cloth that was used and I have a picture of him in his Model T Ford that he traveled in as well at these different locations.  But my grandmother elected, Lillie Mae Carroll Jackson that she thought the road was fine but that she wanted her children to get, she called it a first class education, that she knew the key to making it in this world was having an education.  That one of the problems blacks had was that there was no public school, that it was always attempts to keep them from either they finish the public schools from going beyond that so that you would be part of the Booker T. Washington school of thought that we were meant to be this kind of the, the work hogs for this, this government and this nation.  And she felt that was not the case here.  Her mother was a businesswoman, owned property and she wanted to own real estate as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now one other thing I wanted to ask you about Pine Bluff, Arkansas, Pine Bluff comes up quite a bit in black history in this era, you know.  I mean this, I mean people in Pine Bluff seemed to be doing all kinds of special things.
Speaker 2: Well because the number of blacks who had gone to Pine Bluff and they had created a community there that was kind of self sufficient.  So it was kind of the Mecca and see Carrollton and Greenwood is in that [Mississippi] Delta area and so he was gravitated to that.  He was a waiter and he saw these opportunities and he finally saved his money and thought that--and he got the inspiration he said from one of the business people in Pine Bluff that told him said you can come here man and have your own theater if you wanted to or something.  So that's what he did.  And my grandmother actually operated this, the Dreamland Theater for quite a number of years.  But she decided to give us first class education.  She had to settle in Baltimore.  This--these were her roots and then she began from her profits to buy real estate.  She said that in the Constitution said if you own property you could have a say so in the running of government and paid your taxes.  So she became, started to buy real estate, rental properties and others which gave her an income but also to remain independent.
Story_ID: 10928
Speaker 1: On my grandmother's side, education was important for these children.  So she had three girls and a boy and her goal was that she--words were to give them a first class education.  And all of her children excelled.  My aunt Virginia became a, a very famous portraitist and did the portrait of Dwight Eisenhower that's at the museum in the Eisenhower Museum.
Speaker 2: What's her name?
Speaker 1: Her name was Virginia Jackson Kiah. K-I-A-H.  She went to school in the University of Pennsylvania School of Fine Arts.  The Art Institute is right there on Broad Street till this day.  And then got her master's at Columbia University in--and of course did a, the, the portrait of Adam Clayton Powell, Jr. an Abyssinian, it was done by her of--the various portraits of the, of various fraternal organizations, the Elks, Hobson Reynolds, other religious leaders.  Throughout the country her paintings abound and because there's a--one has to have a gift to be able to be a portraitist because you're then capturing all of the hands and the features just right.  She was the founder of the National Association of Black Artists.  She lived in Savannah, Georgia but she married this Calvin L. Kiah who was born in Princess Anne, Maryland and his father, Dr. Thomas Kiah was the president of the, at the time a Methodist school called Princess Anne Academy and then later became University of Maryland Eastern Shore.
Speaker 2: So she was one of the founders of the NCA, National Conference of Artists?
Speaker 1: Yes, artists.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, black artists and she pushed that.  And she--
Speaker 2: Yeah, with Margaret Burroughs and all that.
Speaker 1: Yeah with a lot of the folk art you know.  She went and brought that to the forefront all of these incredible black artists who had created magnificent wood carvings and other kinds of paintings and other things.  So then--but she was denied admission to the, to the Baltimore--the, now it's called Maryland Institute of Art, it's called 'Micah on Mount Royal'.  But they denied her admission because she was black.
Story_ID: 10929
Speaker 1: My mother, Juanita Elizabeth Jackson, as my grandmother called her, was her brain child.  She was just very bright, very precocious and had a photographic memory.  But she finished [Frederick] Douglass High School [Baltimore, Maryland] at fourteen.  She went two years to Morgan State College which was a struggling black Methodist college and my grandmother she said, found it was unaccredited.  She said I'm going to get my child a first class education.  And my grandmother Lillie Mae Carroll Jackson had a sister, Marion Armstrong living in Philadelphia.  And she went to the University of Pennsylvania.  My mother was turned down at Temple [University], but she talked with a Dean Minnick, M-I-N-N-I-C-K who was a very famous educator but was the dean at the University of Pennsylvania.  And not only did he admit my mother because he recognized her potential but also accepted most of her credits so that she was able to finish the University of Pennsylvania and be the first black graduate and finished with honors.  And she then was taught at that time by Margaret Meade, the very famous sociologist was one of her professors.  I have some of the tests and other things.  But my grandfather's [Kieffer Albert Jackson] admonition to keep these three girls studying as my mother jokingly said he, along with grandmother, threatened to hang them by their thumbs if they even looked at a boy and, that boys and books don't mix.  And so they shepherded and protected those young women to get them an education.  And then Juanita Jackson not--after having gotten her bachelor's from the University of Pennsylvania then went back the following year and got her master's in, again with honors at University of Pennsylvania.  And the only problem is when she graduated she was eighteen and a young black woman in the '30s [1930s] graduating the University of Pennsylvania, wasn't too much you could do.  You hadn't reached the age of majority.  So my grandmother had the wonderful idea that there was a lady traveling around the country who my grandmother had met showing motion pictures and thought it would be just the woman to put this Juanita Mitchell with and that was Mary McLeod Bethune.  And my mother then became the speechwriter and traveling assistant with Mary McLeod Bethune and traveled around the country, did that for a couple of years.  Thereafter, she came back to Baltimore and then formed--she at one point taught French in the school system but then she formed what was called the Citywide Young People's Forum and they did this very historic campaign of don't buy where you can't work and that's what brought the department stores to their knees here in the black community.  And the Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company, the A&P, I think they have another name now, but made them hire for the first time black clerks and cashiers in the stores that were in black community and that was quite watershed cause this is the '30s [1930s].  And they were formed in '32 [1932], '33 [1933], the Citywide Young People's Forum.  And as my mother described it to me you had all of these young, very bright blacks coming back from some of the finest schools in the country because Maryland was so segregated that they would rather pay tuition to send you to Amherst [College], New York University, Harvard [University], Yale [University], Columbia [University], anyplace but the University of Maryland College Park, that was the, the thinking.
Story_ID: 10930
Speaker 1: It was abundant in eighteen, in the early 1800s when the Maryland legislature appropriated the money as I told you for the ships that took these blacks who wanted their freedom back to Africa.  Most people don't realize that in Baltimore a lot was happening.  Sharp Street Memorial United Methodist Church was founded by the Quakers, namely Johns Hopkins, Johns Hopkins University and Enoch Pratt and others gave the land to help form that because the purpose was the education of blacks.  You had all these free blacks in Baltimore but no way to educate their children.  Consequently, these Quakers came together, Hopkins and Pratt and others to give the land and help facilitate the creation of the school. And--
Speaker 2: And Enoch Pratt is the library's name for Enoch Pratt.
Speaker 1: Pratt.
Speaker 2: Enoch Pratt Free Library [Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 1: And then I'll give you another connection later on to the Pratts that happened to me personally, to my family.  But there in the Sharp Street Academy most people think that [Richard] Allen was the founder of the African Methodist Episcopal [AME] Church, however it was Daniel Coker, C-O-K-E-R.  And Coker was very fair but it was his genius who created this African Methodist Episcopal Church.  To defy the Methodist church he said that it would be a stain on the conscience of the Wesley brothers that here the Methodists would not allow there to be integration in the Methodist church and that he wanted--and therefore he brought in Allen to be the head of the churches because he looked more black.  And--but Coker's whole dream was to go back to the continent of Africa and he led that whole movement and therefore became the first governor general of Liberia or president.  And, but it was facilitated by the Maryland legislation.  They said well look if all these black people want to go back, we'll help 'em.  And they thought that's how you deal with this problem of the number of blacks coming into Maryland, put them on ships to, to the continent of Africa.  And obviously we've suffered--I don't know if I put this on tape earlier, we talked about it but I'm not sure if we put it on tape, but about that Liberian thing and--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we talked about it on some level.  But that's, this is independent of the American Colonization Society or is it in conjunction with it, do you know?
Speaker 1: No this is independent of that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And this was simply an effort by the state of Maryland.
Speaker 2: Okay, 'cause I know there was a famous, it's a book called 'Black Nationalism' by [John] Bracey, [Elliott] Rudwick and [August] Meier where they quote Daniel Coker you know, there's a passage and they have, the byline of it is, my soul cleaves for Africa or--.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --or to Africa and Daniel Coker really wanted to go.
Speaker 1: Well that's, unfortunately they consulted the British and the British in their arrogance said well we'll just create this area for you and unmindful of the various tribal divisions at that point.  And he had people who really had no more connection to Africa the continent but had this desire to be away from America.  And so that, to this day that's why there will always be this instability in Liberia because the American presidents and what the racism caused there to be to have the, the Americos as they're called, pitted against the various tribes there.  And they had no appreciation to the culture.  They'd been so removed.  And they tried to bring in all the culture and custom of what they had experienced in this country.  And it, it was destined for failure.  But one of the things that was significant is that some years ago I made a magnificent journey in, as I said thirty to forty kilometers outside of Monrovia [Liberia] is Bowensville, all those Bowens who, who were told by this John Bowen never to be a slave.  They got fed up with America and got on some of those boats in the early 1800s and were part of this incredible group that went back in the founding of Liberia as well as the Kiahs, K-I-A-H.  This was the family that Virginia, the oldest daughter of, of Kieffer Albert Jackson and Lillie Mae Carroll Jackson's husband and they were able to keep their African name Kiah, K-I-A-H as my uncle Kurt told me because they were so independent in--whatever happened on the eastern shore, most of the people, the owners were scared of them.  So in exchange for peace that they not riot or do whatever, they were able to keep that African name.  That was significant and so I believe that they trace some of their background to Senegal.  But, but even the Kiahs went to Liberia.  So there were a lot of Marylanders going back who wanted this freedom so you--this was the unquenchable thirst they had.  You know you could real--feel it.  Here was a place that they had no connection with.  Their forbearers had been brought here as chattel and they had received, had achieved some semblance of, of dignity by becoming independent and moving into Maryland and not being a slave.  But there was always the threat of being snatched and carried down into slavery.  There was, you could only have but so much capital, there was no education for your children.  And as Coker said the shackles of this stuff were just too much and he longed for the return to the continent of Africa and there's that desire.
Story_ID: 10931
Speaker 1: When [aunt] Virginia [Jackson Kiah] who is this portraitist got that again first class education, [mother] Juanita Jackson Mitchell formed the Citywide Young People's Forum with the help of her mother.  I've got to tell you about my grandmother Lillie Mae Carroll Jackson because at the age of twenty-two, a beautiful young woman, you got to remember she had traveled all over the country with her husband [Kieffer Albert Jackson].  She had two children, Virginia and, and my mother Juanita at that point.  And she had, she's talked about she had this headache for almost a year and that it kept her up at night that she couldn't do certain things.  And she went to the Johns Hopkins Hospital, walked there herself and she was in such pain.  But because of discrimination she didn't get the same attention.  But there was a general ward and a doctor came along by the name of Dr. [Samuel James] Crowe and he was a very famous doctor and they, the Crowe building is named in his honor over there.  But this Dr. Crowe made a mistake and cut the main mastoid nerve in her face.  He saved her life but it caused there to be--permanently installed a metal plate in, or covering her brain for the skull portions that this guy Crowe removed.  And additionally it caused then the cutting of the mastoid nerve her whole face to shift to one side, it shifted to the left side.  And here was the disfiguration again because of racism because they wouldn't treat blacks properly and here this Dr. Crowe experimenting on my grandmother.  But my grandmother was so optimistic about things.  And she told us, she said she prayed that, that she said God if you save me so I can raise my two little baby girls I'll dedicate my life to you, to raising them and fighting for the rights of my people, because even at twenty-two having traveled around the country she was given quite a picture of the, every facet of racism and what was happening in the South, in the North, in the West.  They even made it to California in those early years.  So she, upon awakening, she said there was Dr. Crowe leaning over her said, said "Lillie, only God saved you."  And she said, "I know he did."  And she then raised her children and then became emboldened about getting involved in this effort to organize blacks.  And she had read about the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and I found in her early papers where she had gotten her membership and my grandfather's membership in the NAACP and the first membership card they had was, that, that I have proof of shows 1915.  So there was this desire early on to be a part of what was going on and she knew--because they had to suffer the indignity, as she said, of traveling with her children on interstate trains throughout the country.  And because of segregation they couldn't sit in the normal coach cars or the traveling cars of other families who happened to be white, they had to sit in what were called the parlor cars where people smoked and gambled and drank and all this filth was in there.  And that was another reason for her getting off the road 'cause she wasn't going to suffer that indignity of having to sit in there simply that she was traveling as a family.
Story_ID: 10932
Speaker 1: The youngest was Bowen Kieffer Jackson who did very well but it was this Marion Downs as I told you who married to Karl Downs involved with Jackie Robinson.  Of course then when Karl Downs died as a young Methodist minister he was the president of Houston-Tillotson College in Austin, Texas then he--which is now Sam Houston College and--I'm sorry, was Sam Houston, became Houston-Tillotson in Austin, Texas.  But he died at an early age and my grandmother [Lillie Mae Carroll Jackson] always said that you don't sit down on your laurels.  God helps those who help themselves.  And so in this course of mourning that this young bride, my aunt had, she--my grandmother told her you have a voice 'cause she was always singing for various things, you traveled on the road and then she finished Juilliard School of Music.  And then I just found the slip where she was awarded a Fulbright Scholarship to study at the Giuseppe Verde Conservatory of Music in Milan [Italy] and actually lived in Milan for probably eight to ten years and traveled throughout Europe singing classical music as a classical soprano.  And you know obviously she couldn't perform here because of segregation at the Met [Metropolitan Opera, New York] in other places.  And when she eventually did come home she was limited to singing in the various Methodist churches that would have her, you know the ravages of things.
Story_ID: 10933
Speaker 1: My mother who was really the activist, Juanita Jackson Mitchell had the special desire and of course was brilliant and not because she was my mother but it was proven so that people were impressed with her organizational abilities and that kind of thing.  And Walter White selected her as the first youth secretary of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and that she was in 1935.  And she began to organize all the youth and college branches across the country and that's how Dungee the--we met in Oklahoma City, the publisher of the '[Oklahma] Black Dispatch'.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Roscoe Dungee.
Speaker 1: Roscoe Dungee and we, we met him in 1959 right before he passed.  And she talked about his courage crusading journalists in Oklahoma City, Roscoe Dungee the 'Black Dispatch'--my goodness.  And so we were taught early on about these people.  Bishop Borders out of Atlanta who was crusading long before Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was involved in activities, he was challenging the authorities in Atlanta, a lot of freedom fighters throughout things, Adam Clayton Powell as I told you, Adam Clayton Powell, Sr. was converted in West Virginia during the course of a crusade that my grandfather Kieffer Albert Jackson and grandmother were conducting.  And he gave, Adam Clayton Powell, Sr. gave his life to Christ at one of the services and that's why there was a relationship with my grandparents and Adam Clayton Powell, Sr. because they traveled there regularly to the Abyssinian [Baptist Church, Harlem, New York] to show movies.  And when my mother went to work for the NAACP she actually lived with Adam Clayton Powell, Sr. and that's how the relationship developed with Adam Clayton Powell, Jr., the congressman.  And so--and then that's where Juanita Jackson first met Dorothy Height who was a young social worker who was being sponsored by the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] and they, at the time they were support, they were support for what was called the Costigan-Wagner Anti Lynching Law that was of Senators [Edward] Costigan and [Robert] Wagner.  And it never was able to get out of the senate.  Eventually, eventually every time it got out of senate it never passed the house but they would document the lynching of blacks.  And in fact my mother upon returning to school in 1931, there was a lynching of a man in Salisbury [Maryland].  Then in 1933 there was the lynching of George Armwood in nineteen--in, in Princess Anne [Maryland] and horrible.  They not only--this was a situation where the gentleman again was accused of flirting with a--a black man who they claimed was feeble minded.  But was flirting with a seventy something year old white woman and they thought there was some sexual connotation to all that experience which was outrageous you know and that was the spin put on this to, to enrage the community.  And this poor man Armwood was actually jailed in Princess Anne and because the people said they were going to lynch him and kill him.  Well then the governor and authorities got together and a, a doer who was a state's attorney at the time in Princess Anne had him moved to the Baltimore City Jail for safekeeping.  And lo and behold that weekend the same doer who was a state's attorney at the request of his fellow citizens got a writ from the judge there and went to the city jail to, for the express purpose of bring Armwood back to lynch him.  And they actually brought him out of the city jail in Baltimore City, drove back down to the eastern shore in a caravan, told the people in Baltimore everyone along the way what they were going to do, strung George Armwood up in the courthouse lawn in Princess Anne which is Somerset County, Maryland and not only after lynching and hanging him by the neck and killing him they burned the body and then left it on display and then began to break off parts of the body to be sold as souvenirs.  And this was my father's [Clarence Mitchell, Jr.] first experience as a 'Afro' reporter.  And he was able to--was sent down there as a reporter by the 'Afro-American' newspaper and he said he--it was the depression, he needed a job and Dr. Carl Murphy asked him to cover it.  Someone suggested he carry a pistol or whatever have you.  But he said in, because of his youth and eagerness and his reportorial skills might get him over.  So he put a press pass in his hat as he walked around the, the you know the body was still, the charred body was still burning, embers were there in front of the courthouse and, and he--as he approached people he said that, that, the cruelty of this inhumanity began to sink in and a lot of people saw the enormity of it and began to say well we really didn't do this--it was people from Virginia.  And then, then they saw one white mother bringing her child there and the little girl he said dressed in a pretty little outfit and walked by and said, and told--this mother turns to this baby and says "This is what we do with our niggers who get out of line and, and, and who say something to, to us," meaning white ladies and said that this man--"If any nigger ever says anything to you let me know."  This was what inculcated, here's a child seeing a body burning and people selling pieces of it.  He said there was one part of people who when confronted with it, the barbaric nature of all of this just couldn't reconcile it.  And so then they--so he said that cost him to give up any hopes of being a pre-med student and he dedicated his life then for--to, to work for eradicating discrimination and, and using the laws and setting up things to do that.
Story_ID: 10934
Speaker 1: My father Clarence Mitchell, Jr., ran for office in 1933 having graduated from Lincoln [University, Pennsylvania] but he ran as a Norman Thomas socialist for the Maryland legislature and he ran on a ticket of the Maryland legislature house of delegates with a Broadus Mitchell who was a very renowned economist teaching thing at Johns Hopkins University.  And the treasurer of his campaign was a Mae Gilman, G-I-L-M-A-N whose father John [sic, Daniel] Coit Gilman was the first president of Johns Hopkins University.  But she was a Quaker as well and lived on Cathedral Street and believed in these causes but supported my father.  Of course he lost, but got a respectable vote.  He didn't run in the black area, he ran in a primarily white area and did extremely well and then he went to work for the Urban League in St. Paul, Minnesota and then be--continued this magnificent courtship with himself and Juanita Jackson Mitchell and these two young people--my mother was working for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] traveling around the country organizing branches and--.
Speaker 2: They weren't married or anything, they were courting?
Speaker 1: No, they were courting because my--the admonition of my grandparents were such that when at the play at [Frederick] Douglass High School that was performed in French and the play was 'Sleeping Beauty'.  And when it came time for Sleeping Beauty to be awakened by the kiss of the charming prince, my grandmother would have no part of that.  So they actually had to substitute a female for the role of the, the Prince Charming for that particular scene of this play.  And you got to remember this was the major social event of the time, the only black high school in the city and it was performed in French.  But Clarence Mitchell couldn't kiss Juanita Mitchell so you had to just look at things from afar.  And someone asked him one time well how did you eventually get Juanita Mitchell because the only thing is that, they said boys and books couldn't mix?  And he, the only way you could get in to see them was a book.  He said well a lot of times I passed as a book to get into, 'til I was sixteen to see her.  But they continued this courtship that went from high school and which is interesting starting in the late '20s [1920s], roughly 1928 and they weren't married until 1937.  Isn't that something?  Right along--.
Speaker 2: From nineteen when?  From, I'm sorry, from when?
Speaker 1: 1928--.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --to 1937 and quite a courtship.  And when they were married which is another mass--the first Bess in 'Porgy and Bess' was Anne Wiggins Brown, she's from Baltimore, Maryland, was a classmate of theirs at Douglass High School and Anne Wiggins Brown returned from her Broadway production at that time was traveling to sing 'Summertime' at the Penn Train Station here in Baltimore to send my mother and father off on their honeymoon.  So it was quite an incredible wedding with Roy Wilkins, Thurgood Marshall and others here, Langston Hughes, W. E. B. Dubois, James Weldon Johnson, of course Charlie [Charles] Houston.  All of the people who were involved in a number of things were seeing these two young people who--cause my father was working with the Urban League and my mother with the NAACP and they were traveling around the country.  They had created this national movement in the Young People's Forum here in Baltimore which really set the stage for movements throughout the country. And you got to remember that the--.
Speaker 2: Right, the young, the youth of--.
Speaker 1: Yeah this youth movement--.
Speaker 2: --the NAACP are the people who really kicked off the sit-ins and all that.
Speaker 1: Exactly. And she put the fire into things and she was quite an organizer.
Story_ID: 10935
Speaker 1: After marriage my father [Clarence Mitchell, Jr.] was working in St. Paul, Minnesota.  My oldest brother Clarence [Mitchell III] was born there in St. Paul.  He was born in the hospital.  My father thought that if he had his wife--'cause he had heard his premonitions or had heard from, directly from my grandmother that when babies would come, no babies be born in any hospital.  And he said he thought he had escaped things and, 'cause my--he had taken it to the Catholic Hospital in St. Paul and, on a recommendation of a good friend of his at the time and that was Hubert Humphrey.  That's how he developed the relationship with Hubert Humphrey and he was the mayor of St. Paul, Minneapolis and well was a college professor then and, but recommended this Catholic Hospital.  And unfortunately doctors had left the afterbirth in my mother and almost killed her.  So he said that ended the plans of his children being born in any hospital.  So for, the rest of his children were born at home on Druid Hill Avenue.  My brother, Dr. [Keiffer] Mitchell was actually born at 1216 Druid Hill Avenue, my grandmother's house on the second floor and myself and my youngest brother George Davis Mitchell were born at 1324 Druid Hill Avenue delivered by the lady down the street.
Story_ID: 10936
Speaker 1: You weren't in a real religious family, I guess?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah they were very religious, woo.
Speaker 1: Oh they were?
Speaker 2: Yeah oh yeah, no that's--and my grandmother had a lot of expressions for people who smoked to try to discourage us.  And she used to say "Look at that, fire on one end, fool on the other, burning up money."  And then she, she had another one, she said she would try to impress upon you--it kept us from smoking for quite a while 'cause we started then she actually got us to stop.  And the, the way she would do it and then she would introduce us, embarrass in front of people say, "Look my grandchildren burn up money.  Reverend don't you think--what do you think about children who actually set dollar bills on fire?"  Said, "Come here Michael, show you how--show Reverend Payne how you set this dollar bill on fire."  And she would say the cigarettes you know were, were burning money.  And then she talked about not wearing sunglasses and she said "Oh," she said "My grandson is going blind pastor, look at him."  And she said--she said because she said in her day she said you wore sunglasses you were incognito either that or meaning you had been drinking a lot or something, there were a lot of problems to you.  But no, there was no card playing none of that stuff, very, very strict.  But it's, it all helped, but also staying in this neighborhood we got to meet the real people.
Story_ID: 10937
Speaker 1: I was telling you more about the Kieffer and Lillie Jackson, Lillie Jackson's experience and this dedication of herself to fighting for her people because of the botched operation by this Dr. [Samuel] Crowe who they have a whole building now they named in honor of and he made his mettle perfecting this operation on the brain by you know destroying my grandmother's skull and disfiguring her for life.  And one of the interesting things I learned from that, here she was a beautiful twenty-two year old woman suddenly with two children, main mastoid nerve cut in her head and instead of despair when she told the story she would say, she said it only deepened her religious faith that god saved her and gave her a purpose.  And she said then afterwards when, she said whenever you're fighting for your people don't ever let any man or woman shut your mouth.  She said you might not be strong in numbers.  Lillie Mae Jackson's creed she would get in, invigorate crowds.  She talked about this whole sense of if you only had a few.  You know people today as you in the course of your interviews everybody claims they were in the Civil Rights Movement.  Well if everybody was in the Civil Rights Movement we would be free about now.  And I can tell you having grown up in this the people who were afraid to be involved that my friends in school told me that their parents said I couldn't play with you or come to your house anymore because you're with that NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and going to get them in trouble and my father may lose his job or my mother may lose her job teaching school or something like that or working at the post office.  Said you all are just radicals and then this whole class thing began to come in cause my parents insisted we continue living on Druid Hill Avenue and people were beginning to migrate out of the ghetto.  And the other excuse was well they're with the NAACP but they're still living in the ghetto, can't come down there so that the traditional social organizations banned us like the Jack and Jill's didn't want us which was a complement to us.  We didn't really want to be part of them anyway.  It was--my grandmother called, Lillie Mae Carroll Jackson called them "sass-ciety" and she said "sass-ciety" will never get you anywhere, that it's all frills and frivolous stuff.  You do something constructive with your life.  But lo and behold we benefited because invariably all of these "sass-ciety" and Jack and Jill boys were either, had problems or something and they would never have enough escorts for the young women for the debutant balls.  So the only time we got introduced to "sass-ciety" was that they would recruit my brother Clarence [Mitchell III], Keiffer [Mitchell] and myself for the debutante balls of the (unclear) and all of these kinds of activities you know so--and people would just kind of grin and bear it, these mothers you know when, but they needed an escort for their daughters.  Lillie Mae Jackson said that as she began the fight she recognized that prior to her, in, in Baltimore City when 'Plessy [v. Ferguson'] came down that some of the institutions were open, that the Lyric Theater 'cause of the, a large German population here.  And she remembers as a child sitting in the Lyric Theater integrated seeing performances.  And then there was a sea change after that where Baltimore took a stance of re-segregating and she said downtown she could go in and get, buy clothing in department stores, try it on then there was a change in the department stores' ownership.  And it, it--and her, her point was that it wasn't being anti-Semitic, but as more Jewish merchants like the Hechts and the Mays and the Hoshild Kohns purchased these stores, they were more accommodating to the protests of whites because they themselves were targeted and therefore adopted these restrictions that prevented blacks from trying on clothes.  You either purchased it or whatever have you.  But she got involved with this as I mentioned this, this incredible campaign she first saw it and she did it in her own light by preparing her children, giving them a first class education so they could compete.  She said that, get a education.  She said they can't ever take it away from you.  They can repossess your car, foreclose on your house, put you in jail, send you away but they can't take away a first class education and the power of the mind.
Story_ID: 10938
Speaker 1: She [grandmother, Lillie Mae Jackson] would do various things I can remember as a child, she would take me in front of audiences of four or five hundred or sometimes a thousand people but she taught us the mental telepathy thing and she would use us as props in audiences.  And we would be in some church in some part, someplace in North or South Carolina or Georgia wherever, and you know, a Friday night and you had a thousand people there and it was hot and sweaty and I would be blindfolded with my back to the audience and I was about three or four.  But I would pick up things and she, she would go out into the audience and say, "Now Michael, what am I doing," and then there was a code meant that she was about to move among the congregation, the crowd.  And then the whole, how we set off a crowd is she would always find a bald-headed, elderly gentleman there and she would put her hand on the bald headed man and get the rise from the crowd.  And then she did the same thing with my late mother, Juanita Jackson Mitchell but--'cause we were able to pick up little things to remember the codes of mental telepathy and I would be blindfolded just then, "Now Michael" and then after a series of questions she would then place her hand on the shoulder and "What I'm about to do next?"  "Grandma, I think you're getting ready to put your hand on an old bald headed man."  And the audience would erupt and people would applaud and then you know they'd be lining up wanting to know what the number was going to be as if we knew all of this stuff.  But she knew psychology, how to get crowds active and committed to things.  But in the midst of the show business and the rest of that she met all of these incredible people around the country, the ministers and she recognized there was strength in the church.  And she said the church have the largest group of sober people that you'd find in any place.  She said they, said they'll be paying attention to what you say.  So she used her base of operation as the church.
Story_ID: 10939
Speaker 1: As I told you her [grandmother, Lillie Mae Jackson] early, the early indignity she suffered in traveling she and my grandfather [Kieffer Albert Jackson] because he looked white and traveling in these towns in Mississippi and Georgia.  They would say now and my grandfather would say he--it was such an indignity to be traveling with grandmother and then his two children, my mother Juanita [Jackson Mitchell] and my aunt Virginia [Jackson Kiah], babies in the back of this Model T Ford and the sheriff of the town would come and say, "Now see here Jackson we don't allow our men to be fooling with these Negresses during the day time but you can take them at night now."  And he used to, he from there on he wrapped his marriage license in oil cloth to show that to the sheriff that this was his wife and then the sheriff would just in disgust, "Well you got to get out of town then."  And then several times he was locked up as a German agent as a pretext cause he had these chemicals, had a black wife driving through some southern town.  But those were the indignities he suffered and she suffered together.  But then these are the things that kind of caused persons to get this quest for freedom and so that when you sing, oh freedom, oh freedom over me and before I be a slave I be buried in my grave and go home to my lord and be free, and that mantra my grandmother and mother and father [Clarence Mitchell, Jr.] repeated to us.  We heard constantly that--another of her expressions was that you know we were actually taught at the schools that the continent of Africa was full of savages as we hear in the 'Tarzan' movies.  You had 'Amos and Andy' on television and my father would beat the heck out of us if he even heard that we attempted to turn the channel to look at 'Amos and Andy'.  And even before television if he heard that we were sitting around the, the radio in the parlor listening to 'Amos and Andy' we would get a whipping that night.  So and he said don't listen to that foolishness.  And then they, throughout our upbringing in this very segregated city my father would get on us if we even dare purchased a carry out item from a restaurant like one of these chain facilities that only had carry out for blacks and whites could sit in.  We wouldn't--he said you're supporting racism.  Grandma said you're supporting racism.  And we would--and then either you go to the black restaurant or as my mother called it, give us a taste of freedom and take us to Washington because, because of Secretary [Harold L.] Ickes who was the secretary of interior under President [Franklin D.] Roosevelt.  He caused there to be the integration of the parks and swimming pools in Washington, D.C. in the '30s [1930s].  And because of that total effort, the hot shops and Howard Johnsons, these were famous chain restaurants in D.C., opened up and integrated in the '50s [1950s] prior to the adoption of public accommodations law.  Then there were times they would take us for a ride or get on a train and go to Philadelphia for another taste of freedom, to be able to sit down and go to a restaurant and eat and teach us how to eat and whatever things that we were just as--it was a sea change.  You have to imagine leaving a segregated Baltimore where you saw these white people sitting down and you had to carry your food out and then go to Philadelphia and be able to sit in a room full of white people made quite an impression on us.  And then every Thanksgiving or Christmas we would go to, go to New York City and go to Rockefeller City and then we would ice skate right there at Rockefeller Plaza and then go to the restaurants and go to theater.  We couldn't see movies here in Baltimore because it was a segregated area and it was a crow's nest they called it. And we just wouldn't see the movie, no matter what it was.  We were banned from doing that.  And my grandparents--and there were a good many people who, who did that.
Story_ID: 10940
Speaker 1: We were talking about this whole question of all these people who claimed they were civil rights fighters.  These were the lonely days, very few people were committed.  And you look at the membership of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], very small in comparison to the number of blacks in this country but its secret was that the powers that be didn't know how many of those blacks were--had the--were thinking like the NAACP and that the NAACP had branches in every state and could impact things in terms of votes and doing things and that therefore it was dangerous.  And people you know, there were efforts taken throughout the South, Alabama, Mississippi to sue the NAACP and to try to bankrupt them.  And then just then they were--what they would do, the attorney general of Alabama sued the NAACP and he got court orders to get the lists of all the members of the NAACP and then same happening in Mississippi.  And what they were doing was then getting the lists of members then going and firing these members of the NAACP, teachers and then business people, cutting off their bank loans, things of that, homes were foreclosed on, a vicious, insidious campaign.  And people don't understand that the indignities people had to suffer fighting this and, but very few because it was sullen.  And I've got to mention I'm compelled to talk about the, the fact that the majority of the black press in this country felt that the NAACP and Thurgood Marshall and Charlie [Charles] Houston were crazy and they did not support the NAACP's effort in bringing 'Brown v. Board of Education'.  And if you go back and look at the black press in Pittsburgh and Cleveland, Kansas City, one of the papers in Chicago--.
Speaker 2: 'Defender', is that one of them?
Speaker 1: They took a stand against--I'm not sure to be accurate but one of them, there was a black paper in Chicago that was just opposed.
Speaker 2: There's the 'Bee', the 'Crusader', the 'Bee' the 'Crusader'?
Speaker 1: Well I don't want to guess at the name and have it be the incorrect one.
Speaker 2: Okay, right.
Speaker 1: I don't want to give any information but I'm telling you an examination will find and I have copies of newspapers now, their headlines and editorials.  Said the NAACP is irresponsible, that it's a waste of people's money, that we want separate and unequal.  But they said separate and equal but it in essence the equal was unequal because you can never have the proper funding and things that were necessary to bring black schools up to standard.  And that unfortunately was the position of the Urban League and generally most blacks at the time because the, it, they saw it as a threat to their employment as school teachers and principals and things like that, and that if they integrated these schools these blacks would lose their principalships, their teaching positions and things like that. I--and therefore a very small, committed band of people.
Story_ID: 10941
Speaker 1: I read her letters, Lillie Mae Jackson's letters to W. E. B. DuBois, they were committed on the right of women to vote, the whole question of civil rights.  They disagreed on the whole talented tenth and it was my mother [Juanita Jackson Mitchell], father [Clarence Mitchell, Jr..] and Lillie Jackson's position that everybody could participate in this struggle for freedom.  And so my grandmother had the largest branch membership in the country in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] because she brought in the (unclear) carriers unions, she brought the domestics in, she brought not only the, the, that group but also the doctors, lawyers and others and the religious community so it was a broad based movement.  And I will never forget the, the story that was in the Baltimore 'Afro-American' where one of the reporters was musing said he happened to be coming down the 1200 Block of Druid Hill Avenue in the, in the '30s [1930s] and he saw a very distinguished gentleman with the Homburg hat on and a heavy trench coat walking in front of 1216 Druid Hill Avenue in the middle of a major snowstorm smoking.  And as he got closer he said it couldn't be.  And then he said even got closer, it was Dr. W. E. B. DuBois who because of Lillie Jackson's religious beliefs did not allow smoking in her home no matter who you were and therefore the, the race man, Dr. W. E. B. Dubois was relegated to smoking in front of her home in the middle of a snowstorm, point of principles.  And therefore there was, there, although the minority fighting there was a genuine and grudging respect that the community began to develop for Lillie Jackson.  She also felt in order to fight this you could never have a job because they'd fire you right away and all.  So she started using her business skills and this skill she said got, she gained from being the seventh child and also being born with a veil and began to work out an arrangement with one of the major coal dealers here in the city.  His name was Hopberger who were the first owners of the [Baltimore] Orioles baseball team.  And old man Hopberger had a coal company and he would buy properties for at auction and then do a straw transfer to her and she then would give him the coal contract for a year and that's how she accumulated property and had rents.  So she was able to survive the Depression and that's how she was able to get the monies together for the education of my mother and aunts and my uncle at the, at the University of Pennsylvania and give them the kind of first class education that was necessary.
Story_ID: 10942
Speaker 1: He [father] was Clarence Maurice Mitchell, Jr., born March the 8th, 1911 in Stockton Alley [Baltimore, Maryland].  He was this--his sister Evelyn then, but there were three children before then who, who died because of diseases and other things so he in essence was the oldest of seven although his sister Evelyn was a few months older, a few, was a year excuse me, older.  He was the major breadwinner 'cause his father [Clarence Mitchell, Sr.] was a waiter and he--it was just very difficult getting employment.  So he in essence became the breadwinner for the home with all these children and his grandmother who would take washing and do whatever it took to, to make it.  And he began to, to do certain things.  He was skilled in track and things of that nature and so that when--and of course growing up in West Baltimore he said he not only had the ability to handle things intellectually but if necessary go into the alley to--for people who couldn't be persuaded by the force of his intellectual argument.  And he really meant that because during the Depression he, the only job he could get was as a prizefighter and he then became a Golden Gloves champ.  Clarence Mitchell, Jr. was a Golden Gloves champ in the light heavyweight division and fought in the name of the Shamrock Kid.
Speaker 2: Shamrock?
Speaker 1: And during the course of this, the Shamrock Kid in order to make ends meet to support his brothers and sisters because this was the Depression.  So he used whatever skills he had.  And one of the real tragedies again, he said that here were these children and his father was a waiter and spent good part of his time in Annapolis.  So he in essence was the man of the house as well with his mother.  His father worked at a place called Carver Hall in Annapolis which is a segregated place but was a cook but also was a musician and played a guitar and had a troupe.  He would go from club to club and play music and things of that nature.  But my father says that he worked jobs and then went to school and just did--but it was just natural he said in that he didn't experience racism as such because it was an insulated community in the sense that you had a nurturing school.  He says these teachers, he said the only advantage they had was that here you had teachers who couldn't teach at a college level because of racism.  There were no black colleges so you had people with Ph.Ds and others coming to the high school giving a first rate education.  And even though as he said that a lot of times he would look at his textbooks and my mother as well and they would go and the teacher would say now we'll get to page thirty one and my father would say, "I don't have page thirty one in my book."  And he used to wonder about where was the Forest Park High School or some other high school.  They were hand-me-down books.  So, and the point is that anybody who wants to return to segregation is crazy.  There were no great resources in the black community during segregation.  There was no great capital.  The little capital there was came from black insurance companies, the North Carolina Mutual [Life Insurance Company] and other companies there.  And the mainstream is where we needed to get the loans that are necessary to make black businesses work.  So all these people with these notions that suddenly there, it's necessary to return to segregation and that things were better, these people are either dumbfounded or found dumb because anyone with a right mind having lived through the indignities of that system will know that there might have been a closeness because you were left, kept out of things but there certainly weren't any opportunities and many hopes and, of people who have gotten degrees were thwarted simply because there were no jobs available.  But your options were working at the post office or the school system or doing some other kind of menial thing.  You couldn't use that education you obtained.  The next thing is, is that as I get to the Mitchell side, Clarence Mitchell as he was growing up said that there was also in his household and I have the census data in 1910 that they took, a Grace Ruffin and she was Grace Ruffino--(brief interruption)--Grace Ruffino and it was shortened to Ruff.  But actually she was Blackfoot from Montana.  And she married this guy Davis who was--and it was a bit of Brazilian in her too because some of the words that my father remembered my grandmother speaking were Portuguese and his mother and her name was Elsie Davis Mitchell.  And she would go into this, this kind of dialect when things were going bad or something and didn't want the younger children to understand what was going on she spoke in Brazilian to, this, use this Portuguese to communicate.  And her mother was, had, actually the father was Blackfoot and the mother was Brazilian, incredible.  Blackfoot people were allowed to travel a great deal.  You'll see throughout history the, the nation of Blackfoot from Montana came to Washington [D.C.] on a regular basis to petition the government and do all sorts of things.  What had happened was that the, the--it's the same tribe of Native Americans but in Canada they're called Blackfeet, it's interesting.  But in this country they're called Blackfoot.  And they, and they're one of the few Native American groups thus far that have resisted gambling coming into their midst.  But they're doing a number of things.  In fact we get calls from them recently wanting to come to make my Uncle Parren Mitchell, Congressman Parren Mitchell an honorary chief of the Blackfoot nation.  But to show you this mix of America because in the 1910 census it lists all the occupants of that Mitchell household as being, it didn't use the word--they wouldn't use black or Negro, they used mulatto, interesting.  You know that's the tragedy of racism.  There are all these black people living in Alley, on Stockton Alley and they began to create the kind of social grades that then would cause, simply because of complexion and other things, there'd be this division among blacks.  Some were mulatto, whatever have you and, and it just was wrong.  And that's again what, when the 'Brown [v. Board of Education'] decision talked about, and the court used the word invidious, I think best describes this, the machinations that the powers to be went through in order to work not only on the mind to, to mentally segregate us but to physically segregate us at the same time.  And use their every waking moment to put these kind of strictures in front of us so that if you have a house divided obviously you're no longer as a threat.  But my father said that he then worked and he said that when they moved to the corner of Pennsylvania [Avenue] and Bloom [Street] that at that time in approximately, he said it was about 1920 or so, in 1922, '23 [1923], but at one point I was owned by a Dutch merchant at Pennsylvania--this was an all black neighborhood generally but there was, there--below there was a stockyard where they slaughtered animals which were owned by some Germans and there was a Jewish guy owning a drug store and it was kind of a little united nations he said.  So he, the only time he experienced racism and such when he went to school but coming in there were all of these whites because they weren't immigrants as well and they didn't have a place to live.  Then he said that, his urgency was to make sure that his, his siblings got an education and they kept together as a close family unit.  And one of the most tragic things was that they all saved their money for years and years and purchased a house in the 700 block as a matter of fact, 712 North Carrollton Avenue in Baltimore across from Metropolitan [United] Methodist Church but it took them years to save the money just to make the down payment.  They moved in and unfortunately moved in, in 1932 and obviously Depression with no jobs and whatever have you, that they came home one day and sheriff and come and put all of their possessions in the middle of the street and they lost their first home together.  So they now, they began to experience the ravages of that as well and that's why till this day my Uncle Parren and others you know have this compassion for people who suffer.  And people who are generally on the streets who are bumming, people think they just have problems or this, that or what have you, but you never know what their condition is.  And he, I--and we used to stop, we didn't stop today but obviously if Uncle Parren if he's in the car with me now we stop and some--we're at a light and somebody needs some money say, "Oh give him a couple of dollars," you know and that sense of giving to the community you know, when people are kind of down and out.
Story_ID: 10943
Speaker 1: Yeah but we were right at the point where I think we were talking about my father [Clarence Mitchell, Jr.] witnessing the, they purchased this home in the year of the Depression and coming home one evening to suffer the indignity of having all the possessions in your home placed in the middle of the street by the constable because you didn't have the funds to continue paying for that first house.  And so that the churches took them in and eventually they were homeless and the graciousness of their neighbors and others.  But they rebounded and he recognized--.
Speaker 2: Is this before your father was married or after?
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is before he was married but this is after he finished college.  And what, one of the indignities he suffered as the, he, my father was the, the valedictorian of his graduating class of Lincoln University [Pennsylvania] in 1932 and those who were supportive of him he needed in May of 1932 five hundred dollars to pay all of his bills to get his diploma.  They wouldn't give it to him.  So he had to just go to the ceremony in the chapel--the chapel at Lincoln and brought his mother [Elsie Davis Mitchell] up so she would think that was the graduation.  And but eventually he paid for his diploma.  But see, all of those kinds of things and that's important to note because the average person would have gave up.  You know he came up from a rough situation and here's this Lincoln University founded by all these white people.  They were supposed to be so nice to help people out and then they're going to hold up his diploma from somebody who was just poor because he didn't have the money.  And, but then he paid on that and paid on that and eventually paid it off and got his diploma from Lincoln.  But he majored in Greek and was a scholar and really was incredible and a pre-med major you know minor in Greek and then major in biology and then finished in '32 [1932] with honors you know and be the valedictorian of his class.  And you know you would just think that there would have been some compassion in someone to make sure this kid--.
Speaker 2: It seemed like he would have a scholarship if he was a--.
Speaker 1: --yeah to, to get there, and but no.
Speaker 2: --graduated at the top of his class.
Speaker 1: They wouldn't do that.  Well people were suffering this was '32 [1932] so the Depression, I guess the institution was just open by the grace of God.
Story_ID: 10944
Speaker 1: Well, in terms of my father's further background, one is interesting to note is that his father, Clarence Maurice Mitchell, Sr. was the product of the marriage of a Mathias, M-A-T-H-I-A-S Mitchell who was a farmer who had come from Montgomery County and courted a young woman on Tyson Street here in Baltimore [Maryland], her name was Mary T. Pratt, P-R-A-T-T.  She is the granddaughter of Enoch, E-N-O-C-H Pratt, P-R-A-T-T, the financier, great Quaker and founder and really responsible for the creation of the Enoch Pratt Free Library system here in the state, in the city of Baltimore.  But--and who was the cousin, Enoch Pratt of Johns Hopkins [University], so it, it, it's fascinating, so that out of that union came several children, the oldest being Clarence Maurice Mitchell, Sr., who is my father Clarence Maurice Mitchell, Jr.'s father, my, of course my grandfather.  But my great-grandfather Mathias Mitchell was a farmer from Montgomery County.  And it was interesting that Mathias Mitchell's father had gotten together with this John Bowen to help give the land for this Ebenezer African Methodist Episcopal Church as well in Ashton, Maryland in Sandy Spring, Montgomery County.  And what is further fascinating is that the Bowens in Montgomery County and the Mitchells kind of co-existed and their--they say they weren't the best of friends but were united on principle in a lot of fights.  And lo and behold a Mitchell and Bowen unite to the marriage of Juanita Jackson Mitchell and Clarence Mitchell, Jr. later on.  It is important also to note that this Mitchell group as I told you the experiences at Lincoln my father experienced and then his work with the Urban League, of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Story_ID: 10945
Speaker 1: When he [father Clarence Mitchell, Jr.] came home first from 1932 from college, no jobs, had to be a prizefighter, he got a job at the 'Afro [American'] and the first assignment is to cover the lynching of black men on the eastern shore of Maryland.  And then, but one of the great things he got to cover, he was the reporter who wrote the story on the victory of, that was won by Charles Hamilton Houston and Thurgood Marshall in winning the admission of Donald Gaines Murray to the University of Maryland School of Law.  And the reason I mention that is, is that it was the watershed decision because Charles Houston the dean of the Howard University Law School brought his top student, young Thurgood Marshall a young Baltimore resident and as the story was told to me, my grandmother [Lillie Mae Jackson] said Thurgood Marshall's mother and family and everybody was made that the old University of Maryland wouldn't admit Thurgood to law school.  He had to catch a train or a bus to Washington everyday just to get an education.  And so it was kind of sweet victory for Thurgood to come in and sue the university on behalf of Donald Gaines Murray.  It is important, I don't need to be long, but Donald Gaines Murray was again a recipient of the foolishness of racism in the state of Maryland in 1930.  His--the state denied him admission to the University of Maryland, College Park undergraduate school but gave him a scholarship to Amherst University and paid his tuition, room and board and a lot of things.  And of course he was the grandson, Donald Gaines Murray was, of Bishop [Wesley] Gaines, a noted bishop in the African Methodist Episcopal [AME] Church and of course he, he lived with his grandparents on McCulloch Street here in Baltimore, M-C-C-U-L-L-O-H [sic].  And he wanted admission to the University of Maryland School of Law.  And what was historic about that decision was that Thurgood was there assisting Charlie Houston.  You had all the powers of the state focused on this because this was a challenge to the system post-'Plessy [v. Ferguson'] and that's why it's part of the road to 'Brown [v. Board of Education'].  And you got to remember this is Baltimore City, 1935, incredible.  They go in before a white Irish Catholic judge, Judge Eugene O'Dunn and as my father said the time Charlie Houston finished with his constitutional argument that was just so very simple and so clear and Thurgood added to it.  And the other counsel in that was Attorney W. A. C. Hughes who was the brother of the unfortunate minister who married my grandparents Kieffer Albert Jackson and Lillie Mae [Jackson] and who lost a couple of members of his church but caused other things to happen, but it was his brother, W. A. C. Hughes was also co-counsel with Thurgood and with Charlie Houston.  They made such a compelling argument that the judge decided the case without leaving the bench my father said, that this white Irish Catholic judge who was not known as a, a liberal or--but more conservative and very strict constructionist of the law, the statutes said the following.  That this state is denying this man his right to an education.  The state of Maryland even proposed creating a law school at the University of Maryland Eastern Shore--the same school that was founded by the Methodist Church, Thomas Kiah that had--it was struggling as an undergraduate school, had--it was more like a, one of the agricultural and technical schools so it didn't have many liberal arts courses.  And they were saying well he could go there and they could teach him law there, the state said.  They were coming up with all kinds of proposals and finally the judge said no he had a right to come there.  And sure enough the judge said, when the attorney general of the state came rushing in when he found out, [Herbert] O'Conor who later became governor and then he was the you might have heard in history the O'Conor Crime Commission that was fighting crime in the United States.  That was U.S. Senator O'Conor who was fighting, so such a crime fighter but was fighting to keep this black from entering the University of Maryland Law School as the attorney general of the state of Maryland.  The judge said, told Mr. O'Conor said look, he says when I went to law school I learned my constitutional law and learned it that, learned that your constitutional rights were like a cloak.  They enveloped you, that you either had them or you didn't and Mr. Donald Gaines Murray has a constitutional right because of the denial of equal protection and the, a denial of equal access by the state of Maryland to get an education in law and therefore I'm ordering forthwith and I'm therefore issuing a mandamus which is the Latin, to order his admission to the university's school of law.  The court erupted.  My father who was thin and who was also a track star at Lincoln [University, Pennsylvania] said he ran from the downtown courthouse to file his story at the 'Afro' building which was about twelve blocks away and ran up the steps and began to type this incredible victory.  Because when you look at it, since 'Plessy' this was, here was a judge saying something.  And what happened was that the--when the judge ordered the, the writ--this was Charlie Houston's legal genius that he did it in a writ of mandamus which means forthwith to, or to admit someone immediately and therefore the university had to admit him.  And by the time they appealed and because the judge, this white Irish judge denied the stay by O'Conor, Charlie--I mean Donald Gaines Murray was allowed to enter the University of Maryland School of Law and be, and he had already completed a year or the first semester of law school by the time the case went to the Court of Appeals, the highest court of the state and therefore they couldn't put him out.  He had passed all of his courses with flying colors and therefore the highest court of Maryland, the Court of Appeals ruled that the denial of the--by the state of, of Donald Gaines Murray's entrance was a denial of his constitutional rights and denial of the equal protection of laws and that that could not be tolerated.  And that was the first decision by the highest court of a state in the entire country that said denial of blacks access to graduate education was a denial of their constitutional right by the state.  What that meant was that, that was what Charlie Houston and Thurgood had been waiting for because they immediately took that to Oklahoma and the--those host of Oklahoma cases for the graduate school.  The law school, and then 'Sweatt [versus] Painter', Texas.  (Unclear) [sic, 'McLaurin v. Oklahoma State Regents'] is the one in Oklahoma.  And, but all of those decisions they could use as legal precedent.  This was the first challenge to separate but equal.  And here was the highest court of a basically an--and this was brilliant of Charlie Houston and Thurgood.  Charlie Houston said a state that was a southern state 'cause we are--Maryland is below the Mason-Dixon line.  Thurgood Marshall in his more colloquial way would say Maryland was way up south and, but here you got to remember you, all you had since 1896 is 'Plessy' and a court rules that a black man can go to the University of Maryland School of Law.
Speaker 2: What year is this?
Speaker 1: This, that is 1935, that same year.  He was admitted.  Isn't that incredible?
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: A watershed decision.
Speaker 2: It was like thirty-five years of--.
Speaker 1: That was the precedent, legal precedence you know that was used to gradually tear down.
Speaker 2: So this was the first victory in thirty-five years basically?
Speaker 1: And see it was a state court you know 'cause there's always this battle between states' rights versus the federal rights and all that and that's why I don't have much, much empathy for the late departed, our dear president Ronald Reagan because he did everything within his power to try to seize the insecurity of people and play upon and try to flame and intensely inflame the prejudices that existed.  And pit people against--claiming this is a question of federalism versus states rights and all that kind of--whenever you hear people talking about states rights, this knit with Ward Connelly who is now in the state of Michigan trying to do some things and for various efforts, you know.  He tried the propositions in California.  His last proposition fortunately lost when [Arnold] Schwarzenegger was elected governor.  That one lost but he's in Michigan playing mischief there and probably is on his way to Chicago.  But people try to be nice about it but it's nothing but rank racism when they say states' rights.
Story_ID: 10946
Speaker 1: And Thurgood Marshall then in his young genius and that was a--received a bit of vindication for his rejection by the University of Maryland School of Law.  You know and this is the tragedy that the white press after Juan Williams did his definitive biography of Ulysses Marshall began to claim that well it was a ruse by Thurgood Marshall to claim he had been denied admission to the University of Maryland School of Law because they found no evidence that he was denied.  And that this was just to galvanize people and what have you.  And he wanted to go to Howard [University School of Law] anyway. And you know, what a lie.  And fortunately I found in the papers where my grandmother had sent a--she made duplicates of letters interesting back then before the duplicating machine but saying that, and I have sent this day--she kept a little book, you know three dollars to Ms. Marshall to help Thurgood in his tuition money.  And she, my mother, my grandmother Lillie Mae Jackson always added these postscripts saying that, that that so-and-so University of Maryland ought to be ashamed of themselves denying your fine son admission to the law school.  And there that is in the, in my grand--so she wouldn't have made that up and obviously universities destroy things.  But we have a professor here in town, Professor Gibson and I'll show you at the end of this we actually have a letter from the President of the University of Maryland saying, advising the dean do not process these niggers for admission to our school.  This is the mindset so we have a long way to go.  I think that that point in terms of the watershed decision is so significant because it opened doors.  And you could understand how people having lived in this awful, god awful place where people would see you and you would suddenly get a degree from Columbia and so--then you couldn't go to a graduate school like Maryland and you were far superior academically to all of these people, Amherst, Harvard, Yale.  In fact people don't know that Charlie Houston was a graduate of Harvard Law School and was the first black editor of the Law Review of the Harvard Law School and was the prize pupil of Felix Frankfurter, who became a justice of the Supreme Court.  And that was--people don't know that and that's got to be known that it was just--it was Felix Frankfurter who gave the greatest respect to Charlie Houston in deference when he came to argue before the court because he, Felix Frankfurter said that Charlie Houston had the most brilliant legal mind that he had encountered in his entire lifetime of teaching law, practicing law and being a judge.  What a compliment and this was Charlie Houston who was a black lawyer from Washington, D.C.  People don't know his father was a lawyer as well.  They practiced in the firm of Houston and Houston.  He first started as assistant dean then became the associate dean then became a full dean.
Speaker 2: What was his father's--yeah what was his father's name?
Speaker 1: His father's name was Charlie Houston too.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, not Charlie Houston, William Houston.  And Charlie Houston, Jr., his son lives in Baltimore maybe five blocks from my home.  He's not in law but I met him a couple of months ago and told the crowd, he was at a law school activity in how his father, Charles Hamilton Houston, Sr., gave his life for this fight.  He killed himself literally.  Although he had a heart condition he continued to persevere.  And it was interesting young cameraman that it was Charlie Houston who recognized the power of the camera because he took his own camera and began to record the indignities that black children suffered.  He was able to film the tattered textbooks, the deplorable condition of the schools, the deplorable conditions of the roads to even try to get there to go to school, the fact that white buses were riding by with white children and black kids walking through the rainstorms trying to get to school.
Speaker 2: Yeah there's a famous bussing case I've heard about that Oliver Hill was telling us about.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Oliver Hill is another one.  And another thing you don't know about him, you know he read the law, he never went to law.  His law school, his partner, I'll get it another time but Oliver Hill is the cousin to my in-law you know I mean uncle and is related to Nannette, Keiffer [Mitchell]'s wife.  And she's off in that Richmond crowd down there.  But Oliver Hill although without sight now still has an incredible memory of things and still speaking from time to time.  I read recently where he gave a speech to the bar association in Virginia.
Story_ID: 10947
Speaker 1: Then, so when you have this with Clarence Mitchell [Jr.] and what he's doing coming together and dedicating his life having witnessed this lynching that he's fired up so he goes to work for the Urban League in St. Paul, Minnesota.  And how we all earned the, a part of [J. Edgar] Hoover's dossier and files by the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] is because of a racist, dumb FBI agent in Atlanta, Georgia in 1937.  My father had gone to work for the Urban League in St. Paul and had won, had gotten a fellowship to go to the Atlanta University School of Social Work for a Masters and he was attending an NAACP meeting at Reverend [William] Border's church in Atlanta and the [Ku Klux] Klan tried to break up the meeting.  My father was always one for defense because he didn't believe in non-violence but he pushed the Klan out.  And the FBI agent in his report to Hoover said there was a Clarence Mitchell, instead of saying a student at the school of social work, a socialist, and that monitor stayed and from then on a file was kept on my father and it really was wonderful because it enabled Denton Watson, his biographer who did 'Lion in the Lobby' to through the freedom of information, we obtained all his records.  And it had the, the births of his children also when we were born, it had all of the things--so every speech my father gave all over the country.  So it became a bit easy.  They even had the clippings of it and the newspaper coverage and reaction of the press to his speeches.
Speaker 2: So they really archived and documented all of his activities too, in order to, yeah--?
Speaker 1: Documented everything he did and this was so--and then of course now my father was on Nixon's enemies list and that resulted in just a continuing, internal revenue audits, family this, that and whatever have you.
Story_ID: 10948
Speaker 1: So the powers to be have long memories when you draw the system and you challenge the system but don't be afraid to challenge the system. One of the things that is so significant is the, as I look back at the strength and desire of my forbearers and the, all of the kinds of things they had to suffer it gives me the kind of strength as well to, to know and when I as a child face the indignities that even then I was ready because I had loving parents and grandparents, an extended community who gave me a sense of who I am.  As you know my uncle Karl Downs married Jackie Robinson and was a result of Jackie Robinson going to UCLA [University of California at Los Angeles] and saving him from the wiles of the Pepper Street Gang.  But we will, we got our first television set in the 1300 block of Druid Hill Avenue, 1324 and as in the summer of, when we got that about '53 [1953] I just remember Lillie Mae Jackson coming in, in the middle of all of our neighbors watching Jackie Robinson and strike three had just been called at the plate, she changed the channel.  And next thing I know I was looking at a man who didn't look white but he had a suit on, he had a tie, and I hadn't seen anybody of color on television that had a suit and a tie on.  And nor had I seen him standing in, at a podium speaking to people and nor had I seen all or a bunch of white people clapping for him on television.  They might have been laughing at him, they didn't have a tie on.  And she told all of us, she says "You ought to look at this man.  He's addressing the United Nations.  Listen to what he has to say."  It was Gamal Abdel Nasser in one of his speeches to the United Nations.  And as a child I was so intrigued because you got to remember everything I learned in school about the jungles and that the Tarzan, you know you're not supposed to pay attention to that.  But you can't help if your friends talk about it, the jungles in Africa and you know people--they used to say what they said well Negroes are just, you know what a Negro means?  They'll lie, they steal, they cheat, they're incapable of learning and that's why most people (unclear)--well I'm not one of those things.  I'm somebody.  Well and then suddenly see this man of color addressing--and the president of a country.  My interest in baseball didn't wane but my interest in understanding that dynamic and exploring more gave me kind of an unquenchable thirst to find out more about the continent of Africa, about Egypt about the Nubians and this Nasser.  And my grandmother had a way of colloquially putting things and even then on a black and white television you could see he wasn't white.  And she just said "Look ya'll,L she said "It's obvious his mother wasn't white."  Said "Ain't no white woman had him."  And she said "I've been telling you there are more people of color in the world than there are white.  And that we rule vast nations, that"--and that she said it's the white man doesn't want you to know this and keep you ignorant but this is your chance to learn and keep believing me that there are things out there.  And she would always recite her--the fact that you know she came--her forbearers, her, the Bowen side were always free.  That kind of stays with you and so at a very early age I knew we could excel and that the things that my teacher although well intentioned from this book in geography telling me that all the black people were happy with slavery and that the savages were running wild in Africa and there were no governments and things of that nature were dead wrong and they were lying to me and trying to keep me from knowing the truth.  And--.
Speaker 2: Now did you encounter any of the independently published black history books of Carter G. Woodson and [Charles] Wesley or J. A. Rogers or any of those people when you were coming along?
Speaker 1: No, I met Carter Woodson and I have letters from him that he signed and things that he sent to my mother primarily.  She corresponded with him regularly and, and with my father [Clarence Mitchell, Jr.]. And so that, and relished all of his--that was outstanding reading.  We read Carter Woodson and you'd be surprised the, the black press and of course, you know you look at James Weldon Johnson as we read along this way how the story of how he wrote 'Lift Every Voice and Sing', you know an educator in the state of Florida he and his brother.  And oh, see James Weldon Johnson then, was the executive secretary of the NAACP and of course it--he then, this was a school anthem that became the national anthem of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
