Story_ID: 22350
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Observing is Sondra Parker Mitchell.  Sir, can you give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Tyrone Duncan Mitchell, T-Y-R-O-N-E, Duncan, D-U-N-C-A-N, Mitchell, M-I-T-C-H-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth, May 6, 1939, New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: My current title and occupation is program director, National Science Foundation, Chemistry Division, National Science Foundation.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is June 27th, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're presently in Arlington, Virginia at the National Science Foundation.
Story_ID: 22351
Speaker 1: All right, now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up.  And they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do, a New Orleans gumbo made by my wife.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: New Orleans.
Speaker 1: And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  I have quite a few, but I, there's one I use a lot as.  "There's a lot of things I don't do, but there's nothing that I won't do."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that has a meaning that I have to explain a lot of times.  Do you want me to explain it?
Speaker 1: Sure, why not?
Speaker 2: Okay, basically, what I'm saying is, what that really means is that I reserve the right to make the decision on anything I decide to do.  So as, the way things are and people say they don't do certain things.  And I say I don't do something, I won't do it, but I don't do it, but that doesn't mean I will never do it because if I make a decision to do something, then I will do it.  So it's, more or less, I guess it's a free spirit type of activity (laughter), I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 22352
Speaker 1: All right, so I'm gonna ask about your family history now.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll ask about 'em separately, and then put 'em together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Mary Magdalene Duncan Mitchell.  Duncan was her maiden name.
Speaker 1: Okay, and it's spelled just the way Mary and Magdalene are generally spelled?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth, October 19th, 1916, New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: All right, now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Well, I know that my mother came from, her father was a Baptist minister, Reverend Syrene Duncan.  And her mother was, was a homemaker.  She had brothers and sister.  I think there was six in her family.  And three of her brothers were ministers, and her oldest brother was Rev. John Duncan who had a church in New Orleans called Pilgrim Rest Baptist Church, a very, fairly large church.  And she, her brothers, she had three brothers.  Three of her brothers were gospel singers who sang gospel in the '40s [1930s] and actually received a commendation from President Roosevelt [President Franklin D. Rooselvelt].  That was in the '40s [1940s], President Roosevelt for singing.  They used to sing on the radio.  The Duncan Boys were the name of her brothers who sang gospel.  Her youngest, she had one sister who was a school teacher.  Her name was Edna Kerrigan (ph.).  And her youngest brother, who was, his name was Syrene Duncan, and he was a mail, a letter carrier who migrated--immigrated to Los Angeles and carried the mail in Los Angeles for all his career and was highly valued by his, the people whose mail he delivered.  When he graduated, they had a neighborhood block party for him, and he was very, he would bring the kids toys on their birthday.  He'd remember all the people on his route.  He remembered the kids' birthdays and would bring 'em toys, so he's very much loved by his, the people he served.
Speaker 1: Now, the name Syrene, that's derived from I think Simon the Cyrenian.
Speaker 2: Simon of Cyrene, yes.  It's spelled with a "C" in the bible, but my, that was my grandfather's name, and he named his youngest son, Syrene, and my youngest--
Speaker 1: With an "s"?
Speaker 2: --and my youngest brother is also named Syrene?
Speaker 1: With an "s" though, right?
Speaker 2: With an "s", yes, S-Y-R-E-N-E.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Simon of Cyrene is supposed to be the one that--do you know the story?
Speaker 2: No, I don't, I don't remember it.
Speaker 1: He supposed to have been a black man and helped Jesus carry the--
Speaker 2: Helped Jesus to carry the cross, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, you know, (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: All right, okay, so, now, are there any, how far back does your family history go?  Can you go back to the nineteenth century to Reconstruction or the end of slavery?
Speaker 2: Well, I have, I have some pictures of my parents' parents, my mother's parents.  But I had an aunt on my mother's side who could trace the family back to Madagascar through oral history that my youngest brother, Syrene, captured when she was alive back, I guess back in the '60s [1960s] or so.  And he captured a lot of the family history, oral history, and wrote it down.  But I don't know, I don't have any, any records of that myself.
Speaker 1: Now, that's interesting, and this isn't the first time that I've heard--when I first heard this, maybe ten years ago, a friend of mine said that he was from Arkansas and his family could trace a lineage through New Orleans [Louisiana] to Madagascar.
Speaker 2: Oh, really?
Speaker 1: And then there was another interview, person we interviewed that said the same thing.  So I think you're about the fourth person that has this New Orleans, Madagascar connection.
Speaker 2: 'Cause African history was oral history, a lot of it was.  So I guess it may have carried on through generations, and, but this aunt, Aunt Ellen, my mother's aunt, my mother's great aunt, Aunt Ellen was her name.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, that's a story, anybody watching this, there's a book there somewhere or at least an article about this Madagascar connection to New Orleans, which would be, you know--
Speaker 2: Phenomenal, that--
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, so basically, your mother's family was involved in the church and in gospel music?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes, my mother's side of the family, her father and three of her brothers.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, Pilgrim's Rest, is this a large church in New Orleans?
Speaker 2: It's a Baptist church, it was a large Baptist church, yes, that my grandfather had, and his son, my Uncle John, he, he had the church until his death.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what do you know about your mother's growing up in New Orleans?  What did she wanna do when she grew up and did she have any stories about life in New Orleans in those days?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't get many stories at all from my mother about growing up in New Orleans.  My mother never worked outside the home.  She was a, I was from a very large family, seven of us.  And she raised seven children, all through, through to adulthood and all finished college and with advanced degrees.
Speaker 1: So all?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: All of the seven finished?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did--
Speaker 2: Three of the older boys have PhDs in chemistry.
Speaker 1: Now, was your mother able to finish college herself?
Speaker 2: No, my mother finished high school, and my father attended two years of business school.
Story_ID: 22353
Speaker 1: Okay, well, let's go to your father's side now.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Earl, Douglass with two s's, last name Mitchell, Sr.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: June 3rd, 1916.  He was born June 3rd.  My mother was born on October 19th, same year, but he always claimed my mother was older than he was.  I don't know why he had that claim, but (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, a few months difference.
Speaker 2: Yep, and she actually was younger (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, what is his place of birth?  New Orleans too?
Speaker 2: New Orleans, Louisiana, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what do you know about your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, I know my grandparents.  His father's name was Joseph David Mitchell.  And he was a senior.  And my grandmother was Pricilla Mitchell Mitchell.  She was a Mitchell also.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she had the name of Mitchell already?
Speaker 2: That's right, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there were three in his family.  He had two brothers and a sister.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, the, what did his family do and how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't remember too much about his family other than I know that my grandfather on my father's--my father's father, he, as a kid, I remember he always owned a truck.  He always had a, always owned a truck, and I think all his work and occupation came about through the use of his truck.  So I guess he was kind of like in the single, you know, self-employed, 'cause I know growing up as a child, as my family grew, there were seven in the family.  So we were always, we moved quite a bit because of getting enough room for the seven of us.  And I always remember riding on my grandfather's truck with all the furniture, going to the next location (laughter).  So, but that's what I remember about my grandfather and my grandmother.  And I, when I was a kid going to school, my school was in a neighborhood where they lived, which was quite a ways.  I had to walk a long ways, and I could always go, I would always go over to their house for, to visit.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what did your father say about growing up?  What was life like for him in New Orleans in those days growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't, I don't have any stories at all, I don't remember any stories at all that he told from his childhood growing up.  Some of my brothers and sisters, they remember, but I don't.
Speaker 1: Well, did he talk about the conditions his family lived in or about race relations or about his pets or anything?
Speaker 2: No, there was, there was not much talk at all in New Orleans.  We grew up in New Orleans.  And there was really no talk about race relations because as you know, during the time I grew up, it was separate, but equal.  So basically, we had our own society, doctors, you know, you know, everything was confined.  All the schools were segregated.  So the community that I grew up in was predominantly, was predominantly black and we came in very little contact with whites, other than the laws that, the restrictive laws that--and New Orleans was a lot freer, I would guess, because of the generation of, of people living in New Orleans and being more cosmopolitan than the rest of the South.  So I didn't have a lot of stories about from, about that aspect of growing up.  So I, I didn't really experience any racism, so to speak, you know, and things of that sort because it was a confined community.  And a lot of the neighborhoods in New Orleans are pretty much, were desegregated, let's put it that way 'cause you could move, you could have neighbors in the same block who were white, okay, in a lot of the neighborhoods.  But we didn't go to school, we didn't, we didn't, there was no mixing.  But we still, the neighborhoods were a little bit less segregated in some, in a lot of areas.  We still had the different, what you call "projects", and there were white projects and black projects.  So in that case, there was segregation again.  But as, but even with that there was not much, you know, not much experience from racism, directness--
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you know I'm asking about your father's memories now?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What your father passed down.  Not--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, my father, like I say, my father never, never talked about any of that, any things like that in terms of growing up.  So I would assume that his upbringing was similar to mine in terms of interaction with the, between black, white and things of that sort.
Story_ID: 22354
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So did your father, did he ever talk about what he wanted to do when he grew up, when he was--did he have any--
Speaker 2: No, my father was pretty ambitious in terms of providing for his family.  Like I say, seven children, and he, my father is, I remember he always worked two jobs because he was adamant about his wife not working.  And my wife's--my mother stayed at home and took care of the children.  And I think a lot of his, his concerns was that he did not want his wife doing menial jobs because during the time that he grew up, it was difficult to find any kind of, any kind of work for women, in particular, other than working as domestics and things of that sort.  And he did not want his wife to do that, so he worked two jobs all of my life and provided for his family that way.  And as I said, two years of business school.  So he worked as an insurance adjuster with a company called "Good Citizens Life Insurance".  It was a black insurance company.  And he worked that during the day and at night he worked in the Post Office as a lot of African American males did, even with degrees 'cause he worked side-by-side with African Americans who had PhDs who couldn't get any kind of work except for maybe teaching school or working in the Post Office or working independently for themselves.  So, so my father was pretty much, was entrepreneurial in that he worked with the insurance company, but as he, when he retired from the Post Office, he started his own real estate company, Early and Mitchell Realty Company, where he sold houses and things of that sort and rented houses.  So, he was very entrepreneurial.  And he always maintained, maintained those type of outside activities when he was working his two jobs too.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was the name of the insurance company again?
Speaker 2: Good Citizens--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Good Citizens Life Insurance Company.
Speaker 1: Now, is this a black-owned company?
Speaker 2: A black-owned company, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  That's worth saying.  So, Good Citizens Life Insurance.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And he worked for the Federal Post Office as a clerk in the Post Office.
Story_ID: 22355
Speaker 1: All right, now, is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: As far as I know, they met in high school, and they were in the same, in high school the same time as my wife's parents.  So, 'cause there weren't that many high schools in New Orleans, and the one high school was, that most of, a lot of people went to was McDonald Number 35 High School.  And it's the same school my wife graduated from when she went to high school.  But our parents, all of our, both of our parents went to that high school.  And I think that's probably where my father and my mother met.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did they get married soon after high school?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I'm pretty sure they did, considering the age of my brother, my oldest brother and the age I am, and the difference in the, you know, my father's age and stuff like that.
Story_ID: 22356
Speaker 1: Okay, well, can you name your siblings and fit yourself into where, in the order?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  There were seven in my family.  My brother, who's a junior, Earl Douglass Mitchell, Jr.  He was the oldest.  I was second.  And then there's another brother under me, Gerald Duncan Mitchell, who--myself, my brother, Gerald, and my brothers decided (unclear), we took our mother's maiden name.  It's our middle name.  Gerald Duncan Mitchell was a third child, and then there were twin girls.  And twin girls, Linda and Brenda.  And when, and after the twin girls, there was another boy, another boy, Syrene, that's my brother, Syrene, was born in '43' [1943].  The twins were born in '44' [1944]--I'm sorry, in '42' [1942].  And then the final child is my, is a sister.  Her name is Sandra, the same as my wife.  And she was born in '46' [1946].  So that's seven, right?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Earl, Tyrone, Joe, Brenda, Linda, Syrene and Sandra.
Story_ID: 22357
Speaker 1: Now, when you consider your parents' personalities, and their dispositions, their habits, their temperaments, their intellects, how they looked even, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm, everybody says I look like my father, okay.  But I think in temperament, I think I'm more like my mother in temperament.  My wife will disagree with that (laughter).  She thinks I'm more like my father (laughter).  But I think I'm more like my mother in temperament.
Story_ID: 22358
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory?  Probably, my earliest childhood memory--and I always think about this, my, my mother's relatives would visit.  And whenever they would visit, they would always ask me the same question.  And that questions was, "What do you wanna be when you grow up?"  Okay, and my reply was a doctor, okay.  And that stayed with me such that when I went to college, I really was majoring in pre-med 'cause I always wanted, and as I grew up, I always thought I wanted to, I always felt I wanted to be doctor.  And I think I was probably brainwashed very early on because I, that's my earliest memory.  I don't know how early that started, but I remember that from my mother's relatives coming by and always asking me that question.
Story_ID: 22359
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you live in one particular neighborhood in New Orleans or did you move around--you said you moved around quite a bit, but--
Speaker 2: Yes, I said, we moved a lot, yes.
Speaker 1: Was it in the same neighborhood or perhaps--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, we moved all over the City of New Orleans.  We started, we started down in a street called Durgenwa (ph.) Street, 1229 Durgenwa.  I remember that as my, probably my first memory as a child growing up.  And I may have been about, between two and six or seven at that location.  And then we moved to a place called, we were in, it was in the projects.  Then we moved to another location, 3203 Erattle (ph.) Street.  That was further, what's called "further uptown", not uptown, but further--yeah, I guess further uptown.  And we lived there for a number of years, and as I got more younger brothers and sisters coming along, I felt, we started moving again (laughter).  So we moved from there down to a place in the Ninth Ward area on, it's called "LaSatt (ph.) Place.  And we stayed there for a couple of years, but it was a fairly bad neighborhood.  And my father's objective when we were growing up is to keep us away from, from things that were bad in neighborhoods.  So his, his--he moved us a lot whenever we were in a neighborhood and the neighborhood got to be very bad, he would move us to another neighborhood.  So we left LaSatt Place and moved to the other side of the river in Algiers which was in, across the Mississippi River.  It's another part of New Orleans that's sort of isolated from the main New Orleans.  But we moved over there, and I was, I guess had finished eighth grade at the time.  And so I actually started going to, to high school in Algiers.  And we lived in, in the, in a place called Gretna.  Now, that area was very, very much alive with, with racism and all the other things that, you know.  So we lived right across the line, right outside of New Orleans in Jefferson Parish.  There's New Orleans Parish, there's Jefferson Parish.  And we lived right across a line in Jefferson Parish in a place called Gretna.  And so I went to a school in Algiers, high school there, L. B. Landry High School, is where I spent my four years of high school.  My older brother who did not move with us because he wanted to go to another school in New Orleans called Booker T. Washington.  So he stayed with a aunt in New Orleans and stayed, and myself and the other five siblings, we, we moved over to Algiers.  And my younger brothers and sisters went to school, went to grade school there, and I went to high school at L. B. Landry High School for four years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we--
Speaker 1: Well, I don't wanna get you past high school yet.  But so, we got you, so did you graduate from high school when you lived there in Gretna?
Speaker 2: Yes, I actually, actually, it's an interesting story because we were living there.  And, in Gretna, and one day the police came to the door, came through the door of the house, and they had a little white girl with them.  And they, my mother went to the door, and they insisted on, on seeing my brother, younger brother, who was about maybe, he must have been about seven or eight at that time.  And apparently, somebody had something to this little white girl, and she must have said it was a black kid.  And they brought him to the door and had her look at him, and she said, he wasn't the person, okay.  My father wasn't there at the time.  And my mother was, but when my father got home and heard that story, that next day, we moved, we moved from that area, moved back to New Orleans.  He moved the whole family back because that could have been, you know, a bad situation.  And I think he probably realized that.  So he moved the family back to the New Orleans side into an area called the Seventh Ward.  We lived in a duplex there.  And I was going to high school.  And so I continued to go to high school and finish out my four years there.  My other brothers and sisters transferred to schools in New Orleans.  But I had made a number of relationships in the high school, had a lot of friends.  I was doing very well in high school, you know.  I was an "A" student.  And so I just decided to stay, and I would travel every day across the ferry.  I would, it turns out, one of my teachers lived a few blocks from me, so I would walk to my teacher's house and then drive, ride with my teacher back over to the high school.  So I went to school every day that way for the, probably three years, about, well, about two years of high school.  And I worked after school.  I worked at--
Speaker 1: Well, we're gonna get to high school in a little while.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm going back to high school.  I just wanted to find out what neighborhoods you lived in.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, we--
Speaker 1: And I wanna go back to--
Speaker 2: Okay, in Gretna, we didn't in a neighborhood.  We lived in what's called a shotgun house, okay.  Yeah, I don't know if you're familiar with a shotgun house.  Okay, we lived in a shotgun house--
Speaker 1: Tell us what it is 'cause the people watching this are not gonna know.
Speaker 2: Okay, a shotgun house is a house that, it's, you go in the front door, and you keep straight, you go out the back door (laughter).  And so, it's just a straight, straight house, and the rooms are, you know, just straight through.  So they call it a shotgun house.  Well, we lived in a shotgun house on a street where the house we lived in was the only, only house on that street.  But over the other fences and around the corner were just whites, okay, with white families.  But we were on this one street, and it was an older house, and we lived in that house.  And we had a backyard and had a fig tree in the backyard.  And we were right next to the, to the Mississippi River, right next to the levee.  And so as a kid, I would go up to the levy, and we'd swim in the river and come back and things of that sort.  But that was the neighborhood.  We lived there.  We lived for about two years before we moved back to New Orleans, and then we moved to the Seventh Ward on a place, on Allen, 2103-1/2 Allen Street, which was in the, on the, in the Seventh Ward.
Story_ID: 22360
Speaker 1: I just wanted to get a sense of where you, all the places.  But we always ask this question.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, in New, it's New Orleans, you know, so it's gotta be Mardi Gras, you know, and those type of activities were around.  And I remember that we used to, we used to, at Christmastime, since we had such a large family, my father would always get, we'd get one gift, one present.  And as we got older, that present was a pair of skates because everybody skated on Christmas morning.  And for other toys, we would go to, I think it was Tulane Stadium, okay.  And they had a lot of, they'd give out gifts to, to poor kids, I guess it was.  And that's, we probably qualified for that at that time.  So we would travel with our cousins up to, up to Tulane Stadium and get gifts at Christmastime, other than the present my father got for each, each of the children.  So, and the younger kids got things that were appropriate.  But I said, it wasn't a lot of money to buy a lot of toys.  So we got things that really made us happy.  But basically, we had the New Orleans upbringing where there was always funerals going on.  So, you know, with the bands coming through and that sort of thing.  So we got, we had a lot of that, and--
Speaker 1: And kind of explain that tradition of people that, 'cause people are gonna be watching this that have never been to New Orleans.  So what happens typically at funerals?
Speaker 2: Well, typically, when someone dies, there's usually a sad occasion.  And they usually take, there's a progression to the burial place.  And people follow the coffin, walk behind the coffin, and there's a band usually playing, brass band or something usually playing.  And people, and they play a lot of spirituals and songs that people know that's related to that type of activity.  And they go and they bury the person, and then when that's over, the band would come back, and then they play a lot of Dixieland music.  And people would, it's a celebration then, celebration of that person going on.  And that was part of my upbringing and being exposed to that sort of activity.
Story_ID: 22361
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were telling me off camera that you weren't in the band, but you took some clarinet lessons?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I took a year of clarinet, but I had to drop out because I was working at the school, 'cause all my life, as far as I can remember, I always was pretty, pretty entrepreneurial in terms of making money, spending money.  As I said, my family was poor.  So even when I was seven, eight years old, I used to take and go to the store for older people and make a nickel or something like that.  So I would run errands like that.  And as I got older, I would wash cars.  In fact, when I was in seventh and eighth grade, I would take and, a few people in my neighborhood owned grocery stores--this is an all-black neighborhood.  The guy who owned the grocery store bought a new car, and I was the guy who would wash his car, keep his car washed.  So I made money that way and so much so that I washed cars year around.  And during my eighth grade, eighth year, in eighth grade, I actually got pneumonia twice because I'd be out washing cars, and I just got sick and got pneumonia.  And actually, I was pretty sick, and I was in the hospital for a while.  And during that year, and it was this--didn't spend a lot of time in school.  And I had been, you know, a straight "A" student.  You know, I mean I'd make good grades all through growing up.  And that year I, my grades were like, my average was like in the eighties, and it was like disaster for me, you know.  And that, that year I, when we moved across the river, I made a commitment to, to do better in school.  And when I went to high school, I did very well.  But, like I said, I always found ways to make money.  When I, when we moved to the other side of the river, I started working for a veterinarian after school and made money there working at an animal hospital and learned all about, you know, how to take care of animals.  And this particular veterinarian I worked for actually wanted to sponsor me to go to veterinarian school.  He was a white guy, a white guy, because I was really good at, you know, at helping.  And so, but I had, I wanted, I had that goal of being a doctor.  So, so that's--so what was the original question that I was answering?
Speaker 1: Sights and sounds and smells of growing up.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, you mentioned the food was, the smell of food.
Speaker 2: Oh, that was, that was, I mean we took that for granted.  You know, that sort of thing we took for granted, but my mother was, you know, all New Orleans people are great cooks.  My mother was a great, was a great cook.  And she always cooked for the large family.  And as growing up, I can always remember her cooking and that anybody who came by, who visited, other relatives, could always, there was always food to eat.  And I remember that and mostly, you know, like seafood was our favorite, you know.  So we had crabs and oysters and things of that sort.  So that's all the sounds and like, you know--
Speaker 1: What about Mardi Gras.  You mentioned it, but what was your experience with it, and has it changed since you were a kid?
Speaker 2: It's changed a lot.  It's changed a lot since we were kids.  And I haven't been to Mardi Gra in a long time, so I'm not sure how, you know, how much it's changed in terms of when I was a kid.  But I remember when I was a kid, there were certain spots in the city where people gathered for Mardi Gra.  Now, the city has been torn up quite a bit with I-10 going through, and there was like wide boulevards, like Claiborne (ph.) Avenue is a very wide, very wide boulevard and through the, and ran the whole length of, almost the whole length of New Orleans.  And it was a very wide street with trees and people would meet out, meet there at different locations and set up like picnic.  And they'd get locations where the parades, Mardi Gra parades would come by.  So even though during the time of Mardi Gra, like, it was in February, end of, beginning of February, around the middle of February, depending when it came, it was extremely cold.  I remember how cold it was.  But we'd still be out, would be out there during that, during the whole day at Mardi Gra watching the parades and things of that sort.  So Mardi Gra was a different time and all, it's just a fantastic time for kids.
Speaker 1: Were any of your relatives involved in putting the floats together or part of the tribes, like the Chopatula's or the Zulu's or--
Speaker 2: No, I don't know.  I'm not aware of my relative--well, yes, I guess I had, my wife--I'm sorry.  My mother's first cousin was very much involved with the Zulu's.  And so he was, he was like a photographer.  And he would take pictures.  But I, I don't--and I know my father has ridden on floats because there are clubs in New Orleans that put these floats together.  And then members of the clubs can take and go and be on the floats and wear customs.  And I can remember my father riding on floats at some time during my, during my lifetime.  But I don't know of any relatives who were Indians, per se, because, you know, that's a, those costumes, people build those costumes all year, and they were actually, a lot of, a lot of those people did have Indian ancestry.  And, but they were like Indian tribes all over the city, and they were like rival tribes.  And they would be, do whatever they do, you know, (laughter).  So it was, and we, we would be, go where the Indian tribes were because the costumes were just spectacular.
Story_ID: 22362
Speaker 1: Now, was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, church was a huge part of growing up.  Like I say, my mother's [Mary Mitchell] father was a minister.  And so I can remember every Sunday, my brothers and sisters, the older boys, in particular, we would get dressed up in our white outfits and walk to church.  My parents [Mary and Earl Mitchell] never went to church with us though.  We'd just, they'd always send us to church.  And I always wondered about that.  But, you know, after a while, I'd get another brother or sister, and I figured out, I finally figured it out (laughter).  And so, but I do remember them not going to church with us, but sending us to church on Sunday morning.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But we grew up in the church, you know, and--
Speaker 1: Did you go to Pilgrim's Rest?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we went to Pilgrim's Rest.  That's right.  That's the only church I went to in New Orleans.  My father was a Methodist.  My mother was Baptist.  The children, all of the children in growing up went to my mother's church, okay.  My father would, every once in a while would get me to go to church with him.  But I had no interest in going to his church 'cause I'd always go to my mother's church where, you know, a lot of her side of the family were there.  And, but once in a while, my father would get me to go to church with him, you know, 'cause he wanted to show his children off.  But strangely enough, my younger brothers and sisters--there were three older boys, and the four younger ones, we would separate them that way because, you know, the three older boys were quite a bit older than them.  So we would separate the family that way.  They, later on, after we moved to New Orleans, from moving, from Gretna to New Orleans and stayed on Allen Street, my father, because of the GI bill and being a veteran, he bought a house in a place called Pontchartrain Park, and when we bought the house in Pontchartrain Park, I was still going to church sometimes.  My younger brothers and sisters started going to a church in Pontchartrain Park which was close by.  And it was a Methodist church.  And my father transferred to that church, so all of the younger brothers and sisters ended up going to church with my father every Sunday.  And the older ones would still go up to Pilgrim Rest for a while until I got to college.  And after I got to college, then I did, most of the church I did was at the college where I went to, Dillard University.  And they had a chapel.  And my wife and I would, Sandra and I were students there, and we would go to Chapel, go to the Sunday services which were, usually brought in outstanding speakers.  And so we'd go to that service, but that's about where my churchgoing ended.  I spent so much time in church growing up that, as I moved, after I moved away from New Orleans, it was difficult to find a church that was like my original church.  So I just, just got involved in community activities.
Story_ID: 22363
Speaker 1: Okay, so did they have a lot of youth activities for you at Pilgrim's Rest?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Most of my youth activities came from in the neighborhood and being active with my cousins and my brothers and doing things around the neighborhood.  And we, at that time, you know, growing up, we had seasons for everything.  And so we had neighborhood softball, and we played basketball during the season.  We made all kinds of, we made skate mobiles and we made kites.  So we had a lot of, lot of activities and a lot of skills that I developed that I'm sorry I couldn't pass on to my children or my grandchildren in terms of how to make a kite, you know, and things of that sort and how to make a pop gun.  But we did all of that.  And those were, those were basically the activities we had growing up.  It was nothing planned like they plan kids' lives now.  No, we made our own activities.
Story_ID: 22364
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was the name of your school that you, your first school?
Speaker 2: The first school I remember was, it's called Sylvania F. Williams.  It was a grade school, went to fourth grade.  And I went from there to, I guess it's a--
Speaker 1: Now, I take it you liked school, and that was a good experience.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--
Speaker 1: Sylvania Williams.
Speaker 2: --I really enjoyed school.  And another, the next school was, the last name of the school was Hoffman.  But that went to like the seventh, went to about the seventh grade, seventh or eighth grade, Hoffman.  And I used to--
Speaker 1: Now, the first one, you started, did you go to kindergarten or did you to the first grade?
Speaker 2: No, kindergarten was at, my oldest brother and I went to a private kindergarten called Bush, Bush Kindergarten, B-U-S-H.  And it was a private kindergarten that we went to for kindergarten and, not for first grade.  But we went there for kindergarten.  Although Bush was a private school that went up to fourth or fifth grade, we only went there for kindergarten.  And my oldest brother, he was valedictorian of his kindergarten class, and I was salutatorian of my kindergarten class.  And the person who was valedictorian of my kindergarten class was a guy named--what's his name Sandra?  Let me see.  I could ask my wife 'cause she would remember the name.  But anyway, he's a chemist also.  He's a scientist and somebody who I know very well, but I'm drawing a blank.
Speaker 1: But in those days, he was kindergartener, but he became a chemist too, huh?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And actually, he, he and I are the same age, but he and my brother were in college together, okay.  And what happened there is that you remember back in the day, they used to skip kids if they were smart.  Well, he actually stayed at Bush Kindergarten and went through to the seventh grade or something like that.  And he actually skipped a grade, so he ended up being a year ahead of me, as he went through school.  His name is, I don't know if you know him.  His name is Frank Snowden, Frank Snowden.  He's a chemist.  He's at the University of Minnesota.  But Frank was actually in school with my brother, and we met many, many years later.  And in talking, we discovered that we were both in the same kindergarten class, and he was the valedictorian and I was the salutatorian.  And we had no idea until we met as adults, long after we were into our careers.  And--
Speaker 1: That's interesting that--
Speaker 2: And we still communicate--you know, he still comes back to NSF [National Science Foundation] for different panels and stuff like that.  And we've grown to be fairly, fairly good friends.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a classicist at Howard University who's published maybe three or four books who's--I think he's passed now, but he was still active in the early '90's named Frank Snowden, Frank M. Snowden.
Speaker 2: Oh, really?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well-known, black classicist.
Speaker 2: Wonder if he's from New Orleans?
Story_ID: 22365
Speaker 1: Yeah, we could explore, but I don't know now.  I don't know where he's from.  But, so, now did you, so you were at Sylvania F. Williams until, through--
Speaker 2: Fourth grade.
Speaker 1: Fourth grade?
Speaker 2: Fourth grade, yes.
Speaker 1: Now, did you, were you exposed to any science during this period of time?
Speaker 2: Not really, not that I can remember, but I do remember growing up, always interested in things that related to science.  You know, I had a science kit, you know, growing up.  I can remember with, being very much interested in firecrackers and cherry bombs and things like that, you know.  And we'd get those at different, different periods, New Year's and during these times when you do fireworks.  And I was, I remember using these things to do destructive things in the neighborhood like blow people's mailboxes off the wall and things of that sort.
Speaker 1: Did you actually do that?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Blow people's mailboxes off the wall?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, I did.  Cherry bombs were really, they were really exciting 'cause they were very, very powerful.
Speaker 1: Now, what would a cherry bomb do to a mailbox?
Speaker 2: It would just blow it all, and destroy it.  We'd go, we'd run away.  We'd do it and run away, but it was--I, I was, got into a lot of activities like that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, you're talking about a, what kind of mailbox would this be?  A metal one or--
Speaker 2: A metal one on the wall, yeah, yeah, like they put on the wall, yeah.
Speaker 1: It would actually blow one of those--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, cherry bombs are very powerful, yeah.  Firecrackers, we'd, you know, we would throw firecrackers at each other, actually, you know, we were pretty destructive kids, you know (laughter) when I was growing up in the neighborhood.  And we didn't do any, do any real damage to each other.  But it was the type of, you know, I guess I was into pyrotechnics at that point, right (laughter).  But--
Speaker 1: Now, did you ever cut up a cherry bomb or a firecracker to look and see what's in it?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah.  We used to take, take the gunpowder that was in them, oh, yeah, we would do that, and light it, you know, and watch it burn, things of that sort.  We used to also take, I can remember taking cigarettes, getting cigarette butts and taking out the tobacco and feeding it to the grasshoppers and it makes 'em drunk.  We'd take and feed, make the grasshoppers eat the tobacco.  And they would, they'd be flying all funny ways and stuff like that.  So we had a lot of, I mean those were the type of activities as kids growing up.  We would take and, you know, after school, after school play (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, I didn't know that.  Tobacco actually makes grasshoppers drunk.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, we'd feed it to grasshoppers, put 'em in a jar with a cover on it, and put the tobacco in it, and they'd eat it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, when in the process of grade school were you first introduced to science, that you are really conscious of?
Speaker 2: Actually, it was in, probably high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, I don't wanna run into high school yet, but--
Speaker 2: Okay, but it wasn't, it wasn't grade school because like I say, when I was in, when I was--from fourth to eighth grade, I was at Hoffman School.  And then I went, then we moved down to LaSett Place, and I changed schools and went from sixth grade--from about seventh or eighth, we were down at LaSett Place, living downtown.  And I didn't, I just pretty much did my school work.  As I said, in eighth grade, I was ill a lot.  So I didn't really attend school a lot because I was out because I was ill.  But it was, really, it was high school, I guess, when I first got introduced to biology.  It was one of the first things I took in high school.  And then my second year, I took chemistry.  But I loved biology and did very well in it in high school, such that the, Mr. Aaron, the teacher, that I was, you know, one of his favorite students because I did well in biology.
Speaker 1: Now, was school work easy for you or did you have to study hard?
Speaker 2: Well, I, nothing has ever been easy for me, but I've always, I've always, you know, been interested in things like that and try to, you know, tried to learn.  I always loved learning anything.  So I read as a kid, read different books, and I read books on, I did read books on science too, you know, 'cause I had a series of, volume of books I remember buying as a kid and had all kind of different things, science in there about natural science and the environment and things like that.  I could remember reading some of those books and being intrigued by it.  So I guess I did have a, you know, 'cause that was before high school, I used to read those type of things.  But, you know, I don't have much recollection of exactly what it was I was reading.  But I do remember having those books and, and cherishing those books.  So that probably got me somewhat focused on it, but it's only after I got in high school that I really got interested in it and having teachers who were passionate about it.  And I guess, chemistry, I got interested in chemistry because there was a teacher in high school, Mr. Aaron Dutton, D-U-T-T-O-N.  He was, he--
Speaker 1: Now, this is at, I'm sorry, at what high--what's the name of the high school?
Speaker 2: L. B. Landry, L-A-N-D-R-Y.
Speaker 1: L-, lower case, I mean--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Letter, "L"?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Lord Beaconsfield, I think it's Beaconsfield Landry was the--I have to look that one up.  That's such a long time ago.  But, yeah, L-A-N-D-R-Y.  It was a black high school in Algiers.
Speaker 1: And so you started, what, in 1952 or so?
Speaker 2: Started high school in '53' [1953], and ended in '57' [1957].
Story_ID: 22366
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so when you started high school, did you see yourself as going to college already?
Speaker 2: It wasn't in, it wasn't anything I even thought about.  I hadn't even thought about college.  I just thought about getting through high school.  I guess I didn't think about college till maybe my junior year of high school.  But I didn't really have a vision of going to college because I was from a large family.  And, and in my senior year, I guess I started thinking about it, thinking about it more seriously, but I was more focused on finishing college by going into the military.  That was basically my focus.  So during my senior year of high school, I didn't, I may have sent letters out to a few colleges.  Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute] was one and maybe Morehouse [Morehouse College] 'cause I had of people going to Morehouse.  But I got, I didn't get a real positive, no positive responses that would make me start to apply to colleges and things of that sort.  It wasn't that kind of thing.  So I thought I would just join the military and finish, finish school in the military.
Speaker 1: Oh, I was asking because all of your, all seven of you, you know, got, you know, got professional degrees.  And I'm just, I'm thinking, did your parents tell you, you know, when you were going to school, like you're going to college after you go to--or we're gonna try to send you to college?
Speaker 2: No, but I always knew, growing up, as I said, I was programmed, so I always knew I wanted to be a doctor, okay.  So I was gonna follow whatever path I needed to follow to reach that objective.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, and my oldest brother sort of was, like set the path for the rest of us really because he actually stayed with an aunt most of his, he didn't stay with the main family in growing up because, like I said, it was seven.  And my parents had a hard time raising all seven of us, although my father worked two jobs and we eventually, he eventually did.  But I can remember at a point, some time in my life, that I went to stay with a relative, okay, an aunt, my mother's sister.  I went to stay with my mother's sister, and she was very strict.  And she insisted, and all of the things that I had done when I was home with my mother in terms of after-school play and stuff like that, was like gone because she insisted I come home and study and would let me out to play at some times.  I was very, very unhappy in that situation.
Speaker 1: Now, this was in high school?
Speaker 2: This was in grade school.
Speaker 1: Grade school, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in grade school.  So I stayed with my Aunt Edna about maybe two years and it finally got to the point where I guess I was just, forced her hand, and she brought me back home and gave me back to my mother because I just wasn't cooperating very much in terms of the structure she wanted for me.  And I, I never had that structure in my family.
Story_ID: 22367
Speaker 1: So this is when you were about how old, that you stayed with Aunt Edna?
Speaker 2: I was, must have been about ten or twelve, ten or twelve because the event that, that caused her to pack me up and take me home (laughter), which was the best thing that had ever happened to me, was that we were, she had, she and her husband owned a grocery store.  So they were, you know, well-to-do basically, in that time in New Orleans.  They owned a neighborhood grocery store which was pretty successful.  My Uncle Jack ran the store.  And so she didn't, they didn't have any children.  So I guess this was their way of having one child.  And I was, like I say, I was smart growing up.  So I was a smart, I made good grades, and my Aunt Edna finished college, and she was my mother's older sister.  And she was very much interested in molding me to become that doctor that they had programmed me to be.  So she, there was an event at school where parents had to raise money for their child to be the king of whatever parish, whatever thing they had.  And, of course, having the only grocery store, she raised the most money.  So I was the person chosen to be the king, okay.  And she was dressing me to go to be the king, and they had these pants, and with the little tight part around the ankle, around the, below the knees.  I refused to go outside looking like that (laughter).  So she, she beat me.  I cried (laughter), and I refused to go outside (laughter) with those, with those knickers on, okay.  So she was so exasperated with me that she packed up all my things and brought me back to my mother, and brought me home to my mother.  And, of course, I was glad to be back with my brothers and sisters and siblings like that.  And I think she was very disappointed in me, but that was one of the, one of the things I remember very vividly that happened.
Speaker 1: Ghee, so, you were like the--did you go to the ceremony eventually?
Speaker 2: I think, I think eventually she got me to go, and I think she did drag me out to the ceremony.  She did, but I was crying.  I was crying.  I was very, very unhappy doing that 'cause I did not wanna be seen, and I had the whole thing with the cape and the hat, but I was kind of, I was kind of like a shy, I was a shy did too, you know except when I'm in the element of my neighborhood friends and things like that.  I was fairly bold in some of the things that we would do in terms of play and, and things around the neighborhood 'cause I had cousins, older cousins I used to go with.  And we used to do a lot of, lot of things together.
Story_ID: 22368
Speaker 1: Okay, L. B. Landry, your parents had moved to this neighborhood, this, you say which is--
Speaker 2: In Gretna, yeah.
Speaker 1: In Gretna, yeah.  So, now, were your teachers black, all black or mixed--
Speaker 2: I, I, everything, you know, everything, my whole experience was black growing up from the doctors, lawyers, teachers, you name it.  It was separate, but equal, okay.  And separate--it wasn't quite equal, but it was definitely separate.  And, for example, I remember growing up, all my textbooks had the names of white kids in 'em, okay, because the, they would buy new textbooks, and the black schools got all the old textbooks that the white kids had.  So all our textbooks were, had other people's names in them.  But they still have the information in there, you know, that we could learn.  So that was, but I do remember that.  So it was like hand-me-down sort of thing, you know, but, but like I said, all my teachers were black, and they were all, you know, college graduates and brilliant.  A lot of them were very brilliant because a lot of African Americans in the South, in New Orleans, could not find jobs in their own fields so they end up teaching school so they could still stay in New Orleans.  That was, that was a fight my father had with my older brother, with my older brother, myself and my younger brother, in that, at the time we were coming through, things were just opening up a little bit, you know.  And we had, we went to college, and we had goals of going on, going on after.  My father was very disappointed in us because we didn't take any education courses.  He insists that we take education courses so we'd have something to fall back on 'cause he just knew that--'cause he worked with a lot of people who had been to college and gotten their PhDs and came, wanted to come back and live at home and couldn't do anything.  Even though there were government laboratories there where they hired chemists, they couldn't--people or scientists, they couldn't do anything without leaving.  And most people wanted to go, live back home, and he knew that if the family was gonna stay at home, that we'd have to be able to teach.  And he was very disappointed that we didn't take any courses, any education courses during all four years of college.  But that wasn't possible being in a science career.  You had to take the science, all the science courses, and a few--the humanities, we had a liberal arts college, so you did take philosophy and English and things of that sort.  But we couldn't concentrate on education courses because we were, we were--
Speaker 1: Well, I didn't wanna get you into the college too deep--
Speaker 2: Okay, well, we're still in high school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, we're in high school.  So, in high school, you're exposed to biology, you said, that was your first science exposure.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Mr. Aaron was my biology teacher, yes.
Speaker 1: Mr. Aaron, all right, and so, so you took the science curriculum in high school, I guess, or college prep curriculum?
Speaker 2: No, no, no--
Speaker 1: Math and science?
Speaker 2: --no, there was no college curriculum.  There was no college curriculum in high school.  Everybody took the same thing, but, but the, we were taught at a fairly high level in terms of what the teachers wanted us to learn, okay.  So it wasn't really a college curriculum.  We took Algebra and--
Speaker 1: Now, wait a minute.  I've got a question.  So if you were the kind of student that knew you weren't going to college, you had no intention of going to college, you just wanted--
Speaker 2: No, no, I didn't say that.
Speaker 1: --to graduate--
Speaker 2: -I didn't say--
Speaker 1: No, I didn't say you.  I said, if you were that kind of student--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --could you not, could you not take chemistry.  I don't wanna take chemistry, I don't wanna take French, I don't wanna take, could you choose to do that?
Speaker 2: In high school, I don't think you choose, at my high school, that I went to--
Speaker 1: You had to take everything?
Speaker 2: I think everybody took, took the courses.  If you were in high school, you had to take the courses.  And, and the only way you can get out of it, and a lot of kids did this, is not go to class (laughter).  And so a lot of my high school classmates did very poorly because they would play sports.  And they just wouldn't go to class, and they would be great athletes--
Speaker 1: What you're describing to most places, I mean in Chicago [Illinois] or in Ohio and other places, New York, this would be a college prep curriculum--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --chemistry, higher math--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --language.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: It wouldn't be like a, I mean they would have, say a business curriculum where you took accounting and typing and that sort of thing, and you wouldn't have to take chemistry and all if you--
Speaker 2: I took typing.  We had to take typing, but I don't remember accounting even being offered, you know, in my high school, okay.  I don't remember that.  That wasn't offered.  They had homemaking, they had homemaking, you know, as a, as a--people could take that.  You could take art, you know, but, no, I remember just these courses that you had to take.  And I have a lot of my high school classmates ended up going into, some of my best friends went into, one guy has got a PhD in physics, another went and got a degree in biology and taught, taught biology.  So, you know, it was, some of 'em went into business, you know, but they had, they had taken English, and the English, and four years of English was pretty much required.  So people learned English and things of that sort.  But I don't remember accounting and statistics.  It just wasn't that kind of a high school.
Story_ID: 22369
Speaker 1: Okay, so how were your grades in high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was, I was in the 90s.  My grades were in the 90s, so, for almost all my courses.  I didn't finish at the top.  A woman named Marian Edinburg (ph.), and she just was outstanding.  She got a, she finished at the top of the class.  I was in the top 10, but my grades were good because I was very much focused on doing--after that eighth grade experience of having my average be in the 80s, I was very much focused on keeping my average in the 90s in high school.  So, so I did a lot of, so I did, made good grades and was in a lot of activities at school, and, you know, on the newspaper, you know, head of the newspaper, the school paper and things like--I did all those kind of activities.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you--
Speaker 2: I wanted to play sports, but I was too small in high school.  I went out for the football team, but the coach wouldn't let me play because he said I would get hurt.  So he called my father and told my father, Mr. Mitchell, I'm sorry.  I can't let your son play football.  So I took up tennis.  I played tennis in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a basketball team?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had a very good basketball, yeah, we won state championships in basketball, yes.  And one of my classmates, Clarence Red, he was, he was a center on the basketball team.  And Clarence actually went to Xavier [Xavier University, Cincinnati, Ohio] in Ohio and played college basketball.  He was, you know, real successful.  But he was good in high school too.
Story_ID: 22370
Speaker 1: Okay, so you graduated in 1957.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Now, this is the year that Sputnik went up, I believe, right?
Speaker 2: I think so, yeah, yep, that's right.
Speaker 1: So do you remember any excitement about that?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I remember a lot about, you know, about the Russian rocket or putting a rocket in space and stuff like that.  And, but that didn't really have any impact, you know, other than the fact that I knew about it, you know, it didn't have too much impact on, on what I was doing at that time.
Speaker 1: Well, on a national level, they started talking more about STEM education, science education, and we were, the Russians, remember the commercials, they were gonna bury, you know, and all that sort of thing--
Speaker 2: Yep, yep.
Speaker 1: --if we didn't catch up.
Speaker 2: I wasn't in tune to any of that (laughter), actually.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I was mostly going to class and hanging out after high school with my friends and going back and forth.  Remember, I had to go back and forth across that river every day, every day, and I rode with my, I rode with my teacher and I came back on the ferry.  I took the bus and came back on the ferry and things like that.  And my high school was--since most of my friends were in Algiers, I would spend a lot of time over there.  And I would end up coming back home late, late at night, after midnight sometimes 'cause my father worked nights.  And I would just hang out, you know, so, but I still did my school work.  But, you know, we were very, very much involved with the social activities on that side, in the Algiers area which was the East New Orleans, oh, it's the West bank, West bank, yeah.
Story_ID: 22371
Speaker 1: So when you, so you sent out some college feelers to find out where you might go to school?
Speaker 2: I just wrote, in high school, I guess they were pushing people to, you know, letting you know you had to go to college.  So I sent out letters.
Speaker 1: Did you have a good counselor?
Speaker 2: Good counselor?
Speaker 1: Yeah, college counselor--I mean in high school?
Speaker 2: Well, the teachers were more or less our counselors.  We didn't really have a counselor, teachers were or less our counselors and pushing us.  And I can remember Mr. Aaron, my biology teacher in freshman year, he was, he was a counselor for me for my whole four years pretty much because I could go to him.  And he, he propped me up in that he thought I was very smart, and he showed me a lot of leadership and respect and things of that sort.  So I always tried to do well 'cause I didn't wanna disappoint him.  And then I had, my chemistry teacher was Mr. Dutton.  And he actually taught chemistry in colleges, in college in New Orleans.  But Mr. Dutton was, he was just---he taught chemistry and physics.  But his, he would do, actually do experiments in the classroom.  And then that really excited me, some of the things he would do.  He would be in the front of the class, and he would do all the experiments in the front of the class.  We didn't have a lab or anything like that.  So we'd watch him do the experiments, and then we'd learn all of what's going on, with the chemistry.  That's the way he did his chemistry class.  And that was really, really exciting 'cause he was mixing solutions and drinking them and things of that sort (laughter), all kind of weird stuff, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on it, I know you probably didn't know at the time, but was your high school equipped for science very well?  Did you have equipment?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I don't remember a science lab.  I don't even remember science lab.  I remember having a room and there were experiments run in the room.  But there was no science lab at the high school at that time when I was going.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you were involved in the school newspaper.  Did you run for class office or anything?
Speaker 2: I was the editor of the school newspaper.  I didn't run for any class offices.  There were people around--remember, I was, my family moved to New Orleans, and I was going to school in Algiers.  So I wasn't really native to that community, okay.  And most of, all of the students there at the high school had come through the school, through grade school with each other.  So they were much more bonded and so the people who were doing those type of activities, like running for the school president club, union or whatever, they were like natives to that area.  And they were smart kids.  And some of them were my good friends.  And so, I didn't really run for any of those offices at that time.
Story_ID: 22372
Speaker 1: Okay, so, you ended up going to Dillard [University], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And Dillard's right there in New Orleans?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: So was, okay, so how did you make that decision?
Speaker 2: That's really an interesting story.  When I finished high school, I graduated, and I was going to go down and sign up to join, join the military and then finish school in the military.  And the summer after graduation, I don't know why I did this or who prompted me to do this, but I went, I went over to, on Dillard's campus and inquired about going to Dillard.  And the registrar asked me to see my transcript, my high school transcript.  So I went to my high school, got a copy of my transcript, and took it over to the registrar.  And I think they were impressed at my grades in high school.  And my first year at Dillard, Dillard was recruiting, they said they recruited the highest, the best class that they had ever recruited.  They had more honors, people who had finished, had honors--well, honor students in high school than they had ever had, okay.  So, my grades were very good in high school.  My wife was at Dillard, and she actually was the valedictorian of her high school class.  So they were bragging that they recruited more valedictorians and salutatorians of high school, of the high school, of high school in that freshman class than they had ever had.  And even though I wasn't a valedictorian or salutatorian of my high school, my grades were very good.  Like, I think I had about a 94 or 96 average for the four years in high school.  So they actually offered me a scholarship, and it was a, and I would have to work also.  They offered me a scholarship and a job on campus.  And that's what allowed me to go to Dillard, and so I enrolled based on that.  And based on the scholarship and my working on campus, I could pay, I could pay for tuition and all my parents had to do is give me money to go back and forth to school every day on the bus and lunch money and things of that sort.  So that was how I end up going to Dillard.  So that fall I enrolled in Dillard, but it was just a chance thing that, that I had a good high school record, the school was very proactive in offering me a scholarship.  So I end up going to Dillard and majoring, and starting to major, and majoring in chemistry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 22373
Speaker 1: Okay, now what was the chemistry department like, and who were some of the teachers there that helped you?
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, the chemistry department was, the main people in the chemistry department were two people, Mr. Moore and Mr. Hodges, okay.  And they taught, they taught most of the chemistry.  And they were outstanding in that they were very serious about their chemistry, and they taught--neither one had a PhD.  This is my freshman year.  They taught, you know, all of the, pretty much all of the courses but I took freshman chemistry.  After my freshman year, they hired a professor, and they hired a lot of adjunct, new professors.  And a professor they hired was Dr. Jan, J-A-N, Hamer, H-A-M-E-R.  Dr. Hamer was an organic chemist, and he had immigrated from Holland to Dillard, to New Orleans, and he got a teaching job at Dillard.  And that happened to, we had a lot of professors in college who were white, okay, and they could come here and they could get a job at the black school and teach, okay.  Well, Dr. Hamer was one of those people, and he was fantastic, okay, 'cause he came in, and he taught organic chemistry.  And that's pretty much when I fell in love with organic chemistry, and my wife and I, we entered college together at the same time.  We didn't know each other.  She came from 35, I came from Landry.  We never knew each other, and we met in chemistry lab in freshman year through her best friend, Lorene McMillan, who, I was on one bench working and Lorene and Sandra were on the other bench working.  And Lorene was sort of a matchmaker, and she was, she would tell Sandra, "Sandra, isn't he cute, isn't he cute", you know, that sort of thing.  And then she'd tell me, then Lorene would tell me things about Sandra, you know, doesn't she have nice legs, look at, doesn't she have nice--so that (laugher) sort of thing.  I'm not sure that's what got us together, but we, we spent four years in college going to the same classes because it was a small school, liberal arts students.  I mean the science students had to take their classes early in the morning because the education majors didn't like getting up early.  So the majority of the students had their classes later.  So we always had 8:00 o'clock classes in the morning.  And so I, I, and we had Mr. Moore and Mr. Hodges for, for our freshman classes.  And then they hired Dr. Hamer, and he became our, pretty much our mentor because he taught us organic chemistry.  He started out giving, Sandra and I did, actually did research.  He had a research project for us 'cause we were, we were both top students in chemistry--well, we were top students in biology and we were top students in English and philosophy and (laughter) and so, we were good students.  But Sandra was, we had a little rivalry going on too.
Story_ID: 22374
Speaker 1: What kind of research were you involved in?
Speaker 2: In--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that Dr. Hamer--
Speaker 2: In high school?
Speaker 1: No, at Dillard.
Speaker 2: Oh, at Dillard, oh, I'm sorry, at Dillard, yes, yes.  Dr. Hamer, he was working with A, compounds called Azides and these are high explosive compounds.  But you can make alkyl azides by reactions, something called sodium azide with an alkyl halide (ph.) and you do a SN2 displacement on the, on the primary alkyl halides and make azides, alkyne azides.  So he had us doing those kind of synthesis in a laboratory, which was my first experience with trying to organic chemistry and activities like distillation and separations and weighing out solids and computing, and calculating how much, what should be the proportion of materials that we should take and mix together in order to get a reaction, and measuring the yield of the product and calculating the yield.  So those type of things were really exciting to us.  And so we worked in doing, we did a little research in that respect.
Story_ID: 22375
Speaker 1: But like I say, Dr. Hamer was outstanding.  And he actually left Dillard and went to, became a professor at Tulane [University], once he got established.  But we were fortunate enough to get him for organic chemistry, and like I say, he became, he became a mentor and made sure that we learned what we had to learn because at the time he taught organic chemistry, but desegregation of some of the schools was happening during our time in college.  And there was a new school.  It's called LSU New Orleans.  LSU [Louisiana State University] had a campus in New Orleans.  And one of his good friends, Dr. Jack Stocker, S-T-O-C-K-E-R, was teaching a summer course.  And it was the same course he taught.  He taught an organic chemistry course.  Dr. Jack Stocker was gonna teach an organic chemistry, the summer course, which was the same course he taught, except he's teaching it out of a new book by, called, by authors 'Morrison and Boyd.'  Now, Morris and Boyd became like the bible of organic chemistry during my time, and every, most schools were using that because it taught chemistry in a different way.  It taught organic chemistry in a different way, (unclear) mechanistically.  Before organic chemistry was memorization.  But they taught using mechanisms and things of that sort.  So Hamer insisted, not insisted, but he encouraged Sandra and I to go to LSU in New Orleans and take the summer course from Dr. Stocker.  And it was like, the school had just integrated.  So after, the summer after we took organic chemistry from him, we went to, I took that summer at LSU in New Orleans, which now is called the University of New Orleans, but then it was LSU-NO, in New Orleans.  So I took the course, and I did quite well in the course.  But the interesting thing about that is that the class was all white students, and Sandra and I were the only black students in that class.  And these white students had never been to class with blacks before.  So they accepted it, but one thing that they would do is when we--if they got to class before us, wherever we sat, they would move, get up all and move to the other side of the room or to the back of the room or to the corner of the room.  So we used to play games with them.  We'd wait till they get seated, then we go in, and we'd sit down.  And they would (laughter), they would all get up and move.  So, but we'd, that was the whole summer.  But, but, you know, Dr. Stocker was fair, and he taught the course, and I did very well.  I worked the problems and made, made a decent grade in that course.  And that was--
Speaker 2: I'm just saying, this is the first time, this is the first time that LSU was integrated like that?
Speaker 1: Yeah, they'd just integrated LSU, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It'd just been integrated.  And, and Dr. Hamer told us, encouraged us to go and take the course that summer 'cause he knew we would learn--and that course is really what got me, cemented my interests in organic chemistry and actually helped me to be more competitive when I went to graduate school.  And it really prepared me very well for going to graduate school.
Story_ID: 22376
Speaker 1: Now, tell us how that came about.  Now, were you recommended by Dr. Hamer or did he help--
Speaker 2: For grad school?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, by the time we got to college, we were really like, my wife and I, Sandra and I were both pre-med students.  So we took chemistry and biology for, a lot of chemistry and a lot of biology thinking we're going to medical school.  But after my junior year in college, I realized that my parents couldn't afford to send me to medical school.  So then I started focusing on graduate school.  And like I said, my brother was a role model because he was a year ahead of me, and he went to Xavier University, and he was majoring in chemistry also.  So, and we were being badgered and beat up by our father because we took no education courses.  So my father was very disappointed in us, even though we made good grades and things.  He was very disappointed that we were going through college, and we weren't gonna have any kind of a future because we weren't gonna be able to get a job.  But like I say, at that point, schools were just opening up and it was '61' [1961] is when I graduated.  A lot of Northern schools were desegregating, and my brother tested the waters and, and went to grad school first, went to Michigan State [Michigan State University], got accepted, and went on to work on his PhD at Michigan State.  He got his Masters first, and then he stayed on for his PhD.  And once we had that model out there--and then there were other, like we, in my, you know, college class, there were other role models.  When we went to college, actually, there were other people at the college who were a few years ahead--we were freshmen.  And there was a guy who was a senior.  I joined in the fraternity, Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity, and one of the, one of the Alphas who was a senior when we were freshmen, his name was Joe Nathan Gayles.  Have you ever heard the name before?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: He should definitely be in this--I don't know where he is now.  But Joe Nathan Gayles--
Speaker 1: Gayles, G-A-Y-L-E-S.
Speaker 2: G-A-Y-E-S, G-A-Y-L-E-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Joseph Nathan Gayles.  He finished from Dillard, but he went on and go this PhD in chemistry.  So we could see the path based upon the upper classmen who were at Dillard, who were going on for advanced degrees.  So that was definitely a motivation for us in terms of trying to go to medical school or what to do after graduation.  And like I say, my oldest brother was, was like a role model.  And once he did that, then when we came along, we applied to graduate schools as we got to junior and senior year.  And I applied to a number of, wrote letters to many graduate schools.  I was accepted at, some of the bigger ones, I wasn't accepted because coming from a small school like Dillard.  But I was accepted into a Masters program at a school the University, College of the Pacific, which is now the University of the Pacific.  It's in Stockton, California, and I was set to go there for my Masters, after I left college, and they had accepted me.  And they had money and everything for me and that type of thing.  But my wife, who was also gonna go to medical school, well, she was applying to graduate schools too.  And we both applied to the University of Pittsburgh, and we both got accepted.  And schools did not take two people from the same school into the same area, but she was going into biochemistry which was separate from chemistry, and I was going into chemistry.  So the schools were independent, and they didn't know that each of us were applying.  So she got a fellowship to Pitt [University of Pittsburgh], in biochemistry, and I got an assistantship to Pitt in chemistry.  So we both, weren't married then.  We were just, we were dating at that point, and we both went to Pitt for graduate work.  And that, that was how we got into school.  And I was going on an assistantship, and I made $1,800 a year on that assistantship.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is 1961, right?
Speaker 2: Sixty one [1961], fall of '61' [1961].
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Story_ID: 22377
Speaker 1: Who were some of the professors that you encountered there or students at University of Pittsburgh?
Speaker 2: At Pittsburgh?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That was, they had a lot of good, a lot of very good professors there at the time, a lot of young professors.  And they had a system, again, like I say, you need role models.  And when we went to Pitt, there were already African American, African Americans in the chemistry department who had gotten there before we were, and were good role models.  Two of 'em are very good friends of mine and they're friends to this day.  One person who was at the, at Pitt [University of Pittsburgh] working on a PhD in physical chemistry is Dr. Frederick Humphries.  I don't know if you know Dr. Humphries.
Speaker 1: He was the president of FAM-U [Florida A and M University](unclear)--
Speaker 2: President of FAM-U.  Yeah, he was working on his PhD at the time, and another person who's at FAM-U right now, Dr. Ralph Turner.  Dr. Turner has been at FAM-U for a long time, professor of chemistry.  He's now a vice provost or something of that sort now.  But these were, were, they were in the department, upperclassmen in the graduate school working on their PhDs.  And they were like good, good mentors and role models.  And so when I went to Pitt, we had that network that had been there.  Another person, Dr. Lucius Walker was there.  He was a professor engineering, head of the engineering at Howard University.  He was there.  So there were a number of people who were instrumental in, in helping pave the way when I went to grad school at Pitt.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the professors, in terms of professors, there were, as I say, all the professors were white in the school.  And it was, it was difficult.  And, and Fred Humphries and Ralph Turner, they did help with telling me what was important, but it still was difficult to negotiate the, that environment.  I met some classmates who were excellent.  My wife and I, we learned in doing that, that we could be competitive because our education at Dillard was a liberal arts education.  And we had the sciences and we also had the humanities.  So we were very, we had good writing skills, you know, we had, you know, all the humanities and philosophy and things of that sort.  So we were pretty well rounded, and a lot of our classmates, we found, were very, very, very focused in that they went to schools that didn't have, they weren't liberal arts colleges, okay.  So they missed a lot in terms of, of the breadth of education that we got.  So we were, we were fairly well, we felt fairly well prepared.  And when we met the students, a lot of the students were from smaller schools, and we found that they weren't any more educated than we were.  And that was very, very enlightening to us.  So--
Story_ID: 22378
Speaker 1: Now, was that a lingering question in the back of your mind, coming out of all-black schools and--
Speaker 2: Yes, because our teachers had always, you know, told us that we had to do this or you weren't, not going to be competitive and things of that sort, you know.  So it really was, but I had had an inkling of this when I took the course at, at LSU in New Orleans.  It was very, very much encouraging to me to find out that I could be competitive with those students.  And it was a first, my first time at LSU of being in the class with white students.  So it, at Pitt [University of Pittsburgh], it was not intimidating at all for either myself or Sandra because we were, you know, were able to adjust in that environment.  And although we were always the only one, you know, the only one in our class.  But the teachers were, some of the teachers were supportive at the graduate school.  Some of them weren't.  Pitt was a great school in that I think it had, it did outreach to minorities at that time.  But being in that environment in the chemistry department, it was difficult because as you went in as an African American, if you went into the chemistry department, you didn't have the same path that the white students had, okay.  And there was a number of things.  One, after the first semester in school, the white kids were allowed to pick a research advisor, okay.  The black kids were usually on probation for one reason--and most times it's on, it's grades because you took courses, and, you know, you're dealing with white professors and, and your background really doesn't allow you to be, you know, right with all the other students.  But like I say, I, I had a good training in organic chemistry.  So I made very good grades in all of that.  So my grades were pretty decent my freshman year, but they still would not allow you to pick a research advisor, okay.  I didn't understand it at the time, but after a while, I understood it because what happens, after you pick a research advisor, you're advisor becomes your protector.  Okay, so you're gonna be the one that's gonna work and do his research.  So all of the professors respected the students who had advisors, so they can--we get the benefit of the doubt, okay.  So I didn't pick a research advisor until after my freshman year and, after my first year of graduate school.  And when I tried to pick a research advisor, you had to go around and interview the people, the professors, they, none of them would accept me as their student, okay.  I--
Speaker 1: Now, that's a serious disadvantage.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, and one of the, one of the top people I wanted to work for is a Dr. Edward M. Ornett.  He's well known.  He went to (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So he finally is somebody that said you--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, he was one of the ones I wanted, I really wanted to work for Dr. Ornette because he was doing something that's physical organic chemistry, looking at mechanistic chemistry, which was my interest.  But he wouldn't accept me as his student.  But Pitt had a young professor who had just come, just gotten his PhD from Duke [Duke University], and he was a Southern guy, southern person named by Dr. Claibourne E. Griffin, G-R-I-F-F-I-N.  And he had just got, just got his PhD.  so he wasn't but a few years older than I was because he was, probably his late 20s or early 30s.  And I was in my 20s.  And he accepted me as his student.  And so I started doing my research for him.  But I was in a Masters program.  I was in a Masters' track.  I wasn't directly in a PhD track like most of my other classmates were.  So I was working on a Master's thesis with him, with the option to stay on for my PhD if I did well for my Masters.  So Dr. Griffin accepted as his student, gave me a project, and I started working very hard in the lab on the project.  And we actually got, maybe about three publications out of my Masters work.  I sort of discovered a new reaction that--I was working on this particular reaction then.  And he, he published it, you know, and we had to do some things to verify that, the mechanism of the reaction.  So we did those experiments.  And he actually worked with me on that because he had to go another lab to make some measurements that we didn't have the equipment for.  So he actually did that part of it, did some measurements, but very, very excellent role model, mentor.  And that's the interesting thing, is after I left college, all of the mentors I have, have been white.  So, which I think is, you know, it speaks to, I think it speaks well to mentoring, you know, that you can mentor almost anybody, you know, if you have, if you, you know, if you're interested in that person.  So he was a great mentor.  I learned a lot of chemistry from him.  I did some, I think excellent research while was with him.  I learned a lot, and he, up until he passed away, we were, we were communicating, you know, because later on in his life, some of the graduate students, I would run into graduate students who were in, in his group.  And we would meet at chemical society meetings, and we decided to take and, to do reunions.  So when he got to be older and got, he had a stroke 'cause he smoked a lot, we would take and meet every two years with him.  And we would pick a place.  And some, one of the graduate students would have a house somewhere, and we'd go to that city and all the graduate students would show up.  We'd have a, like a reunion.  And that, that--and I organized that with another one of my classmates, Myra, Dr. Myra Gordon.  We organized that, that reunion, and it was very, very successful, and a lot of students came back because he was such a great mentor.
Story_ID: 22379
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, the University of Pittsburgh is the last.  So you worked on the Master's, but you didn't go forward to--so many people I interviewed, once they finished the Master's, that's just a, like they just collect that and keep on going.  So what happened, 'cause you didn't finish at the University of Pittsburgh, the PhD.
Speaker 2: It's my wife's fault.  No, I'm only kidding (laughing).  No, we, we were both in grad school together at Pitt [University of Pittsburgh].  And I, as I got my Masters I was at the crossroads because always in the back of my mind, I thought about medical school, okay, 'cause I thought I wanted to be a doctor, and I wanted to fulfill that dream.  And at that time I got my Masters, I concerning going into the Pitt, going over to the medical school and just go to medical school after that.  After the first year, we got married.  We were dating all through freshmen, the first year of grad school.  Then at the end of our first year of grad school, we got, we married.  And I, like I say, I was living on $1,800 a month--$1,800 a year which was about $200.00 a month.  And Sandra had a fellowship, and she was staying at a very luxurious dormitory and had money to burn.  So I said, now, I need to marry this woman.  Otherwise, I'm gonna be poor forever.  So we got married.  And we pooled our resources.  We got a, we were able to get a nice apartment.  We bought a car, and I was on my way (laughter).  And so, actually, I married her for her money, okay, at that time.  But anyway, so after grad, after getting close to my Masters, we got married.  And then we, we Sandra got pregnant.  And then I panicked 'cause she wouldn't be working as a student anymore.  So I thought I needed to get a job to take care of this new child that was coming 'cause I couldn't do it on a graduate student's salary.  I saw a lot of my classmates, had families, had children or were married and having children, and they were really, really struggling very badly.  And, and having grown up in New Orleans and, you know, living a certain quality of life and stuff like that, I, I couldn't see myself as, as doing that.  And so I decided to get a job.  So I started interviewing with companies and interviewed about, maybe thirty or forty companies.  And most of 'em wanted to talk to me because I had, they saw my resume.  They saw my resume, my resume and my, the courses I'd had.  And so I interviewed with a lot of companies on Pitt's campus, but when they would interview me and saw I was black, I wouldn't get a, I wouldn't get invited on a trip.  I would not get an invitation to visit.  Fortunately, there was the--this was around '64' [1964], and the Civil Rights Act had been, had been passed.  And one of the things in the Civil Rights Act is the fact that the government was holding these companies' feet to the fire in terms of hiring more underrepresented minorities and stuff like that.  And they tied it to contracts, government contracts.  Well, the big companies, like GE [General Electric] had a ton of government contracts.  So they started a recruiting program for African Americans.  And I interviewed with a number of different GE, GE labs or GE facilities when I was with Pitt.  And I had about three invitations to visit, visit these facilities because they were very much interested in hiring African Americans at that time because it was gonna help them with keeping their contracts and things of that sort.  So they really stepped up in terms of trying to be responsible to what the law was requiring.  And so I had interviews with General Electric.  I had interviews with DuPont and some other companies, but when I went to visit the, I actually visited those companies, but when I, when I got to those companies, I, it wasn't--they didn't make me an offer.  And I think it's primarily because I was African American and one of the first ones.  So GE actually did make me an offer.  It was at their Research and Development Center in Schenectady [New York].  And I interviewed, and I also interviewed with their Silicon products division department.  And they made me an offer.  I interviewed with their business in Evansville, Indiana that made Lexsan (ph.).  And they made me an offer.  So I had three offers from General Electric.  And so I chose, actually chose to go to the Research and Development Center, and actually, they, the Research and Development Center, actually withdrew their offer to me.  And I, I end up going to their silicon products division which is right across town.  And the reason they withdrew their offer, I interviewed in February.  They made me an offer.  A good friend of mine, who I had been at Pitt with, interviewed in March, and he, I couldn't start until the fall.  I wouldn't start until the fall because I was gonna finish my Masters first.  And then, but he could start immediately.  So they actually withdrew the offer to me and hired him, and then the other, the other division kept their offer out to me.  So when I finally got my Masters, and in the fall, I went to work, in October, I went to work for the division that was in Waterford, New York.  And my friend, he worked at the Research and Development Center in Schenectady.  So that's how I got, got to GE.  So I left grad school, and with, my wife and I, we went up to upstate New York to live in Troy, New York.  And I worked at General Electric's silicon division for about seven years and then transferred to the Research and Development Center in Schenectady where I worked another seven years.  So-
Story_ID: 22380
Speaker 1: Now, what were you working on at GE?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What were you working on at GE?
Speaker 2: Well, when I first went to GE, I was a process chemist.  And I would, I was doing organic chemistry, making new molecules for different applications in General Electric, making new molecules and also doing process chemistry which was trying to improve on the processes for some of the organic materials they were synthesizing that had been made and scaled up in their plant and trying to develop new processes that were more efficient and, or to take and, if we came up with a new, if we came up with a new chemical that had to be synthesized, I was the one who would take and try to optimize it in the laboratory, and the scale it up to the poly-plant and then into the plant.  So I did that for about seven years, working at the silicon division.  And then I left--
Speaker 1: So that takes us to when, what year?
Speaker 2: That takes us to, from '64' [1964] to about seventy--
Speaker 1: Seventy-one [1971].
Speaker 2: About '71' [1971], to about '71' [1971].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 22381
Speaker 1: And at the point, actually, actually, I, GE [General Electric] had a strike in '69' [1969], a very big strike.  And I was working in the plant, replacing the strike workers and things of that sort.  When the strike ended, and they settled with the union, GE had a lot of layoff's, okay.  They cut back quite a bit after that.  And my division I was with had cuts, and I was one of the people who was cut, okay.  You know, last hired, first fired type of thing.  So at that point, I had contemplated going back to school to get my PhD.  That was gonna be my option.  And at, I was laid off on a Friday.  That Monday, I got a call from GE's Research and Development Center, and they offered me a job.  So I never really, I never really stopped working because I was laid off on that Friday and that Monday, I had a job at the, another GE location in Schenectady.  I didn't have to move or anything.  I stayed right, still stayed in the area.  So I just went to work at the Research and Development Center as a chemist over there, doing, I was doing research now and still had a Masters.  But then I had already made arrangements to go back and get my PhD.  So since I had a wife and three kids by that time, I decided I would just work and go to school part time.  And GE had what's called a tuition refund program.  As long as you maintain a "B" average, they would pay your tuition.  You would pay the tuition out of your own pocket.  Then they would reimburse you.  So you had to have some upfront money yourself.  And so I went, I went and started taking courses at night at a, at a school called Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.  And my wife started working then.  She started doing, before that she was just doing independent things like getting involved in community activities, going around giving speeches and things of that sort.  She was very active in the community.  During, during that whole time when I was working at GE, she, she was a stay-at-home mom, but she got very much involved in the community.  And she was on a number of different groups like one's called "Panel of American Women", and it's just a bunch of, it was a whole group of women who were different nationalities, white, black, and they would go around speaking to community organizations about racism, things like that.  So she did that kind of activities, but when I, when I started working on my PhD and going, and working full time, and working full time and still going back to school nights, she actually started, started some activities, work activities and got involved in the community and being a high school counselor and things of that sort.  And she's had a very, very spectacular career in terms of the type of things that she did with her degree in chemistry.  But, but so, I--
Speaker 2: So you're a Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute--
Speaker 1: Institute.
Speaker 2: Troy, New York.
Speaker 1: Troy, New York, right.
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy, is this '72' [1972] or something.
Speaker 1: No, I still had taken courses around '71' [1971], '72' [1972]--
Speaker 2: Seventy-one [1971], okay.
Speaker 1: And then--
Speaker 2: And you finished in '78' [1978].
Speaker 1: Seventy eight [1978] because I was going--
Speaker 2: And you were working too.
Speaker 1: --I was going full time, yeah.
Speaker 2: Full time?
Speaker 1: Full time, taking courses in the evening, and then actually, when I did my dissertation, the schools, most schools had a residency requirement, you know, where you had to actually live on campus.  But at that time, RPI got rid of their residency requirement because they were making money from GE employees going back and getting their Ph--getting their degrees while they were working, okay, 'cause that was almost like the practice at the Research and Development Center where a lot of people would go there without a, without an advanced degree, but would work at nights.  And so RPI set up, made it convenient for you to go to school a nights 'cause they offered the courses you need at night.  And they would, it was accessible.  And they got rid of the residency requirement so that you could take and work and still go to school.  And, but it's amazing how African Americans changed the paradigm wherever we go, you know.  And one of the paradigms that changed was that, when I went to GE Research and Development Center and look around, a lot of my white colleagues were doing this, going to courses at night and getting their PhDs.  And most of 'em finished their PhDs in like three or four years, just like they would if they were going full time because what GE would allow, would allow them to take their work, the research they were doing at GE and write it up for their dissertation, okay.  So that--which means during the daytime, they were doing their research when they were working.  They were doing their research for the PhD.  They had taken all the courses, got all their requirements out of the way.  So they could get their PhDs in like three or four years, okay.  Now, here comes the African American, gonna do the same process, okay.  What happened to me was, my department head, well, when I decided to go back to school and get my--I was going to school nights and getting my PhD.  And some of my white colleagues decided, hey, this is great, maybe I'll get my PhD too.  So they started taking classes at night, all right.  And we were, we were all in class together.  I was, you know, ahead of them because they had just, they decided to start doing it too 'cause this process looked pretty easy where you do your research in the daytime while you're at work.  But my, the head of the chemistry section of the Research and Development Center, Dr. Alan Hay, I'll mention his name, Dr. Alan Hay, who was a very big, a big manager who was very well respected, changed, sort of changed the rules when I was, when I came, when I was trying to--'cause I had done a lot of work that I could have written up for my dissertation.  And my immediate supervisor was really supporting me on that.  Dr. Peter Juiliano (ph.) was my immediate supervisor.  He was supporting me on that, but the new rule was that since we were in chemistry, that I couldn't use the research I was doing because it might be something in there that's patentable.  And if it's patentable, GE didn't want to publish it, okay, 'cause they like to keep everything, and say trade secret, right.  So I had to carry a completely different project than anything GE was interested in, okay.  So my research advisor at RPI [Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute] came up with a project that I could work on for my PhD.  Now, they would allow me--so since I had to do GE's work during the daytime 'cause I had some really critical projects I was working on, and I couldn't write that up for my dissertation, they would allow me the time in the evening to do my research for graduate school.  And they would provide me with all the resources I would need, like the analytical stuff and all that.  I could have, you know, so they set up a special account so I could charge it to that account.  So what I would do is, I would take and come to work and work 8:00 to 5:00, my normal job, get dinner.  And then I'd come back at 6:00 o'clock, and from 6:00 to midnight, I'd do my research for my PhD.  And I did this for at least three years.  I did it that way for three years.
Story_ID: 22382
Speaker 1: And, and I had, the work I was doing, I couldn't tell, I couldn't let anyone know if it was anything, if I was doing anything new that was patentable because that would ruin the whole thing, okay.  So I was communicating mostly with my research advisor, and I made some interesting discoveries during that period of time that weren't patented, but we published a lot.  We published about, maybe six papers from my, my dissertation.  But if I had, if I had let GE know about that, they would have wanted to patent it, and then I wouldn't have been able to do it, I wouldn't have had anything to write up.  So I had to sort of almost like sandbag a lot of that, and so I just communicated with my advisor on the work I was doing with GE, doing for my dissertation.  I would just communicate with my advisor and I got, got most of my work done.  It was completely, a project that had to be completely separate from anything GE was interested in at that time.  So that's how I changed the paradigm, and I mention, the reason I mention that is that, once he set up that rule for me because there were some people who had gone before me, colleagues, young, white colleagues, who had gone through--we started at the same time in school, but they got their PhDs like three or four years ahead of me because they were in another division.  And their director supported them and let them write up their, their research for their dissertation.  They were done.  The way that, what that did is, since that rule was made for me, all the other, my white colleagues who had decided to go back and get their PhDs, they never got them, okay, because once he put that rule in, they were not going to work the hours that I worked in the evening.  That wasn't in their plan to do that.  So, so they just dropped out.  They didn't get their PhDs.  They, you know, so, but that was, that was my experience with GE.  So I, you know, I got my PhD while working at the Research and Development Center and when I, after I got my PhD, I moved to another division where I spent another seven years.  And one reason I moved is because I got a big bump in salary in making that move, and if I had stayed at the Research and Development Center, my salary would have gone up only a smaller, a much smaller amount because when I went there, my salary was depressed, having been, working at the other division 'cause--and I try and tell a lot of young people this too.  If you go in with a, if you go to industry, and you don't have a PhD, you have a Bachelors or a Masters, the salary trajectory that you get on is very, very low and very long to reach that level where you'll be paid for a higher degree, whereas, if you go, if you get a higher degree and go in with a PhD, you start at the PhD's level, whereas, if you start with a Bachelors, you'll never get up to a PhD level salary.  If you're a Masters, it may take you seven to ten years to get up to that level that you would start off.  So it's worth that investment of going and spending another few years in college to get the PhD.
Story_ID: 22383
Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you this.  We've talked about basically the politics of it, but what was your dissertation about?
Speaker 2: My dissertation.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: It was, it was a reaction, I was trying to do a reaction of a group, it was beta keto esters, was the functional group that I was reacting with.  And I was trying to react those with something amines (ph.).  It's a type of structure.  And I was trying to build polymers reacting beta keto, di beta keto esters with diamens, okay.  It's a condensation, it's called a condensation polymetization reaction.  And I was trying to build these polymers which had a structure such that if you heat them, the, certain parts of the polymer would cyclize and form aromatic structures and these would be high temperature, high temperature, would be useful for high temperature applications.  So that was basically the, my dissertation was "The Reaction of Beta Keto Esters with Amines" was the basic topic, but it was a difficult project in that the materials I needed to do the reaction were not available commercially.  So I had to do organize synthesis and figure out how to synthesize the molecules I needed to study the reaction I was trying to study.  So that's why it took a lot longer and it was little, quite a bit more intense 'cause I, I'd have to make these molecules and purify them and get them in a format they can react as, 'cause when you run these polymery reactions, you have to have pure starting materials.  So I spent a lot of time finding routes to make these materials and make 'em pure and crystallize them or distill 'em to make 'em to a point.  So it took a lot longer than if, if I were, if I had another project.  But that was my dissertation.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what's the practical application of your work?
Speaker 2: Well, there's, for my dissertation, there's really no practical application other than the fact that I got publications out of it because nobody carried it on or pursued it after I got my dissert, after I got my degree.  So there's really no, other than the chemistry that was discovered and the molecules that were discovered in the process.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now--
Speaker 2: Most of the, most of the work I did at General Electric concerned the patentable materials.  That was where a lot of the applications, that was mostly GE work there.  That was my dissertation work.
Story_ID: 22384
Speaker 1: Okay, now, are you promoted to senior chemist at GE [General Eectric], after you got your PhD?  Is that what happened?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was promoted to senior chemist 'cause they had two tracks at that time.  One was a management track, and there's a technical track.  And I always selected, not, well, I selected not to go into the management track mainly because I enjoyed working in the laboratory and being creative and making stuff.  And so, the, in order to take and get promoted and to go to much higher salaries, you had to almost get out of the laboratory and get into manage, some kind of management position where that takes, that would have taken me away from the science that I love doing.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you did file a patent in 1985.  That's the first one that we have written here.
Speaker 2: Eighty-five [1985]--
Speaker 1: For a process for preparing metasalens (ph.) and--I may be, I'm probably mispronouncing it.
Speaker 2: Imadatocylenes (ph.)?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Ammadato (ph.), yeah.
Speaker 2: Immadato, Immadaito, yeah.
Speaker 1: Aminosilanes (ph.), yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, aminosilanes (ph.), yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, aminocylenes, yeah.  And aminosiloxanes
Speaker 2: Siloxanes (ph.), yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what is this?  What is the nature of this patent and, I mean what is it, and (laughter), how do you know I don't have one of 'em here (laughter) right now, so.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, at GE, you work on projects and the aminosilanes (ph.) was a certain class of compounds we were trying to, trying to develop for applications in some of the products.  And so when you make these new products, they make these new compounds, they usually file a patent on 'em so it'll protect, to protect the structure so that, you know, if the, if you find applications, then they will be protected from having someone to infringe on making those new materials.  So a lot of the materials that I synthesized were, some of 'em were used in applications and a lot of 'em weren't.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what is an aminosilane (ph.)?
Speaker 2: It's silicon.  Silicon is an element and carbon, the carbon silicone bond is very rare, very rarely occurs in nature other than something called silicon carbide.  You heard of silicon carbide?  It's a hard substance.  But most of the silicon carbon, materials that contain silicon carbon bonds are manmade, okay.  So there have been processes by which people have been able to take and connect the carbon to silicon and making different type of materials.  So marrying silicon, is part of sand, okay.  Sand, SI02, and it's very stable.  People who develop silicon in chemistry learn how to make carbon analogs of this by connecting silicon and carbon.  And it turns out those materials are very valued because they're high temperature, and they're very inert, and so there are many ways to connect carbon compounds and put a silicon atom in those carbon compounds.  And those are called organo functional cyclenes or silicon--silicons is the general germ that's used for those materials. These aminosilanes have a certain group and they're connected to silicon, and silicon has a function, functional groups on 'em.  It's really complicated to try and explain this, but silicon has a high affinity for oxygen.  So, 'cause that's why sand is so stable.  But you put a carbon bond on a silicon, then you can attach other organic groups, and then you have the silicon attached to oxygen and have other organic groups on the other side, other side.  So the silicon is all part of the molecule, but those molecules tend to take and, when you expose 'em to different, like moisture and things of that sort, the silicon part that contains the oxygen can polymerize and form a structure like sand, silicon oxygen and silicon.  It's just like sand.  So that gives it the stability because it's very inert, and the organic part would allow it to be, you could work with those materials, and they're soluble and, you know, and, and you can do all kinds of, make all kinds of new materials.  So these materials are used to make new polymers which are very stable.  You know, like the first, first boot that worked d on, that walked on the moon was made of a silicon polymer that allow it to be, you know, take the heat and the temperature and the UV radiation, things of that sort.  And some of these silicon materials are used in, as additives in foods, for example.  You have ketchup, okay.  You can use something called Silica, which is SI-02 in another form, and you can put that in ketchup and make it think so that when it pours, there's a term called Thixotropic. (ph.), okay.  And something that's thixotropic mean it flows under shear, okay.  If you squeeze it, it'll move, okay.  But if you don't squeeze it, like toothpaste.  You can, you could squeeze toothpaste, and it'll just sit there.  It's not gonna flow.  But if you mash on the tube, it flows, okay.  And the terminology given to materials that have that property is that they're thixotropic, T-H-I-X-T-R-O-P-I-C, they're thixotropic.  So, and this is a property of, that you get when you add certain silicon materials to other materials and silica is one material that's made out of, that has silicon atoms that's very good in that use.  A lot of the silicon sealants you see, those materials are thixotropic, and they come out of the caulking gun, but once you put 'em into place, they don't run.  They don't run down.  They just stay there until they harden up.  So silicons have certain properties that are valued in making materials.  And they're involved in all of the foods you eat, they're involved in the processing industry because they have properties that make 'em like antifoaming properties.  When they cook batches of food, they put in a little silicon that keep the foam, it breaks the foam and so these things are very widely used.  There was a concern years ago about silicon showing up in the environment, and they were very much concerned that when you take a shower, since your deodorants, all your lotions that have these silicon materials in there.  And they were concerned about it washing and going into the environment and being toxic to the environment.  But lately, they've shown data that it's not.  I worked on a project at General Electric where we were making something called Octomethocyclotetrosaloxene (ph.), okay, and that's a structure were all the silicons, atoms are in a ring with organic groups hanging off the ring.  And this material is, is used quite a bit in the cosmetic industry, in fragrances and things of that sort.  So it's a multibillion dollar industry.
Story_ID: 22385
Speaker 1: Now, yeah, so breast implants made with silicon, right?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: And there was concern at one time about them.  Some women were complaining, but I don't know what the--
Speaker 2: Well, that's an interesting, that's a long story about breast implants, but I worked for Corning Incorporated.  Corning Incorporated is where silicones were basically founded.  Dr. Franklin Hyde was a scientist who first started working on making silicon versions of organic molecules, putting silicon, marrying the silicones with the carbons.  And over the years, a number of companies have been involved with using silicones as breast implants since they're inert, and they can be put in a body.  They thought they would be great for breast implants.  And when they were popular, a lot of companies got involved in making these, these materials.  And most of 'em were silicon manufacturers.  One was Dow Corning, which was the largest silicon producer, General Electric also made these materials, and Union Carbide.  These were three of the biggest producers of silicones, back in, when I worked in the silicon industry.  And they worked on products that could be used in, as breast implants.  Well, this became a big business, and Dow Corning, which was part of Dow Chemical, was the leader, and they made a lot of those.  It turns out that General Electric also made them, but General Electric actually got out of the market for supplying those things and got out long before the health issues came up.  So, therefore, when, when those health issues, 'cause some of the breast implants, they never have demonstrated that it was the silicone implants that were causing breast cancer, okay.  But it was certain procedures and certain things that were used that, where it was contributing to it.  It was never demonstrated, but the breast implants, the silicon got to be, got a very bad name because of that.  And then, then that's when Dow Corning, people started suing Dow Corning, and they got, went to Chapter 11 because of that.  GE actually escaped that because they got out soon enough from making those materials, and Union Carbide, I don't think was ever involved.  So, so that was one bad use of, of that, got to be a really bad name.  But like I said, now-a-days, I think people have gone back to using these things as implants because they, they've never been able to prove that these materials were the things that caused cancer because they, silicones are fairly inert.  And like I worked with silicones a long part of my career and was exposed to, to these materials.  And I think it, I think it helps longevity myself 'cause if you get coated with silicones, you're inert to most things (laughter).  So things just roll off me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, you know, and they called Ronald Reagan the Teflon president.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's right.
Speaker 1: So, maybe there's some truth to this.
Speaker 2: But I know a lot of people who were in the silicon industry and they've had pretty good longevity, and--
Speaker 1: And there's no syndromes of illness or--
Speaker 2: Of illness or any kind of exposure, right.
Speaker 1: --that reoccur.
Story_ID: 22386
Speaker 1: So, now, you, well, just kind of summarize, like what kind of things did you invent at General Electric, and then like, 'cause you left in 1990, before we get you to Dow, and what did you--
Speaker 2: The Corning.  I didn't, I was at Corning Incorporated.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Corning, all right.  Dow was out of it, I guess?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no.  Dow, no, Corning, Dow-Corning is a joint venture between Dow Chemical and Corning Incorporated.  Corning Incorporated is a separate company that had nothing to do with silicones or, the only thing Dow-Corning has, is that Dow Chemical and Corning own Dow-Corning.  And when Dow-Corning goes out and makes millions of dollars, Dow Chemical and Corning come in at the end and take the profits and split amongst each other (laughter), okay, after they pay off all their bills and expenses, and all their, everything.  So they are the owners actually, of Dow-Corning.  So Dow-Corning is a separate company.  And I spent, I was at Corning Incorporated, which is quite a bit separate from Dow-Corning.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But anyway, while at GE [General Electric], most of the work I did that led to patents was synthetic work, making molecules that's known as adhesion promoters.  They're called adhesion promoters.  Now, when you make a silicon sealant, one of the major properties is that it stick, okay.  If it doesn't stick, it's of no use, okay.  So most of my career was work, I worked on making adhesion promoters or process or developing processes to make adhesion promoters and following those processes from the laboratory to scale up to whatever size of, amount of material that was needed.  So, but the basic patents on the, they would have to patent a lot of these materials before we even scaled them up, so to protect the rights to the products that were developed.  Products that were developed contained many, many different ingredients, and there were polymers, they were something called "fillers".  There were additives.  All of these things went into these polymers, but there was something, about a half a percent of a material called an adhesion promoter.  And that half a percent allowed the material to stick to, to whatever surface, wherever they put it down, it had to stick.  So, we would make these materials and put 'em into products and test them out and see what they--and we'd measure the adhesion and, and determine whether or not these materials were--and they had to be a certain structure of these materials that would allow them to go into the product and to react with whatever substrate you spread it on, the materials would have to react with that substrate to, to bond, and the bonding occurred through the reaction of the, what we call functional groups, on those molecules with the water that's on the substrate because every, everything you touch has a layer of water on it of some kind, okay.  Unless you put, unless you put the materials in an even and heat it to a very high temperature, as soon as you get it, as soon as it get in the environment, it gets a layer of water, okay.  So, when you put down a sealant in a crack, okay, there's a moisture layer because you've got humidity, okay.  As long as you've got humidity, you've got moisture collected somewhere.  You got moisture on your body, moisture.  So when you put that sealant down, the additives are reacting with the moisture on that surface and forming, and causing the polymerization and these things to stick to, to the, to those different substrates.  So we would work with all different kinds of sub plastics, metals, and we'd put these things down and we'd make, make, glue them together and then measure the strength to pull 'em apart.  And that's how we would test a lot of these materials for adhesion promoters.  But I would make, design all kinds of molecules and test them.  And we finally arrived at a type of molecule, and what the function groups had to be in that molecule in order for it to, to be an adhesion promoter.  So we discovered and manufactured, and synthesized many of these kind of materials.  And we'd get a new one, they would file a patent on it 'cause we had no idea how successful it was going to be.  So most of the patents I have concern those type of materials.  And when we would take and put these things in a sealant, we would patent the whole compound.  So whatever added, whatever mixtures we put together, combinations of polymers and additives, we would put that down in a patent and file a patent on that.  That's why you see a lot of patents have multiple names on it because we had many different people working on this.  We had people that do synthesizing and making the materials and other people putting the formulations together.  So we had formulation chemists who would put the formulations together and test them.
Story_ID: 22387
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you left GE [General Electric] in 1990 and joined Corning [Corning Incorporated].  Now what was, was it a money issue or was it--
Speaker 2: Well, partially so, yeah, I guess.  I had spent about twenty five years at General Electric.  And during my twenty five years at General Electric, I actually never looked for another job.  And a lot of my colleagues left GE to go with other companies, mainly to get more salary, promotions and things of that sort.  I, I was, I guess I was fairly naive.  I really enjoyed my job.  I really enjoyed working in the lab and, and inventing things and making new things.  And there's always family issues, you know.  When you move and you've got kids in schools.  So you tend to get comfortable, and you, you know, and so I was at GE for twenty five.  And my kids all grew up in that area.  They went to school.  I gave them an opportunity to be successful and to have a stable home life.  So I never really considered leaving General Electric during my whole tenure there.  So I never interviewed for another job, although if I had gone out and interviewed for another job, I'm sure I could have gotten promoted and gotten into management and things of that sort.  But it wasn't my interest.  So--
Speaker 1: So you were more interested in research anyway?
Speaker 2: I was very much interested in research, yes.  But it turns out, around late '90s [1990s] I was working at GE, and I had a number of joint projects.  And they were things that were coming on, they were just starting to do new materials on--
Speaker 1: This is in the late '80s [1980s], not '90s [1990s], right?
Speaker 2: This is late, late '90s [1990s].
Speaker 1: Nineties [1990s]?
Speaker 2: Late, I left--okay, I'm sorry, late, you're right, late '80s [1980s], late '80s [1980s] 'cause I left GE in 1990, right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay, you're right.  In the late '80s [1980s], I had worked on a number of different projects at GE and started doing some joint work with younger colleagues.  And we had done some work around making some UV [ultraviolet] cured adhesive coatings.  And, again, like I say, I had worked on adhesion promoters, so I had made some materials, and we were trying those out.  And one of my colleagues went to a meeting and gave a presentation on these UV cured adhesive coatings.  And in the presentation--there were three of us working on it, my name was on the, on the slide as one of the co-authors of the presentation.  And I think that one of the companies, I think that one of the companies that recruited me, Corning, I think one of their employees may have been at this meeting, okay, because after that I got calls from a head hunter, saying that a very--he wouldn't tell me what company it was.  He said there's a company that wants to talk with you about a position, you know.  Well, I hadn't even thought about it, but at that time, I was kind of like getting a little fed up at GE anyway because of the politics and the way things had changed.  So I was vulnerable to a change, okay.  So I decided to take the job interview.  So I found out that it was Corning Incorporated.  So I took the job interview, went out to Corning and sat down.  And Corning was in the process of trying to hire, they had African Americans working there.  But I think they were interested in hiring someone to be in their management track, okay.  And that's what these companies do.  They don't promote from, very rarely do they promote from within.  They usually go out and try and bring somebody in.  And I saw it at GE too.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they don't wanna give anybody else hope, that's already there (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Exactly, and, you know, but so I took the interview and went to visit Corning and gave a presentation and went back to GE.  Then I got a call from the head hunter wanting to know, said, the company is very interested in you.  Are you interested?  I said, well, not really.  I'm not really interested, you know, 'cause I was, you know, my kids were just about going off to college, had gone off to college.  My wife was working and felt very secure, and she had a nice job.  And, you know, I was very comfortable.  And they said, well, the company wanna know what would it take for you to leave GE?  So I say, so I gave 'em a bold (laughter), a bold, a very bold number for salary, and I talked about my house.  I had a house there, you know, and I'd have to sell my house.  And I went through all these little things, and they say, okay.  So they gave me the salary I requested.  They bought my house.  They actually, they didn't buy my house, but I put my house on the market in Albany.  They paid for me to, to come there and--they paid all my travel, all my moving expenses.
Speaker 1: Where were you going now, to?
Speaker 2: I went to Elmira, New York.
Speaker 1: Elmira, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, they paid all my moving expenses.  They gave me a bonus for signing, just for signing only, they gave me a signing bonus which was about, maybe 10 or $15,000 or something of that sort.  They, when I went there, I rented a house 'cause I didn't have a, and they picked up the rent for about six months of that while I looked for a place to live.  And I end up renting a house for a year while we looked for a place.  And meanwhile, my house in Albany wasn't selling that well.  My boss thought that I would take and leave and go back to GE.  So what they decided to do, they bought, actually bought my house.  They sent a, they sent whoever they do to go and buy my house and, and this, this company that does this for corporations, okay.  So they bought my house, actually.  And so I got the money from my house.  So I was able to take and buy another house in Elmira.  So it was, it was fairly lucrative, the transition was fairly lucrative.  It was something like, you know, you say you get an offer you can't refuse.  So I just went in and told GE I was leaving.  I was, I was leaving.  And at the time, I didn't tell 'em where I was leaving to.  I told 'em I was just, I was just--I didn't tell 'em where I was, 'cause I--once I made a decision, I was very, very much afraid that they would block my transition to another job because I was responsible for millions of dollars worth of products at GE when I was there 'cause I was the chemist who had gone through, I was there twenty five years.  So a lot of the processes in the plant, I had taken and developed those processes.  And whenever they would have any kind of problem with those processes, they would call me because most if the documentation for those products, 'cause we would have to write something called pat--process letters, okay.  And all of the process letters for all of their chemicals and stuff had my name on it because I was the process chemist for over, you know, developed a lot of those processes and had, had maintained those processes.  So I was actually pretty valuable, you know, although at that time, my salary didn't reflect that because you tend to flatten out in salary when you've been at a company a long time.  And the only way you can get a higher salary is to move into management which I didn't wanna do.  So my salary was pretty flat over my last few years there.  So I got about, maybe a 30 percent bump in salary when I left GE and went to Corning, which was, you know, phenomenal at that time.  So, so I had no, I had no qualms about leaving.  And plus, my wife had been bugging me forever to get out of the cold Northeast, okay.  So I told her, honey, we're going South.  And she was very happy, but she didn't realize that Elmira is South (laughter) of Albany (laughter), but it's, but it was still in New York State, okay.  But the other, the other thing that was great is that I told the company that my wife was, had a very good job.  She liked her job, and they actually created a position for her as the EEO Affirmative Action officer for the whole company.  And so she went there in that, in a responsible job.  She reported to one of the vice presidents.  So actually, we were, we were a dual-career couple again.  Our kids were all gone off to college.  So we moved to Elmira, bought a big house.  She and I worked, both worked at Corning in very responsible jobs.  So it was like a new beginning, a new start.
Story_ID: 22388
Speaker 1: And Corning actually turned out to be a great company to work for because when we got to Corning, they're a small company, about a $6 billion company.  But they were family oriented and they weren't, they were not afraid to try new things.  When you're in a big corporation like GE, they have so many systems in place that, that they, they just don't, don't really push the envelope very much.  But Corning was willing to try a lot of new things.  And they had started recruiting underrepresented minorities.  And it was really a great experience for Sandra and I to go there and to have an impact on, on a lot of the changes that Corning made around diversity and inclusion and things of that sort.  So I have nothing but good things to say about my experiences at Corning.  They, they, everywhere I've been, there's been, been turmoil because being an African American, you can, you've probably figured out that you have things that happen because you are African American.  But, you know, I've been able to negotiate those all my life and try to stay focused and, and try to not allow those things to take and, and change who I am or change what my focus is in terms of--and I tell young people this all the time, if you get a job, you have to--two things you have to do, okay.  You have to understand the culture of the organization you're joining, and you have to work hard.  There's no substitute for hard work, and I always try and impress upon that.  And I think I've always worked hard throughout my career and try to learn new things and become, understand the culture of the organization that I'm working in.
Speaker 2: Now, what are some of the milestones at Corning, I guess?
Speaker 1: Hum?
Speaker 2: What are some of the milestones at Corning?
Speaker 1: The milestones?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: For the company?
Speaker 2: For you, you know, for you as you are there, 'cause you were there for how many years?
Speaker 1: Ten years, I'll say ten years.
Speaker 2: Ten years, yeah, so what were the highlights or the (unclear) (simultaneous) things that you did at Corning?
Speaker 1: Well, first I went there, I went there in a management, a management position, but I was still doing technical, technical management.  And, and I had projects that were very important projects.  I was working on developing new coatings for optical fibers which is, which I think they were interested in me because of the paper my colleague gave that dealt with new UV [ultraviolet] cured coatings because one of the important part of optical fibers was coating the glass to make it stable to all kinds of conditions.  So going, going in at Corning and being in that, and having a leadership position and having respect and having resources and things like that was very, very, a good part of, of my career, to have that kind of--so I enjoyed that.  I was able to take and join an organization, that, an organization that started at Corning, called "Awareness Quality Improvement Team".  Corning had a lot of, they were very big on quality.  So they had a lot of quality improvement teams for all aspects.  There was a women's quality improvement team.  There was, manufacturing had one, marketing, all kinds, all these different organizations could have quality improvement teams.  And that's where a group of employees get together and try to figure out how they're gonna take and make everything better.  Corning supported, they supported, had a very strong support of women, women engineers.  They were one of the first companies that made sure that women and men got the same salaries.  So, and they had a very strong organization that dealt with women's issues.  And the organization I joined called "Awareness Quality Improvement Team", AQIT, we were part of the research and development arm of, of Corning.  And one of the things we, we did, it brought all of the African American employees together in the R and D, okay, and as a quality improvement team.  And one of the things that, that we insisted upon is that management be part of that team.  So the team wasn't just African Americans.  It was management at all different levels, including, up to the vice president would sit on that team.  And we would try to figure out how can we make the company better and more and more accepting to African Americans.  And, and it turns out, it expanded to include any underrepresented minority and some of things, that's one of the milestones I'm very proud of having been a part of that because we completely changed the face of that organization in terms of, we started off by developing an intern program where we, we convinced the management that if we're gonna exist as an organization, we should have a budget, okay.  And that was the big turning point.  We should have a budget that we can do whatever we have to do to do the activities.  And they actually, the vice president of Research actually gave us a budget of $20,000 for this team.  And from that, we developed a recruitment program, a recruitment program for Corning to recruit underrepresented minorities.  We developed a summer intern program for underrepresented minorities that expanded to include all of the interns in Corning in which were white, black, under--all different nationalities.  So actually, when we developed our program, Corning Incorporated had us to take and direct their whole intern program for the corporation.  So we would, we would have, we developed a process by which we could bring students in.  We took the money we had, the budget we had and we developed relationships with four universities, four HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities] that had engineering programs and PhD programs in engineering.  And there were four schools at that time that had those type of, Florida A and M, what were the other ones?  One of the North Carolina universities.  I think it was maybe Morgan State [Morgan State University] or, but anyway, there were four of them.  And we had what we called campus managers, and we had, we'd take $25,000 in the budget that we would use to take and do outreach to those campuses.  And we developed intern programs we would go down on the campus and recruit their students in all different fields of science, technology, math or engineering, to come to Corning to work for the summer and, and it got to be a very--and we also convinced the company that we'd have to provide housing for these students and also ways for them to get back--'cause Corning is very rural.  So they, so we had a car that was dedicated to the students.  And one student would be a driver to drive the kids from the hotel we had taken and taken over, where the students who live, where they would live together.  And this got to be a very, very popular outreach program for the company in terms of recruiting 'cause a lot of those students came to Corning as interns, and they stayed on.  We developed a process by which, when the student would finish his internship for that summer, if he was successful, he would receive the same kind of review that we as employees got, in terms of his performance.  But at the exit interview, if a student did well, we would give 'em a job offer for the next summer.  So they went away from that interview with a piece of paper in hand which says, you can come back next summer.  You have a summer job.  And that was fantastic in terms of recruitment because the kids formed bonds with each other, and they looked forward to coming back for the summer.
Story_ID: 22389
Speaker 1: And one of the things that we would, we would mentor the kids in, we would mentor them and tell 'em, well, if you come into this program, your goal is to get a PhD.  So those kids would come back and even though, when they graduated, Corning would make them an offer to come and work, at the BS level, most of 'em would make the decision of going to graduate school.  So Corning, having invested in those kids, they would take and help to fund their graduate work.  And so they went to graduate school, and some of 'em were funded through the GEM Fellowship program.  Some of 'em were funded by being able to come back in the summertime and work and make money.  But Corning got to hire, hire those, and when those students finished, when they got their PhDs, they had been there.  They knew the culture, so they would just come back and work.  So at this point, Corning has a very large number of African American engineers and scientists that came in through that process.  And it's like developing a critical mass, you know.  So, and the thing I like most about this whole situation is the fact that when Corning, when, in 2000, I left Corning in 2000.  At that time, Corning's stock was very, very high, around $300 a share.  Because of the way the economy changed during that period of time, the shares of Corning stock went down, went down to like a dollar a share, from 300.  Corning had massive layoffs, but they maintained, in the R and D facility, a lot of those African American PhDs who were hired, were not part of the separation process.  And to this day, there is strong evidence that they have contributed greatly to the R and D organization, in terms of patents and things of that sort.  So I feel very proud at having been part of that and that process.
Story_ID: 22390
Speaker 1: Now, the other thing Corning did very well, as I said, diversity.  In the R and D, we set up diversity training for, the company set up training for the whole, all the employees.  There was a course that I took when I got there called "Men and Women as Colleagues".  And everybody in the corporation, plant, everybody had to take that course.  And what that course did, it made it safe for the women, like women engineers, you hear things going on in the plant and cat calls and things like that.  That completely stopped at Corning.  People developed respect and it was really an amazing adventure, the ten years I was there to see the changes that were made.  And it was made because the president of the company, Jamie Holton, it was a top-down situation where he was very strong about these things, and he insisted that, that his manager all, all take part in this activity.  So it was a top-down situation where, which can't happen in major corporations because they're so diffused.
Story_ID: 22391
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Observing is Sandra Parker Mitchell.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Tyrone Duncan Mitchell, T-Y-R-O-N-E, middle name, Duncan, D-U-N-C-A-N, last name Mitchell, M-I-T-C-H-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth, May 6, 1939, New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: My occupation is program director, program at the National Science Foundation.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is July 17, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Somewhere in Washington, D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia]
Speaker 1: The Skadden Arps law firm, I think downtown D.C.
Speaker 2: Skadden Arps law firm.
Speaker 1: And we're finishing an interview that we started about two weeks ago, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And here at the National Science Foundation.
Speaker 2: National Science Foundation, yes.
Story_ID: 22392
Speaker 1: Okay, so we, I think we're picking up in 1990 when you left General Electric to go to Corning.  So tell us about that transition?
Speaker 2: Okay, I, I left--well, actually, I was recruited from GE [Heneral Electric] to Corning [Corning Incorporated].  And at that point, I was, had been at GE for twenty five years, had just received my twenty five year pin at GE.  And during that time I'd never actually sought employment out of GE because it was a great place to work, and I was working in the laboratory which I enjoyed.  And my whole career was pretty much working as a scientist, as a research scientist.  I was approached by a head hunter and they said a Fortune 500 company wanted to speak with me, which, which I wasn't quite sure why my name was selected.  But I figured out that one of my colleagues had presented a paper at a conference, and I was one of the co-authors on the paper.  And apparently, that company had members in the audience, and the work I was doing had to do with, something UV cured coatings.  And apparently, this attracted the company and they hired a head hunter to, to solicit me to interview with the company.  I had no idea who the company as until I agreed.  I went to interview with the company.  And they, they interviewed me and apparently wanted to hire me and contacted me after I interviewed.  And I had no intentions of that time of leaving General Electric.  My children had just gone off to college.  So as my wife was working in, in the area, I was happy in my job.  And they asked me what would it take for me to leave General Electric.  And so I just told them all of the barriers to my leaving General Electric at that time, my wife was working, had a job she really loved.  I was a long-term employee at GE, you know, and making a decent salary.  And so I just told 'em what--and I had a house in the Albany area that we had been in for quite a while.  So I threw all these barriers at them, and, apparently, it was no problem because they offered me the large increase in salary that I requested to get me, you know, to the place where I thought I should have been.  Having, when you're with a company for a long term, your salary doesn't grow as fast as it ought to.  So I gave 'em a large number for my salary.  I told 'em about my wife being employed.  I also told 'em about my house.  So the company, in order to get me to, to join them offered me a bonus for signing, for coming on board and also made it easier for me to transition from one house to the next in terms of closing costs and stuff like that.  And my wife, who had a lot of good skills and was working at a very good job with the State of New York, they hired her to be EEO Affirmative Action officer for the company.  So we were both hired at managerial levels in the company.  And with that type of transition, it was kind of difficult to turn down the offer, especially since, having lived in upstate New York for twenty five years and being from New Orleans, my wife never really enjoyed the winters up there.  She, she tolerated them and learned to, learned to negotiate the winters by staying warm and things of that sort.  So when I got the offer, I told her we were going South, she was very enthusiastic, she was very excited about that because Elmira, New York is actually South of Albany, New York.
Story_ID: 22393
Speaker 1: So, so we, we went to Elmira, and moved, we relocated there and purchased a house.  So from there, it was--and our transition, there's something called a development associate which was like more or less a technical project leader, project leader, technical manager.  And I worked on new coatings for optical fibers, UV cured coatings for optical fibers while at Corning.  After about five years of working at that, I was, I received a promotion, so to speak.  I transitioned to another, to a more administrative job as a manager of technology assessment.  Corning had just started a technology transfer group in the company where they were expanding their research, research to be more global and also trying to take and help with the growth of the company because during that time Corning had grown, was growing rapidly because it had gotten to photonics.  It was the largest supplier of optical fibers in the world at that time and had, had gone to battle with companies like AT and T in terms of patents and actually won those patent fights over who invented certain aspects of optical fiber production.  They were, and they were very profitable and growing very rapidly.  In fact, the Research and Development part of Corning which is at Sullivan Park was growing so fast that they had a hard time keeping up with all the new areas.  So they were hiring a lot of people and building buildings, and the technology transfer area that I went to was, I worked for a guy who was the manager of technology transfer.  And he managed all of the technology transfer which included our foreign operations.  We had laboratories in France, in Japan and we bought a building in Russia and then established a laboratory in Russia.
Speaker 2: Now, this is 1997.  I just wanna make sure that, this is--
Speaker 1: This was like 1995--
Speaker 2: Ninety-five [1995]?
Speaker 1: Ninety-five [1995], '96' [1996].
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, all right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 1995, '96' [1996].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, which is when I transitioned from being a laboratory project manager to technology, to being a technology transfer manager.  And in my role as technology, as manager of technology assessment, I was mainly responsible for, one, the technology, technical library was, I managed that and also managed external, any external research that Corning was involved in that involved university, primarily, universities.  And--
Speaker 2: Now, what did the library aspect, did this--you're keeping track of the, of the various patents and--
Speaker 1: Well, Corning had--
Speaker 2: --research papers and that sort of thing?
Speaker 1: Corning had a tech, a very, very good technical library.  There was a librarian, and there was three or four workers in the library.  And mainly, purchasing the correct technical journals to cover all of the areas of science.  So, so the library's budget was very large, maybe, over $20,000 (unclear) [$200,000] where we maintained journals for the scientists.  We purchased databases for them to go on line and search for, and find, and use online journals.  The other thing is when I took over that position, I used the library to set up what I called a search process by which scientists and also my group could search to find new technology because, as I said, they were going to enter photonics, and they were growing so large that we didn't have all the resources inside of Corning to take care of all of the research that needed to be done.  So the scientists in Corning needed to partner with universities who were doing some of the cutting-edge research that we were trying to do in terms of, Corning did basic research, and they also had, they did development research.  So the library was instrumental in setting up that search process and getting and hire--and paying for the databases.  The other area of responsibility I had was Corning put out a journal since the history of the company of all of the, it took all of the papers published by Corning scientists and compiled them into a book which is sent out all over the world free.  It's called "Corning Research".  And so I was managing that process of getting all of the papers together and making sure that this book is published and that we had, and maintaining a database of all of the places, entities all over the world that we would mail this book out to each year as we got it published.  So, 'cause Corning scientists were encouraged to publish.  That's one of the unique things about Corning that I liked is the fact that a lot of companies, their work is highly proprietary.  Corning encouraged its scientists to publish in peer review journals.  And the process that made that work was the fact Corning had a very, very sophisticated legal department in terms of patenting its technology.  And when a scientist would invent something, Corning could get, could turn that patent around in a few months and get all of the work done in terms of getting the patent applied for, thus allowing the scientists to publish a lot of information.  So that was one aspect of the company that I thought was great, the fact that they encouraged the people to publish.  So my, the, the library, I managed the library.  I managed the Corning research information getting out to, to people all over the world.  And the other part was the external research program.  Corning, as I said, it was growing so rapidly that they needed external researchers to help with the research internally.  So our scientists would have, would want to take and connect with someone at a university who was doing fundamental research in their area.  And the barriers to that, there were a lot of barriers to companies working with universities.  And the main barrier had to do with intellectual property.  And the intellectual property part of that, of that research, universities were interested in publishing because in order to get a doctorate or degree, the work has to be publishable.  And the company was interested in confidentiality, and patent rights.  So in my role as manager of technology assessment, I fashioned what I call a generic patent agreement where I took a standard, a standard patent agreement used by the universities which had about maybe sixty or so different clauses in that patent agreement.  And I, I narrowed it down to about nineteen different clauses in that patent that the university had an interest in and the company had an interest in.  And I picked out the key things that each entity was really interested in and put that agreement together to the point where the patent attorneys inside of Corning signed off on it on this generic patent agreement that if the universities would agree to these terms, then they had no problem.  So I was able, during this period of time, to fashion a number of collaborations with universities whereas before, we would start these negotiations and the patent departments would hold it up and these things would never really get consolidated.  So I was able to generate a lot of new collaborations with universities during this period of time, using this generic patent agreement, which I, at that time, I was a member of the Technology and Transfer Society which is a national organization.  In fact, I was on the board, and I would give talks on this, this process to that society based upon the successes we had at Corning with this generic patent agreement.
Story_ID: 22394
Speaker 1: And that, that was one aspect of my job.  The other part of working at Corning that I really, really enjoyed is that the R and D organization or the company, in particular, was very, very strong in wanting to do diversity and to, and to foster the presence in the company of underrepresented minorities and women.  Corning was one of the first companies, one of the top companies that would take, started paying women equally, equal salaries to everybody else.  Corning had a lot of training programs, and unlike a large company like GE [General Electric], it was able to take, through the downward push by upper management to, to do some of these activities, they were able to take and do diversity and I say do it very well in terms of women and underrepresented minorities.  And one of the things that I feel very proud about is being part of the transition that Corning went through in terms of hiring more underrepresented minorities in their R and D organization.  We had an organization called "Awareness Quality Improvement Team" which had started back in the '90's [1990s] before I got there, by African Americans in the R and D organization.  And while there, I participated with this particular group in terms of, we set up--we had a number of goals, one was, we started a summer intern program which was very successful, such that the company asked the group to take and manage the entire summer intern program for the technical, for the technical part, for R and D for the company.  And we were very instrumental in bringing in underrepresented minorities and other interns and develop a process by which they can come in and do their research and be mentored.  So that was, so we did the intern program, and the other thing is, we developed a hiring process to--most companies will say, well, we can't find underrepresented minorities.  That's usually the standard line.  And we actually set up processes for Corning in how to hire underrepresented minorities.  And this group, inside of Corning, which was called "Awareness Quality Improvement Team" was made up of all of the African Americans in the R and D organization.  And one of the, one of the stipulations was that this organization would have to be populated by management throughout the whole management structure in R and D.  And that was the one thing in Corning that I think worked very well for the organization, is that they had, what's called Quality Improvement teams throughout the whole company.  And these teams were made up of people throughout all of management, from the lowest worker up to the top vice presidents, were on these different teams.  That way, all of these teams worked.  There was a women's, WUIT, Women's Quality Improvement Team.  There was the Awareness Quality Improvement Team.  There were all kinds of teams.  If there was an issue in Corning, you could set up an improvement team and populate it with all--and these problems got solved.  And, and so that worked very well.  And so this Awareness Quality Improvement team, we actually showed Corning how to hire underrepresented minorities, and based upon, on how business works, we convinced the vice president of the Research and Development team that this committee could not operate without--if it's gonna be a legitimate committee in the company, it had to have a budget because if you have a budget, then you can make decisions and do things.  So they provided the organization with a budget, I think something like $200,000 budget.
Story_ID: 22395
Speaker 1: Let me ask this question.  Who do you think or what group of individuals set the tone for this kind of culture at Corning?
Speaker 2: That's a good question and I'm glad you asked that because it came from the CEO, okay.  The CEO's name was Jamie Houghton, H-O-U-G-H-T-O-N, Jamie Houghton.  Now, Jamie Houghton, when we arrived at Corning, he was the CEO.  During the '90s [1990s], he retired and, and turned it over to other managers.  But at some point, when the company started doing poorly, he came back.  But Jamie Houghton was the key during the whole time we were there in making the diversity effort work because it was a top-down thing where he would, his managers were held to certain, certain guidelines.  And it was related to salary and things of that sort.  So he set the tone, and this is why I think it worked.  And, the fact that it was a five, about a $5 billion, three to $5 billion company.  But it wasn't as huge and humongous as General Electric and spread out.  So it was a well-managed company, and he could set the tone for the whole corporation.  And I think this is the key.  So all of his vice presidents would try to, would try to meet these goals that he set.  So it was, but I can also say that inside of the R and D organization, there were key people who also bought into his, his vision.  One I remember is Dr. David Morris, was one, and when I was there, the vice president of Research was Dr. Skip Denica (ph.).  And these two, I think these two people were really the key in the R and D organization who actually made some of the activities, activities work.  And, as I said, the Quality Improvement team had a budget, and we tried to show Corning how to recruit underrepresented minorities.  And that involved, we actually went out and formed relationships with historically black colleges and universities.  And since Corning recruit engineers, we picked the top five HBCUs, historically black colleges and universities, that had engineering programs.  And we had each of these school had, it was called a campus manager.  We set all this up in the R and D.  And the campus manager had a budget of $25,000 to go and do activities with each of these schools.  And that really worked very well because we could use that to recruit their students for, as interns.  And it was, it was a very successful program, and I think it's still going on now.  Now, this was back in, in the 2000s.
Story_ID: 22396
Speaker 1: I'm interested in, like who were the top five HBCUs in terms of science and technology in those days?
Speaker 2: Well, they'd try and pick schools that had advanced degree programs.  North Carolina A and T was one, I think Morgan State [Morgan State University].  Let me see if I can remember.  Florida A and M definitely was one of the schools, and they had a joint engineering program with Florida State that the state had set up there.  That's three.  Let's see, who was the other one?  Howard, of course, Howard University, of course, was one of them.  And there was another one.  North Carolina A and T, Morgan State, Howard, Florida A and M, and--I'm trying to think of some, maybe some around Atlanta.  I don't remember the fifth one.  Let's see.
Speaker 1: Not Morehouse [Morehouse College]?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't Morehouse.  It had to be an HBCU with an engineering program.  It wasn't Hampton [Hampton University].  I don't think it was Hampton.
Speaker 1: It wasn't Hampton?  Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't think it was Hampton.  I know North Carolina A and T was one for sure.  Oh, ghee, let's see, Florida A and M.
Speaker 1: Not Lincoln?
Speaker 2: Oh, was it Prairie View, no, I don't think it was Prairie View.
Speaker 1: Lincoln [Lincoln University]?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't Lincoln, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Baltimore, I--
Speaker 1: Well, okay, I thought I'd ask though 'cause--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but I know there's a fifth one.
Speaker 1: Not Xavier [Xavier University], not Xavier down--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Not, okay, 'cause I know they're big in pharmacy, but I don't know what else.
Speaker 2: Right.  But anyway, so they set up relationships with these schools, and we would go down and recruit the students and bring 'em to Corning for the summer.  And one of the, one of the keys to that program is that these students, we got the best and the brightest from these schools.  They would come up for the summer, and the way we set up the program is that the students would all, we rented out a hotel for the summer.  The students all lived together so it was like creating a critical mass of these students.  So they bonded with each other, and we monitored their research activities.  And if a student wasn't having a good, a good experience, we would change immediately.  They would come to our committee and we would change their assignment immediately and, which allowed them to move to--because sometimes the, the mentors that we would choose, which were Corning scientists, and most of 'em were white.  They, they might not have interacted very well with the students for various reasons.  And we would not leave the students in those situations, and we'd just end up moving the students.  So these students couldn't wait to come back the next year.  And we set up processes to help that.  One, in particular, is that when the students would leave for the summer, after the summer was over, we would give them a review liked we'd review any, any other Corning employee.  They'd have to have an exit interview and a review of their performance.  And if they performed well, we would make them a job offer.  It would be like a job offer for the next summer.  So they'd leave the company with a letter saying they could come back the next year and work.  So this made it much easier to get, to retain the students and a lot of the students did their, you know, from sophomore through senior, would do their internships at Corning.  And Corning at that point wanted to hire them 'cause that was the whole goal.  That was the thing that would convince, that the company was interested in hiring more underrepresented minority engineers.  But these students were well coached and had goals, career goals in mind.  So almost, most of them would opt to go to graduate school.  And the ones that Corning was interested in hiring, they would actually track them through graduate school, would also contribute to the GEM fellowship program to, so that these students had GEM fellowships that were sponsored by Corning.  And most of them, when they got their PhDs, they'd have a job offer immediately at Corning, after they got their PhDs.  So this was really a great way of recruiting underrepresented minority scientists, African Americans, in particular, and even today, some of those people who came through that program are still employed by Corning and, as scientists.  So it, that was another aspect of working at Corning that was really enjoyable.  In order, to be able to make a, to contribute to making a difference in the company, actually developing a diversity program and like I, I left Corning in 2000.  It's 2012, and the company is still very much doing a lot of those, those activities.  And if you attend the NOBCChE meeting, National Organization of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers [NOBCChE], Corning has a very strong presence at that meeting.  And this is because of the work of the Awareness Quality Improvement team over the years in getting Corning involved in and to stay involved.  So many of Corning's scientists have received awards from NOBCChE for outstanding, being outstanding, doing outstanding work.  And the company stays engaged.  So that, I think is something I feel very, very good about.
Story_ID: 22397
Speaker 1: That's not necessarily true for GE [General Electric] though, is it?  I mean when you left GE, a lot of the things that you started--
Speaker 2: When I left GE, you know, like I said, it's such a defused company in terms of its business is so, it's almost like every division or business in GE is like a separate company.  And they pioneered this SBU concept that a lot of companies adopted back in the '70s [1970s], '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s].  SBUs stands for Strategic Business Unit.  Each of the entities became a strategic business unit in GE, and that operated like a small company whereas they would take and promise a certain profit to the main company.  And if they met those goals, then they got, they were able to get money for growth and things of that sort.  So, and so they operated like separate, so it depended on who the head guy was.  So that the head of GE could not dictate across the whole company that we are going to do diversity.  GE was very good at following the federal laws and guidelines and things of that sort because it's a big company.  And when Civil Rights came into being and the companies had to take and abide by Civil Rights laws, GE was excellent in doing that because their, they were, their fingers were so broad in terms of government funding that they had to make sure that they were in compliance with all the federal regulations to get government contracts.  So that was very, based upon that, GE was a good employee of underrepresented minorities based upon that and trying to get balance in some of their businesses.  And I think you could have some businesses that didn't have that many underrepresented minorities.  Then you have some that had a lot depending upon the goals or missions of those.  So, so if you started something in GE, you start it a particular part of GE, but it all depends on the management structure.  If the management changes, that could be, because of budgetary reasons, that could be cut very, very quickly.  But like I say, it was, working for a big company was an experience, you know, and I enjoyed my time at GE.  And like I say, the processes they have in place are, they try to be fair across the board.  But, but in terms of growth in the company, it's, you have to take and be a company man in order to take and--you can't, you have to go through all of the training programs.  Big companies have their own training programs, and you have to be selected to go through their training programs to, to go up through management.  And that has a lot to do, it doesn't only have to do with your own expertise.  It has to do a lot with politics and things of that sort.  So, you know, it, like I say, there're opportunities, you know, if you wanna take and become a company man and do the things you have to do.  But most of my career, I was, I was a nerd, let's say a nerd.  I loved working in the lab.  I loved working in chemistry, doing chemistry--
Speaker 1: Just finish your sentence out.
Speaker 2: Okay, I loved doing chemistry and so, and I loved working with students and things of that sort.  So I really enjoyed my time, but to go to Corning and get the management experience and to do some of these other things and to actually put in some processes that worked and are continuing to work, is quite, is an accomplishment that I'm very proud of, to be able to have been part of that.
Story_ID: 22398
Speaker 1: I think it was, Tuskegee [Tuskegee University] was the school you were trying to think of earlier, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right.  That was the fifth school, Tuskegee was the fifth school.
Speaker 1: So that made, North Carolina A and T, Morgan State [Morgan State University], Florida A and M, Howard [Howard University] and Tuskegee.
Speaker 2: Tuskegee, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, in 2000, when you were age sixty one, you joined the National Science Foundation.  Now, why, now, Corning sounds like such a great place to work.  I mean did you retire from Corning or what happened?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't retire from Corning.  It's, I don't know how to say this, but wherever you go, you tend to wear out your welcome (laughter), okay.  You, you, if you have--there are changes.  There's always political changes in the wind everywhere you go.  And that's why I try and advise young people to learn the culture of the place where you're working.  And Corning, when I left was trans--it had grown considerably over the ten years I was there because it went to photonics and optical fibers had taken off and telecommunications.  And they were the largest fiber manufacturer in the world.  So doing very well.  The stock had risen to something like $300.00 a share at that time, so it was really flying along very well.  Well, there were political, there's politics in the air, okay.  The company was transitioning.  They had foreign laboratories, like I say, in Japan and France and in--Japan, France and the U.K.[United Kingdom].  And they had built optical fiber plants in the U.K., I think in Japan.  Corning, when the Cold War ended and a lot of other things happened, there was, Corning, Russia had a lot of scientists who were unemployed.  And a lot of these scientists were in the area of physics and this area.  Corning took advantage of that opportunity to set up an entity in Russia.  They bought a building and hired, for $100,000, they hired like, you know, fifty to one hundred scientists and set up their own Corning entity.  And that was part of my responsibility when I was doing technology and transfer, was to take and help to, to manage that--my boss was the manager of those laboratories.  But I would help with the, any type of visits we had, communication with the scientists in Russia.  I would help with a lot of that.  Well, there was, there was a, my boss had this plan by which he would transition to another position that managed all the international, all of the labs that were brought.  And the technology transfer area I was in was gonna be scavenged, okay, 'cause they were moving to--so, my boss came up with a plan to do this.  And with the politics he was positioned to take and be the one to get this top position.  But at the, for some reason they decided to give it to one of the guys out of the French lab, okay.  And my boss who had contributed a lot to Corning in terms of developing the first fiber optic plant in U.K..  When they moved to Japan, he went over there and managed the Japanese lab.  So for all of this work he had done--he had a PhD in physics, they brought him back as a technology assessment manager, which was really a holding pattern because he was probably going toward being a VP [Vice President]of some kind.  But then some of, you know, when your mentors, when your, your mentors retire, then other people's mentors become, you know.  So there were some transitions going on at that time, and my boss didn't like some of the transitions, and so he retired.  And, and he was my mentor, okay.  So, so after he retired, I, I--the organization, the technology transfer organization was that, his position was really vacated, but my position was still, was still manager of technology assessment.  Then the person who took over, where the people in my group would move under another person, another manager, they started changing things, you know.  And, so my title changed from manager of technology assessment to manager of technology outsourcing.  And I was given the job of running a small business in the R and D.  Corning was, was selling a lot of its services.  It's a glass company, and they had developed a lot of processes and ways to analyze glass.  And so these tests that they did were, they weren't done anywhere else in the world except at Corning.  So they set up a business whereby they sold these services to outside companies that were dealing with glass and glass products and ceramics and things of that sort.  And so I was, the advantage of technology outsourcing, and given the job of going out finding these new businesses like that.  So it was a small business that brought money in R and D.  And not being my forte, 'cause I'm basically a scientist by training, I'm not a marketing person, okay.  I looked at doing something different, okay.
Story_ID: 22399
Speaker 1: And one of the things I thought, I always wanted to do, well, all my whole career, I wanted to teach in a university.  I wanted to, and I thought having been in industry for thirty-some years, I thought that--and having worked with the interns and with young people, I saw it as a value to take and go and teach at a university and try to bring these skills and bring these connections I had and try to help those students to plan their careers, whether they wanted to go into research or industry or whatever they wanted to do, and to be aware of the landscape.  And I thought I could help them with that in becoming, into making that transition and understanding what is required when you go to work anywhere, you know, any kind of work that you go to do.  You know, you have to, you have to understand the culture that you're going into, and the other thing I always tell students is that you, there's no substitute for working hard.  You have to work hard.  Okay, there's just no way to get around that.  And I always point out that even though I've been in my career for all these years, I still end up working nights and weekends because you have goals to meet, and you have to meet those goals.  And it becomes, you know, if you're self-motivated, then you'll do that.  And a lot of young people that I mentor have done quite well and been successful by following that advice.  So I thought I wanted to do something differently.  And so I got, I worked to get my, put a CV together, and I started sending it out.  And I sent it to, I, I was, I guess I was a little naive because I sent it to two schools that I thought I definitely would like to, to work at, that I thought had the infrastructure, and I thought that I could really bring a lot of value to that school as a research scientist and as a chemist and as a person that worked with young people and a person who had contacts and knew the industrial area and knew, and, and having the technology transfer stuff, I had a lot of contacts at universities and so I put together a CV, and I sent it to two schools.  Maybe I should have blanketed it, sent it to more schools.  But I sent it to two schools that I was interested in, two HBCUs [Historically Black Colleges and Universities] that I was interested in transitioning to.  And to my surprise, I never heard back from them.  And after a few months, I called them, and they said, oh, we lost your, must have misplaced your CV.  And they, they said, send us another copy.  So meanwhile, when this is, when this was going on, I had served on a number of boards, okay.  And I was on a board of, when I was at Corning, I served on the Center for Advanced Materials processing.  It's a board, it was an entity at Clarkson University that was funded by the state.  And the State of New York funds a number of different centers, about ten or twelve centers throughout the state.  And they get something like a million dollars a year or something in that ballpark, and New York Centers of Excellence.  And each of these centers are located at universities throughout the State of New York.  And they all have an expertise that, that university will take and, area they'd work in, to try and develop technology in the state and make jobs in those regions that they're located.  Well, Clarkson, being in upstate New York, had a Center for Advanced Materials Processing.  When I was on the board of that center, one of the things Corning was a supporter, and in my technology assessment capacity, I managed a lot of those activities in terms of giving funding.  So I managed the funding that went to these different university centers, like there was one at Cornell, one at SUNY Albany [State University of New York, Albany], and if part of the money that I'm, part of the Vice President of Research's budget, then I managed those activities and sat on the boards and things of that sort.  Well, the director of the Center for Advanced Materials Processing had, had stepped down as the director of that.  He had been there the whole time I was there, and I know him, knew him very well.  And he had come to NSF [National Science Foundation] to do a rotation as a program director, as a program director in the chemistry division.  And when I was waiting to hear from these universities, he contacted me.  He said, Ty, you really should look at doing a rotation as a program director at NSF, as a rotator 'cause they brought in rotators.  NSF brings in people from universities to come in and spend a couple of years helping with the, with the review process and funding process.  But they didn't, they didn't recruit many people from industry.  And my, my friend from Clarkson, what was his name?  Ray, Ray--I've forgot his name at the moment, he, he actually encouraged me to send my CV to NSF.  And when I did, they invited me in to give a talk.  I came in, and I talked about some of the research I had done at Corning.  I also talked about the management, some of the management activities I had done.  And, and lo and behold, I got an offer from them to come and be a rotator at NSF.  And meanwhile, I still hadn't heard from the universities that I was interested in transitioning to.  So I decided to do that for a couple, for at least two years--it was a two-year appointment, while I sought out the other part of, of going, becoming part of a university faculty.  And after working there, I enjoyed the work, and I saw an opportunity to really, to really make a difference in some of the funding activities.
Story_ID: 22400
Speaker 1: Now, so you had to move from New York to D.C. at this point?
Speaker 2: At that point, at that point, when I decided to make that transition, my wife, Sandra, was still working in the Corning, Elmira area.  She's had a spectacular career in some of the things she's done.  She actually left Corning before I did, okay.  She left Corning and took a job with the county, with the County of Chemung, as the executive director of the commission on human relations for the County of Chemung in New York State.  And, and so she was working in that position with the county, doing a lot of, you know, really, really great, exciting things that called upon, that called upon her background which was, she's had a background in, as a scientist in terms of, in terms of being a chemist.  She worked in public policy with New York State.  She's worked with, she was a lobbyist for a while.  Well, then she lobbied the state, New York State legislature.  She spent a couple years in law school.  She worked in Corning as the EEO affirmative action supervisor.  So when she went to work for the county, that brought all her skills because she was managing the, the commission on human relations for the whole County of Chemung.  And this commission was set up back during Civil Rights, when the Civil Rights--they had these commissions all over New York State that were dealing with human rights issues in the counties of New York State.  There was a commission that was in Ithaca, New York and one in Elmira, New York.  And these were the last two commissions that remained in the whole State of New York since that time.  And so she was managing the one in Elmira, which was very effective.  So when I left, when I left Corning, I took this temporary position at the National Science Foundation.  So I was actually commuting between Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] and Elmira, New York.  So I would take and, I would drive on Friday, I would leave the National Science Foundation and drive back to Elmira, which was about five hours, spend the weekend, and depending on the time of the year, if it was fall time, I'd go back and rake leaves for the weekend.  If it was wintertime, I'd go back and I'd shovel snow for the weekend (laughter) because Sandra was still there.  And, and we, the whole time during our marriage, I was Mr. Outside, and she was Ms. Inside.  So anything that went on outside of the house, I took care of, and that included shoveling snow.  So after I left I had to, I set up with, I had to set up with someone to provide grass cutting during the year.  And so I paid somebody to do all of the lawn and trimming.  And actually, I had to pay somebody to come and shovel snow.  So the first time snow would fall, when I wasn't there, Sandra would not leave the house unless everything was taken care of outside.  So someone would go by and shovel and the plow would go back.  We were very, had a very large house, and a long driveway.  So all that was taken care of, and I felt very comfortable while being away during the week.  So I actually moved to D.C., got a bachelor's pad, which I called a bachelor's pad, but she would visit me (laughter).  She would visit me, so it wasn't really a bachelor's pad, okay.  She would make random visits--no, no.  She would come down from, from Elmira and visit.  And she would visit one weekend out of the month.  The other weekends, I would drive back on Friday.  I'd drive to Elmira on Friday and drive back on Monday.  It's five hours, so I would leave around 11:00 o'clock on Friday, to go home and Monday, I would leave, say about 4:00 in the morning, and I'd be back to work by 9:00.  So I did this for about two, at least two years.  She would visit, but since she was a Corning retiree, she could still ride the Corning jet.  So she could take the Corning plane from Elmira to Newark [New Jersey].  So when she would visit, she would take the Corning plane, she would just sign up and take the Corning plane.  It was free 'cause she was a retiree.  And she would fly from, say on a Friday morning, she'd fly, 7:00 o'clock flight to Newark.  Then she'd take a train from Newark to D.C., and she'd spend the weekend.  And since she was still working, she would, she would take, take the, sign up to take the Corning flight back so you can do the roundtrip from Newark to Elmira.  So she would actually take a train from D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia], at 3:00 a.m. on Monday morning.  I'd drive her to the train station.  So 3:00 a.m., and by 8:00 a.m., she was in, at Newark Airport, and she would take the company plane back to Elmira, one hour.  And at 9:00 o'clock, her car would be there, so she'd just go to work.  So she did this for a while, so she was still working, going to work, be to work by 9:00.  And so we had this going on for about at least two years.  And after about two, two and a half years, my, my two years was almost up at NSF, but they offered me a chance to become a permanent federal employee.  So I accepted that and transitioned from a temporary federal worker, rotator, to--actually, I went there as what's called a, the program is VSEE, as a visiting scientist.  I was a visiting scientist.  So I transitioned from that to a permanent employee.  And after about a year of that, Sandra decided, enough of this.  And so she took retirement from, from the county.  And she actually stayed another year after she retired because we had a house in Elmira.  And we realized we had to sell our house and things like that.  So since she was Ms. Inside, she had the responsibility of getting the house ready for the market.  So (laughter), so she was able to get a, come up with some unique activities in order to prepare the house for, to be marketable.  One in particular was that my daughter had a friend who was a carpenter, unemployed carpenter.  So she actually--and she was living in New Orleans.  She came up with this idea to take and fly this guy up to Elmira.  He was unemployed, and she would give him, she gave him plane fare and he could bring his tools, and she would give him breakfast, lunch and dinner.  He would stay with us, and he would do all of the work that we needed done on the house.  He did all kinds of, fixed the roof, I mean he was just a wonderful carpenter.  And she paid him for it, of course.  She asked what his rate was.  She gave him his rate, but the interesting thing is, she gave him his rate, and then she subtracted his transportation (laughter), all the things, I mean real busi, real business person, okay.  So during that period of time, she was able to get the house very marketable.  And we put it on the market, and sold the house.  And she moved down to, to D.C.  And I had to take and get a larger apartment because she wanted to bring her stuff, okay.  So I had to have some place to put her stuff in my, in my crib (laughter).  So she moved down, and that's, that's been the journey from Corning to NSF.  And now, I've been at NSF for, since 2000, about twelve years now, as a program director.
Speaker 1: So she made the transition down in 2002?  Was that--
Speaker 2: No, she came out 2003, I think it was 2003, 2004, transitioned out.
Story_ID: 22401
Speaker 1: All right.  So, you became the program director in the chemistry division at the National Science Foundation?
Speaker 2: Right, I was the program officer, program officer for the first two years.  And then when they hired me permanently, I became a program director in chemistry, running one of the programs in the chemistry division.  It was a program, I was in a program called Organic and Macromolecular chemistry.  And that was divided into two parts, synthesis and dynamics.  And one of my colleagues ran the synthesis side, and I ran the dynamics side of that program.  And it was about a, I think it was about, the total program was like 38 to $40 million.  So my side of the program was about 18, 18 million [dollars] funding.  That was the funding amount for that particular program.  And so we'd get proposals in, and those proposals, we would take and have them reviewed by external reviewers.  They would send their comments back, and the program director would take those, take the comments, read the comments and then rank the proposals, based upon what the external review would say and then determine the funding, how we would fund those proposals.  And we would prepare the budgets and things of that sort.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so I guess there was a cycle of certain times you--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, well, you know, in the National Science Foundation, we have many different ways we receive proposals from people who are seeking money.  One is solicitations where they put out a solicitation and it has certain specifications.  Another is announcements.  They had, we could put out announcements that we're gonna take and run a competition in certain areas and please send us your ideas in terms of preliminary proposal or whatever.  And the other way is we had what we call unsolicited proposals.  And almost all of the divisions in the areas of engineering, biology, chemistry, astronomy, math, physics, all of these different areas in the National Science Foundation, STEM fields, have what they call unsolicited proposals.  And those are proposals that come from single investigators, a person at a university, for example or at a company or wherever, at a museum, wherever, see, look at NSF's [National Science Foundation] website.  And they look at all of the things we fund, and they look at what they're doing.  And they say, okay, what I'm doing fits into this area.  So then they would make a phone call to the program director in that area and say, hey, I'm doing this type of work, and this is what I'm doing.  Can I send you a White Paper or can I talk to you about what I'm doing.  And based upon that conversation, we would say, sure, you can send a proposal to my program.  And that's called an unsolicited proposal.  And they are submitted, whenever the program decides that they wanna have these proposals submitted.  So some programs might say, we wanna get all proposals in November, okay.  And then the people who are submitting to that program have to submit by that time.  Chemistry, where I was, we had two times we can receive unsolicited proposals, July and January--no, when I first started, actually, it was a window that lasted for six months.  So between July and January of any year, anybody out there who wanted to submit a proposal to chemistry could submit a proposal, okay.  After January, they couldn't submit a proposal.  From January through July, they couldn't submit a proposal.  But during that period of time, we would have to take and evaluate those proposals and decide how we were gonna fund them.  This is called a window, submission window, okay.  And it varies over the Foundation.  Some people's submission windows might be a month long, and during that period of time, they would accept proposals.  Outside of that window, they won't accept proposals.  We had a six-month window.  Over the time, I've been with NSF, that has changed.  We all, we went from having a six-month window to having two, one-month windows.  And the one-month windows was like, one was in July.  People could submit these unsolicited proposals throughout the month of July.  After that, they couldn't submit any more.  Then we had a month of November, and then people submitted proposals in the month of November and after that.  So we actually broke it up into two times during the year.  So we were hoping to get half of our proposals in July and the other half in November.  And they gave options to, to the submitters to, if they missed July, they can come in November, things of that sort because when proposals are submitted, they have to be compliant with this document called the "Grant Proposal Guide".  It's like the bible for submitting proposals to the National Science Foundation.  Every proposal we get has to follow the guidelines in the Grant Proposal Guide, okay.  So in addition to that, programs have their own specific guidelines.  So the submitter has to understand the Grant Proposal Guide and also look at the program they wanna submit to and see what other, what are the requirements for that particular program, okay.  So these proposals, we went from a six-month window to two, one-month windows.  And all of these, these ways of getting proposals has increased the workload of the program directors because the manpower at NSF is very flat, okay.  One of the things that, one of the reasons NSF is, is very, is valued by the government is that we put very little money in overhead, okay.  Most of the money NSF gets goes out to the community in terms of funding for research of some kind in science, technology, engineering or math in the STEM areas.  Most of the money goes there.  We have, we have some money for, so the staff has been pretty flat.  And a few year--NSF has canvassed the government for more, a little more money to increase our staff size.  And we have gotten money over the years to increase our staff size, but it's not nearly, it hasn't--the staff size has not been going up as rapidly as the requests for funding has been going up.
Story_ID: 22402
Speaker 1: Now, the push in recent years to increase, you know, America's, I guess--
Speaker 2: Competitiveness.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in STEM areas--
Speaker 2: Right, um-hum.
Speaker 1: --has the, I know the funding has gone up, but has it, has politics had anything to do with it in terms of--
Speaker 2: Oh,--
Speaker 1: Does it matter if it's Republican or Democrat in the White House?
Speaker 2: That's interesting, that's the interesting thing about it--one would think it would matter.  But we've had, NSF [National Science Foundation] has been, it was founded in 1950, okay.  And we've enjoyed--and it's part of the Executive Branch.  That's the other thing.  NSF is part of the Executive Branch of the government.  But we've enjoyed support from Democrats and Republican presidents over the years.  They're, you know, politics plays a part in, when they start talking about the federal budget and where to cut, okay, and that's where we get thrown into the hopper with everybody else, but fortunately, the area that NSF covers is very important to the success of this nation.  And the data and all of the past history in terms of the number of Nobel prize winners that come out of, that are funded by NSF, chemistry, in particular.  The last few Nobel Prize winners in chemistry have been funded by NSF.  So based upon these successes and the number of businesses that have come about because of research funding that NSF has done, you know, the Internet, all these type of things, NSF has played a role in some of these, some of these activities in terms of the funding that goes out to people who have worked on these things.  So, based upon that track record, we get good support from, from both parties.  And, but we do get thrown in the hopper with everybody else.  When it comes time to cutting the federal budget, nobody is left untouched.  And, and NSF is, but we've been fortunate in that we're not, the cuts to NSF has not been as deep as to other parts because I think Congress recognize that we, we are a very important entity.
Story_ID: 22403
Speaker 1: Yeah, you just wanted to clear up some of the transition from Corning [Corning Incorporated] to NSF [National Science Foundation], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, basically, when I decided to go to NSF, I took a leave of absence from Corning and made the transition to NSF.  And after two years, when NSF offered me a permanent position, I actually retired from Corning at that point and then stayed on at NSF.  So I am currently a retiree, I guess from, sort of retired from GE [General Electric] and a retiree from Corning.  And (laughter) will probably be a retiree from NSF at some point.  So, it's, which is interesting because my wife has done three retirements also (laughter).
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: She's, she's in her third one.  I'm just in my second one.
Speaker 1: Well, that's interesting.  I, I wonder, I was wondering.  I think I asked the question before we started, but were you part, when they hired you, what was--did you participate in or were you a part of a diversity effort of NSF in 2000?
Speaker 2: When I was hired?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I could have been, but I hardly, you know, I have--most places I've been hired, I am sure in somebody's mind I was part of a diversity effort.  But I think, most places I've been hired, my skills have, I brought more skills than probably a competitor--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Let's say if they were, if, if--when Corning was trying, when Corning was hiring, hired me, I'm sure they had African American scientists on their staff.  And I'm fairly sure that they were looking at not only the chance to hire an African American into their management structure, okay, because when I went to Corning, I guess, I know I was the first African American in their management structure in R and D [Research and Development] and 150-year history of the company, okay.  So I don't like first, you know, I don't like, because I look at being the first in anything is really a negative thing because, you know, we should have been there a long time ago (laughter), okay.  So, but anyway, but I'm pretty sure, it was never stated that, but I'm pretty sure that in the history of, 150-year history of the company when I got there, I was probably the first African American that went into the management ranks, okay.  So based on that, perhaps it was a diversity hire in that respect.  But I brought skills that had to do with some of the things that they were interested in expanding, like they had very few polymer chemists in their R and D when I got there.  And so I was a, I was really a rare bird at Corning because they had hired a lot of engineers and physicists and people like that, and not many polymer chemists.  And so I was probably one of the first polymer chemists they hired in the work on coatings.  NSF, when I got to NSF, I don't think it was a diversity hire because, you know, there was another African American scientist, and they had had a number of African American scientists in chemistry who were very, very well known throughout the chemistry community.  So I doubt seriously whether it was a diversity hire so to speak.
Story_ID: 22404
Speaker 1: Well, maybe I asked the question wrong 'cause what I'm trying to figure out, were African Americans well represented at NSF [National Science Foundation] when you started?
Speaker 2: Ah--
Speaker 1: And further were you a part of strategizing ways to attract more African American participation in terms of the funding and everything else, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes, well, that, that's a different question--
Speaker 1: 'Cause we know we live in American, and it's--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --been making a trans, it's making a, it's still trying to make a transition to some kind of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you have to understand NSF, okay.  And NSF prides itself on hiring the best, okay.  And that means a lot of different things to a lot of different people.  But I think there's been a trans, there've been African Americans hired at NSF throughout the whole foundation.  There's a very large, very large contingency of African Americans at the administrative level in NSF.  It's a very, very huge number of African Americans, predominantly female at the administrative level in NSF.  But in terms of the program directors, it depends upon the--see, as you come down through the foundation, there's directorates, that's right under the, right under the head is doctorates.  And the doctorates are divided into divisions.  And the divisions usually represent a discipline or part of a discipline, okay.  So when you get down to the division, you're hiring, your hiring is primarily centered around the division director and the people who work for the division director making suggestions on people to bring in, in the rotator position, okay.  And the rotators come in, and they go out.  It's a rotation, okay, and every once in a while one would jump off and become a permanent, okay.  But it doesn't happen that often because like I said, the permanent staff is fairly flat, okay.  So to get underrepresented minorities into these divisions is probably fairly difficult because now you're talking about a small number and, and, you know, so the chemistry community, the number of African American faculty members, they like to hire faculty members.  And not only do they like to hire faculty members, in the discipline areas, we hire almost exclusively people who are research active, okay, because one of the keys to NSF in reviewing proposals and in taking and making sure that the, we're funding the right technology as technology is moving, the rotator program is designed to bring in people who are at the cutting edge of the science that we're funding today, okay.  So that's one way we keep it fresh in terms of bringing in people who are at the cutting edge of the research.  They come in and spend a couple of years and help us to decide, you know, okay, this is, this is an old area.  We don't need to be funding this anymore.  This is a new area.  We need to be putting money here because this is going forward, that sort of thing.  So you're getting down to a point where there's not that many, the pool of people to draw upon is not that great.  So being an African American, I can help in that respect in taking and helping to identify people.  And that happens with other groups, other ethnic groups.  Women have been very successful in NSF in doing that.  The number of women is, is, in some, a lot of these organizations, has grown tremendously.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think before you came to NSF, they had their first woman director, right, and then I think Samuel Massey was the first black director of NSF--
Speaker 2: Right, Samuel Massey.
Speaker 1: --back in the '80s [1980s], right, that was back in the '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: Right, that's correct.  And when I came, there was a woman director, right.  And there hasn't been one since.  But there have been, in fact, a woman division director hired me in the chemistry division.  We had a female division director when I was hired which--
Speaker 1: Now, when you were hired, I think the president was, was it George Bush, yet or was it the last year of Bill Clinton?
Speaker 2: It was 2000, so George Bush hadn't been elected yet.
Speaker 1: That was an election year, yeah, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was election year, right.
Speaker 1: So President Clinton--
Speaker 2: Clinton was on his way out, right?  George Bush was coming in.  That's right.
Speaker 1: Right, okay, so we were talking about before we broke, we were talking about the increase in funding and the funding, and there's a goal.  I think there's a President's Plan for Science and Innovation Funding goal.
Speaker 2: Well, let me just make, let me finish up this other discussion we were having.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: So, so I could have sort of an impact on helping them to identify African Americans in particular who might qualify to come in as a rotator.  One of the other things I think that I could, I think I've had a big impact on is, is, as a program director, we all have the responsibility to fund the best research, okay.  And another thing that NSF is interested in is not funding, putting all the money in one area like, the big schools have the most resources.  They hire the best people, they think, the best people, the top students, etc.  So they tend to dominate when it comes to getting funding and things like that.  And one of the things that we're charged with as program directors, they have a balanced portfolio of what we fund.  So we try to fund big schools, small schools, women, underrepresented minorities.  So I think I have had an impact on doing that and trying to have a balanced portfolio.  So that's a way that most programs, a lot of program directors, not just myself, but a lot of program directors take this seriously.  And based on that, underrepresented minorities get funded, women get funded and my colleagues, regardless of, you know, what their backgrounds are, they take this seriously, and we work very hard at, at making sure that we have a very diverse portfolio of what we fund.  So in that, that respect, but I, I have, I think I can make a difference 'cause I know more.  I have more contacts in terms of being part of NOBCChE so, over the many years.  I've been part of it since, almost since its founding.  So I'm more aware of African American scientists in industry and in the government and in academia than a lot of my colleagues who may not be aware.  So I'm able to take and, and bring, bring that skill and help with that.  And I think I have.
Story_ID: 22405
Speaker 1: Yeah, in 2004, you received the Equal Employment Opportunity Achievement Award from the National Science Foundation Chemistry Division, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think that had a number of, that had to do with a number of activities that I was doing at that time.  One was when, when I joined chemistry.  I was interested in helping with getting more African American and other underrepresented minority reviewers because in order to diversify our reviewer pool and panels that we used, we needed to identify more people like that.  So one of my colleagues who was there before me, Dr. Joan Frye, had kept a list of these in a spreadsheet of African American scientists and engineers.  And working with Joan, I was able to, I actually got a summer intern to come in and set up an Access database, putting all of these names that we had gathered of African American and other minority scientists and engineers, chemists in particular, in a database which I think contributed to being able to put more of, of these type of persons as, use more of these type of persons as reviewers on our proposals.  So, that was one of the activities, I think that I participated in.  The other was the, NSF [National Science Foundation] had a summer intern program.  And I would participate with the summer intern program, having set up and been part of forming some intern programs at Corning [Corning Incorporated], this was a thing I felt I could really make contributions to.  So I, during the early parts of my time in NSF, I always had a summer intern I was working with to help with the work in chemistry.  So I think with these activities I was nominated by my, probably my division directors to get this award that you were mentioning.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell us about, in 2006, it says that you became a fellow with the American Association for the Advancement of Science.  Now, what is the American Association for the Advancement of Science, and what does it mean to be a fellow?
Speaker 2: Oh, and it's a national organization that that incorporates all fields of science.  And they have an annual meeting, AAAS meeting every year, where they cover all different topics of science and engineering, even medicine and has a very large membership.  And they name people who have accomplished, have accomplished certain things in their careers.  You can become a fellow based upon, in your area.  They are separated into different divisions.  For example, there's a group that handles chemistry and one that handles physics and you can get elected as a fellow in your respective discipline.  And there's a process by which that happens.  And you go, you get nominated, and then they, vote on whether or not you can become a fellow.  So that, I became a fellow in 2006, I think it was.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.
Speaker 2: And it's just a highlight of having a very successful career and having made contributions to the enterprise.
Speaker 1: Okay, now in 2008, you received the thirty-year pin from the Polymer Division of the American Chemical Society too, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, that was, I've been, I'm a polymer chemist, and the ACS, American Chemical Society, has different divisions.  And as a polymer chemist, I participate in the activities of that division and have, since I've been a member of ACS, I think I'm coming up on, I think I've been a member of ACS for over fifty years now.  I'm not sure if I got my fifty-year pin.  I think they kind of like, missed me.  But I've been a member of ACS for over fifty years, so, in the polymer division after a thirty-year membership, they, they gave me a pin to celebrate that tenure.
Story_ID: 22406
Speaker 1: Okay, 2009, the National Science Foundation's budget was raised almost six percent, and I think what I was trying to say that, a few minutes ago that there's like a goal to double the budget, I think, by 2016.  And do you think that that's gonna be met or--
Speaker 2: Well, that's interesting, that's an interesting question because when Obama [President Barack Obama], he, he was able to get a large amount of money doing America COMPETES Act stimulus funding.  And based upon that, NSF [National Science Foundation] got a very large amount of funding--a lot of federal agencies got a large amount of funding for science and technology.  And NSF got a large amount of money also.  These, the money came very late because Congress didn't pass the budget right away, and it took a while before we got a budget passed.  And the funding year started in the federal government on October 1.  But very rarely does Congress pass a budget by that time.  So usually the budget process takes, takes a while, and I think the year, that year we got our budget like April, okay.  And it was supposed to come in October.  And we got all this stimulus money came in, and we were supposed to have this money spent by July.  So we had from April to July to spend about maybe $250 million.  So that was a crazy year in terms of funding, but the NSF, unlike some other agencies--the Department of Energy got a lot of money, and the National Institute of Health got a lot of money.  And based upon their extra funding, they opened up a lot of new competitions to, to people to come and get money and they wrote solicitations to try and broaden what they were funding, and allow people to come and get that money.  The director of NSF took a different tact.  They decided that we would not put out any new solicitations.  What we would do is, we would fund proposals that we'd gotten in that fiscal year.  Fiscal year started in October, and all the proposals we had gotten that year, we would, they would be eligible for this new funding.  So whereas our funding rate may have been like 25, 20-25 percent, because of this extra money, we could have a funding maybe like 35 percent.  So we were able to fund a lot of people who would not have been funded because of the budget because we get so much, so many proposals, okay.  And some are good, some are bad.  But they're, the good probably outweigh the bad because all the schools that are submitting have outstanding researchers.  And ideas are like, trans, a lot of 'em are transformative ideas.  But at some point, we, we only have a certain finite amount of money, okay.  So we can't fund everything that comes in.  But this gave us an opportunity with the stimulus funding to take and fund a lot more research than we would have funded.  So that was, that was a good year.  Before that, we were on a, Congress had said that, had passed a bill that said they would double the NSF budget in ten years.  And we were basically on that doubling track.  But after that big sum, lump of money in 2009, and you know what the budget situation's been, I mean with Congress and, and the President and all of the cuts, and, you know, cuts to Medicare and all the cuts to, social security proposed and all these other things.  Well, NSF is right there in the hopper with everybody else, all the other--so when the budget, when the budget comes out, we haven't been given the amount of increase that would keep us on the doubling path.  So basically, we're sort of off track right now on the doubling of NSF's budget over, in 2016.  And I don't see that happening with the current funding climate.  It's an election year, and, and we're talking about budget cuts and things of that sort.  But we've been fortunate at NSF to, to remain fairly flat.  The President and the Congress, including the House and the Senate, are usually very close and in close agreement to what NSF should get in terms of a budget.  The House tends to give a little bit less than, than the Senate.  The Senate gives a little bit less than the President.  But we're, we're in the, not in the red too much.  We're not too much in the red in terms of--so, our budget is basically flat, which means if it's flat, it's not gonna double.  You know, we need a five or six percent increase.  But we were on a doubling path up until 2009.  We were doing pretty good.
Story_ID: 22407
Speaker 1: Okay, let me ask you this.  I know we were, we were discussing, in our discussions with some of the department chairs at some of the black colleges and stuff, they were, they were concerned that they--there's a direct relationship between, I guess, getting research and being able to keep pace with the kind of department that can, in fact, you know, submit a proposal for research.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So you've got as a dynamic with relationships there.  And so what are your thoughts about that, having been, you know, on the funding side of it?
Speaker 2: Well, this is one of my pet peeves, okay.  I, I do a, I do a lot of speaking.  I go out and talk to, to universities as, there's a group called Quality Education for Minorities run by Dr. Shirley McBey.  And she does a lot of training of small institutions, minor serving institutions on how to write proposals that are compliant for and for submission to NSF [National Science Foundation].  And so I go to a lot of these meetings, and a lot of times, there're presidents in the audience from small schools, provosts, researchers and one of the things that I always try to, to tell those administrators is that they have to take and allow their faculty more time to do research because the only way you're gonna take and help the students to become more prepared and to be more competitive internationally is the students' got to, gotta be, gotta participate more in research.  And we have a lot of programs we fund at NSF that fund students, schools to have their students do research.  And the, see, a lot of these schools have been, have funding.  A lot of 'em are very well funded, actually, but they're funded with what I call program money, okay, which is not the same as what NSF provides.  NSF provides research funding.  A lot of the program money, other mission agencies in the federal government fund a lot of small schools, minority serving institutions, MSIs or HBCUs.  And one of the, one of the, part of their mission is to undergraduates and to get 'em into engineering and things like that because they, the government, federal government, recruits a lot of these students in their programs for engineering, in engineering in some of the mission agencies.  So a lot of the funding they get from these other divisions are, they have to write a proposal, but it's not competitive like NSF, like NSF funding.  Now, here's the dilemma.  These schools are hiring new professors, a lot of young new professors in engineering and chemistry, science and things like that.  These young professors who are coming into these schools are coming from majority institutions.  And they're being trained in research because these majority institutions are getting a lot of money to, to fund these research projects.  So, but these professors that they're hiring are people who can't get jobs in the majority institutions because there's only a certain number of those jobs available, okay.  You've got so many students coming out with PhDs who are excellent researchers and on papers and doing creative things.  But they can't get a job at a R-1 institution except for the very top ones.  The other ones end up going to small schools, community colleges.  And this is untapped resource of having these bright young people out here at these schools, teaching and the provosts and the people at the school are making these folks teach so much that they're not able to do research.  And the key, I think, to these schools is to try to establish a research infrastructure so that they can take and have these young people to do more research and to become competitive in terms of getting funding.  And that's what Shirley McBey's organization, QEM, does.  It teaches these schools, these young professors at these small schools how to write proposals and be competitive.  And I see these proposals coming in to my program at NSF.  And a lot of 'em are funded, once they learn how to write a proposal.  But a lot of the problem for these people come in their institutions and number one, not having a good-sponsored research office that can handle these type of grants.  Number two, in not allowing for more research time or for these professors.  They load 'em up with teaching courses, and they can't, can't do research and mentor their students properly.  So that, it's a real big problem in terms of, in terms of these small schools.  Now, there are a number of organizations like the Council of Undergraduate Research that is very much interested in getting more research into undergraduate institutions.  But small schools and minority serving institutions really suffer for this in not being able to take and allow their professors the time to write proposals and to get research funding.  And it's competitive, you know, it's, we don't give special breaks to small schools.  We have programs that will allow small schools to participate.  For example, there was something called, if your proposal, if the university has no research, has no office, only a Bachelor's degree, it can submit a proposal and it gets, it's called a RUI, R-U-I, Research in an Undergraduate Institution.  So, if you submit a proposal, before the title of your proposal, you get the letters RUI, and then the title of your proposal, that's to alert the reviewer that this individual is from a small school.  So don't be as hard on them for having a good publication record because a lot of these, a lot of these schools don't have the infrastructure to take and go and have graduate students, they have undergraduates doing their research.  So they don't publish at the same rate as the big schools.  So we have RUI program throughout all of NSF.  So any of the, any of the programs where you submit, what we call an unsolicited proposal, you can submit your proposal from a small school as a RUI and that will allow it to be reviewed by reviewers and, and they--the reviewers get a letter which, saying, this is a RUI.  It's from a small institution.  Don't be as critical on their publication record or, as you would--but the science has got to be tight.  It's gotta be good science, 'cause that's what we fund.  We fund good science, and good ideas do come from these people, from these small schools.  And it's just a matter of getting them to, to be reviewed in the proper context.  And that's, we have panels and we have reviewers.  But a program director like myself has the responsibility to, to fund, to have a balanced portfolio.  So we, in the final analysis, we take into consideration all of these other act--all these other things like whether it's a small school and what is our, in my portfolio, do I have any small schools I'm funding?  So if I get to, when I get down to, when my proposals are reviewed, I end up with the ones that are in the top category in terms of intellectual merit and broad impacts.  And I get, some of the middle category and some in the lower category.  The ones in the top category, we don't have enough money to fund those, okay.  But we can take and fund, we would try and take and balance the funding by, if there's a small school in there and it's competing against a larger school, then we can, as a program director, I can make a decision to take and fund a smaller school because if the science is about equal, and just to have a balanced portfolio.  And we do the same thing with other groups where men and underrepresented minorities just to have that balanced portfolio.
Story_ID: 22408
Speaker 1: Yeah, tell me about some of the success stories from the HBCUs, I guess, the historically black colleges and universities.  What are, I mean what have been some of the better research projects that NSF [National Science Foundation] has funded from those?
Speaker 2: Well, we have, we have a group called "EHR", okay, Education and Human Resources.  And in that, in that group, they have a division of undergraduate education, a division of graduate education.  So there's money there for a lot of these schools to carry out certain, to come in and compete and get money.  There's a program called HBCU up where a lot of the HBCUs could take and come in and get money.  There's one called "Teacup".  It has to do with the Native American institutions that can come and get money.  So there's a lot of opportunity for, for these schools to get, to get money for different programs.  There used to be one called CCLI, and CCLI has, has transitioned to something called "TUES", and basically, I'm not sure what the--we're full of acronyms at NSF, but basically, it's money, it's money where schools, small schools, not just HBCUs but any small school can come in--its Curriculum Laboratory, Improvement.  So any school that wants to improve its curriculum and its laboratory can come and get money from, it was the CCLI program.  Now, it's the TUES program, to take and improve their laboratory and their curriculum and their teaching.  And a lot of the small schools do have these type of, come and get these kind of awards which allow them to take and get instrumentation for the kids, for the students to work on and to even improve some of their infrastructure of their schools.  So, there's a lot of opportunity for small schools, but I think the, the NSF is a one-stop shop, okay.  If you're skilled in negotiating the NSF website, and you're interested in funding for science or technology, there's almost something there for everybody.  But you have to know how to find it.  That's the problem.  And, and that's one of the things that we try to do.  We go out and talk to people at small schools and tell 'em of the opportunity.  For example, the grad research fellowship program, okay.  That was a flagship program for the NSF when it first, when it was first founded.  That was the first program ever was funded out of NSF.  And that's been going on for over sixty years of the company.  The GRF [Graduate Research Fellowship] program is available to any student who's a senior in college or a first-year grad student to apply for a fellowship, for fellowship money.  And there's not a, not enough underrepresented minority students applying for that.  And that's one of the things the GRF program in NSF is trying to do.  The president, in his budget, when they gave the stimulus money, they put much more money, they realized the success of this program, and they put a lot more money in that program.  It's available to, you have to be an American, American citizen or a permanent resident to apply for that, for that fellowship.  So, so it's something that, it's restricted for American citizens pretty much.  So that needs to be explored more by, by minorities, in particular, but that's a flagship program for NSF that's available.  So what was the other part of your question?
Story_ID: 22409
Speaker 1: Well, I just wanted to know what programs at HBCUs impressed you, I mean what good things, good stories are coming from those?
Speaker 2: Okay, well, it depends on the HBCU, but a lot of 'em are very, a lot of HBCUs now are starting to get involved with trying to do more research with the undergraduates.  We have programs in, throughout NSF [National Science Foundation], called REU, Research Experience for Undergraduates.  And what it is, is that a school can submit a proposal and get funding to bring in students to do research for the summer.  So a lot of the major institutions are getting these Research Experience for Undergraduate awards, okay.  But the stipulation in the solicitation is that they have to recruit beyond their own campuses, okay.  So you can't just get the money and just put your students in the program from the summer.  You have to go out.  So these people write proposals and they include a lot of small schools, minority servicing institutions, community colleges, in those solicit--in those programs.  They say they're gonna recruit from those schools.  So those things have benefited a lot of the small schools in having, in giving their students an opportunity to go and do research for the summer.  But the schools have to be aware of this and point their students in that direction because these things are on line, and, and a lot of the HBCUs and the small schools are taking advantage of this and, or instructing their students to go out and, and seek this type of opportunity.  They pay the students a salary for the summer so they don't have to work at McDonald's, and they get paid to do research.  So it's a good program, and some of the HBCUs and small schools are taking advantage of this.  The, the other thing I think that's really in their favor is that they're hiring a lot of good, young professors who are very  energetic and really wanna get out there and do stuff.  I get calls from 'em all the time, calling me because they wanna submit a proposal or they wanna serve as a reviewer or panelist because we always encourage people at small schools to, to get in our database to be a reviewer or panelist because I found that, we have found that if they become a reviewer or panelist, it's invaluable experience in that it teaches them how to write a proposal.  It teaches them the things that's important in terms of getting their proposal reviewed.  So they sit in on these panels, and they get a chance to see that.  And they can go back and write a, write a good proposal.  So there're a lot of things that these small schools are starting to do that's really helping to move it forward, move them forward in terms of getting their professors trained and funded and getting their students prepared for science and technology careers.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, I wondering if there're any of the historically black colleges working on some exciting research and what kind of research it is that they're working on that's funded by NSF [National Science Foundation] or, if any, NSF is supporting any of those projects?
Speaker 2: There are, but I'm not--I have to research that to find out exactly what individual schools, but a lot of 'em are working in terms of being connected to bigger schools that have projects going on, especially, we fund a lot of centers.  And centers are big projects that we fund at a major university, and then they get, get other smaller universities involved in a--
Speaker 1: For instance, at Hampton [Hampton University], they're working with the Jefferson Accelerator, and I don't know if you fund any of that interaction at Hampton between the students and the Jefferson Accelerator and that sort of thing?  I just wondered if--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I'm sure NSF participates in those type of activities 'cause we have centers all over, you know, that we're funding, and these centers do involve minority-servicing institutions.
Story_ID: 22410
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, well, okay, so, now, are you--now, are you thinking about retiring from the National Science Foundation at any time soon?
Speaker 2: Not any time soon, but I'm thinking about retirement at some point (laughter), yeah.  But I haven't really put, you know, thought about it that seriously at this point because, you know, I'm, I like what I'm doing.  As long as I can feel I'm making a difference, then, you know, it's, it's--this is my retirement job.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you look back over all your years of service as a research scientist at GE [General Electric] and at Corning [Corning Incorporated] and your years of administrative work and your work of service for the National Science Foundation, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: What would I consider to be my legacy?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Hum, I wrote something about that, and now I forgot what I wrote.  I was thinking about that question.  I would, I would think my legacy would be what I've, what I've accomplished in terms of my career and what I've been, what I've given back to others in terms of their careers.  I, I've mentored, I mentor a lot of young people throughout my career, and having seen their success is, is validation of what I've, of my being able to transfer some of the knowledge that I've gotten to them so that they can have a successful career.  My, I think my children are probably, probably part of my wife's legacy in terms of having mentored them to be, to be fine adults and human beings and successful in their own right.  So I haven't thought about, and overall, like I said, but I just think that the type of things that I've been able to do and to help, help others to be successful in their careers, I think that's what I would see as my legacy in this.
Story_ID: 22411
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you look back over this same period of time, is there any major thing that you wish you could go back and do over again and change?
Speaker 2: Nothing I would change.  There's nothing I can see that I would change.  It's interesting because my, my career has been a series of, of--it's like going with the flow, you know.  You, you don't, I've never been the type, in five years, I wanna be doing this or in ten years I wanna be doing that.  You know, early in your career, people, you know, and when you're in industry, in particularly, they say, well, you know, where do you wanna be in five years?  You know, what do you wanna be doing in five years?  I've never had that kind of career plan.  In fact, I think circumstances has pretty much guided my whole career and being able to take and to adjust, to adjust to situations and to be always looking forward and being excited about what you're doing.  I think every job I've had I've had a certain amount of excitement and, and been allowed a certain latitude to be creative.  And I think that's what propelled me forward in my career, is having a latitude to be creative and to be excited about what I'm doing.  So I think, you know, when I look at, look back, it's been a number of different, from the time I graduated from college, you know, like I had no idea about going to college.  But I end up, end up at Dillard [Dillard University] in pre-med.  I went to, went to, and found out I couldn't go to med school, so I end up in graduate school.  After grad school, I went to, I got a Masters and then went to work, and went to work for a big company and started working there and just was, was focused only on my work and doing, doing a great job, you know.  And, and so I did that for about seven years and really enjoyed every minute of it.  I mean I was doing chemistry, I was doing what I love to do, but being creative, making contributions to the company, things like that.  And, but I, in the back of my mind, I knew I wanted to finish my education.  So then that came in, so I made the transition to do work and also go to school.  So all these kind of things came about, you know.  And, and it just happened.  So there's nothing, there's nothing I can see that I would change or do differently.  Like, I could say, well, you know, maybe I could a stayed, I would have stayed in school and finished my PhD rather than go get, you know, but I don't think that would have, that would have--that wasn't an option, you know.  Everything I've, it's, I've seen it as, as the step as being my only option, okay.  That's the way I've approached things.  And I put all my energy into doing that and it's been successful.  You know, it's been, you know, it's been a wonderful journey for me, you know, because my wife and I, we have always tried to remain balanced, okay.  So I talk a lot about my career, but we had a whole nother (ph.) career in terms of community action, community activity.  We've never left that in our, in all of the things we've done.  I haven't talked at all about the community activities that we've done when we were in the area, when she was part of the Panel of American Women and giving speeches, when I was, when I was doing community activities and being president of the Board of Hampton Arts and Craft Center for about six years working in the community and doing art with young kids and all those kind of things.  So all those things came about when we'd put on a science fair in the Albany, New York area for all of the kids in the inner city.  And we put together a slide show on contributions of African Americans in Science, Invention and Technology, which we showed all over the country and at technical meetings and even at NOBCChE and things like that.  So all those things just came about, you know, as we were, as we were moving along.  So I think, you know, anything, everything I've done, I think it's been like, you know, going through these different transitions.  And so I don't really have anything that I think I would have done over.  I, I would married my wife, I would have married her again.  I would have married her, yeah, yeah (laughter).  And so, so we, we met in college and have been together since.  This is our 50th anniversary year.  So, but it's been a good journey, you know, I wouldn't have, I can't think of anything I would have done differently at this point.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: And I've had trials and tribulations.  You know, I've had, I've had some successes, and I've had a lot of situations which I would not like to repeat again in my career, you know, but it was all part of my growth, you know, in terms of learning how to deal with, with the culture of the environment I was in and dealing with the people and finding ways to overcome obstacles because no matter where you go, people throw obstacles in your path and you have to take and deal with those obstacles.  And I think I've done a good job with the help of my wife, to deal with those obstacles.  I would like to have repeated some of those activities, or some of those things that I've gone through, but it's all part of my growth and all part of my being able to advise other people based upon my experiences.  And I think that, I think, is part of my legacy in terms of having, being able to give that back to people and to have young people understand how to negotiate their careers throughout, throughout all of these setbacks.  I meet a lot of people who go through, I mean it doesn't change, you know, because human nature is what it is.  And, you know, people call me all the time, and they're going through things that I went through, and I'm able to advise them and say, well, you know, this is why this is happening to you.  And this is what you need to do.  And it's been really successful in taking and getting people on track and to stay on track in their careers rather than get sidetracked because these things that come up and happen, it gets you sidetracked, and you end up, you know, end up imploding your own career because you can't deal with that.  And I think that a number of people who are my mentees who I've helped to get, to get through that.  So I wouldn't, I wouldn't change anything at this point.
Story_ID: 22412
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Whew, wow.  Hopes and concerns for the black community.  I'm, I am concerned that, that the younger black community do not have an appreciation for what the older black community has done to set the stage for where they are now, okay.  And, and, and I say that, I say that because a lot of, a good number of them don't, okay.  But I'd also like to say that I am very hopeful that we, the black community will, will survive, will survive all of this because I run into, in my position, I see so many young, black kids who are in the science and technology area, who are doing wonderful things, okay.  They really are, they're very bright.  They're unrecognized because they don't get the attention that the, because of the media and the way society is structured, you don't hear from those people who are doing well and doing great things and they're in the background.  They're not in the noise, you know, but the media spikes with the other stuff, okay.  So I think that there's a, there's a movement out there, and a lot of young people are coming out of school and doing quite well and being very competitive.  So I have hope that, that we will do what we always do, overcome, because that's what it's about, is overcoming because there's obstacles everywhere.  There's, but it's becoming more and more difficult now to put obstacles in the path of young people because young people are coalescing pretty much in terms of how they're interacting with each other.  And I see it with the young people and some of the, the way they get along with each other.  And it's just a matter of the politics, you know, how do you, how do you get the society back to being what it was with a, say with a big middle class.  You know, we're always talking about the middle class, you know, and things like that.  Those are the type of things that affect everybody.  So it's not about black and white anymore you know.  It's about people being, being successful and being allowed to pursue their talents to the end.  So I think, you know, we have to be able to take and, young people have to get more involved.  That's the big issue, to understand the society around, the politics around them and to vote, you know.  I mean, look what happened with Obama [President Barack Obama] when young people got involved at the last, last election, got out and did work and try to get this country back righted and going in the right direction.  But, you know, it's a constant struggle, so, but I'm hopeful that, that we will get there.
Story_ID: 22413
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us something about your children.
Speaker 2: Okay, we have three children, and the oldest is a girl, second, boy, and the third is a boy.  And we, we raised our children in upstate New York.  So we didn't have the benefit of a lot of people around, family.  We were isolated in upstate New York.  We raised our kids up there.  And we made an attempt throughout their lives to stay connected with family by traveling to New Orleans.  Every year we used to drive from Albany, New York to New Orleans every year with a big station wagon, bring the kids down so they can meet their cousins, their grandparents and things of that sort.  And we, we provided our kids with, we tried to make sure that they were grounded, and they understood who they, who they are, okay, cause we grew up, in upstate New York.  The schools they've gone to have been predominantly white, okay.  And being black kids in a predominantly white school is not an easy thing, but we surrounded them with all the tools they needed to survive in that environment.  And as a result, they became very ecumenical in terms of their friends and, and who they, you know--so, so, my kids, when they went to school, they, they were surrounded by a mostly white, white environment, but they had a very strong self concept, okay, because as I say, my wife and I were always involved in the community.  And so, we were involved in all kinds of activities that involved the community, African American community.  And we would, they talk now about how we always would drag them out to these events against their will 'cause they would rather have been doing other things.  But we always made 'em go, and so they grew up with a very strong con, self-concept.  They all entered college.  We, we sent 'em all the college.  My oldest is a girl, my daughter, Tracey.  She's, she was very, very smart in high school, excellent record, but at the time, we, we are parents, who were like other parents, and white or black, in our generation, okay.  And we found this out over the years in our interactions with white associates and going to the different, and being in the, going, going out to and talking and that everybody, most of our friends have an older child who's an underachiever, okay.  And my daughter is an underachiever.  What I mean by that is that she has pursued her dream, okay, and not her parents' dream, okay.  And what we do as parents and I hope there are parents who, you know, who--I'm sure a lot of parents will agree with me, we put a lot of pressure on our firstborn.  Okay, we were first generation, you know, to get, to be, to be accomplished, you know, and like my father worked in New Orleans, but, you know, my brother, we were the first ones to go on to grad school and get a PhD.  So we have a lot of hope for our children, okay.  And we put a lot of pressure on them.  Like my daughter, I, we counseled her to be an engineer, okay, because she had, I mean math and science was her forte.  But she was interested in the Arts, okay, in high school.  Well, being in a predominantly white high school, it wasn't, that wasn't to her advantage because if she had been in a predominantly black high school, she would have been the lead in the, in "Cinderella" when she was in high school.  You understand what I'm saying.  She would have been the lead because she was a very good actress, okay.  But she couldn't be Cinderella in an all-white high school, you know, because, you know, everybody knows Cinderella is white, right (laughter), is that right?  So, so she was in plays in high school, and she was very good at being creative and dancing and things of that sort.  So we encouraged her to go, she went to Spelman [Spelman College], and went to a pre-engineering program.  And she, she did so-so in pre-engineering because her heart was in, in the arts.  So after a while, she dropped out of that program and went into Economics, and she was doing okay in Economics, but not fulfilling her parents' dream, okay.  About three and a half years of college, she decided that she wanted to be a singer.  So she left college and went to New York and was singing with a group in New York for, and when we realized that that's what she wanted to do, we supported her completely, you know, and we would travel to, to the shows in New York to see her perform and things like that.  And she was very good.  And she did this for about ten years, but her main interest was to be in like entertainment and in management, that sort of thing.  So this is a dream she's been pursuing since she left college early.  And, so she was, but she's had up's and down's in her, in her life in terms of--she was in New Orleans, living in New Orleans at the time Katrina [Hurricane Katrina].  And, of course, she got caught in it, and loss everything and then moved back and, and lived in D.C. [Washington, District of Columbia] for a while, went to Chicago [Illinois], came back.  Now, she's back in New York; came to D.C., got an ideal job.  She was doing an ideal job in D.C., but then when, with the way things were, she's, you know, last hired, first fired type of thing.  She lost that job and has, has since set up her own management company which she's done, where she would manage other people and stuff like.  And she's done that, and now she's going freelancing now in New York.  She finally--stayed in D.C. for a few years and she's finally back in her native love.  She loves New York.  So she's in New York trying to make something happen.  So that's my first child.  And we have supported her.  My other two children saw the turmoil we put our first child through, and they walked the straight and narrow (laughter), okay.  So they, both my sons went through four years of college, one majored in engineering.  Then they heard dad talking about his stories, how his, he got sidetracked from medicine to chemistry to work, to grad school, to working while going to grad school while working.  So they heard all those stories.  So the, in mentoring them, my message to them was, finish school--and I tell all young people this, finish school, get it out of the way and then start your career.  And most of the young people I've mentored who have done that have done quite well because they get all of the, they don't end up going back to school to finish up and get a degree like I had to do.  So I had to fight that.  So my oldest son went to RPI [Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute], got his Bachelors in Materials Engineering.  And he had offers out of high school from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] and Yale [Yale University] and Princeton [Princeton University].  They were really recruiting him very heavily.  But he decided to go to RPI, and we never quite understood, we were pushing him to go to, why don't you to MIT, why don't you go to--like parents will do.  But then we backed off.  He went to RPI, and after he was there, after a number of years, we realized the reason he went to RPI is because when he was growing up as a kid, I was working on my PhD at RPI.  And that was always his dream to go to RPI.  And we never knew that, so he went to RPI and got his Bachelors in engineering.  And then he left there and then went to Berkley [University of California-Berkley] and got his PhD in Materials Engineering, and left Berkley and went to work for a company called McKinsey in New York City as a consultant.  And so, and since that, he's, he's never, he's always been where I always wish I could have been in that having control over your own career in terms of using your expertise to, to propel you to wherever you wanted to go.  I found myself, throughout my careers, always working for somebody.  And most times, the people I was working for were, were--didn't have the skills that I had, okay.  So, that's my second child.
Story_ID: 22414
Speaker 1: All right, okay, so that's your second child.
Speaker 2: Yes, so my second child went, like I say, he left, left grad school and went to work for McKinsey in New York City as a consultant.  And he was consulting for them in technical areas all over, all over the world.  And one of his colleagues called him about looking for someone to run a small company out of, an incubator company out of Cornell.  And he looked at that as an opportunity, so he accepted.  He decided he'd go do that, so he worked for this small company.  And then he left, then he went to Cornell and went to work with this, he took the company from Cornell, moved it to Silicon Valley and sought venture capital funding.  And they kind of grew that company, and, and after about five or six years, he, the company was sold, and he moved back East to Chapel Hill to work for a company called Cree, and they make light-emitting Diodes.  And he's been at Cree since then, and he's worked as VP of manufacturing.  He's worked as the vice president of marketing and now he's general manager of one of their businesses now.  So he's, he's parlayed his, his, as I said, he's--my sons have taken, you know, some of the things I talked about that I thought were my failures in that, in that I always worked for somebody, and in terms of not being, being able to make my own career choices in some respects.  But I had a lot of things I was dealing with, you know, in terms of raising a family, making things--so those type of things make us, we make choices.  My third son went to school at, went to Vanderbilt, okay.  He wanted to go to Stanford.  We took him on a trip to look at Stanford.  He had excellent grades in high school.  And he was accepted at Stanford, and we took him on a visit, and we got him out there, and his eyes just went boom because he saw the kids throwing a Frisbee on campus.  He saw them doing surfing and things like that.  So we said, you're not going to Stanford (laughter).  So, so he went to, actually, went to Vanderbilt on a full scholarship and majored in chemical engineering.  And was a Dean's List student, you know, "A" student, Dean's List.  And after four years, he worked the summertime for Exxon-Mobil in New Orleans, so he was down in New Orleans with his grandparents for a while.  He worked in the summer for Exxon-Mobil on an offshore rig or something like that.  And when he got ready to graduate, the company was like throwing money at him, you know, because he's a black engineer, "A" student, and he remembered, I said, you will not take a job.  You're going to figure out where you're gonna go, but you're gonna go to grad school or something like that.  So, and he had remembered the stories I had told about being a three-time loser, that I was a three-time loser in that I went to college to go into pre-med.  I didn't go to medical school.  So I didn't become a doctor; went to grad school.  I ended up getting a Masters in chemistry.  I was at University of Pittsburgh.  I could have, I could have just moved right over to the medical school and gone to become a doctor, but I decided I'd go get a job and work as a chemist.  The second time, I'm a loser.  Then I went to work in industry, and I worked, after seven years, I was debating whether I would go to medical school or get a PhD.  And since I already had a Masters, I said, well, it's easier for me to get a PhD because a doctor will take, going to become a doctor will take four years, okay.  And I have a Masters.  But I didn't realize I was working full time.  So it took me seven years (laughter) to get my PhD, okay, whereas in four years I'd have been out of medical school.  So that's a third time, okay, so I always say I'm a three-time loser because it was three times I could have been a medical doctor.  And, but I chose a different career path.  So my son had heard those stories.  So after, after four years of college, he said, Dad, I think I wanna go to medical school.  So he actually put in for this--my hand goes down and hits this thing here.  So he put in for, he applied to Vanderbilt's medical school, and he actually, he got a full scholarship to medical school.  And he went to Vanderbilt for medicine.  And when he did his rotations, he decided he didn't really wanna be a regular doctor because he didn't like, you know, being--he said a surgeon was just like a plumber, you know, and so he had all these ideas.  So he became a psychiatrist, okay.  And so he went into psychiatry.  And he, all, both my boys, all my kids like music because as, I've always owned a piano.  But I never played any instrument.  I always wanted to play an instrument.  That's been my, one of my failings in life, is not going and learning to play the piano because it's my favorite instrument.  I always wanted to play the piano.  So I made my kids take piano lessons when they were growing up.  They convinced me that I was wasting my money, giving them piano lessons.  So they said, you could save a lot of money if you fire the piano teacher.  And so we took their advice 'cause we taught our kids to, to always negotiate and to take and, logic prevails on everything.  So they would, when they got to be old enough, they would meet together with each other.  And they would call us in the room and they would hit us with a logical argument about something they didn't wanna do.  And since we were training them to be logical, we had to agree with them.  So they quit taking piano lessons, but my kids all took up music later on their life.  My daughter, who we never knew she could sing when she was high school, became a singer.  My two boys, actually worked a paper route and bought themselves their own electric base, and they taught themselves, having had piano--music lessons when they were with their piano, taught themselves to play the electric bass.  And all throughout college and graduate school and even today, they play their bass [guitar] in a band.  So I'm saying that because my youngest son, when he finished medical school, he had a residency at University of California-San Francisco.  He took a year off to take and make a CD with his group 'cause they were, he played bass in his group.  And they actually played music and made a CD, a rock CD or something for that year.  And during that year, he was doing some things with medicine in that he was doing this special project with the homeless.  He was in Tennessee, and at Vanderbilt, he was going around working with this clinic, going around, bringing, bringing psychiatric care to the homeless.  So he'd find people under bridges and stuff like that, and he'd provide psychiatric care.  He did that for a year, and then he went to University of California-San Francisco and opened his own practice, opened his own medical practice as a psychiatrist, half time because he's also teaching at UCSF, University of California-San Francisco.  He's also teaching, so he worked half time as a psychiatrist and the other half time, he was teaching.  After a few years, he didn't like the politics of the school, and so he decided that he would quit that teaching job and open a full-time practice.  And what's what he did.  He opened up his full-time practice in San Francisco, downtown, San Francisco, and a couple of years he decided that he liked academia.  He liked teaching.  So he went back, and he did volunteer, he volunteered, did voluntary teaching at the school, where they didn't have to pay him.  But he had his full practice too.  So he did that until UC-Berkley had a position open on their staff for a psychiatrist at University of California-Berkley.  So he applied and got that, got the job as a staff psychiatrist at UC-Berkley.  Actually, he became a state employee when he did that, and he, he moved to Oakland, moved to Berkley, and he maintained his practice in San Francisco, his practice in San Francisco.  And today he's still practicing psychiatry in San Francisco, and he's at UC-Berkley.  But he was recently promoted to the Director of Psychiatry at UC-Berkley.  So that's what he's doing now.  So, my oldest son is a VP at Cree.  My youngest son is a Director of Psychiatry and my daughter's in New York doing whatever she likes to do and surviving there.  So, that's basically the story of my kids.
Speaker 1: And each, my son in North Carolina who's at Cree has four children.  And his wife, he, his wife was, he married a woman that he met--actually, I knew his wife before he did because she was an engineer at GE [General Engineer] with me before he met her.  He came to GE as an intern, and he met her, and they've been together since then.  And she's, she's an engineer, but they both are very much alike in that they decided that they would get married, but they would get married after they both had finished school, after he got his PhD and after she got her MBA.  So she got her MBA at Wharton.  He got his PhD, and they got them the same year, and they both went to New York to be consultants, and so they're both, as consultants in New York.  And they had a family and after they had their second kid or so, they decided she'd, she'd work--she convinced the consulting firm she was working for to let her work out of her home.  So she's worked out of her home from the time they moved to California to the time they moved back to North Carolina.  So they now have four children, and my youngest son, who was a bachelor up until he was about forty, finally hit the wall and got married.  Now, he has a two-year old son and a wife.  But those are the only, five grand kids.  And my daughter is still unmarried and no children, and unmarried.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, is there anything we haven't talked about that we need to discuss before I ask my last question?
Speaker 1: No, we've talked about a lot.  Let's see.  No, we're up to date pretty much.  No, I can't think of anything at the moment.
Story_ID: 22415
Speaker 1: All right, well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different, sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered?  How would I like to be remembered?  By, I should say, by whom (laughter) or what community.  I guess I'd like to be remembered by my kids as a good, good parent who did everything to make them, to help them to be successful.  I'd like to be remembered by my colleagues as a good colleague who was always helpful.  That's a tough question.  I'd like to be remembered as having been a good husband to my wife and somebody who's easy to get along with, who's supportive of other people, you know, even sometimes I think at the expense of myself, I do give a lot to help other people, probably much more than I receive.  But that has never been my goal to, so I may go overboard in that respect sometimes.  So, I guess I'd mostly like to be remembered to my acquaintances as a good friend, you know, somebody they can count on, somebody they can rely on if they ask for support.  In terms of my, in terms of my career, I don't--in my career I was very creative.  I thought I was very creative, a very creative person, and my strengths I think came from being a problem solver, okay.  I think that's my strength in that, no matter what the situation is, I've always been able to take and look at the situation and come up with a solution whether it's a chemistry problem or a life problem.  So I think that, that's my strength and I don't expect that I would be remembered for my technical accomplishments, other than what's written down on paper and documented, okay, because I don't think, I don't think I've gotten the recognition in my career that others have because I've never been a person to wave my own banner, you know.  So some people do that very well, you know, in terms of seeking awards for different things.  You know, I don't do that.  So it's, it's gonna hard for people to remember me, okay and things are gonna be a little difficult to be remember (laughter), you know, the way, the way others are remembered in terms of, you know, having their picture up and for being, for having made certain accomplishments.  I think I've done a great job in terms of my, in terms of my inventions and some of those technical problems I've solved over the course of my, my career many of which I haven't really talked about, you know, but personally, I just think I'd like to be remembered as a good person who tried to do the best with what I had to work with.
Story_ID: 22416
Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead and tell us about this one, please?
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my father and my stepmother.  It was taken some time in the '70s [1970s], early '70s [1970s].  My stepmother is Doris Williams.  My father is Earl D. Mitchell, Sr.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a younger picture of my father.  I guess this is probably, he's in his, probably thirties or early forties when this picture was taken, in his forties in New Orleans.
Speaker 1: This is Earl D--
Speaker 2: Earl D. Mitchell, Sr.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother, a very young picture, probably in her twenties or thirties.  My mother was born and raised in New Orleans, passed away in 1968 at the age of 51 years old after raising seven children.
Speaker 2: Her name?
Speaker 1: Her name is Mary Magdalene Duncan Mitchell--her family name is Duncan, which is the same as my middle name, Duncan.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And this is her mother.  Her name was Mary Magdalene Washington Duncan.  And she was born in, around 1878.  So that was my grandmother who passed away when I was about four years old.
Speaker 2: And that's my grand, that's my grandfather, my mother's father.  His name is Syrene Duncan, D-U-N-C-A-N, my middle name, Duncan.  He was a minister in New Orleans, Rev. Duncan.  He had Pilgrim Rest Baptist Church, and he has four sons who were gospel singers, the Duncan Brothers, they were called.  You can look 'em up on the Internet.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Syrene?
Speaker 2: Syrene, S-Y-R-E-N-E. It's a biblical name, but it's spelled with a "C" in the bible, Simon on Cyrene.
Speaker 1: And that's my mother's mother's father, Rolly, R-O-L-L-Y, Washington.  And that was probably in the 1800s.  I'm not sure of the date, early, middle 1800s, he was when this was probably taken.
Speaker 2: And that's a drawing of his wife.  Her name was Maggie, Maggie Metcalf Washington.  Her maiden name was Metcalf, and her married name was Washington--was Washington, yes, Rolly Washington's wife.
