Story_ID: 95590
Speaker 1: Okay, here we go.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Observing is Frank Walton.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My full name is Pam, Jacqueline, J-A-C-Q-U-E-L-I-N-E, Morris, M-O-R-R-I-S.
Speaker 1: And, ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born December the 20th, 1949 in Charleston, West Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: My current occupation is radio host on WVON Radio, Chicago, Illinois.  I'm also an interfaith liaison and a retiree from the City of Chicago, 2009.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is Thursday, January the 23rd, 2014.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're presently at 1900 South Michigan Avenue at HistoryMakers.
Story_ID: 95591
Speaker 1: All right, now, before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up.  And they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I really do.  You want to know what it is?  I got to tell you right now, salmon.
Speaker 1: Is it fixed in any particular way?
Speaker 2: I loved--I love broiled or baked salmon, and it must come from Seattle [Washington].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Wild salmon.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I do have a favorite color.  I love red.  I love purple, and I love black.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I love Christmas.  I love Christmas because I love getting, having the opportunity to decorate my home and share and give to others.  Even though I do it all year long, Christmas is very special.  We always went home to West Virginia during Christmastime before my lovely Aunt Mabel passed.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, I really do.  Montego Bay, Jamaica.  It's beautiful there all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I could go there today too, if I could (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I do have one.  "I love you and there's absolutely nothing you can do about it."
Story_ID: 95592
Speaker 1: Alright now, I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but separately so we don't get 'em mixed up, but can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Paskalena Page, P-A-S-K-A-L-E-N-A, Page, P-A-G-E.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story behind the name, Paskalena?
Speaker 2: I believe there is.  I believe when my mother was named Paskalena, that it came from my mother's mother having worked at one time for an Italian.  And she liked that name and named my mother Paskalena.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, interesting.  So, and what is your mother's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother was born eighty-one years ago on May the 11th, in Charleston, West Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Well, what I do know about my mom's family, I think I can take you back to when they were all coming up--it was eight of them that I remember mom telling me all about, okay.  And it was in West Virginia and somewhere down in Alabama that they were raised and came up together.  The dad worked in the mines.  He received a Purple Heart, okay, and--
Speaker 1: And during the, World War II?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And his name was Herman Page.  That's my grandfather, my mama's dad.
Speaker 1: Okay, your mother was born eighty-one years ago, so that's, she's like Korean War generation, I guess, right.  And your, so your father--her father was a World War II veteran?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he received a Purple Heart.  So he was wounded in the War?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  Dad was wounded, lost his leg.
Speaker 1: Do you know where it happened?
Speaker 2: I don't know where, I don't know.  I wasn't given that information.
Speaker 1: Okay, but he served in Europe or in the Islands or--
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay, all right, well go ahead.  I don't, just--
Speaker 2: And they, I know that, they're a Christian family.  So they were very, very close to doing more things as it relates to church and church gatherings and being raised and going to church and things of that sort than doing other things.  So I just know about the church life, and them being raised and brought up together.
Speaker 1: Now, does your family have a history of being--your mother's side have a history of being from any other place other than the Charleston area?
Speaker 2: Well, West Virginia was home even though some of them moved into other places.  West Virginia was home.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, Charleston or St. Albans, West Virginia, which is thirteen miles apart.
Speaker 1: Okay, so St. Albans is sort of a suburb of Charleston?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yes, yes.  St. Albans is like, as like a suburb.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, now, what did your mother's parents do for a living?
Speaker 2: Mom was a homemaker, grandmamma was, and dad, her father, he worked in the mines and then he became a shoemaker and later had the shoe company in the bottom of his home, down in the basement in St. Albans, West Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did he make shoes from scratch or did he--
Speaker 2: He just fixed shoes, and he did a good job.  I remember all of his equipment.  He fixed some good shoes.  He was a shoe repairman.
Story_ID: 95593
Speaker 1: Okay, so your mother [Paskalena Page] then, did she go to school in Charleston [West Virginia]?
Speaker 2: She went to school at West Virginia State College in Charleston.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she not only finished high school, but she went on to college as well?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And so did her siblings.
Speaker 1: Okay, there are eight, all eight--
Speaker 2: Eight.
Speaker 1: --all eight went to school?
Speaker 2: Went to West Virginia State College.
Speaker 1: Well, that's quite a heritage.
Speaker 2: Yes, we were a family of, a studious family as well as a church family.  So we were just raised--it was church and school.  It was church and school mostly all the time, even when I was coming up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  West Virginia State's a big part of--did your mother have any stories about growing up that she shared with you?
Speaker 2: Not really that many stories other than church.  We was a church-going family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, that was our life.
Speaker 1: Now, did she have a--what was her aspiration in school?  What was she going to school to become, a teacher or a nurse or--
Speaker 2: Teachers were in our family.  So we, I believe, if I'm correct, mom did.  But she just got, just finished college maybe about ten years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she didn't finish at the time--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --when she was young?
Speaker 2: No, she didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did she want to be a teacher or did she wanna do something else?  She wanted to be a lawyer or what did she--
Speaker 2: Mom, mom, teachers was in our family.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she did aspire to be a teacher.  And so did she have any stories about West Virginia State?
Speaker 2: No, just the fact that it was integrated.  It became integrated (laughter).
Speaker 1: While she was a student there?
Speaker 2: Um-hum (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now, so from what I--did your mother have you while she was in college or did she--
Speaker 2: My mother had me at the age of seventeen while she was in high school.
Speaker 1: In high school, okay.
Speaker 2: My mom dropped out of high school--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and had me.  That's why she went back and finished later in life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so she finished high school later in life too.
Speaker 2: Both.
Speaker 1: Okay, and West Virginia State.  All right, okay.  Now, did your mother have any particular talents or--
Speaker 2: Can sing and cook.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She could sing and cook, and still can sing--
Speaker 1: Still, okay.
Speaker 2: --and still can cook a good meal.
Speaker 1: All right, so let me go to--now, are there any stories that are passed down in your family about the end of slavery or Reconstruction or any of that?
Speaker 2: Not exactly, no.  No more than the fact that they experienced a lot of unusual things coming up, but they made it work because they were a close, tight-knight family.
Story_ID: 95594
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: I'm told that his was John, J-O-H-N, Brown, B-R-O-W-N.  I did not have an opportunity to meet my father.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was he from Charleston [West Virginia]?
Speaker 2: In the Charleston area, worked at West Virginia State College with the ROTC, I'm told.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: And it's one thing I wanted was to meet him, but I wasn't privileged with that opportunity.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was an ROTC instructor or--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --at West Virginia State.  Okay, now, West Virginia State--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And my grandfather [Herman Page], my grandfather cut his hair.  He did hair also, my grandfather did hair and shoes.  I forgot to mention that to you.  He did hair and shoes.  He cut hair.  He was a barber and a shoe repairman.
Speaker 1: So, now, is that how your parents met because of your father getting his hair cut--
Speaker 2: Um-hum (nodding, yes).
Speaker 1: --from your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So he was teaching at West Virginia State.  Now, West Virginia State--
Speaker 2: ROTC, West Virginia State College, Institute.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in Institute, West Virginia, which is how far from Charleston?
Speaker 2: Maybe five miles, and a half, six.  It's right in between St. Albans and Charleston on 64 [I-64].
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is really close.
Speaker 2: --Interstate 64.  Very close.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Very close.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what happened?  Now, your father, did your father move on?  Well, I know they didn't get married, right?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: But you don't know what happened to him?
Speaker 2: No, he had a family.
Speaker 1: Oh, he already had a family.  Okay, all right.  And these are the days before people were compelled to pay child support and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, that's right, 1949.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, okay.  So you never met him.
Speaker 2: Never met him.
Speaker 1: And he never--
Speaker 2: The closest I came to knowing my father was Colonel Bacon showed me a picture one day of my father because he worked in the ROTC, and we had become, to know each other through my work with the City of Chicago [Illinois].  And I told him I was from West Virginia and that my father, John Brown, I had never met him.  He said, I know your father.  I know your father, and I have a picture of your father on my desk.  He sent me that picture.  I don't know what happened to it.
Speaker 1: So did you ever meet any of his relatives or--
Speaker 2: Never, never in my life.
Speaker 1: And, now, over the years did anybody ever tell you where he was from?  Was he originally from that area or was he from someplace else or--
Speaker 2: Don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But that would be something that would be easily looked up though, if he, you know, I would guess.
Speaker 2: I think my son tried to do that, but we didn't get far.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 95595
Speaker 1: Alright, so you were raised as an only child?
Speaker 2: I was, yeah.
Speaker 1: Had a young mother and--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And was adopted very quickly in the family--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --while I was very young inside the family.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: That's how Aunt Mabel became who she was in my life because of the adoption by her father.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so your--Mabel is your aunt.
Speaker 2: My great aunt, but I call her Aunt Mabel.
Speaker 1: Your great aunt, okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about her.  Tell us about--
Speaker 2: She was the lady that's responsible for me being the woman I am today, sitting here.  Aunt Mabel and dad, and Burl, her father and Aunt Pearlie, her sister, P-E-A-R-L-I-E, and Mabel is M-A-B-E-L.  They took me at a very young age, and raised me, church and school, church and school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were raised in St.--
Speaker 2: Albans, West Virginia.
Speaker 1: --Albans.  Okay, just like, you said thirteen miles outside of Charleston [New York].
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And did your mother continue to live in Charleston?
Speaker 2: No, my mother moved to New York--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --and became a barmaid.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have relatives in New York?  I mean did she have--
Speaker 2: We had relatives.  She had a sister that was living there.  One of her sisters had already moved there.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a question, I guess that comes to mind, just thinking about the time period and your family's deep involvement in church.  I mean was your mother embarrassed by the fact that she got pregnant in high school?
Speaker 2: I would kind of think it was different.  She was the only one.  And so my mom left home.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you were basically adopted by your aunt, your great aunt?
Speaker 2: Adopted by my Aunt Mabel's father, Burl Page--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Burl Page, and they--
Speaker 1: So this is your grandfather really?
Speaker 2: My great grandfather.  Like, well, that was my mother's father's father.
Speaker 1: And Burl, how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: B-U-R-L--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Page.
Speaker 1: You were adopted by him, but you're basically raised by your Aunt Mabel?
Speaker 2: Because we were all in the same house on the hill.
Speaker 1: So the house consisted of your--
Speaker 2: Aunt Mabel, Aunt Pearlie, me and granddaddy, Burl Page, until he passed.
Speaker 1: All right, so he was their grandfather, right?
Speaker 2: No, he was their father.
Speaker 1: Their father, okay, all right.  So this is--oh, that's right, your great grandfather, all right, yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So what did he do for a living, and--
Speaker 2: All I remember Aunt Mabel and them telling me was that granddaddy worked in the mines.  That's all I remember, is that he worked in the mines.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's a popular occupation in that region.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, and he built the church that my Aunt Mabel pastored, the Apostolic Free Church of God.  He helped build the church that she pastored, that I was raised up in.
Speaker 1: Now, that was the next question, the name of the church 'cause I know that's important.
Speaker 2: Yes, it is, Apostolic Free Church of God.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 1004 Rosedale Drive, in St. Albans, West Virginia.  However, the church was not that address when I was raised.  When I was raised up, the church was called Redds Hill, Apostolic Free Church of God on Redds Hill, R-E-D-D-S, H-I-L-L.
Story_ID: 95596
Speaker 1: I usually ask people who they take the most after, their mother or their father.  But in this case--
Speaker 2: My Aunt Mabel.
Speaker 1: --you probably don't know that much about your father [John Brown] to know about his habits, but do you look like your mother [Paskalena Page]?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Or what--
Speaker 2: Maybe (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, or what qualities do you think you get from your mother?
Speaker 2: I get most of my qualities from my Aunt Mabel.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: That's who raised me.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and did--
Speaker 2: My mother didn't raise me.
Speaker 1: I know.  Did, does any--has anyone ever--
Speaker 2: But she's a nice-looking lady.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Even at the age of eighty-one, she's still nice looking, okay.  We have a lot of Indian in my family.  So my mother looks very fairly like an Indian because my mother's--my mother's mother's grandmother was a full-blooded Cherokee Indian.  I remember that because she told me.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so that's the history--
Speaker 2: So, yeah.
Speaker 1: --to remember.
Speaker 2: Yeah, them high cheekbones and stuff, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a little history that I remember.  It's coming to me, okay.  But we didn't talk too much about that, didn't talk too much about that.
Speaker 1: Did your mother visit periodically?
Speaker 2: Yes, when she could, she did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I was raised with to height--Tackett Creek to elementary school, junior high school and high school in West Virginia through my Aunt Mabel and Aunt Pearlie and granddaddy.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what was your Aunt Mabel like and what qualities did she pass on to you?
Speaker 2: She was one of the most devoted, loving, dedicated, caring Christian women I've ever known in my life, never had an enemy, was very bible-driven, faith-based, believed in the Lord.  She taught me a lot about faith and that's the reason why I have a lot of faith today is because of what she instilled into me, and that we could do all things through Christ which strengthening us.  She was a faith woman, never married, never married, and died at the age of ninety-one.
Story_ID: 95597
Speaker 1: Okay, now, she [Mabel Page] was a--was she a graduate of West Virginia State [Institute, West Virginia] herself?
Speaker 2: She went.  I don't know if she graduated from West Virginia State because I know she started preaching early in life, so I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was a reverend, the Reverend Mabel, what was her last name would be what, Page--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Reverend Mabel Elizabeth Page, P-A-G-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I was Pam Page, growing up, Pam Page was my name.
Speaker 2: Now, in many denominations, even today, they're challenged by the aspect of a woman reverend.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: You know, I know they, some of the denominations have struggled with this--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --even as we speak today.  So this is way back in the--
Speaker 1: Way back when--
Speaker 2: Not that far back because you're (laughter), you're not that old.
Speaker 1: But back (laughter).
Speaker 2: But it was back.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And so what was--was she one of the first women pastors in that region?
Speaker 1: She was back in that area, yes, she was, and very well supported through Bishop Quander Wilson (ph.).  I can't think of the direct organization.  I want to say it was Church of God, but I'm not sure it was Church of God.  But I know he had a lot to do with her ministry, Bishop Quander Wilson, who was out of Huntington, West Virginia before he moved to Ohio.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so he supported her assent, as it were?
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause she became a bishop later.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: She became Bishop Mabel Page later in life.
Speaker 2: This is the--of the Church of God, right?
Speaker 1: Um-hum, Apostolic Free Church of God.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's the denomination's proper name.
Speaker 1: Free, Apostolic Free Church of God.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  And it's, now, is this a black denomination or is it--
Speaker 1: At that time, I think so.  I don't know exactly where that denomination is at this time, Apostolic Free Church of God.
Speaker 2: Okay, so at the time it was called the Redds Hill Apostolic Free Church of God?
Speaker 1: Um-hum, it was on, it was located on Redds Hill.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: R-E-D-D-S, off of Old Route 35 in St. Albans, West Virginia.  And it was pretty popular.  That church was pretty popular in West Virginia.  A lot of people come long distances to worship the Lord with Aunt Mabel.  She was my Aunt Mabel so I never called her Pastor Page.  I never called her Bishop Page.  I always called her Aunt Mabel.
Speaker 2: Okay--
Speaker 1: She could preach too.
Story_ID: 95598
Speaker 1: Okay, what is the, what, I guess, is the, what is the creed of the Apostolic Free Church of God?  I mean what, I know, you know, Quakers don't go to war.  I mean there are a lot of different, you know, creeds that typify a church.  And, you know, Baptists are more prone to, I guess, exuberance in church than Methodists, you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --I mean so, what is the, what characterizes the Apostolic Free Church?
Speaker 2: Well, the Apostolic Free Church of God was a lively, a very lively sanctified, Holy Ghost filled church where they believed in Jesus' name, one Lord, one Father, one Savior, all are one Jesus.  They baptized in the name of Jesus.  So they all say the three were one, the Godhead is one.
Speaker 1: Okay, and this is--
Speaker 2: Holy and sanctified life.
Speaker 1: Right, do you want to tell us or can you tell us about the origins of the church and the, I guess, and it's distribution today, you know, in the United States or the world?
Speaker 2: Well, I can just say that it still stands.  I can say that it still stands and that there's only been two pastors of her church where she is.  It's her [Bishop Mabel Page] and Bishop Robert Haley who's the pastor now, H-A-L-E-Y, who's the pastor.  And they follow the same beliefs as they were raised with.
Speaker 1: Are the, well, are the churches independent of each or--
Speaker 2: They're independent.
Speaker 1: --are they part of a--you know, like the Methodist, you know--
Speaker 2: Independent.
Speaker 1: --I know Methodists have bishops, but the bishops are bishops over--
Speaker 2: They're independent.
Speaker 1: --a group of churches.
Speaker 2: They're independent.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, if you're a bishop in the Apostolic Free Church of God, you are higher than just a reverend or--
Speaker 2: It's kind of like the highest title.
Speaker 1: Okay, but within that church--
Speaker 2: Within that church, yes, right.
Speaker 1: --setting.  Okay.  All right, and, okay.  And you don't really, you can't--you know, there's a--I was asking you for the history of it if you care to give it.  I don't know if you know it, but--
Speaker 2: I really can't.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: No, I can't.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Very good.  Sometimes those are interesting stories of how they get started, and, you know--
Speaker 2: Not privileged with that.  I apologize to you.
Speaker 1: Okay, no problem.
Story_ID: 95599
Speaker 1: So, we always ask people this.  Now, you were raised in St. Albans [West Virginia]--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --and you talked about your church and school, church and school, church and school.  Now, what was that like on a day-to-day?  I mean what--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was all I knew so it was wonderful because I didn't know anything else, all right.  I tried to slip and go to a couple of things inside the school like sock hops and stuff, but my aunt and them would find out about it before I got home.  And that wasn't what we did.  I didn't go to the prom.  It was church.  I went to church four times on Sunday and two times through the week, Tuesday and Thursday nights.  We were raised to worship and praise the name of the Lord.  And it was church, really, and school and fellowship where we fellowship with other churches on various weekends or through the week nights.
Story_ID: 95600
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we always ask this question.  Before I ask you about school, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up, and, well, you know, can--yeah, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Some of the sights?  Explain what you mean?
Speaker 1: Sights, sounds and smells?  What did it look like to you?  What did it smell like?  You know, what sounds did you hear growing up?
Speaker 2: I think the best way to respond to that is because it was all that we knew, it was all good.  The smells of whatever, fresh air.  It was wonderful, on the--in the mountains.  We lived on the hill, saw the stars in the sky, mostly every night.  That's the sights.  Trees, green grass (laughter), winters, cold, snow.  The sounds, we heard birds tweaking and sights would be, I guess you would say we had a farm.  So we had land.  I may not be going the way you want me to go there, but I could just tell you what I can remember, you know.  We had a lot of land.  We had a whole lot of land in West Virginia.
Story_ID: 95601
Speaker 1: But what I mean by sights and sounds and smells, say you were describing growing up to--well, you are actually doing that, describing to the next generation, and the generations following.  Where did you live?  What did your house look like?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What did your--what did that farm look like?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What was grown on the farm?  And what were you, what was life like on the farm?  You know--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --what were the sights and sounds?  What did you see when you looked out in the mornings?  You know, what did you hear?  What did--
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: --smell?
Speaker 2: So, the house was a little white house up on the hill, on the top of the hill in West Virginia, on Redds Hill 'cause we didn't have an address at that time.  Later the address became 1425 Rosedale Drive, but before we got a street name, it was Redds Hill.  And the Pages lived on top of the hill.  And that's Reverend [Mabel] Page, and then Herman Page which was her brother, lived next door to the church.  That's like in the middle on the hill, okay.  And going, raised, being raised in Aunt Mabel and Aunt Pearlie and granddaddy's home, it was a two-bedroom home.  And they had double beds.  And we'd wake up, and we can look out and we could see nothing but land and trees because that's what was surrounded around us.  And dad, granddaddy had a farm, and he had some horses at one time.  And we grew, we had a garden, and I probably was the only person at that time--we wore, I had to wear stockings all the time.  So I'd wear stockings in the garden.  And I'd plant corn.  I'd plant too much corn sometimes and had to go back and pull some of it up.  But I'd plant corn and beans and tomatoes and greens and it was just--'cause we had a lot of land.  So the garden was behind the house.  And it was just beautiful, again, because that was all I knew.  That was all I knew.
Story_ID: 95602
Speaker 1: I lived a very closed life coming up, didn't go out a lot, didn't date, did not date at all!
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: I wanna make sure you hear me.
Speaker 2: You really emphasized that.
Speaker 1: I did not date at all.
Speaker 2: Okay, and, well, I'm basically--
Speaker 1: I know I'm going a little fast there because I brought this guy home in high school.  His name was Sugar Bowl.  I don't remember Sugar Bowl's real name.  And I brought Sugar Bowl home and granddaddy said, "Well, who is this?"  And got his shotgun out and Sugar Bowl left.  And Sugar Bowl never came back, and I saw him in school the next day, and he said, Ooh, I said, ooh.  I said, well, I'm sorry 'cause I didn't know, but I was just trying.  But again, they didn't allow me to date.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, I wanted to ask you about--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That was a little early, but (laughter) I just had to tell you that (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, I haven't got to the teenage life yet, but that seems to have made a big impression on you.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Oh, my God.  They, just closed.  I mean I was, I was very sheltered coming up.
Story_ID: 95603
Speaker 1: Well, was music allowed in the home?
Speaker 2: We were able to listen to music, but it was church music.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was albums with Mahalia Jackson, the Swans, the Silvertones, the Sensational Nightingales, Professor Harold Boggs, B-O-G-G-S, out of Port Clinton, Ohio, and the Raspberry Singers and people like that.  But it was all Christian, gospel stuff.  And, wasn't able to do no other stuff, not even sneak and do it.  I found out I couldn't do it so I just didn't do it.
Speaker 1: Was there a television in the home when you grew up?
Speaker 2: They did have a television but it was, they watched stories and the news.  I don't know how long "General Hospital" and the "Guiding Light"--General Hospital, the Guiding Light and one other story that's no longer on.  That's what they would watch and the news and Ted Koppel.  They loved to watch Ted Koppel at night.
Speaker 1: Nightline, yeah.
Speaker 2: That was it, Nightline.
Speaker 1: Well, that didn't come on till much later, till about 1979--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I don't know when it came on, but that's what, but they watched that in our home, growing up.  And I had to watch it 'cause that's what they watched.  And as it relates to listening to other music, that wasn't allowed in my home, where I lived.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I wasn't privileged to it until I became grown and on my own.
Story_ID: 95604
Speaker 1: Okay, so a typical day for you would be, you'd go to school, went to--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --public school in--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, it was.
Speaker 1: Well, was it in Charleston or--
Speaker 2: It was in St. Albans [West Virginia].  St. Albans was the Tackett Creek [Elementary School], which is torn down now, Tackett, T-A-C-K-E-T-T, Tackett Creek was the school, and then I'm not remembering what the junior high school was, but it was in St. Albans, and St. Albans High School was in St. Albans.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was close community.
Speaker 1: Now, were these schools like segregated, all-black schools?
Speaker 2: They were segregated, but they were not all-black schools.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were white schools with a few blacks.  I was going to grade school, there was just three or four blacks.  I was one of 'em.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Wasn't raised around a lot of black people.  I was raised around a lot of white people.
Speaker 1: So not true segregated schools, but--
Speaker 2: They weren't segregated if you lived in area, but not that many of us--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I mean in terms of racial segregation, not the way that--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, right.
Speaker 1: --people describe.  But, so did you have any black teachers?
Speaker 2: No, no black teachers at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when you speak about church and home, I literally remember doing homework in church because it was church and school.  And then when I did more church, we were going out to fellowship with other churches, other pastors.
Speaker 1: Now, I understand that, I mean your aunt [Mabel Page] had great values that you've--
Speaker 2: Great.
Speaker 1: --incorporated into your life.  But did you ever get frustrated with the fact that you couldn't--
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't good for me to get frustrated 'cause again, I didn't know anything else.  I didn't know anything else.  And then at school, I kind of stood out a little bit at school.  You know, I was a little talented, could sing a little.  I would sing--one of my favorite songs, two of my favorite songs would be "Moon River", and "You Never Walk Alone", "You'll Never Walk Alone", and I remember singing those in talent shows, and, of course, "Precious Lord".  I remember that song, but--and I learned "Moon River", but Aunt Mabel and them never knew I learned that song till they heard me sing it in a talent show.  But, no, no, I have to say, very, very tight-knit.
Story_ID: 95605
Speaker 1: Now, did growing up in a home full of adults make you sort of an advanced little girl?
Speaker 2: Well, my uncle--let me share this with you, my uncle is Beauford, B-E-A-U-F-O-R-D.  Beauford was two months older than me and Beauford lived right down the street from me.  So what I'm trying to say here is that my mother and her mother both were pregnant at the same time, okay.  So Beauford, my uncle, and I kind of grew up close together, all right.  But Beauford was a little rebellious.  Pam learned not to be that way.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what things did Beauford do?
Speaker 2: Beauford played ball, and I thought I could stay and watch him play ball, and I had to get on the bus and come home.
Speaker 1: Was this baseball or football?
Speaker 2: He played football.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And did a good job.   Beauford didn't, Beauford didn't--okay, let me see how I say this.  I learned, if you be good, you get nice things (laughter).  And I learned that early in life.  So I was good. Beauford, they didn't make Beauford do.  But Beauford was just the opposite of me.  He was kind of like the bad boy, but they didn't pressure it because Beauford is living with his dad and mom down the hill.  I'm living with Aunt Mabel and Aunt Pearlie and granddaddy up on the hill.  Okay, so that's what I know.
Speaker 1: So, Beauford, was he rewarded for doing bad things or what--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't know (laughter).  I know he got by with a lot of stuff (laughter).  I couldn't.  But I don't think he went to the prom.  I don't think Beauford went to the prom that I can remember.
Speaker 1: Now, did he go to church with you too?
Speaker 2: Sometimes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, but not as much.
Speaker 1: So his father was your aunt's brother?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so he had a different, had a different take on things.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yes.
Speaker 1: He didn't--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they were members of the church, but they didn't go?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, members.
Speaker 1: They didn't go as much?
Speaker 2: Not as much.  I don't even remember Beauford in Sunday school like I was.  I have to ask him.  I don't remember Bruce in Sunday school.  But he didn't do like me.  He just turned and said, I don't like this.  I don't like this kind of life.  He doesn't really go to church that much today.  I think he just really joined a church out there in Georgia not--recently, not too long ago because he didn't, he wasn't there.  He didn't feel it, but it, you know, life makes you change.  But, of course, I learned early that, hey, this is the way to go.  And I happened to like it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That makes a difference.
Story_ID: 95606
Speaker 1: Now, how many parishioners were in your church?
Speaker 2: I knew you were gonna ask me that question.  I knew you were gonna ask me, about thirty-five, forty.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is small group.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, small church.
Speaker 1: What about the youth?  Were there other youth besides you?
Speaker 2: A few.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mary Lou, Mary Lou was there and Lucy--the Haley family, the Haley family was there.  That was a close family, but not too many.
Speaker 1: So this is very tight community?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, very, very.  I'm telling you, I was almost raised exclusive.
Speaker 1: All right, so but you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I really was.  I was surprised myself.
Speaker 1: So, but you would travel to other churches in the region or how far away did you get a chance to go from St. Albans [West Virginia]?
Speaker 2: When we'd go to other churches, we would probably go maybe--I think one of the furthest we went at--unless Aunt Mabel [Page] was preaching a revival, and we'd go to Indianapolis or Port Clinton, Ohio where Professor Boggs lived, we would just go maybe to Huntington, Charleston, in those areas like that, very close--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because she, there was another woman pastor not too far from her in Huntington, West Virginia named Pastor Katherine Jackson (ph.), that she did a whole lot of fellowshipping with.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: That's how I met my children's father [John Morris].
Speaker 1: They were the same denomination?
Speaker 2: No, different denomination, but holy, Holiness.  They were both in the Holiness church, but not the same denomination.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  Okay, now, well, can you explain how that works?  I mean I don't under--so they're in a Holiness church, but not the same denomination?
Speaker 2: Well, they were Apostolic Free Church of God, that denomination, and Katherine and them, Pastor Katherine Jackson was in AOH, Apostolic Overcoming Holy Church.  That's the church they were in under Bishop Robey, R-O-B-E-Y, or R-O-B-Y, R-O-B-E-Y [sic, Jasper Roby] out of Birmingham, Alabama, a different organization, a different denomination, okay.  But we fellowshipped together.
Story_ID: 95607
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  All right, now did--you started school at St. Albans [West Virginia] at Tackett Creek [Elementary School], and you said the only--
Speaker 2: Tackett Creek.
Speaker 1: --there were only like three black students?
Speaker 2: About three or four of us, uh-huh.  It was me, it was me and Bruce and Renee and--on the hill, Renee Toller (ph.), Toller was her name, and, and Bertha.  I want to say Berletha (ph.), Berletha.  It as just the four of us.  We were the only four black children in the school.  Renee, Berletha, Beauford and me.
Speaker 1: How were you all treated in school?
Speaker 2: I thought I was white.  I didn't know I was black.  I found out I was black later, a major--
Speaker 1: When did you find out you were black?
Speaker 2: They told me I was, they said, you ain't white.  You're black, you're different, you're black.  But we were treated very nice.  I remember that.  I can remember being treated very nice 'cause I was talented.  I was always gifted and talented, could always talk and sing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was raised up singing in the church.
Speaker 1: Did you get good grades in school?
Speaker 2: I got good grades.  I had to study.  You don't bring bad grades home in the Page family.  No, you didn't bring bad grades home.  I was a good student.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Were there any particular teachers that you remember that--
Speaker 2: Un-un, I don't.  I'm sorry.  I don't remember the teachers.
Speaker 1: So basically, then were there any other adults that you consider like mentors other than your family, you know?
Speaker 2: No.  No, no, my family stood out.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: I liked English.  I remember English.  I liked English.  I didn't like arithmetic 'cause I count on my fingers, you know, multiplication and all that.  I did it on my fingers and my toes.  I did.
Speaker 1: You could (unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Was a little ashamed of it later (laughter) in life, I was a little shamed of it (laughter).  But that's how (laughter)--
Speaker 1: I guess you would run out of toes, I guess (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, you did (laughter), and then you'd, you know, you add it up, you know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --with my fingers.
Story_ID: 95608
Speaker 1: So I guess you weren't involved in any, anything like Girl Scouts or anything like that growing up?
Speaker 2: I went into Girl Scouts one time briefly, and then they took me out because it interfered with church service.  And nothing was gonna interfere with me going to church and sitting on the front row.
Speaker 1: Now, within the church environment, did they--did you have like youth responsibilities and, I mean, you know, as a--did they give you--I know some churches have a youth usher board, a youth choir, you know--
Speaker 2: We didn't have a youth choir.
Speaker 1: I know the Baptists have the Baptist Training Union and all that, but--
Speaker 2: No, didn't have that coming up.  We just had the young people's, Young People, YPWW, Young People's Christian something or other like that, where we learned the books of the bible and sing, had vacation bible school and things of that sort.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so did you have to really learn the Bible thoroughly, I guess, growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, absolutely, the books of the Bible and all that.  I learned them, still know them.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Don't ask me to do it.  Don't ask me to give them to you (laughter).
Speaker 1: I won't, I won't (laughter)--
Speaker 2: I know Genesis, Exodus, Levitus, Numbers, Deutoronomy, Joshua, Judges, Ruth, first, second, Samuel, first (laughter).
Speaker 1: You can do it though.  I can tell you can do, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughter)--
Speaker 1: You can do it if you like.
Speaker 2: And learned, no, and learned the 23rd Psalms, "The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want", you know, learned the first Psalms, "Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly."  I was into the bible, and I still am.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite passage in the bible?
Speaker 2: One of my most favorite passage of the bible is the one that's still with me now.  "I can do all things through Christ which strengthenth me", and I want to say that Philippians 3:14 [sic, Philippians 4:13].  I'm not exactly sure, but I think that's where that's found.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I had broken that down, and I understand it thoroughly. I, personal, can do all things, no matter what it is.  But I can only do it through Christ which strengtheneth me.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So there's nothing impossible for you to handle or do.  And that's the way I was raised.
Story_ID: 95609
Speaker 1: Okay, so as you're growing up, now, as you grow up, 'cause we're the same age exactly.  I know the Civil Rights Movements was cranking up in the South and in the North as well.  So stores were being desegregated North and South--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --public accommodations.  And--
Speaker 2: We would talk about that, these things that you're saying that was happening, We'd come home, and Aunt Mabel [Page] would talk about it with me and say, we're not a part of that.  We don't agree with these things that are being done, especially some of the bad things that were being done down South and stuff, and even [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]'s passing and things, you know.  She would always give me the positive side of things, always the positive side of things.
Speaker 1: And so you're saying that she was saying that we're not a part of, we're not, I mean--she wasn't saying we're not a part of the Civil Rights Movement, but not--
Speaker 2: Not, but, but we, we, what's the word, what I'm trying to say, we're not associating, we're not getting involved with how things are.  If it crosses our path, we have to be a part of it, we will.  But, but we are not action people getting involved with things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, did she consider that like extraneous to the rel--
Speaker 2: The religion and where we're (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the path of the religion.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: She said, we're gonna pray for 'em, we're gone pray, and we would pray right then.  I'd be going like, Right now?  Right now, we would pray.  That's in my book.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So she's gone pray.
Speaker 1: She was, she wanted the Civil Rights Movement to be successful, but she wasn't gonna take an active role in it?
Speaker 2: Part in it, was not gonna take an active role in it, no.
Speaker 1: All right, I see.
Story_ID: 95610
Speaker 1: Now, were there publications coming into the home like, you know, the newspapers--
Speaker 2: Ebony.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ebony and Jet.  And the National Geographic Magazine, I had to read that every month.
Speaker 1: Really, okay.  That's interesting.
Speaker 2: Every month.
Speaker 1: Was there--looking back on it, was there a--a lot of homes don't get the National Geographic.
Speaker 2: She got that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ebony and Jet.  That's when Ebony was a thick magazine--
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: So we could keep up with what was going on.  And I remember it was an article--I don't know what the article was.  It was something in one of those JET's, and she said, you know, this is okay, but this is just not good for us.  And I don't know what it was.  I can't tell you exactly what it was, but we were reading it, you know, 'cause it was sitting right there on the table.  She said, this is not good for us.
Speaker 1: Well, I can just imagine any edition of Jet would be filled with worldly activities that had nothing to do with a Holiness church--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) With the spirit of the Lord.
Speaker 1: --so, I mean, but there, some aspects of church life were, you know, was covered in those, in the [HM, John H.] Johnson publication.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So I don't, I mean--
Speaker 2: I don't know what it was.  I can't tell you, but, and she hated the middle page.  We was never supposed to look at that, and I'm never supposed to be like that, you know.
Speaker 1: Oh, the foldout of the Beauty of the Week, in a bikini or something, you know, or bathing suit.
Speaker 2: That was just so sinful, and you're not gonna be like that.  You're not gonna even grow up and be like that.
Story_ID: 95611
Speaker 1: Okay, so in high school, so you were in St. Albans High School [St. Albans, West Virginia], and what percentage of blacks were there?
Speaker 2: A few more, a few more blacks, maybe ten percent because Amandiesville (ph.) was not that far from St. Albans.  It's like another area where more African Americans lived.  It was like, not the ghetto, not the ghetto, but a different part of town.  And so some of them would be at the high school, not Tackett Creek [Elementary School], but at the high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I remember that.
Speaker 1: All right, so did you continue to get good grades in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was a good girl.
Story_ID: 95612
Speaker 1: All right, but you were saying--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I really had no, well I had a choice to be other than good, I could have been bad, but it didn't pay off.  And when you are growing up, and you learn that it's better to just go on and do right, and be right, that's what I would do.  Let me tell you something I did that my aunt [Mabel Page] and them, I don't think they found out about.  I hope they didn't, but I had to take the bus home, all right, and you don't miss the bus.  But I loved butternut candy.  It was a butternut bar.  I would take a early bus and go over somewhere downtown and get me a couple of butternuts, and some Mary Janes and Kites, K-I-T-E-S and let the regular bus pick me up 'cause I'd see it coming by and just go on home like nothing ever happened 'cause I couldn't, better not miss that bus 'cause I gotta get off that bus and walk on up the hill and go on home.  And I, there was no reason for me not to be on time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I figured out, I was, figured that out 'cause I wanted that candy.
Speaker 1: Could you have candy at home?
Speaker 2: Not that candy.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: No.  And then another thing, if we had a chicken, like for dinner, we didn't have like you can now order, have all chicken legs or all thighs.  We had the whole chicken.  And I got the thigh.  It wasn't till I got grown that I was able to order what I wanted and have what I want.  And I don't eat thighs no more, that much, don't have to.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you, you see, and not so much that I was privileged, but I was just careful.  I was careful.  I didn't miss that bus.
Speaker 1: All right, so--
Speaker 2: Do that make sense (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I'm telling on--
Speaker 1: It's just another--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --myself (laughter).
Speaker 1: But, so as you were saying earlier that you weren't allowed to date or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --anything like that.
Speaker 2: No, you couldn't date.  No, un-un.  No, I didn't have no boyfriend.  I wanted to have a boyfriend.  I thought I could have a boyfriend.  Oh, and you know how kids play house and stuff.  I, I played house with a house.  You know, you got a little house, and I got a little house and little dolls.  That's how you play house, okay (laughter).  But no, no dating, no dating.  And that day when I thought I was gone bring Sugar Bowl home, Lord, Sugar Bowl didn't stay five minutes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I wanted to introduce him.  It didn't happen.
Story_ID: 95613
Speaker 1: So, well, now what kind of counseling did you get--did you get any counseling about college at all when you were in high school?
Speaker 2: I was very good and very smart, so I did classes during my senior year at West Virginia State College [Institute, West Virginia].
Speaker 1: So you were allowed to attend West Virginia--so did you attend all your classes there or just some?
Speaker 2: Just a few, just some.
Speaker 1: So what did you take at West Virginia State.  It was acting and business.
Speaker 2: Acting.  Now, that seems rather worldly for--
Speaker 1: Yes, I needed, I was ready to change (laughter).  I was coming out.  I was ready to change.
Speaker 2: Okay, so were you--
Speaker 1: Um-hum, yep.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was (laughter).  Yes.
Speaker 2: So, what roles did you play?  Did you get a chance to be in a play or anything?
Speaker 1: I acted in a lot of plays in church, you know, Christmas plays and things in church very well.
Speaker 2: Okay, so there was an arts--
Speaker 1: Very well.
Speaker 2: --aspect then of church.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.  Very well.  I was very good and got a lot of the lead roles, could learn and memorize much better than I do today.  But I did that very well.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, so you all--you were already going to West Virginia State before you even graduated from high school?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: And did, so, you knew that's where you were going to college?
Speaker 1: Um-hum, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Of course.
Speaker 2: So, was there anything special--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And wasn't going, wasn't going too far from home.
Speaker 2: Was there anything special about high school graduation, any special honors or anything?
Speaker 1: I was voted "Most Favorite".
Speaker 2: Okay, so even then, I mean would people then, even though you weren't allowed to do a lot of things, but did people consider you to have a big personality or, and that--
Speaker 1: I did, yeah, "The Most Likely to be Successful".
Speaker 2: Okay, so when you were on the verge of graduating from high school, were you thinking, I can't wait to get to a college--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Of course.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Absolutely, absolutely.  I was getting up there now.
Speaker 2: Okay, and did you have any idea how you were gonna balance the--
Speaker 1: No, I didn't.
Speaker 2: --your life in lieu of what you were taught, you know--
Speaker 1: I didn't.
Speaker 2: --growing up and the opportunities to do anything--not anything, but--
Speaker 1: I really didn't, but I knew because of the training I had and what God had given to me, I would be okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Well--
Speaker 1: You don't go too far.  You don't go too far.  When you're raised right, when you're trained right, you don't go too far.
Story_ID: 95614
Speaker 1: Okay, so now you worked in high school, and in your grandfather's store?
Speaker 2: In my grandfather's store.  It was like a little candy store and canned goods with a little coal stove.  I wish I could describe that stove to you.  I can't describe that stove to you, but I know that the soot from the stove, they would put on sores if you fell, and you'd get healed.  Honestly, you would.  I had moon pies, raisin cakes--we sold a whole lot of those.  I ate a lot of 'em too coming up.  They had Kites and Mary Janes, but I got my Kites and Mary Janes somewhere else too.
Speaker 1: All right, all right.
Speaker 2: It was nice, it was nice.  Grand--and the store later turned into the church dining hall.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was the store in the church?
Speaker 2: No, it's next door.  It was next door.  There was the store, my mother's father's home and then the church, one, two, three like that, and then you go on up the curve, up the hill to Aunt Mabel [Page]'s house.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Small community.
Story_ID: 95615
Speaker 1: Alright so now at West Virginia State, now, we were talking about graduation.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, oh, yeah, I was, I was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And you had a big personality.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was kinda like special.  Yeah, I was voted "Most Favorite To Succeed", and "Miss Personality".  I remember that.  That was so nice.  That was very special, and I don't have my yearbook.  I misplaced it, but I do have it.  I just can't put my hands on it right now, and my Uncle Bruce [Beauford Page] gave me my yearbook recently during a visit to his home down in Virginia--down in Georgia.  And I just looked through all the people that had written in it to me about being successful.  And if anybody makes it, you will, you're a sweetheart, and all of that.  So those were some great days.
Story_ID: 95616
Speaker 1: Okay, so West Virginia State [College, Institute, West Virginia], you're already familiar with it.  Who is the president of West Virginia State when you were there?
Speaker 2: Lord, I don't even remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's awful.
Speaker 1: Well, who were some of the instructors and personalities there on campus that you do remember?
Speaker 2: That's pretty bad.  I'm not there.
Speaker 1: Okay, none of the instructors that you--
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  Professor, was it Brother Wayne?  I think it's Professor Wayne.  I wanna say Way--Wade, thought well of me.  Professor Wade thought well of me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what did Professor Wade teach?
Speaker 2: He taught business, and he said, you could be a good business lady.  But I had a, I wanted to go, I wanted to do journalism, you know, acting, journalism, broadcasting.  That, that's kind of where my head was.
Speaker 1: Now, what was your major?
Speaker 2: Communications.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they did have a communications, and you--
Speaker 2: Yes, they did, uh-huh--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --majored.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And they had a little radio station.  So I played a little bit, you know, with doing the turntable and things like that.  I was very good at that.  Matters of fact, the instructor--I cannot tell you his name.  He was hard on me.  He was very hard on me, and he told me at the end of my, at the end of my year, he said to me, and I won't ever forget this.  He said, "Pam, if anybody makes it in this class, you will."  That was the biggest compliment he could have ever gave me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 19--what?  Sixty-seven [1967] when you're--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --a freshman?
Speaker 2: How do you know?  You're right.
Speaker 1: We're the same age.  That's why (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So this is making this really easy for me, you know.  But, all right--
Speaker 2: This is good, this is all good.
Speaker 1: --nineteen sixty-seven [1967].  I wasn't at West Virginia State though, but--
Speaker 2: Where were you?  Oh, never mind.  You're interviewing me.
Speaker 1: Wright State [University] in [Dayton] Ohio.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay, we gotta stay on the course.
Speaker 1: At any rate, but on the course here, so you're majoring in communications, and you got a college radio station.  So you, were--did you have a show on the station?
Speaker 2: I didn't have a show.  I didn't have a show, but I was real good in helping others.  I was real good in helping others.  And that's when I learned how good I really could be in this field.  And I had a knack for radio.  There was something about radio that did it for me.  I had a knack for radio.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were like a production assistant then, for--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --people on the air?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, and now, this is a time period when there were, you know, there were some women on--did you know of any black women on the radio--
Speaker 2: I did not.
Speaker 1: --at that juncture?
Speaker 2: I did not.  I did not.  But my Aunt Mabel told me you can be whatever you want to be.
Speaker 1: Did you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And you just go and you do well.  And I'm counting on you, I'm counting n you.  And I said, I'll never let you down.
Speaker 1: Did you admire any of the national personalities on the radio or on television?
Speaker 2: Not at that time that I can remember.  I watched television and saw people and things that I liked and said, I think I can do that.
Speaker 1: At that time, did you see yourself as behind the scenes more--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I saw myself more in front than behind the scenes.
Speaker 1: Okay, yet you were operating behind the scenes, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, but I saw myself in front.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, in terms of campus life, did you get out in front--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, no.  You can end that right now.  No.
Speaker 1: Well, why not?  Why not?
Speaker 2: No, I had to go to church.
Speaker 1: Even at West Virginia State [College]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Had to go to church.
Speaker 1: So you went back to your--you were like--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, I was living at home.
Speaker 1: --five miles away, right?  Oh, you were living at home while you were at West Virginia State?
Speaker 2: I was living at home.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was being picked up and dropped off.
Speaker 1: Now, (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was still living a little sheltered life.
Speaker 1: Now, did they--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Was there a gospel choir at West Virginia--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: --State that you could be a part of?
Speaker 2: No, but I was a good singer.  I was always singing, always singing.  If I wasn't talking, I was singing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm so glad I did that.
Speaker 1: All right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: 'Cause I'd come right on back home to church and lead devotional service and sing in service.
Speaker 1: So did you have any kind of extracurricular campus life?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: This was all church?
Speaker 2: Um, church was my life.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.
Speaker 2: Church was my life.
Story_ID: 95617
Speaker 1: Okay, and so when--are there any--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And I left there, and let me just speed up a little bit.  I left there and went to New York to be with my mother [Paskalena Page].
Speaker 1: Okay, well, I don't want to speed you to that yet.  I--
Speaker 2: But I did that.  That's what I did.
Speaker 1: I, okay, it's good to know, but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 1: --so other than Professor Wade, there was nobody else at West Virginia State that you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Not at all.  No, I'm so sorry.
Speaker 1: And you, did you ask about your father [John Brown] there at all?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did, and the information was very limited for me.
Speaker 1: There would have to have been someone that knew him, you know, I would guess.
Speaker 2: It was.  I was very closed because it wasn't a beautiful situation.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he have family members--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was not a beautiful situation.
Speaker 1: --in that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It wasn't a beautiful situation that John Brown got Paskelena Page pregnant.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: And had a family.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was something that they didn't wanna bring up because of the embarrassment it would cause his family and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, God, yes, absolutely; still don't know to this day.
Story_ID: 95618
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so, now, while you were in school, lots of national events were going down, and I know you were focused on church, but [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated in '68 [1968] when you were a sophomore, I guess, right?  Did you attend West Virginia State [College, St. Albans, West Virginia] all four years?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how long did you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Two.
Speaker 1: Two, okay, so you were for '67 [1967] and '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: [Nodding, yes].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Only two years.
Speaker 1: All right, so '68 [1968], so much, so many things happened.  Dr. King was assassinated.  There were riots in most of the major cities.  [Robert Kennedy] Bobby Kennedy was assassinated--
Speaker 2: It was so sad.  And I'd come home, and we'd watch all of this on television, and Aunt Mabel [Page] would try to see the good in all of this.  She would try to see the good in all of this.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was seeing this as part of God's plan or something?
Speaker 2: She was just saying, it's sad, but we not gonna, you know--he didn't live his life for this to happen, the way things were being torn up and people were robbing and destroying businesses and so forth, pretty sad, it was a pretty sad time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we prayed.  I remember as sure as I'm sitting here in this chair, we prayed.  We prayed!
Speaker 1: At home?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: On our knees, not just standing up or looking at each other.  We got down on our knees and prayed.
Speaker 1: Now, how long would a prayer last?
Speaker 2: A little bit, for a little while, for a while.  It wasn't no short prayer.  And I pray today.
Speaker 1: I was getting a sense that it probably wasn't, but I just wanted to, wondered.
Speaker 2: Un-un, no, and I pray today.
Speaker 1: The same way?
Speaker 2: Most of the time.
Speaker 1: Okay--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It answers, prayer, it answer--prayer works and I believe in it.  And I've seen what happens when you pray.
Speaker 1: Do you have a story you can tell us?
Speaker 2: I can say that I have many instances where I have seen prayer work through some difficult situations and challenges without going into what it is.  Prayer worked.
Story_ID: 95619
Speaker 1: I mean what happened that you only went to West Virginia State [College, St. Albans, West Virginia] two years?  You're a good student.  We've established that, and--
Speaker 2: It was time to leave.  I had to leave.  It was time to leave.
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: It was time to leave.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Wanted to be with my mom [Paskalena Page].
Speaker 1: All right, so you were--you just felt compelled to join your mother in New York?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, and didn't live with her because she was a barmaid.  I lived with my aunt, her sister.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But it was time to leave West Virginia.  It was time to leave West Virginia.  I didn't go to church as much, but I went to church.
Speaker 1: In New York?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, on the island, Long Island.  But I went to church, but not as much.
Speaker 1: Did you go to a church of the same denomination?
Speaker 2: Holiness, but not the same denomination.  And my mother didn't live a holy life.  That's all I wanna say about that, 'cause I thought I could change some things.  But I didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was your goal to try to change your mother's life?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  Yes, sir.  It was.
Speaker 1: Well, can you tell us about, I mean had you--how long before you went to New York had you seen her?
Speaker 2: Not that long.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she had been in West Virginia before?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, she'd visit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She'd visit and go back.  She played cards, worked in a bar--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Lived a different life.
Speaker 1: So these are things that people in the Holiness church don't do?
Speaker 2: [No audible response.]
Speaker 1: I mean I don't know.  See, you have to explain this, these things to us--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --'cause we don't really know.
Speaker 2: There are different, these are things--
Speaker 1: I would have guessed 90--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --these are things, there are things--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --99 percent of people are not in the Holiness church don't--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --that you don't do.
Speaker 1: --that you have to tell us.  Okay.  So, no card playing.
Speaker 2: No drinking.
Speaker 1: No drinking.
Speaker 2: No rousy [sic, rowdy] life living.
Speaker 1: Okay, which (laughter) encompasses a lot of things.  All right, okay, so you were trying to reform your mother or bring her back to the church?  And it didn't work out?
Speaker 2: She kept living her life.
Speaker 1: I mean were you surprised that it didn't, you know, you weren't able to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: A little bit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A little bit, 'cause I was "all that", I thought, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so were you--how, did you stay in New York or did you--
Speaker 2: Un-un.
Speaker 1: All right.  So how long were you in--
Speaker 2: I got married.
Speaker 1: In New York?
Speaker 2: Un-un, West Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went back, I mean about--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Went back because I had met--
Speaker 1: How long were you in New York?
Speaker 2: A couple of years.
Speaker 1: A couple of years, but--
Speaker 2: A couple of years because I got married at nineteen.  See, I went to college, in my last year, when I was seventeen and eighteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 95620
Speaker 1: All right.  I went to New York, didn't stay long, came back to West Virginia because I had been, I had met my children's father [John Morris] in church, during a church service.  And I came back from New York to meet him and another friend of mine who was in church.  I really.  I talked to two guys in the same day.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you had two potential--
Speaker 1: Um-hum, and John was who I decided--instead of James, John was who I decided, that's who I would like to get to know and be with.  And things changed in my life.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so you're nineteen, and now what did John do?
Speaker 1: John was a, worked for Lenox, L-E-N-O-X [sic, Lennox] air conditioning and was a--starting to preach, just starting to preach.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And a good singer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: A very good singer.
Speaker 2: All right, so you got married in, this is 1969, I guess right?
Speaker 1: I got married in 1969.
Speaker 2: All right, so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: You are so good with your numbers.
Speaker 2: I'm the same age (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, you know, this is easy (laughter).  Yeah, I got married--
Speaker 2: So, 1969, you get married.  Now, what--so is the church, is the marriage in the Holiness church different from a marriage in another church or--
Speaker 1: Well, we got married in my aunt's church in West Virginia.  I don't remember--when did we get married?  March the 2nd, 1969.  I remember it now.
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm just asking if the ceremony was any different from a ceremony in a, say a Baptist church or a Methodist church?
Speaker 1: I don't know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I don't know.  I don't know.  I really don't.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But it was a nice wedding.
Speaker 2: All right, so did you court that long--well, you didn't court that long, right, 'cause--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Un-un, didn't court long.  We didn't court long 'cause I had seen him and kind of like fellowshipped with him off and on, you know, when Aunt Mabel [Page] would be preaching and going around in churches.  So I would see him.  We would see each other, you know.  And I'd write a little note and stuff.
Speaker 2: Okay,-- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I saw him in church one time, and I said, I'm gon' marry you. (Laughter)  And it happened (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, so--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Oh, boy (laughter), I didn't know I was gonna go there--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --did you have a family right away?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Did you have a family right away?
Speaker 1: We, I had my first child at twenty-one, and my second son at twenty-three.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He came a year and a half later--
Speaker 2: And what was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --because John, I want to say that we moved.  I want to say that he got a church.  I think we moved.  I'm not sure.  But I wanna say that Kenneth was born--John was born--Kenneth was born in Columbus, Ohio.  John was born--we moved to Birmingham, Alabama.  John got a church in Bessemer, Alabama.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right outside of Birmingham.
Speaker 1: That's right.  Bessemer, Alabama.
Speaker 2: So, I mean--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Pastored at--I was twenty-one, because he was born down there.
Story_ID: 95621
Speaker 1: But you said you first moved to Columbus [Ohio], first and then?
Speaker 2: I think it was Birmingham, and then we moved to Columbus.
Speaker 1: Oh, Bessemer first and then Columbus?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, and then Columbus.
Speaker 1: So Bessemer, that's a steel town, I know, right, and--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, had a nice little small church.  He [John Morris] was a good minister.  We sang together.  He ran revivals, recorded an album.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Our lead song was, "I Feel a Shout Comin' On".  It was nice, a nice little run.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was it--he recorded an album.  So this is a big event in your life, 'cause this is--is this the first time you'd been associated with someone who'd produced an album?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Well, what did you learn from that experience?
Speaker 2: It was a nice experience.  We blessed a whole lot of people.  He wrote all the music--I have that album cover at my house, I think.  Somebody gave it to me.  Somebody bought it on eBay or something and sent it to me.  So I have it.  It's called "New Life", N-E-W, L-I-F-E, yeah.  And we sang and went around, went around doing revivals.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the album consisted of, I mean--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Music, songs.
Speaker 1: --performers were--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Me and him.
Speaker 1: You and your husband, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So you were singing a duet or--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: We were duet.
Speaker 1: And were you backed up by any musicians or--
Speaker 2: Backed up, he played the organ and piano.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was very talented.
Speaker 1: So is that all the backup you had?
Speaker 2: I think we had a choir on a couple of songs.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was there a--
Speaker 2: Bishop McMurray produced it out of Los Angeles [California], 'cause he had met us in traveling.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's what I was trying to ask about the--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah, he had met us.
Speaker 1: --production of it.
Speaker 2: He had met us, and he produced it.
Speaker 1: So was it produced in a recording studio somewhere?
Speaker 2: I think we were in church.  I'm not sure.  I'm not remembering.  '
Speaker 1: So they just brought the equipment to the church and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, I have it.  I'm gon' look that up.  But I think so.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And that was the only album that we did.  He did another one later himself with a choir.  But that's the only one that we did.  "I Feel a Shout Coming On".
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And another song was "I'm Getting Stronger".  I'll never forget that.  Wow (laughter), yeah, nice, it was nice.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you got this church in Bessemer [Alabama]--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --and you've got an album out, and you're doing revivals.
Speaker 2: And we pastored, I'm not sure how long, but it was a brief pastorate there.  And then we went to California, went to California, and then West Virginia or Columbus, one of the two.
Speaker 1: What part of California did you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Los Angeles.
Speaker 1: Okay, Los Angeles.
Speaker 2: I lived in Los Angeles, and that was brief.  That wasn't long.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your husband have a church there?
Speaker 2: No, he worked as an associate minister under Bishop Robert McMurray.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's the same fellow that--I mean the same bishop that produced that album, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: That was really nice.  That was a very special time.  We were a lovely husband and wife team at that time.  We really were.  We did a whole lot of things and helped a whole lot of people.
Speaker 1: Okay, and this--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And we blessed a whole lot of people through our music 'cause they liked it, the way we sang together, and he did--he would do commercials, and it was really nice.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went from Los Angeles to Columbus?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: All right, and did he have a church in Columbus?
Speaker 2: He worked out of a church in Columbus with someone.
Speaker 1: All right, so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He was evangelizing.  He was evangelizing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were you on the East side of Columbus or--
Speaker 2: We were on--you know, I don't remember where we lived, but I know we lived in Columbus, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So how long did you stay there?
Speaker 2: Brief.  We moved around.
Speaker 1: So during this time, you were primarily doing music with your husband, you know, and being a mother, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And pastor's wife, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, minister's wife.
Speaker 1: Minister's wife.
Story_ID: 95622
Speaker 1: Um-hum, and then he got a call for this church in Chicago [Illinois] and we came to Chicago.
Speaker 2: Okay, so what was the name of the church here?
Speaker 1: Apostolic--no Bethel Apostolic Church--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: --on Garfield Boulevard.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is on the West side of Chicago?
Speaker 1: Um-hum, 'cause the kids were small, 'cause they went to elementary school in Hazel Crest.  That's how I know.
Speaker 2: So this is about 1975 or so?
Speaker 1: I think somewhere around that time.  He got a call to pastor.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this is in Garfield Park?
Speaker 1: Garfield Boulevard and Halsted.
Speaker 2: Okay, Garfield Boulevard and Halsted?
Speaker 1: No, Garfield.  I, I'm not sure.
Speaker 2: It's on the West side, it's Garfield Park, I guess, but if it's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No, it's off of the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --on the South side--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Dan Ryan on Gar--55th.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's 55th, yeah, yeah, that's not the West side.  That's, yeah, that's South side, yeah.
Speaker 1: Garfield, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.  Garfield Boulevard and Halsted, okay.
Speaker 1: He pastored a nice little church there for a while.  And that started my Chicago experience.
Speaker 2: All right, so what else did you get involved in here in Chicago?  This is 1973, right--'75 [1975], you were saying, it was '75 [1975].
Speaker 1: Seventy-five [1975].  I got involved in radio.  I got involved in radio.
Speaker 2: All right.  Now, there're several black radio stations, you know, in Chicago at the time.  But what station did you get involved with at that time?
Speaker 1: Charles Sherrell, oh, wow.  What was the name of the--it was in Harvey [Illinois].  I can't think of the, 'cause I went from there to V103-1390.
Speaker 2: I remember.  This is the same radio station in Harvey that did Jazz during the day?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, and on Sundays, they did gospel and the reverend that died that, that pastored at 63rd, that Pastor [Gerald] Dew has that church now, Antioch [Missionary Baptist Church].  What was that pastor's name?
Speaker 2: Antioch Baptist Church, right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I can't think of that pastor's name [Reverend Dr. Wilbur Daniel].  He was tall.  He was your complexion. I can't think of his name.
Speaker 2: I can see him.
Speaker 1: You know who I'm talking about.
Speaker 2: I know who you're talking about.
Speaker 1: I introduced him every Sunday.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I did a little gospel radio.
Speaker 2: We interviewed his eldest church member, Amazon Brooks.  She was 107 years old when she passed away.
Speaker 1: Oh, my goodness.
Speaker 2: She was the oldest registered voter in the City of Chicago.
Speaker 1: My goodness.
Speaker 2: Reverend--it almost came to me.  It almost came to me.
Speaker 1: I know his name.
Speaker 2: Daniels, Daniels.
Speaker 1: Daniels.
Speaker 2: Reverend Daniels, right.
Speaker 1: Reverend Daniels was his name.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yep, that's it, yeah.  I was on that radio station, Charles Sherrell.  What an experience.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, so this is, if I recall correctly--correct me if I'm wrong.  I think he operated out of a trailer or something or a mobile unit?
Speaker 1: Um-hum, and while they were building Antioch.  You're talking about Charles Sherrell?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the radio station.
Speaker 1: The radio station, uh-huh, a little box, a little place, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was out there once for something, and I can't remember what.  But I was out there once.
Speaker 1: Um-hum, I used to turn the station on, okay, got my FCC license.  It was wonderful.  I'll never forget that experience.  I enjoyed that.  I worked for him.  I can't remember how many years I worked for him, but I know I worked for him first before I, before Barry Mayo [HM] hired me at 103, V103.
Story_ID: 95623
Speaker 1: Now, how, what is the gospel music scene like in Chicago [Illinois], in terms of--I know you're in a particular denomination, and yet, there are a lot of, a lot of the gospel, important gospel people are different denominations from each other.  And I just wondered if there was a, if the denominational thing plays any factor at all--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Not at all, not in gospel.
Speaker 1: --and who.  Plus, we have, Mahalia Jackson was here in those days, I guess.  She would--wasn't she still alive then?
Speaker 2: She was still alive, but gospel is gospel.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Gospel is gospel.  You didn't have all that temporary stuff that came later.  You didn't have all of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Un-un, James Cleveland, Albertina Walker, the [Gospel] Caravans, we'd play all that good music.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Best of Thomas Dorsey, you play all that good music.
Speaker 1: Was Thomas Dorsey--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Choirs--
Speaker 1: --still alive in that--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He was still alive because I went, I attended his funeral.  That's how I know he was still alive.
Speaker 1: Now, he is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Matter of fact, I got John P. Kee to sing at his funeral.
Speaker 1: Tell us about, now, he's known as the Father of Gospel--
Speaker 2: The Father of Gospel.  Tell us about him.
Speaker 1: I met him at a gospel festival that Mrs. Juanita Passmore [HM] took me to.  And we know that he did other music, but he was compelled to change his lifestyle into gospel music, which he did do.  I think it was when he, his wife lost a baby or something, he wrote the song "Precious Lord" and started the gospel choirs and choruses convention out of Ebenezer Church before Pilgrim Baptist Church.  And that's what I know, and it just, you know, escalated into great events and great things.
Speaker 2: Did you get a chance to meet him?
Speaker 1: I did meet him.  I met him twice, have a picture with him.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Didn't bring that picture.  I have a picture with him and Mrs. Passmore.
Story_ID: 95624
Speaker 1: All right, so you're assisting Charles Sherrell--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --with his radio operation?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Are you doing only gospel?
Speaker 2: I'm doing only gospel.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Had a gospel program, talked him into it.  He hired me.  And he loved it, ooh, he loved me on Sundays.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had it goin' on.
Speaker 1: So what was your time slot on Sundays?
Speaker 2: Six to 8:00.  I was 6:00 to 8:00 because at 8:00, I'd bring on Reverend Daniels [Wilbur Daniel] and Antioch Missionary Baptist Church of Chicago.  Yeah, that was wonderful.
Speaker 1: So, is this your first radio show?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us about the first one now?
Speaker 2: I did a little radio in Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just a little radio in Los Angeles at Stevie Wonder's radio station, KJLH, "Kindness, Joy, Love and Happiness", which was the station he bought, that he called his toy.  I did a little bit there.
Speaker 1: So was this in '73 [1973]--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --or '74 [1974]?  What?
Speaker 2: Early, around that time.
Speaker 1: Around '73 [1973], '74 [1974], okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, just a little bit there.  It wasn't long.  That was a little, short spin there.  But my first real show was Charles Sherrell in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So what was the public reception to this show?
Speaker 2: Wonderful, uplifting.  Where did she come from?  That's fabulous.  When you gon' be on again?  Next Sunday.  It was a hit.
Story_ID: 95625
Speaker 1: Now in those days--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was a hit.
Speaker 1: --in the mid '70s [1970s], who had the most popular gospel show in town, would you say?  I mean just looking back at it, I know, before you got started?  Who--
Speaker 2: I wanna say Jackie Haselrig, that's what I wanna say, Jackie Haselrig had it on V103.  That's what I wanna say, okay.  I'll tell you who else.  Let me give you another one.  Crawford Broadcasting, what is his name?  Crawford Broadcasting, Taft Harris.
Speaker 1: Taft Harris, okay.
Speaker 2: Taft Harris, T-A-F-T, Taft Harris, Crawford Broadcasting.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Taft Harris--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, Taft Harris on Crawford Broadcasting--
Speaker 1: Jackie Haselrig, and--
Speaker 2: And Jackie Haselrig on the other station.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was [Reverend Dr.] Stanley Keeble [HM] doing anything on the air in those days?
Speaker 2: Stanley Keeble was doing something, but I just can't tell you what he was doing (laughter), other than playing for some church.  I'm not sure what else--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --Reverend Stanley Keeble was doing.
Speaker 1: All right, so there's a lot of, you know, well-known or nationally-known gospel personalities in Chicago [Chicago]?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, oh, God, yeah.
Speaker 1: So did you--so you had started to meet these personalities.  You met--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --you met Thomas Dorsey, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, and the Barrett Sisters, and Albertina Walker, oh, my God, took 'em flowers.  They were appearing at some program, and I went in there with flowers in my hand, okay.  I was determined to meet them.  It's a wonderful experience.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the Barrett Sisters and Albertina--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.  They were on, appearing on the same program.
Speaker 1: Now, these are people that--
Speaker 2: Legends.
Speaker 1: --my parents had on record when I was growing up.
Speaker 2: Oh, my God [whispering].
Speaker 1: You know, so--
Speaker 2: And we hit it off just like that, just like that, became my dearest friends.
Speaker 1: Now, can you--now, both of these, I mean the Barrett Sisters and Albertina Walker are legends in gospel--
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, became very close to them, worked with them, hired them, got into the opportunity of hiring them.  I'm trying to think when I got hired with the City of Chicago.
Speaker 1: It's in '89 [1989] from what I understand.
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-nine [1989]
Story_ID: 95626
Speaker 1: So you're working with Charles Sherrell.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Did you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I had a lot of fun working there.  Let me tell you.  It is such an incredible feeling to go into a radio station and be able to play music you choose and bless people's lives.  I had the Barrett Sisters to come over there and interviewed them in person.  There's this young girl.  I can't think of her name right now.  She married a professional football player, little girl.  What's her--young, her name?  Can't think of her name right now.  She came there and, and people just getting their start, she was.  But, oh, I wish I could think of her name.  I hope it comes back to me.  But got an opportunity 'cause I had personality, right?  So I'm gon' reach out to these people, invite 'em to come over to the station, interviewed folk live.  And then just the opportunity to play music, to make people feel good and make their day and to inspire them, and to give them a dose of inspiration.  I had an opportunity to do that.  That made me happy, and others too.
Speaker 1: Now, who were some of the sponsors of your program?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.
Speaker 1: I'm sure their products were wonderful, right (laughter)?  Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Thank God for the sponsors.
Speaker 1: Yes, thank goodness for them.
Speaker 2: Thank God for the sponsors--oh, Isabelle Joseph Johnson was doing radio then.
Speaker 1: Isabelle Joseph--
Speaker 2: Joseph Johnson.  I met her and talked to her 'cause she said, girl, I like your program.  You're good.  You gon' go a lot of places.  Now, I do remember her furniture company because Charles Sherrell went after them.  But I don't know if he got 'em or not.  Okay, oh, Moo & Oink.
Speaker 1: Oh, Moo & Oink.
Speaker 2: Moo & Oink.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That was who--
Speaker 1: Calumet Meat Company.
Speaker 2: Moo & Oink, please forgive me.  You know I love you.  Okay, I love you Barry, love you (unclear), yes.  They were one of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they said that the meat was good, and the music was good.  They went together.
Speaker 1: Okay, their official name was the Calumet Meat Company.
Speaker 2: Calumet Meat Company, that's who they were then, the Calumet Meat Company.
Speaker 1: Moo & Oink, yeah.
Speaker 2: Calumet Meat Company, you're right.
Speaker 1: They sponsored a lot of black radio in those days.
Speaker 2: A whole lot of black radio.  Yeah, they knew that was their market.  They knew that was their market.  If I recall, now that I'm thinking, I think Sears--no, was there a store called Goldblast?
Speaker 1: Goldblatt's, yeah.
Speaker 2: Goldblacks?
Speaker 1: Goldblatt's.
Speaker 2: They were on.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: That store was on.  I think that was a clothing store, if I'm correct?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was like a department store--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, because I--
Speaker 1: --a pre--it wasn't a big-time department store.  But it was a--
Speaker 2: No, but I remember going to that store and they saying, thank you for doing what you do on the radio.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause they had stores in Roseland and in Englewood.
Speaker 2: They did, Englewood was where it was.  But I've not remembering anyone else at this moment.
Story_ID: 95627
Speaker 1: Okay, so your show is catching on, and did you-- the logical growth, outgrowth of a good radio show is live events with the performers--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, I would do, host programs, started to host programming, started, people start calling me up, asking me to host.  Would you please come to my church?  Antioch [Missionary Baptist Church] was the first church I went to.  Reverend Daniels [Wilbur Daniel] was so sweet.  He was such a wonderful person.  He was always so kind.  He loved his wife [Marguerite Richards].  Oh, my God, he loved his wife.  She loved me, she just thought I was the most loveliest person.  She said, and I want to thank you for your music 'cause you know how to play music.  I'll never forget that.  Those were some great days.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you did your first public program there?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And who was on the program?  Do you remember who was on the program at Antioch Church?
Speaker 2: No, other than his choir, I don't remember who else sang?  I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you were just like the host for the program?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, I introduced.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that just started, where I started just going from one place to the other.  I mean a whole lot of it.
Speaker 1: So people were coming, I mean you were a draw then since they heard you on the radio, you were a draw for their programs?
Speaker 2: They were coming to see me and shake my hand and give me a hug, for real.  It made my day and theirs.  I think I was flight somebody.  I want to say I was Flight 1570, take a flight with me.  I think that, I had a little cliche or something going on there.  I think I did.  I'd have to ask Ron Baker that because I remember him coming over to the station.  But I think I did have something like Flight 1570.  I want to say that was the call letters, 1570.
Speaker 1: Okay, AM radio?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, AM radio, 1570.  That wasn't WVON.
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: No, I think it was 1570.
Speaker 1: This is Charles Sherrell's station.
Speaker 2: Sherrell, yeah, I think I was a flight.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  I can't think of the call letters right now, but anybody--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But I think I was on a flight.
Speaker 1: --who wants to research it can find it.
Speaker 2: Okay, I think I was on a flight, and I was saying, "Come go with me on my flight.  I'm gon' take you somewhere", and I would take you.  And then when I would host, I would say, "Come meet me, 'cause we've landed.  So come on over and meet me." And that's how people were hugging me and-
Story_ID: 95628
Speaker 1: Did you have like a script for how, I mean or an order of how you would things?  Would you start off with a rousing rendition or would you, something slow--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: In music?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, right, in terms of--
Speaker 2: Always fast.  Always fast.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Always rousing fast because I wanted to draw people in.  I think it was Aretha [Franklin].  I want to think it was Aretha.  I wanna think it was Oland Mark (ph.).  I'm not exactly sure, but I think it was an Aretha song.  I always had that fast-moving music and then I'd slow it down to something moving like, Reverend Cleveland, "Peace Be Still" [singing] "Master, the tempest is raging . . .".  And, you know, you could feel that.  You see what I'm saying.  If you playing a real fast song, and you got the people, and then you slow it down with something meaningful like that, you don't lose your audience.  They stay right with you.  I did that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then the Barrett Sisters.  I want to say "What a Wonderful World", but it may not have been that song.  But it was something that I was playing by them that was just so sweet.  And it was a trio, right?  So the people were like, oh, give me more, give me more.  When you gon' play that again?  Give me more.  It was wonderful.  Those were some beautiful days.
Speaker 1: So did it boil down to certain songs, a certain set--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --songs that you were playing every week?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  And certain songs you do play.
Speaker 1: Every week, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, certain songs you do play every week 'cause they--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I know that gospel--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --work.
Speaker 1: --programs often do that and, because of the life of a gospel record is longer than a secular one in some respects, you know, 'cause you, they don't, you know, they're not--you know, so--I mean they don't, there's, I guess the gospel charts stay more static than say the popular charts?
Speaker 2: Yes, they do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, they do.
Speaker 1: So a song like, you know, the James Cleveland's songs, I guess--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: If, it could be "Peace be Still" or "I've Stood on the Banks" or 'cause he did more slow great songs than he did fast songs, like "Some Got A Hold of Me", you know, he'd do--I'd play that.  But I would play them slow, smoothing songs because he had that kind of voice.  You know, he had a rusty, kind of what, laid back rusty voice, and people liked it, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, so I just wondered how you paced the show and--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  I'd go by feelings.  I'd go by how I feel.  That's what I do today.
Speaker 1: And I suppose recording companies send you new releases and that sort of thing too?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  You go by what you feel, and what you feel, if you feel it, somebody else is gonna feel it.  You're gonna touch somebody else, and that's what you're there to do.
Speaker 1: So--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I loved it.  It was easy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause it was something I loved to do.  I was excited to do it, and then had a job doing it too.  It was wonderful.
Speaker 1: All right, all right--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, and people catch on to somethin' good now.  See, it don't take you a long time to catch on to something that's good, that works.  You know, it's like, she's comin' on when?  I'll be--they're listening.  They're right there.  And then when you're going out and you're hosting programs, and people standing in line to shake your hand.  It's a beautiful honor.  It's very humbling.
Speaker 1: So did I ask you what year your show started on--
Speaker 2: I don't know if I remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, this--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: --had to be after '75 [1975].  Would you think '76 [1976], '77 [1977]?  How old were you then?
Speaker 2: I don't--
Speaker 1: About 30, 28, 29, 30?
Speaker 2: I was young.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was young.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I was young.
Speaker 1: So--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Those were the days (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.  And--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, my God.
Speaker 1: Did you ever do anything at Operation PUSH?
Speaker 2: I did.  I hosted for them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I hosted many gospel programs for them because Reverend [Jesse L.] Jackson [HM] liked the way I did what I did.  And his director, what's his director's name?  I can't think of his name right now, but I know it so well.
Speaker 1: Reverend Brady (unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He's an organist.  He plays real well.
Speaker 1: Oh, the music director.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the music, (unclear).  He would always say, I need Pam.  So, yeah, I did some things for them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, things just ignited, did a lot of hosting.
Story_ID: 95629
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I know the churches in Chicago [Illinois] are really involved in the political scene too as well, and--
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Speaker 1: Yeah, towards 1983, I know we had the election of Harold Washington, you know, as mayor, I mean his campaign was building from 1982, you know, to '83 [1983].  Was the gospel music scene a part of that campaign?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum.  I had an opportunity to meet him and host a gospel event, through Mr. [Edward] Gardner [HM].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Through Mr. Gardner, 'cause I was doing a little work with him, Ed Gardner.
Speaker 1: Of Soft Sheen Products.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, it was doing Black on Black Love campaign.
Speaker 1: Okay, right.  And this is an important step toward the, that election, the Black on Black Love campaign is--
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.
Speaker 1: --and the voter registration campaign.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It was, yeah.
Speaker 2: Very important, very important, and they went together.  And, and the late Mayor Harold Washington loved gospel music.
Speaker 1: Right, and so many of his campaign speeches were given in black churches.
Speaker 2: That's where the people were.  You want to get a message across.  Go to a black church, go to a black church on a Sunday morning.  You'll see 'em.  That's the people.  Very good days, those were very good days, very meaningful days.
Story_ID: 95630
Speaker 1: Now, were you still in Harvey [Illinois], broadcasting in Harvey during the Harold Washington campaign days?
Speaker 2: I want to say that I had went to V-103 then 'cause I know we were, I was driving out to Oak Park [Illinois] 'cause it was, the signal was over in a nursing home.  I was coming out of there so I think I was already there.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, they were operating out of a, what, the Oak Park Arms Hotel.
Speaker 2: That's it.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And you remember.  That's where we were.
Speaker 1: Right, so what happened--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I'll never forget that.
Speaker 1: --how did that transition take place from--
Speaker 2: I got an opportunity to do something better, met Barry Mayo [HM] and convinced him, I convinced him to hire me.  That was a beautiful thing.
Speaker 1: So this is about 1982 or so or--
Speaker 2: You're good with numbers.
Speaker 1: You think so?  Does that sound right?
Speaker 2: You're good with numbers. [Nodding, yes]
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Good with numbers.
Speaker 1: Now, about, so circa 1982 'cause this is before the Harold Washington campaign--well, it's during the campaign, I guess or as the campaign is being launched.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And, okay, so, you're on V103.  Now, this is FM now, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I'm trying to figure out was I on the AM--you know what?  I want to tell you I was on--I wanna say I was on the AM station.
Speaker 1: Now, I didn't--I'd forgotten he had an AM station.
Speaker 2: They had an AM station called WBMX.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: That's where I was.  I was on WBMX.  That's where I was.  Before I went to V-103, I was on WBMX, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: Now, you remember that.
Speaker 1: So was your show roughly--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Overnight, all night.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Overnight, all night.  I was on the radio overnight, all night before I went to V103 on Sunday mornings.
Speaker 1: So overnight, all night.  Now, this is all-night gospel?
Speaker 2: All night gospel.  I was on midnight to 6:00 AM.  And I said there are people that are working while you're sleeping.  I'm gon' be your company.  And I gave them good music.  It was so beautiful.  I remember those days.
Speaker 1: I never would a guessed there would have been a gospel music market late at night 'cause I thought all good gospel people would be asleep (laughter).
Speaker 2: No, they gotta stay up.  Some of them worked in nursing homes and old people and--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --some people working.  That was encouraging to them.  That was delightful to hear that kind of music.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, I was up.  They were up with me too.
Speaker 1: So now were the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: 'Cause I, and the reason I know I did that was because I got the job with the city while I was on all night at WBMX.  I remember it clearly now.  It's coming back to me.
Speaker 1: And the city job didn't start till '89 [1989], so you were on--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was on overnight.
Speaker 1: --all night from around '82 [1982]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: For quite a while.
Speaker 1: --through '89 [1989].
Speaker 2: Um-hum, did a good job for them too.  It was beautiful.  You build an audience, okay.  People hear about you, they listen, and then you build that audience.  That audience comes.  And it don't take you a long time when you're doing something good.  You're inspiring people and uplifting them with good music and playing long songs, and you programming your own music.  I had it going on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Those were great days.
Story_ID: 95631
Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned before--I'd asked you about meeting Thomas Dorsey before, and did you realize he was the Father of Gospel music when you met him?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, oh, yes, oh, yes.  Aunt Juanita, Mrs. Juanita Passmore [HM] had already said, we're gonna have this gathering and meeting.  And I already had did my research.  I knew.
Speaker 1: Now, you--I suppose you were very close with Mrs. Passmore?
Speaker 2: Very much.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very close.
Speaker 1: I know Mrs.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: She listened to me on the radio, fell in love with me, and after my Aunt Mabel [Page] passed, she said, I'm gonna be your Aunt Mabel.  I'm Aunt Juanita.
Speaker 1: That sounds like Ms. Passmore.
Speaker 2: That's what she did.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this--
Speaker 2: She was with me a long time, been with me a whole lot of years, several dozens of years.
Speaker 1: Now, Ms. Passmore, unlike your Aunt Mabel, was involved in every aspect of civic life.
Speaker 2: Every aspect, the opposite.  But we connected with the music.  We connected with the music.  She said I inspired her, and I made her feel good, and she liked the, I think she appreciated the way I was raised.  So she wanted to be that staple in my life that was no longer living
Story_ID: 95632
Speaker 1: Because, see, my Aunt Mabel [Page], which I hadn't told you about, after I moved here to Chicago [Illinois], I would get in my car and drive all way to West Virginia just to be with her and go to church on any given week.  I would get in my car and drive to West Virginia just to go to church to be with my Aunt Mabel.
Speaker 2: So did you have the weekends free basically or--when you worked at BMX?
Speaker 1: Um-hum, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So it was like a five-day a week, all night show?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Then on the weekends--
Speaker 1: Um-hum, yep.  I would go.  I'd go and go to Sunday morning service and take her to Kentucky Fried Chicken for dinner, nothing like it in the world.  Pam's home.  It was just beautiful.  I did that more times than I can remember.  It's in my book.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: It was wonderful.  It was a wonderful experience, take her clothes, take her slips and different other little things that she liked, whole slips actually and some other things, Ensure (laughter), Depends.  I'd stop in Dayton, Ohio and pick those up and keep on going.  It was nothing for me to drive 486 miles to be with my aunt--
Speaker 2: And (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --and go to church.  I went to go to church.  And I had to sing.  I was talking then.  Now, I'm on the radio.  But I had to sing, I had to come up with a song.  I'd get down there and say, [singing] "I've been through the storm and rain, but I made it."  And Aunt Mabel would go like, "Oh, thank you, Jesus, hallelujah, thank you, Lord."  It's some good ole days.  It's the good ole days.
Speaker 2: So was singing a part of your appearances in the Chicago churches too where you did a lot of singing?
Speaker 1: No, speaking.
Speaker 2: Speaking, okay.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yes.
Speaker 2: You didn't sing in Chicago?
Speaker 1: Un-un, no, I sung in West Virginia (laughter).  I sung in West Virginia.  I sure did.  I didn't go home without singing.  I'd better not come home and not sing.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm going like, I don't sing anymore.  She say, you gon' sing here.  I'd say, [singing] "Precious Lord, take my hand, lead me on, let me stand.  I am tired . . . " And, oh, she'd just be on the corner saying, "Sing, Pam, sing".  [singing] "I am weak, I am warm . . . ".  And I'd build that song, and Aunt Mabel played the piano.  So Aunt Mabel is over there picking on the song while I'm singing.  Make her day.  I'd do that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 95633
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, back here in Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 1: Um-hum, I'd come on back to Chicago now, and do what I was doing.
Speaker 2: Now, we'll get back to Aunt Mabel [Page], but--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You met Mahalia Jackson here right, before she passed?
Speaker 1: I met her with Albertina Walker.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Albertina took me to meet her.
Speaker 2: Tell me about that.  About when was that that you met Mahalia Jackson?
Speaker 1: I hate to tell you I don't remember.  I just remember eating chicken.
Speaker 2: It seems like it had to be--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I don't remember.
Speaker 2: Late '70s [1970s] or early '80s [1980s], I guess, right? (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: She said, I want you to meet her.  I want you to meet his woman, Pam Morris.  And I met her, and she say, "Keep doing what you doing. You good."  And then her and Queen did their talking.  Yep, Albertina.  She took me to meet her.
Speaker 2: So you would just listen to 'em talk after they--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, oh, God, yeah.  They'd talk about everything (laughter), everything (laughter), everything.
Speaker 2: You just threw a pitch right down over the plate, and I'm supposed to ask you like, what now?
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: What did they talk about?
Speaker 1: Everything (laughter).
Speaker 2: Everything (laughter).
Speaker 1: "Girl, did you see so and so?  Did you--Ain't that a shame?"  I mean they talked about everything.  It was really nice (laughter).  I'm sorry.  You should turn the tape off right now (laughter).  This is a moment.  Oh, God.
Speaker 2: That's all right.  It'll be okay.
Speaker 1: They talked about everything, everything.
Speaker 2: So you had the privilege of listening to them.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, because I was okay.  I was okay.  Um-hum.
Speaker 2: So you had to feel by that time that you would eventually--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, I was all right.  I was in.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I was in.
Speaker 2: Like the mafia says, a made person.  You were in there.
Speaker 1: I was in.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hum, they'd talk about men (laughter).  She said, he ain't no good.  He ain't never been no good.  He ain't no good (laughter).  I'm not gonna tell you who that was (laughter).
Speaker 2: All right, okay.
Speaker 1: Oh, God.  Okay.  I'm sorry.  I didn't mean for you to take me there.  (Laughter)  That was a beautiful experience.
Speaker 2: Well, I meant for you to go, I meant to just, there had to be historic--
Speaker 1: It was.
Speaker 2: --to have Albertina Walker and Mahalia Jackson--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And Albertina drove, she drove her Mercedes, and I rode with her.  She drove, and I rode with her.  That was really nice.  She said, we're going over to Mahalia's house.
Speaker 2: Now, these are two international gospel stars that, you know, are known all over the country.
Speaker 1: Um-hum, and I wanted to take a picture.  And she said, take a picture for what?  And then she said a bad word (laughter).  Heck no--she didn't say that.  You don't need to take no picture.  You here.  And I said, yes, ma'am.  It was a beautiful experience.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, just a beautiful experience, trust me when I say it.  And we ate chicken and potato salad, chicken and potato salad and Kool-Aid, Kool-Aid.  We had Kool-Aid.  I wanna say cherry, but it might have been lemon-lime.  But we had Kool-Aid.
Story_ID: 95634
Speaker 1: Okay, so we were talking about you meeting Mahalia Jackson, through Albertina Walker.
Speaker 2: Fabulous, the Queen of Gospel and the--
Speaker 1: You knew the Barrett Sisters and--
Speaker 2: The Barrett Sisters and Mahalia was labeled the greatest singer in the world.  And she really was.
Speaker 1: She was considered that by many, all over the world.  That's what, she was considered in my little home town and everywhere else.
Speaker 2: A great woman, she was just a great woman.  It was just a great meeting for me and the honor that I had, and the Barrett Sisters.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it would--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Delois, Rodessa, and Rodina [sic, Billie].  Delois went on to be with the Lord as the Queen went on to be with the Lord.  But knowing them, Jessy Dixon, Reverend Milton Brunson, knowing all of them and having traveled with them, having hired them.  It's a good feeling.
Story_ID: 95635
Speaker 1: Now, what was your--did you stage any gospel shows yourself before you started working for the city or anything?
Speaker 2: I think I did a couple of concerts or maybe appreciation services that had been given in my honor for being a radio host, but not a lot, just a few.  One was given out at Calvary Baptist Church, Calvary Missionary Baptist Church out on Jeffery.  And then I think another one was done at Mt. Pisgah.  One was done at Mt. Pisgah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I was wondering if you had accrued experience in, you know, putting on a gospel program.
Speaker 2: Just a couple of 'em, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But every week for about seven years, you know, you had an all-night gospel show, right, on WBMX?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And so in 1989, you joined the City of Chicago, the Department of Special Events--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Got a phone call--
Speaker 1: --Events, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I had hosted the Gospel Festival several years as a guest host from a radio station.  And that particular year in '89 [1989], Avis LaVelle [HM] had seen me on the side and Kathy Osterman, when I was hosting--Sasha Dalton was doing the Gospel Festival, Sasha Dalton.  And they had, I think some kind of way taken a liking to me.  I remember Kathy Osterman asking Avis LaVelle who I was, okay.  She asked, who is that lady?  Who is that lady?  And one thing led to another and I'm not sure about the disconnection there with the City of Chicago and Sasha.  I just knew that her time was ending or it was coming to a close there.  And--
Speaker 1: Was she considered a part of the previous administration--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, with Mayor Harold Washington.
Speaker 1: And Mayor [Eugene] Sawyer [HM], I think had--he was mayor for two years--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --after--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, she was, yes, she was, right.
Speaker 1: --Harold Washington passed.  (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: right, and now the new--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: He served out the term of, unexpired term of Harold Washington.
Speaker 2: That's right.  And now the new mayor, Mayor--
Speaker 1: [Richard M.] Daley.
Speaker 2: --Daley was in.  It was a new administration.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and Avis LaVelle was working for the new mayor.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  And Kathy Osterman was an alderman but also working in special events.  And they was going through a transition period.  I think it was like maybe six months or so that there was not--they were going through whatever, and then I'd hosted.  And then I got a phone call.  I was on my way to King's Island with my family, on my way with my children's father [John Morris] and our children.  We were going, as a family, we were going on a road trip to King's Island.  And I got a phone call.
Speaker 1: That's in Cincinnati, right?
Speaker 2: In Cincinnati, Ohio, got a phone call and I took the call and said, oh.  They said they'd like to come down and meet me for a possible opportunity.  And I said, well, I'm on my way out of town.  Can I come when I get back?  And I remember making that phone call when I got back on a Wednesday.  Next thing you know, I'm meeting with Kathy Oysterman and Mayor Richard Daley and received the position of special events coordinator for the Chicago Gospel Music Festival.
Story_ID: 95636
Speaker 1: Now, Chicago [Illinois], for those who don't know, has several festivals.  And they were started under, I think under the Washington [Mayor Harold Washington] administration.
Speaker 2: Was it the Washington or was it Byrne's, Jane Byrne?
Speaker 1: Could be.  Now, I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It might have been Mayor Byrne.
Speaker 1: You raise a point, yeah.  It might have been--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it might have been Mayor Byrne's because I know Stanley Keeble [HM], not Stanley Keeble, L. Stanley Davis did something with her, with gospel, and I think they had something Blues that was going on with someone else.
Speaker 1: There's a blues festival, the jazz festival--
Speaker 2: Jazz.
Speaker 1: --was very old.
Speaker 2: The jazz festival was going on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That was going on a long time.
Speaker 2: Right 'cause Penny Tyler did that out of the Special Events office.
Speaker 1: Right, right, but the Office of Special Events, you know, was coordinating all these huge festivals that would draw people from all over the country--
Speaker 2: All over the country.
Speaker 1: --to Chicago.
Speaker 2: All over the country, and the Taste of Chicago.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Festivals, plus the Taste, which was always, I think in late June or early July.
Speaker 1: In those days, the festivals were held at the Petrillo Band Shell, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, Petrillo Band Shell.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That's where it was.
Speaker 1: In Grant Park.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, Congress and Jackson.
Speaker 1: And so they're outdoors, lots of people.
Speaker 2: Lots of people, and that started a new opportunity and challenge in my life that turned out to be a blessing to bless a whole lot of people with a platform.
Story_ID: 95637
Speaker 1: Now, the Gospel festival, I believe, is in June, right?
Speaker 2: June.
Speaker 1: May or, is it June, June? (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: June
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay.  And it's how many days?
Speaker 2: It was two days, and then it went to four days, and then it went back.  So I can't tell you today exactly how many days it is.
Speaker 1: When you were running it, how many days?
Speaker 2: It was two days, and then we did four, did three.  We did three days.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was wonderful.  It was a great, it was a glorious experience.
Speaker 1: All right, so what were the--so were things pretty much in place when you came onboard or did you have to reinvent something?
Speaker 2: I added to what was already built.  It was kind of like a house.  You got a mansion, you want to add a couple of rooms, change the furniture around, keep the foundation.  That's what I did, brought in some people.  We had a team already working and a committee, brought in some people, added some more, people that I felt would be strength to this festival in building it to what it became.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what did you--so did you add like new performers or was the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I had new performers, more performers, added a committee, added a committee team, professionals in certain fields of what they did well to bring, to come in with suggestions and so forth.  And it was a volunteer committee, but a great group of civic leaders, which included Reverend Clay Evans [HM].  It included Deacon Ruben Burton who's over the Gospel Announcers Guild, Quartet Convention, I mean, not Gospel Announcers Guild, correction on that, who's over the Gospel American Quartet Convention, Chicago chapter, and worked--he was a quartet singer and is a quartet singer and had expertise in that field.  Fred Nelson, who at that time was the minister of music, I wanna say for First Church of Deliverance, but it might have been Christ Universal Temple.  But he brought such expertise and Percy Bady, Percy Gray, people that were working with choirs, brought in Pastor DeAndre Patterson, brought in people like that, that would help me to do a better, impressive, program, to bless hundreds of thousands of people.  And that's exactly what their contribution did.  I did a better job because of them.
Story_ID: 95638
Speaker 1: Reverend Evans didn't make all the meetings, but when he didn't make a meeting, he'd pray.  He'd call me and have prayer.  I have to tell you about his prayer before this I over.  I wanna tell you about the power of his prayer.
Speaker 2: Well, tell us about it now.
Speaker 1: Tell you now?
Speaker 2: Sure, this is, seems like a good time, unless it's kind of--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: He prayed for me before I would have a meeting.  He said, I can't always be there with you, but I can pray for you.  And, you know, I'm a WVON radio host, and I added something new to my radio program at WVON a couple of months ago or back in September, during Gospel Heritage Month, got an opportunity to honor Reverend Evans with three hours of his music or messages or prayers.  And I got an opportunity to go back through the help--somebody always helps you.  You don't do it all by yourself.  Brother Frank Walton found this prayer for me called Sweet Hour Prayer.  And I blessed the audience with that prayer, and I play it like every other Sunday on my broadcast on WVON, to the fact where people meet me out in places and pay my bill because I blessed them with a prayer.  I'm in line checking out, and I don't have a bill.  I'm sitting in a restaurant and don't have a bill because someone blessed me because I blessed them.  I'm a little emotional now as I talk about it because I know the power of prayer because of the way I was brought up and raised.  And prayer was always in my home.  And now I've been able in this uncertain world that we live in, to bless people with prayer, a recording that's right.  So that's what I wanted to say.
Speaker 2: Okay, so what you play is not only music but prayer--
Speaker 1: Yes, I do prayers, I--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --portions of sermons, I guess?
Speaker 1: Yeah, portions of sermons, sermonettes, and special events.  I speak on current events that are going on.  A lot of violence been in the City of Chicago [Illinois], a lot of violence, and I give special messages to our listeners in embracing our young people and making a difference in some young person's life.  Even my organization that I have called P. Morris and Associates where I bless college students to complete their education.  I'm about helping other people.
Story_ID: 95639
Speaker 1: So, yeah, Chicago [Illinois]'s a city where so many pastors are involved in civic life and politics and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, you got--almost have to be.  Not everybody, not that you should be, but you almost have to be 'cause it's right there.  Plus, a lot of politicians are members of churches.  You look at Dorothy Brown [HM], the Clerk of the Circuit Court during this time that you and I are sharing and talking and have been for years and is currently in that position, and she's a minister at one of the Church of God in Christ churches right here in the city.  You look at Ken Duncan, who's a State Representative.  We sit on the same row at Apostolic Faith Church where my pastor is Dr. Horace Smith [HM], where I go to church.  So that's just speaking of a couple of people, but there's so many.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And they're affected by this.  Congressman Danny Davis [HM], he listens to my program so much that he was at one of--Reverend [Clay] Evans [HM] was sitting at a recent Operation PUSH, [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King observation day, where they were honoring, commemorating the life of Dr. King, and went up and told them about the prayer, and said, I didn't stop until I went out and found it.  He did something I didn't, haven't done yet.  I haven't been able to find it.  So, but I'm gon' find it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 95640
Speaker 1: But back to the fest [Chicago Gospel Music Festival] itself, what are some of the--now, you were the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, and, but speaking of Reverend [Clay] Evans, let me take you back to the fest--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --and say that even when he wouldn't make meetings, he'd call me up and tell me about somebody.  He said, I think so and so need to be, put this down, consider this person, consider them.  He would do that.
Speaker 1: Oh, to be on the committee?
Speaker 2: He was on the committee.  So he was always helpful to me, had some great resources there.  I was good, but I was better because of the help that I had.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You gotta give credit where credit is due, had some great people working with me.
Speaker 1: Well, are there any special moments from the Gospel Festival, you wanna share with us, 'cause you did this for--
Speaker 2: Twenty years.
Speaker 1: Twenty years, yeah.
Speaker 2: Twenty years, so many.  It's so many.  I could go back, I could go back to Mom and Pop Winans, sitting on the side of the stage, Mom and Pop Winans sitting there saying, "Now, that's what I like right there", and I think at that time, it was Doc McKenzie and the Highlights singing "I've Won".  And they're sitting on the side of the stage.  I can go back to Solomon Burke when we went to Millennium Park, and he was one of, he was one of the featured performers.  And they laid the red carpet out for him, and he sat in throne chair, or whatever you call that big chair he sat in.  And he sang and he sat back there and sang, and people loved him, but it wasn't until Rance Allen came on behind him that people went crazy.
Speaker 1: So they performed with him?
Speaker 2: No, they performed after him.
Speaker 1: After him, yeah.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, with Destiny's Choir.  I think his choir was one of those choirs that performed with him or with Solomon Burke.  It's just so many highlights.  I can go back to when we honored Andrae Crouch and how beautiful that time was.  And then let me tell you about this wonderful experience, of sitting at a gospel supreme, Pastor Maceo Woods, Evening of Gospel Elegance and, at Christ Universal, and I look over at one of my board members.  Actually, it was Pastor DeAndre Patterson, and I had a "Ah-hah Moment", like Oprah [Winfrey] would say, an "Ah-hah" moment.  And I said, I wanna take elegance to Grant Park or to Millennium Park, downtown Chicago [Illinois].  And I just felt something from how he was doing what he was doing where I wanted to bring an evening of gospel elegance to the festival.  And I met with Fred Nelson, one of our board members.  He said, we can make this happen.
Speaker 1: Now, what characterizes an evening of gospel elegance?
Speaker 2: A gospel evening of elegance is when you dress up in your tux, in your long gowns, and you come out and you present yourself accordingly.  And you add into that a stringed instrument like a violinist or an opera singer or a tenor singer as we added in one of those performances from Three Men--Cook, Dixon and Young.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Three Mo' Tenors.
Speaker 2: Added Dixon in there.  Oh, my God, you talking about a evening of elegance.  He steps out in his tuxedo and sings in that baritone voice, and it rings throughout the park.  Oh, my God, and we dressed up too.  Nothing like it, nothing like it, and God blessed us to do this for the City of Chicago for over a dozen years or close to a dozen years, that particular segment on a Saturday evening in downtown Chicago.  Just get up, get dressed and come on down to the park and feel special.  And every group was great now.  I can go from the Barrett Sisters.  Let me tell you another important part of this was Pastor Archbishop Lucius Hall, one of our board members.  Arch Bishop Lucius Hall walked into one of the board members, one board meeting and said, I'd like to work in this area.  And he helped us recognizing living legends, people that never really had a chance to come down and be honored that were still performing.  And you had to be now over a certain age now.  You couldn't be fifty, couldn't be fifty-five.  I'm not even sure if you were sixty, might have been over that.  But he was over that segment and presented them--oh, I could just go on and on, the Caravans, all of them, the Caravans, Dr. Albertina Walker, Delores Washington Green, Shirley Caesar, Dorothy Norwood, oh, just--I could just go on and on.
Speaker 1: Shirley Caesar.
Speaker 2: Oh, my God, it was just, oh.  Israel Houghton of, and New Breed, the Clark Sisters.  Oh, the Winans, Take 6, I could just go on and on in telling you how we were blessed to bless many people with great music during our tenure for the City of Chicago.  Yeah, wonderful.
Story_ID: 95641
Speaker 1: Now, did--I know it's the Gospel Music Festival, did--were there any other styles of black praise music?
Speaker 2: We did liturgical dancing with dancers that would dance to the music, recorded music.  We did praise singers that would act it out to recorded music.  Then you had a couple of comedians that we had to come through and perform.  All right, and they'd give you laughter 'cause laughter makes you feel good.  It makes the soul feel good.  So they laughed.  They made us laugh.
Speaker 1: Did any of the groups--I know Delano O'Bannon (ph.) has a group that does, you know, the old Negro spirituals.  Did they have any--
Speaker 2: We did have Fisk University [Nashville Tennessee], Jubilee Singers to appear.  And we had several college--we had a couple of segments, a couple of years where we had a couple of college choirs that came and did spirituals.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was very well received.  It was a moment where you kind of stepped back and said, I appreciate this contribution during the Gospel Music Festival.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what--you have become a noted, you know, an expert on gospel music because of your life-long involvement with it.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: What would you consider, I mean to be different genres of gospel music today?  I mean can you kind of walk us through the landscape?
Speaker 2: Well, you've got, you've got the traditional gospel music that will be with you forever.  That's the music that has no expiration date.  That's those good ol' gospel hymns and the music that, if you're laying sick in the hospital, you might not wanna play "Stomp", by Kirk Franklin, but you might wanna play "This Too Shall Pass" by Reverend James Cleveland.  You might wanna play the gospel music workshop of America Women's Choir, "Order My Steps", all right, by the women's choir.  You might wanna play Albertina Walker, saying "This'll Be Over Soon" or Andrae Crouch, "Soon and Very Soon".  You might wanna play some music like that or you've got the contemporary music.  It is just that.  It's contemporary.  As Albertina Walkers say, it's got its time.  And then it passes on.  It--
Speaker 1: Okay, so the music, gospel music is changing constantly or is it, but--
Speaker 2: Gospel music is good news music.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All right, it's what Professor Thomas Dorsey coined "good news music", all right.  But you've got the certain styles of music, the urban contemporary, the inspirational, all right.  And if you--I can play "I Look to You" or have that song at an event by R. Kelly, that was sung at Whitney Houston's funeral, that was written by R. Kelly, that I play on the radio, and it would inspire you, "I Look to You", the words in it, all right.  Or a Michael Jackson.  If you ever really listen to the song "Man in the Mirror", there's a message in that song.  People listen to the beat, but listen to the message in the song.  That song, and "Earth Song" and "Keep the Faith", and the "Heal the World", I play that on my broadcast because it has its place.  Will it be forever?  "We Are the World" wasn't forever, but you can still play it.  You, you're with me?
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, right, right.
Speaker 2: Contemporary, traditional, spoken word.
Speaker 1: Is there, I suppose now, I don't know of any examples offhand, but there must be some sort of gospel rap.
Speaker 2: There is gospel rap.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: There is gospel rap.  Now, I wanna say Canton Jones gave us that, but he didn't.  Someone else gave us gospel rap, and I did actually hire a couple of gospel rappers when we did pre-events in schools, leading up to the festival.  I did do that.  Yeah, there is gospel rap.  Gospel rap is out there, and it works.  It has a positive message, and you're reaching a different group of people.  Gospel rap, kind of--young people can relate to some things that they can't relate to with other music.  They can relate to that, that beat and that message.  Gospel pop.  You look at Kirk Franklin, what is, what are some of the songs that Kurt has given us?  They, you know, they would fit in a different area, category for the lack of a better word.
Story_ID: 95642
Speaker 1: Okay, is there a--I know I was hearing--I heard a talk show where they was, there's a discussion about the secularization of gospel music or religious music today in a sense where there's a fuzzy area where it doesn't, it seems like you're not really dealing with spiritual music anymore.  I mean it's--
Speaker 2: It's according to what song it is, what song is being played--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: --and what artist is singing it, okay.  I mean is Amy Grant doing gospel?  Is that really gospel?  Michael [W.] Smith, I mean even though they're Caucasian or white artists, do we relate to that music is what I'm saying?  Do you relate to that music?  So there is--the music has its place.  Let me say it like that.  It all has its place, but gospel music is good news music.  It's uplifting.  It's inspiring, it's encouraging.  It makes you feel warm.  It makes you feel better.  It comforts your soul.  It does all of that.  It's a dose of inspiration too.
Story_ID: 95643
Speaker 1: Now, in terms of the African American community and the economic--
Speaker 2: It's our music.
Speaker 1: --realities that we have, I mean, do, are--do we have like decent economic rewards from gospel music, I mean in terms of, you know, being able to control the business of gospel music?
Speaker 2: I don't, I can't answer that (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I mean are there black record producers?  Is there a gospel Berry Gordy out here?  (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: There has, there is.
Speaker 1: Or--
Speaker 2: There is Malaco Records.  There is Varieties, Zambia.  There is independent labels, a lot of independent labels.  I recently was at the Stellar Awards down in Nashville [Tennessee], and they had a morning--I was a special guest.  And they had a morning there of nothing but independent artists on labels.  So they're out there.  It's just do they get their turn?  Do you know about 'em?  Do they have their chance?  Do they have their opportunities?
Speaker 1: I was just wondering that, as if in other genres of music that we participate in, are we like, you know, are we not in control of our own product in terms of gospel music?
Speaker 2: I think that there was a time when were in more control.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I think that sounds better.
Speaker 1: So we were in more control at one time?
Speaker 2: In more--at one time, we were in more control, yes, yes.  We were in more control.  Now, people are buying people out.  Now people are fading out.  Now, some labels are going out, yeah, we were, there was a time we were in more--there was a better time.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the largest, what was the, I guess the biggest black record producer at one time, I mean or recording--
Speaker 2: Company?
Speaker 1: Company, yes.
Speaker 2: I know that Malaco Records out of, I wanna say somewhere down in Jackson, Mississippi or down in Mississippi, they have an incredible catalog, an incredible catalog, Malaco Records.
Speaker 1: Now, how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: M-A-L-A-C-O, Malaco Records, okay.  There was Savoy.  There was Jewel Records.  There was Savoy Record.  There was Light Records.  There was Word Records.  I can't say where they are today, but Malaco and Varity slash Zambia and then I just heard that Motown Gospel is black.  There's a label called Motown Gospel.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All right, I just, I wondered, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So there's some out there.  There are some out there.
Speaker 1: All right, so--
Speaker 2: And you survive better when people support you.  You survive much better when people support you, okay.  But there are a lot of independent labels out there with great product that just needs an opportunity and a chance, just need to be heard.
Story_ID: 95644
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were the coordinator of, the head of--
Speaker 2: World's largest free outdoor gospel festival for twenty years, free, outdoor.  All you had to do was show up.  You didn't have to pay to hear one artist perform because of underwriters and, of course, the city's support.
Speaker 1: So from 1989 to 2009?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And well, what happened in 2009?
Speaker 2: This is very interesting.  The festival had finished.  A couple of years before that night, I had received a message from my executive director, Jim Law, that the festival was being challenged by a Buddhist, and it really disturbed me.  It disturbed me greatly.  And I really wanted to look at making some changes in my life because of a very challenging time that the City of Chicago went through where the festival had to be changed by name to the Gospel Music Festival from the City of Chicago Gospel Festival.  It went to Gospel Music Festival, and in 2009, after an incredible 25th year anniversary of the festival, having done it for twenty years, Sasha Dalton, five years before me, under the other administration, I felt that I had completed the work that I had come to do.  And some things were changing.  Some things were changing.  Some things were not the way it used to be anymore.  So things was changing.  Change is always difficult, but some things were really changing.  And the voice of the Lord came to me one evening after the festival when every--a few people were in my home enjoying some refreshments.  And the voice of the Lord came to me through my Aunt Mabel [Page] and said it's time to go.  She spoke to me through the spirit world.  It's time to go.
Story_ID: 95645
Speaker 1: The voice of the Lord came to me--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --through my aunt [Mabel Page].  A lot of people don't believe in the spirits.  But she's visited me several times since she's been gone on to heaven.  She's visited me several times.  We were sitting, having ice cream, had various cakes there, eating, had some out-of-town guests sitting there, and said, "It's time to go", and I looked up like this, and I got up and went upstairs and started writing my resignation letter.  Was off the next day, went in the next day and turned it in because my aunt said it was time to go.
Speaker 2: So you heard your aunt's voice?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Just--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, she said, "your work was complete".  It was time to go.  And when you have done all that you can do and given your best, and there are a few challenges that are challenging, I understand when a voice comes to you and say it's time to go.
Story_ID: 95646
Speaker 1: Under different leaderships, a lot of different things change in jobs and things, different leaderships, things change.  That year, I had a gospel tent every year for our young people, for the students, little kids to perform. That year, I had a gospel tent every year for our young people, for the students, little kids to perform.  I went through a very challenging experience with that gospel tent with Queenie Lenox at the helm of it, running it and ran it every year beautiful, with on problems.  Everything's beautiful.  Oh, my God, the young people got a chance to come in and perform from age two to twenty-one or eighteen, in that tent.  People came down from Wisconsin, drove up from St. Louis [Missouri] to be, want their children to perform in that tent.  It was so beautiful.  I ran into a challenge with that and with some contractual challenges.  And it disturbed me for several days.  I went into prayer over that because that disturbed me.  Whenever I'm trying to help somebody and I get a, something like a stab.  It wasn't a stab, but it still disturbed me as a leader when you're doing all you can.  Some of the times were being cut back.  I'll share that with you.  You know, you can't do this like you used to do.  Do this.  And it just, a different, a lot of--
Speaker 2: These are directives from the city in terms of--
Speaker 1: Directors from your leader.
Speaker 2: Directives from the--
Speaker 1: Your leader.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And you're trying to please a group of people.  You know, you're trying to please a group of people out here that don't know what's going on, on the inside 'cause all they see is what you present.  But you know what you're going through, and then you have given--when you have given all that you can do, and then the voice of the Lord speaks to you through someone, you'd better listen.  You better listen because if you listen, there's gotta be somethin' else out there even better that He's calling for you to do.  That's what God was doing with my life.  He was calling for me to go into something else, do more, be available to do more and let someone else pick up the helm and take it to another level because I had done all I could do.
Speaker 2: So was this, would this have been the last year of [Mayor] Richard [M.] Daley's administration, I mean in terms of, I think--was [Mayor] Rahm Emmanuel elected in 2010 [sic, 2011]--
Speaker 1: There was one more year, one more year.
Speaker 2: One more year, yeah, yeah, so it was the last year of Richard Daley, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hum.  Yeah, because actually, the--
Speaker 2: But things were gonna--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Park District picked up the Gospel Music Festival for that next year and hired me back as a consultant.  And I ran it for that one year.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then after Mayor Rahm Emmanuel came in, it went back to the city, and the special events cultural affairs department picked it up, and a very lovely young lady that I had the opportunity to have to work with me and under me, leads it now, Ivy Hall.  And I'm so happy to say she's doing a great job.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: She's doing a great job.
Story_ID: 95647
Speaker 1: Now, I don't have dates for everything that's happened since then, but you've had some remarkable experiences, you know, since then and maybe even before you left the city in terms of travel and consulting with other--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, during that time, during vacation time or business, I did twenty-four trips, all expenses paid, Umbria Jazz Festival and presented gospel music, usually over the holidays.
Speaker 1: Now, this is in Umbria--
Speaker 2: Umbria Jazz Festival.
Speaker 1: Umbria--
Speaker 2: Umbria Jazz Festival, Perugia, Italy--
Speaker 1: Umbria--
Speaker 2: Umbria, U-M-B-R-I-A, Jazz Festival.
Speaker 1: In where was it now?
Speaker 2: And that's in Perugia, P-R-U-G-I-A [sic, P-E-R-U-G-I-A], Perugia, Italy and had a--Amanda Knox brought a lot of attention to Perugia because of some unfortunate incident that happened there.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But before that incident happened and during that, I had the opportunity to take gospel music there.  And that was a beautiful experience.  Also, during my tenure with the city, I also did gospel music work with the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival, as a gospel consultant working with them, with the city and then later came on as a gospel consultant after I left with the City of Chicago in 2009.  Did gospel in Durban, South Africa, beautiful experience with Regina Fraser, Danny Glover.  It was a beautiful experience there and I do gospel consultant work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it works.  It is wonderful, worked a couple of years for the United States House of Representatives in the Second Congressional District as an interfaith liaison.  That works; did ambassador work for the American Heart Association, and did--helped with their gospel tour.  And that worked beautiful.  That was so delightful.  So I did a couple of wonderful things that makes me feel real good about gospel music.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I can imagine, to be able to travel and to--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --be entertained by people that you really know and respect and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --whose music you love.  It's gotta be--
Story_ID: 95648
Speaker 1: I feel tremendously blessed on this wonderful journey of my life.  And I have really had a smile placed on my life through my Aunt Mabel [Page].  And I have such a wheelbarrow of faith that I believe all things are possible to him that believe.  And I have a lot of belief and a lot of faith.  So the best is still yet to come.  It ain't over.
Speaker 2: Now, you wrote a booklet about your--
Speaker 1: Yes, I did.
Speaker 2: --Aunt Mabel.
Speaker 1: I did.
Speaker 2: What's the name of it, and what--
Speaker 1: The book I wrote is called "Lessons Learned from Aunt Mabel and So Much More".  I lost my Aunt Mabel at the age of ninety-one.  I wasn't there on that Wednesday night when she passed.
Speaker 2: Now, what year was this?
Speaker 1: It was several years ago, several years ago.  And I wanted other people to meet her, so I wrote about her 'cause they didn't get a chance to meet her in person.  So I just happened to just do a little writing and took that manuscript and turned that manuscript into a 50-page story about "Lessons Learned from Aunt Mabel", things you must do.  Church is a must.  I, the first chapter because I went to church during all of my life comin' up and what was so special about church is that I still go to church.  But I don't go seven times a week, but I do go to church.  Holidays are special.  Whether you have a family or not, you need to make sure your holidays are special.  They still remain special in my life.  I still decorate my house because holidays are special.  And this is something you must always do, follow your first mind.  My Aunt Mabel told me follow your first mind.  If your first mind tell you to do something, follow it.  I don't always do that now, and I get in trouble.  But if I follow my first mind, I won't go down that road.  I'll go around another road and I'll miss that accident.  Follow your first mind.  And something that Aunt Mabel said you all must almost--should always do is pray.  I wrote about that because she made sure I prayed.  I still pray.  So it's just a, it's just a good book.  She told me how to treat seniors, treat 'em special.  Carry their things, open the door for them.  You'll get the door open for you.  Just open the door for them.  She taught me how to yes, ma'am, and no, ma'am.  She taught me how to love people.  I have a bubbling personality.  A lot of people would say she--ain't no way in the world that girl is real.  That, she--that just ain't real, the way she acts and carries herself.  It is real.  It's the way I was raised.  I was raised in West Virginia.  We were taught to love people and speak to people and be kind to people.  I'm always like this.  I wake up happy.  I go to sleep happy 'cause I was raised that way.  Now, if you wasn't raised that way, that's your problem.  But don't blame it on me.  Accept me for the way that I am, and may I make your life better and may I bless you because I've been blessed.  And that's how I try to live my life, is live my life to be a blessing to others as I've lived my life.  Aunt Mabel taught me to be a good person.  Aunt Mabel taught me how to dress.  She said there's a way you need to dress and carry yourself.  That's how she taught me.  She said there's a certain way you need to wear colors.  She said, wear bright colors.  Don't wear dead colors.  Wear bright colors, and I found myself with my wardrobe with a lot of bright colors, might not have wore a lot of bright colors today, but I wear a lot of bright colors because Aunt Mabel taught me that.  She also taught me, now, if you're going to have a car, double those car payments as often as you can so you won't have to pay for it the rest of your life.  Just little wonderful things.  She said, say, yes, sir and yes, ma'am.  Don't be saying yes and no to people.  And I still do that to people, and they'll say like you don't have to say that to me.  But that's the way I was raised.  So I'm giving you what was given and put in me.  I have grandchildren, and I teach my grandchildren, you say, yes, ma'am and no, ma'am.  And one of my grandchildren said to me, not long ago, "I don't have to say that to my daddy and mommy."  I said, but you gotta say to me.  They said, I say, yes, and no, to dad and mom.  I said, and what do you say to granny?  Yes, ma'am, no, ma'am.  That's the way I was raised.  Ain't nothing wrong with that.
Speaker 2: Okay, so--
Speaker 1: I know I went on and on, but--she--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, that's fine, that's--
Speaker 1: She gives me a reason to want to go on and on, so that's why I kind of talked a little bit more about my aunt.  I love her, and I miss her so much.  I miss her in my life.  But God, God has a better place for her.  She's in heaven, looking over the balcony smiling on me today.  When the things had broken down in her system, she didn't need to live any longer because her organs wasn't producing anymore.  So it was better for her to go on home to be with the Lord, but I thank God that she still speaks to me through the spirit, and I listen.
Story_ID: 95649
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is your mother [Paskalena Page] still alive?
Speaker 2: My mother's still alive.  My mother is eighty-one as of 2014, the year 2014.  She turned, she'll be eighty-two if the Lord let her live to see May the 11th.  And I surprised her.  I drove all the way.  I called my mother and told her that she had a package being delivered to the house and to be there for it.  It would be delivered probably between 12:00 and 2:00 o'clock.  And I had been to the Jazz and Heritage Festival and come back home and drove to West Virginia.  And I took her flowers and took her dinner, and I was her surprise.  She was looking for something else and looked up and there I was sitting at the house.  She wrote a note on the door, just in case Edible Arrangements who had come by earlier and she thought it was for her.  She said, well, my daughter, my daughter is sending something to me, and I wanted to make sure that I didn't miss it.  She left a note on the door, "I'm gone, but I'll be back.  My daughter is sending something to me."  And when she walked up there on her little walker, coming from the store, I was sitting there in front of her door.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, she's back in West Virginia?
Speaker 2: She's back in West Virginia.  She went back home from New York to take care of mom when her mother took ill.  And she never left West Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, is she involved in the family church at all?
Speaker 2: She visits.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She visits the family church.
Story_ID: 95650
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us about your children.
Speaker 2: I have two of the most wonderful children in the world.  My oldest son, my eldest son is John [Morris].  John is a tennis pro.  And he does a very good job teaching tennis, and playing tennis, just won the top forties division, even though he's in his forties, and he did a great job.  He's a father of two, and the husband of one lovely wife, named Andrea.  My grandchildren by him is Christopher and Sheridan.  One is a tennis champ, and the other one is a dancer.  And they are so precious.  And this year, of 2014, they're seven and eight years old.  My youngest son [Kenneth Morris], in his forties, is a former lieutenant commander in the United States Navy, an aviator and has a very special position and is a wonderful guy, gave me a lovely, lovely daughter-in-law, Dr. Tammy Morris and a lovely granddaughter, Chloe who in 2014 will turn three years old.  I have two of the most finest sons any mother could ever ask for.
Story_ID: 95651
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back--you've received many awards for your work--
Speaker 2: Oh, my God--
Speaker 1: --and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, my God, a whole lot of 'em.  I don't know where to start.  A Stellar Award for announcer of the year back in 2000, I think, 2006 or '07 [2007].  N'digo--
Speaker 1: N'digo, yeah.
Speaker 2: N'digo, N'digo Religion Award, Lifetime Achievement Award that Dr. Lena McLin who is Reverend, Professor Thomas Dorsey's living niece, his only living niece, Dr. Lena McLin, received that prestigious award the year before I received mine, very special award.  And also Women of Excellence Award from the Chicago Defender, Real Times.  I have a wall of awards in my home, and a table of awards in my home and three boxes of awards in the closet (laughter).  So I have--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --a lot of them (laughter).
Speaker 1: I just mentioned that to say--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I thank God for them.
Speaker 1: --to ask this question.
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry.  I just started telling you about them--(laughter)
Speaker 1: That's, yeah, they're probably listed, they're gonna be listed in the, in your folder.
Speaker 2: Yes, I have so many.
Speaker 1: But the question--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I feel thankful (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --is this.  When you think about everything you've done to this point--and you're still working 'cause you're still on WVON, right?
Speaker 2: I'm still on WVON.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you're--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Retired, but still do a little work.
Speaker 1: Yeah, doing a show.
Story_ID: 95652
Speaker 1: Like when you look back on what you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: That I helped somebody along the way, that I made a difference in someone's life.  I inspired them, uplifted them and encouraged them, and helped some students to finish their education so they can make this world a better world to live in.
Story_ID: 95653
Speaker 1: And you're on the air now.  What are your hours on the air?
Speaker 2: I'm on 11:00 to 2:00 on WVON1690-The Talk of Chicago.  I talk to you through the music.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 11:00 in the afternoon--
Speaker 2: Eleven [11:00] in the afternoon till 2:00.
Speaker 1: Till 2:00 in the afternoon.  Okay, and--11:00 in the morning, rather till-- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And it's on iHeartRadio.
Speaker 1: --2:00, yeah.
Speaker 2: iHeartRadio, you can download the app and pick me up anywhere or WVON.com or in Chicago, 1690AM.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Melody Spann-Cooper [HM], Pervis Spann [HM], has given me an incredible opportunity to inspire and uplift people and to play my own music.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a, like a what's next plan?  I mean what would you like to do if you could do anything you wanted to do next?
Speaker 2: I'm actually working with Brother Frank Walton out of Seattle [Washington] and Phoenix [Arizona] on a couple of business projects that I wish I could open up and tell you what they are, but I'll say it's exciting and it's wonderful.  And if you don't hear me talk about it, you sure will hear it and see it in the near future.  I'm excited.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm so excited, and one more thing, my voice, I thank God for.  Grove Quest Records is looking at releasing a release of my voice to music with inspirational thoughts, called the "Inspirational Walk with Pam Morris".  It will be released in 2014.  I'm excited.  I've already recorded each thought and it's being placed to music.
Speaker 1: Now, have you ever considered pastoring a church yourself?
Speaker 2: No, I have not. (Laughter) Have others considered that for me?  Yes.  But have I?  No, I would love to be a servant and serve and help others.  But I have not considered that position for me.  I'm not sure that's my calling.
Story_ID: 95654
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  Once again, if you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: I'm not so sure that I would do too many things differently except I would spend, I wish I could have spent more time with my Aunt Mabel [Page] than I did.  I wish I'd a made more trips home, even though I did make several trips home after leaving home.  I wish I could have made just a few more trips back home.  But other than that, I--because of my upbringing and how I was raised and what I tried to--how I try to live my life, I'm all right with it.  I think God is pleased.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, is there anything we haven't discussed we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I'm happy for the opportunity that Ms. [Julieanna] Richardson, HistoryMakers, have felt necessary through some recommendation to reach out to me to hear my story.  I'm heartfelt thankful.  May it be a blessing to somebody.
Story_ID: 95655
Speaker 1: Okay, well, our last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different, ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: She was a good woman that gave her best to help somebody and make life different.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you very much.
Story_ID: 95656
Speaker 1: My eldest son, John Morris, his wife, Solois Andrea Morris and myself in November of '09 [2009] when I was being honored for a wonderful Lifetime Achievement Award.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Two thousand and six [2006] when I won the Stellar Award for Announcer of the Year in Nashville, Tennessee with Dr. Albertina Walker, my dear friend.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Go ahead, I can go?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, we're still recording.
Speaker 2: I am presenting to the City--from the City of Chicago, Mayor Richard [M.] Daley a wonderful book of the City of Chicago and gift to Patti LaBelle.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: I am singing during Christmas in Charleston, West Vir--St. Albans, West Virginia at Aunt Mabel's church.  We are singing, the family.  That is so sweet.
Speaker 1: A picture with the love of my life, Reverend Bishop Mabel E. Page, my Aunt Mabel.
Speaker 2: Kurt Carr and singers had just finished their performance in Perugia, Italy at the Umbria Jazz Festival, Perugia.
Speaker 1: Greeting Dr. Albertina Walker doing a wonderful gospel concert for the Albertina Walker Scholarship Foundation at Dr. Arthur Brazier's church several years ago.
Speaker 2: A Saturday morning on WVON Radio, Pam Morris.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Pianist Dana along with the Reverend Jesse Lewis Jackson [HM] after her performance at the Petrillo Music Band Shell several years ago for the City of Chicago Gospel Music Festival.
Speaker 1: Several years ago at the Gospel Music Festival in Millennium Park the one and only Roland Martin [HM] of BET.
Speaker 2: Back stage at the Gospel Music Festival with Clerk of the Circuit Court, Dorothy Brown [HM], FOX-TV, Wanda Wells, Committee member, and Committee member, Nate Parker.
Speaker 1: The Evening of Gospel Elegance at Millennium Park at the Gospel Music Festival in the City of Chicago.
Speaker 2: An Evening of Gospel Elegance, right before the performance of Otis Clay at the Millennium Park Gospel Music Festival.
Speaker 1: Otis Clay performance at the Gospel Music Festival in Millennium Park.
Speaker 2: Hosting a gospel program at the Apostolic Faith Church with Allison Payne, formerly of WGN.
Speaker 1: Has she retired now?
Speaker 2: I don't know what happened to her.
Speaker 1: Autograph signing of the book, "Lessons Learned from Aunt Mabel and So Much More" at Mrs. [Juanita] Passmore's [HM] home.
Speaker 2: Gospel under the big tent in New Orleans, Louisiana at the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival.
Speaker 1: Aunt Mabel is preaching in her church in St. Albans, West Virginia, a Sunday morning service.
Speaker 2: Pam Morris, your gospel sister on WVON1690, the Talk of Chicago.
Speaker 1: What's his name?  Wait just a second, hold up, one moment.  He is the Park District president.  Okay.  Chicago Park District Superintendent, Michael Kelly, and Vice, Tanya Anthony at the Gospel Music Day, during the Taste of Chicago, 2010.
Speaker 2: Bishop Bully (ph.) and congregation of the New Testament Church that we support in Kpandu, Ghana.
Speaker 1: Pam Morris, receiving the "Woman of Excellence Award" from the Chicago Defender, Real Times.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Pam Morris at WVON1690, the Talk of Chicago.
Speaker 1: The family, the Page family with Aunt Mabel, Bishop Mabel E. Page in West Virginia at Aunt Mabel's church, the Apostolic Free Church of God, St. Albans, West Virginia.
Speaker 2: Pam Morris as the Ambassador for the American Heart Association Gospel--Most Powerful Voices Gospel Tour in 2011, April.
Speaker 1: A [Chicago] Crusader article of Pam Morris moving to another gospel radio station.
Speaker 2: The spirit fills the Millennium at the Gospel Festival in the year of 2005 in Grant Park.
Speaker 1: Or is it Millennium Park.  I'm not sure which park it is.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And left to right, please?
Speaker 2: Pam Morris as a baby.  Pam Morris at one year old and Pam Morris' mother at five years old, Paskalena Page.
Speaker 1: Pam Morris in 1989 with Mayor Richard [M.] Daley.
Speaker 2: Pam Morris with Mayor Richard Daley and Martin Luther King [III].
Speaker 1: Pam Morris in 1995 with President [Nelson] Mandela and Reverend Jesse Lewis Jackson [HM] and Mayor Daley.  Wow.
Speaker 2: Pam Morris with the President of the United States of American, the Honorable Barack Obama [HM].  I've done a few things, huh (laughter).  I've been with a few people.
Speaker 1: Pam Morris and the Gospel Music Festival write up by Lynn Woods.
Speaker 2: Pam Morris with the former president of the United States of America, the Honorable William Clinton.
Speaker 1: Pam Morris with the Honorable Nelson Mandela, February, 1995.  Wow.
Speaker 2: Pam Morris at--no, Donnie McClurkin with his opening performance, debut performance at the Gospel Music Festival in Grant Park, many, many years ago.  Many, many years ago.  That was his first performance, national, international performance.  He looked at the crowd and didn't want to go outside.
