Story_ID: 156095
Speaker 1: And I'd like to start out by having you state your name and spelling it for us, including your middle name.
Speaker 2: Raymond Jeffrey McGuire.  Oh, spell it.  Raymond, R-A-Y-M-O-N-D, Jeffrey, J-E-F-F-R-E-Y, McGuire, M, small C, big G, U-I-R-E.
Speaker 1: And can we have your date of birth?
Speaker 2: 01-23-57.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date, can I look that up?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I'll tell you if you want.  I think it's July 12th, isn't it, July 12, 2013, isn't it?
Speaker 2: Today's date is Friday, July 12, 2013.
Speaker 1: And our location?
Speaker 2: Our location is Manhattan, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And we're at Citigroup, Citigroup Headquarters, right, isn't it?
Speaker 2: We're at, at Citi downtown.
Speaker 1: Downtown.  Okay.  And then the last is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm in finance.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How would you describe--you're an investment banker?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm yes.
Speaker 1: No I (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I, my role is, I'm the Global Head of the Corporate and the Investment Banking Business at Citigroup.
Story_ID: 156096
Speaker 1: And I, we ask People magazine-ish questions, five of them, short answers.  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Turkey burgers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: St. Barths [Saint Barthelemy].
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Hold fast to dreams, for if dreams die, life is a broken winged bird that cannot fly.  Hold fast to dreams, so if dreams go, life is a barren field full of frozen snow.  Hold fast to dreams.  It's Langston Hughes.
Speaker 1: That's so beautiful.  Thank you.  (Unclear) at you.  That's beautiful.
Story_ID: 156097
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I wanna start out by asking you about your family background.  So I'd like to start out with your father, can you give his name?
Speaker 2: My mother raised me and my two brothers, so my father was not part of our lives.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now, what about your mother, can you give her name?
Speaker 2: Yes, her name is Wiletha McGuire.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And can you tell us about her background?  I know she came from Georgia originally.
Speaker 2: She came from Georgia, and she was a social worker.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did she just share with you any of her growing up in Georgia?
Speaker 2: A little.  A little.  I mean she was a wonderful childhood.  They moved, as I understand the history, they moved from Georgia to Ohio, probably in her early teens.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she, can she go back, does she have memory, you know how far does she know about her family background?
Speaker 2: I think she goes back pretty far.
Speaker 1: Oh, pretty far, okay.
Speaker 2: Pretty far.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I've not gone back that far with her but I think she's--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then, that's another that's, that's kind of an opportunity that I'll, that I, that I will seize upon at some point.
Speaker 1: 'Cause she's eighty-seven right now.
Speaker 2: She is.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: That's a wonderful age.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.  So now, do you remember her sharing any stories from her childhood?
Speaker 2: A few.  A few but me recounting them would be revising history so it's probably better for me--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) okay.
Speaker 2: --not to recount stories from her childhood 'cause I'll make 'em up.
Speaker 1: So how did, do you know how she got to Dayton [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: I'm not quite certain how they got to Dayton.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You mean, plane, train, or automobile?  Let's, let's take the plane out, 'cause I'm pretty certain they didn't fly.  They could have driven.  Mm-mm, I doubt they took the train, so it's likely more driving or maybe, I say maybe Greyhound but that's probably down (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Yeah, but even what took them, do you think right path?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think it was, it wasn't right, it was probably, it was manufacturing.
Speaker 1: Manufacturing.  Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 156098
Speaker 1: So, now let's, your, your sibling.  What, what is your sibling's name and--
Speaker 2: I have two.
Speaker 1: Two.
Speaker 2: I have a middle brother whose name is Tony or Anthony.   And I have an older brother whose name is Arthur.
Speaker 1: So you're the middle child?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, I'm the youngest.
Speaker 1: Oh, you're the--
Speaker 2: I have a middle brother--
Speaker 1: Middle brother.
Speaker 2: --and an older brother.
Speaker 1: Oh, oh, an older.  Okay.
Speaker 2: The brother who is in the middle of me (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --my older brother and me.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, you're the youngest.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So three boys.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 156099
Speaker 1: So let's talk about your earliest memory of growing up in Dayton [Ohio].
Speaker 2: Let's talk about which, which part of that, this is--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) (unclear) no, I mean--
Speaker 2: There are few, there are a few early memories of growing up in Dayton.  (Simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Your earliest, your earliest.
Speaker 2: Earliest.  You mean like when I was throwing toys out of the crib or something?
Speaker 1: That's right.  I mean earliest--
Speaker 2: I can make that, I mean I'm supposed to say that, I don't remember having thrown toys out of the crib but--
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: --but, but I can say that 'cause I have son now, so I can, you know, say that I had that memory.  I don't have that memory but--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: (Unclear)
Speaker 1: Just what was your, no seriously, but what--
Speaker 2: No, I am being serious.  I (laughter)--
Speaker 1: What I'm asking right, you know, I'm originally from, I, I grew up in Newark, Ohio, which is like--
Speaker 2: In Newark.
Speaker 1: --you know, Dayton and about--
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.
Speaker 1: --Forty-five miles southeast of Columbia.
Speaker 2: Dayton's a big city compared to Newark.
Speaker 1: And it's totally is, 50,000 people.
Speaker 2: We at least (unclear) Dayton was a big city only about a 100,000 plus people.
Speaker 1: That's right so.  I, and there were a thousand blacks out of that 50,000, so, back then.
Speaker 2: There were a thousand?
Speaker 1: Blacks.
Speaker 2: Out of 50,000?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Did all of y'all know each other?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we all, pretty much knew each other.
Speaker 2: You go back to Newark, now?
Speaker 1: A little bit.
Speaker 2: Is Newark, Ohio, like Newark, New Jersey?
Speaker 1: No, not at all.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, not, not even beginning.
Speaker 2: Not as active?
Speaker 1: Not as active.
Speaker 2: Do you all have stop lights in Newark, Ohio?
Speaker 1: We did.
Speaker 2: Not many, though, right?
Speaker 1: See, you know, what you are doing?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: We're changing this around now--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)
Speaker 1: --back to your earliest memory.
Speaker 2: I made the first part up throwing toys out of the--
Speaker 1: You are not throwing, so what is--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --your earliest memory?
Speaker 2: That's tough to say.  I have so many.  I would say maybe Christmas or maybe driving from Dayton to Youngstown.  It's something, something along that line.
Story_ID: 156100
Speaker 1: And can you, when, were, were, do you remember the address of the house you lived in?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I lived at 120 Garst Street [Dayton, Ohio], dead end street on both ends.  On one part was Howard Paper Mill, on the other part was Reynolds and Reynolds. I do remember it vividly.
Speaker 1: So can you describe the block that you lived on--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --your street?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  To, as we look out from the porch to the street on the right-hand side was a place called the Mary Scott home [sic, Mary Scott Nursing Center] which was a home for the elderly.  We called it the old folks home.  And to my left, was what we call a, I won't call the name of the propriety but, proprietor, but it was a bootleg joint.
Speaker 1: And so you grew, grew up from all, you had two factories on really either side--
Speaker 2: I had, I had--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --factories.  I had a river to the right, the Little Miami River which had a, I would say the river embankment, and to the left was a, was a factory, and out front was, was a paper mill.
Story_ID: 156101
Speaker 1: And did you, can you share some of your times of, you know, what household life was like for you and, I mean, you were the young, youngest of three boys, how, what is the age difference between each of you (unclear)?
Speaker 2: The, let's see, my oldest brother is probably nine or ten years older, and my middle brother is probably five.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: So I'd say five, five, four, or five between us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well that's a lot of separation really between all of you then, right?
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: You're saying five years between you and the middle?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --there's three to four years and I'm trying to remember--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: --his birthdate now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: I should know that.  I know the actually day--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --of both of their birthdays.  I'm, actually, that's something pretty good.  I'm, I'm actually rewarding myself for knowing that.
Story_ID: 156102
Speaker 1: But, but what, what about, can you share some times with, like with your mother [Wiletha McGuire], I mean, getting up to go to school or, (unclear)
Speaker 2: We had to go to church every Sunday morning, every Sunday morning.  I had to go to church every Sunday morning 'til I was sixteen years old.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: Bethel Church of God in Christ.
Speaker 1: Oh, you go to Church of God in Christ?
Speaker 2: COGIC is what you're probably referring to.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so--
Speaker 2: Pentecostal.  I grew up Pentecostal.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Did not know.
Speaker 2: My, grandfather [Leo Wilson] was a state Sunday school superintendent and he was the head deacon at the church, so that meant that we went to church every Sunday.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So can you describe what it was like going to church, you know, in that, you know, and your role?  Did you have specific roles?
Speaker 2: My role was just to make certain I kind of got there and sat next to my grandfather.  Then I had an uncle who was a national evangelist, and he was one of the great orators, one of the great preachers.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Reverend C. H. Butler [ph.].
Speaker 1: C--
Speaker 2: --out of Detroit, Michigan.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: And my aunt played the piano, so when things got moving in the church and, and he was hitting the points in, in the sermon, she would play the piano or the organ.
Speaker 1: 'Cause, you know, people are speaking in tongues and things in Pentecostal churches.
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And did, is there a song that reminds you of growing up, you know, in the church--
Speaker 2: Ooh, a lot of 'em.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: 'Sweeping Through the City', 'Takes a Long Ways to be Like the Lord,' oh, we have a whole bunch of 'em.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite?  Is that sweep-- 'Sweeping Through the City'--
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: --one of your favorites?
Speaker 2: I got a lot of favorites.  That would be one of them, the choir doing the A and B Selection, you may know nothing about an A and B selections if you didn't grow up, we grew up, actually it was a wonderful, celebration of the, the gifts that we all been given.  Testimony, if you will.
Speaker 1: So talk about the A and B selection, 'cause maybe I don't know--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes so you get, the choir gets two selections.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: They get to sing two songs.
Speaker 1: During that service.  And how long were your, your, your church services?  They started they--
Speaker 2: Ooh, they could go for a while.  You could be there most of the day.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Go from Sunday school and Sunday school transitioned into church, and then the preacher would get up, sometime around noon, noon and half.  So we got out around 1:00, 1:30.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: Then you'd go and, and you'd have dinner right there.
Speaker 1: That's right.  Right after church?
Speaker 2: Right after church.
Speaker 1: So do you, how, how did, how do you think that experience influenced you?
Speaker 2: Oh, fundamental.  It gave me a, a fundamental sense of appreciation.  This my, mine is a walk of faith so it gave me a grounding in faith.  And when you get that kind of grounding notwithstanding the challenges that you meet you'll always have something to rely on.  The Word say, "He that dwells in the secret place of the most high shall abide under the shadow of the almighty."  That's what the scripture says so, and if you have that as your anchor, notwithstanding the challenges, what it say "No weapon formed against you shall prosper."  So that is, that's the basis on which I've been able to live my life.
Speaker 1: That's brilliant, that's--
Speaker 2: You know, the song 'Should We Come Up the Rough Side of the Mountain?'  Well, actually it's the rough side of the mountain that, that that we've been fortunate to scale, if you will.
Story_ID: 156103
Speaker 1: So Ray when you think of that, about your childhood then, you know, the church and your, you know, and the street you lived on and, you know, we'll talk about school, what sights, smells, and sounds remind you of your childhood, and I'd like to take each one.  Let's start with sights?
Speaker 2: Sights was the community, and we all kind of, you knew who the neighbors were.  You knew when the, the truck would come by, sweet corn, watermelon, the trucker would say.  And you'd yell out and the truck would stop and you'd go out and you'd pick the corn off the truck and you'd pick the watermelons off the truck.  That, that was wonderful 'cause you get excited as a kid, or you, the sight of the, the, the ice cream truck coming by, Mister Softee, and that was a wonderful sight.  The sight of the weeping willow tree in the front yard.  A wonderful sight.  Or the, the repairs that we made in the garage with my grandfather [Leo Wilson] who was a would be handyman and a would be carpenter.  Still wonderful sights of the community where people had, we had everything that money could not buy, and we had a few things that it could buy which were the essentials.  Those are kind of the sights of the community.
Speaker 1: What about sounds?
Speaker 2: What about?
Speaker 1: Sounds.
Speaker 2: Sound.  Laughter, ice cream truck, the fruit truck and the corn truck that I talked to you about.  Ice, you know, the guy who used to come by with the block of ice.  Playing in the streets.
Speaker 1: The smells?
Speaker 2: Ooh.  Sulfur coming out of the pulp of the paper mill.  Sometimes they'd get it wrong over there and the smell would get to be so strong that you'd have to close the doors but even then, and the windows, but even then the smell would come through.
Speaker 1: So were a lot of people on your block, were they employed at the mills?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Not, not--
Speaker 2: No, they had a different job.
Speaker 1: --not at that time.
Speaker 2: Not at the, (unclear) if you worked at those mills I, you'd make a fair amount of money.
Story_ID: 156104
Speaker 1: Tell me about what you were like as, as a young--
Speaker 2: I probably more quiet and reserved.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Just kind of like how I am now, you know, quiet and reserved.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: Shy.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: Played a lot of basketball though.
Speaker 1: You did?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was that, when did you start playing basketball?
Speaker 2: Early, early--
Speaker 1: What--
Speaker 2: --early.
Speaker 1: How early is early?
Speaker 2: I don't know, you know, seven, eight, nine, something like that.
Speaker 1: Playing--
Speaker 2: We used to have a makeshift basketball, you know, how you get the, there was a tree in the backyard and so you'd put up some facsimile of a backboard and then you would somehow figure out how to get a rim and you would nail the rim to the backboard and that nail into the tree--
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: --and that would be the basketball court.
Speaker 1: So were you, were you, did you show promise early and who were, who were you playing with?  Were you playing with (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Just people in the neighborhood, kids in the neighborhood, you know, we'd have it in the alley--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: --they call it a alley way, we just called it the alley.  That was out of the back door.  I remember that out of the back door.  Yeah, it was a, a large garage that housed the, a doctor's office was in the backyard.  I described to you the front yard, so we had a backyard also.  The backyard was the alley, alleyway and there was a, we had a garage but across the alleyway there was a doctor's office.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: And a big storage garage.  So I don't even, I don't think ever knew what was in that storage garage.
Speaker 1: Now were you required to do chores and things around the house?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Like what?
Speaker 2: Cut the grass, take out the garbage, water the lawn, paint, when needed, clean up the garage.  Oh, yeah we had a lot of chores.  You didn't get out of my neighborhood, out of my house or without doing chores.
Speaker 1: So your mother road, ran a tight household?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Wiletha McGuire], my grand, my mother, my, we grew up with my, my, my grandparents [Leo Wilson and Mamie Wilson ph.].  So they were--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: So they actually lived in the--
Speaker 2: Well, we lived in part, we lived, and on occasion we lived in their house.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, and, and so there were a lot of chores, lot of chores.
Story_ID: 156105
Speaker 1: Ray, can you give me their names, your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Leo [ph.] and Mamie Wilson [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So can you describe them too?
Speaker 2: Hmm.  Church going folk.  Salt of the earth.  They were probably as, if there, if there people who, who, who kind of lived the right way and served as examples of how you should treat others, and who walk by faith, they're certainly are the two.  I think the, the, the, as an example, language.  The, the most aggressive language, the most aggressive word that I've ever heard my grandfather use, I don't think I ever heard my grandmother use this was, shucks.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: And that was it.  The household was one where I think the strongest, the strongest and most favorite drink we had was Vernors Ginger Ale.  There was never a drop of alcohol in the household, not one drop.  So I grew up in a household that was, I guess in some communities they call it dry, I don't know if it was dry, we just didn't, it's just that that wasn't the way it was supposed to be.  These were folks who lived in The Word as, as they, as we say in church.
Speaker 1: They were God-fearing.
Speaker 2: God-fearing, God-loving.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: You know, what I'm talking about, looks like if, you know, that word choice then--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I do.
Speaker 2: --looks like you grew up somewhere around the church.
Speaker 1: I did.
Speaker 2: Did you?
Speaker 1: I did.
Speaker 2: Did you grow up Pentecostal?
Speaker 1: A.M.E.
Speaker 2: A.M.E.?
Speaker 1: And Baptist.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's the Methodist people.  Them the high, those were the high sprinkle, sprinkle people.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: Ooh, ooh.  Y'all (unclear) high, high that's what you'll do, right?
Speaker 1: No, I first started out Baptist then--
Speaker 2: Then you graduated to A.M.E.?
Speaker 1: --and then my mother went on to Episcopalian (unclear)(laughter).
Speaker 2: Ooh, that's just, that's the highfalutin.  Man we stayed right there with the folks, man.  It's, it's (unclear) you know, when the prayer went up it was going direct, you had no, your intercessions know how to get there.  Oh, yes.
Story_ID: 156106
Speaker 1: So, so let's, let's talk about school.  What, what is your earliest memory of school?
Speaker 2: My earliest memory, geez, I remember this so good.  Sitting in a auditorium, fifth grade, as you graduate from fifth grade to sixth grade, and they kept calling my name to go up to the stage to these prizes, I was thinking why you keep calling me?  And I, I must have picked up five or six different prizes for having been, having excelled at something.
Speaker 1: Oh.  So, what, what were you always a good student or did anything that you're, let's go back to your grandparents [Leo Wilson and Mamie Wilson ph.] and your mother.  Did they see that in you as a young, a young person even before fifth grade?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know if they saw it, they were always supportive though.  Remember I, I started getting, 'cause in the fifth grade there was a teacher, my fifth grade teacher.
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: Ellen Moore [ph.], Mrs. Ellen Moore.  Ellen Moore thought that I had some special talent.  And so Ellen Moore said there's a school in the suburbs, it was called the Miami Valley School, remember I was going to a public school from kindergarten through fifth grade.
Speaker 1: What was the name of that--
Speaker 2: I went to the Irving Elementary School [Dayton, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Irving Elementary.
Speaker 2: Irving Elementary School.  Irving Elementary School now is a parking lot.  The, by the way the house that I grew up in is now the highway.  The paper mill is gone and that was called urbanization, urban renewal, I guess, that's what they call it so.  The big highways came in and they, they, they seized the property, bought the property from us.  But anyway, back to the school, Ellen Moore said I think you got something special here and you should go and, and, and see if you can't get into this private school.  And it was a private school that had the, the, the most resourceful of the Jewish community, the most resourceful of the WASP [White Anglo-Saxon Protestant] community, and, and the wealthiest of the black community, the doctors, and the lawyers in their community and the judges.  And I had come from the other side of the tracks.  And this school had, this school had been established by some wealthy, very wealthy benefactors, who lent their names to companies.  And so I went to this school, I got bused to this school, I was, I'd walk from my house to, to close to the interstate so the, the school bus could exit the interstate and pick me up and then came from the north and the school was in the south of town.  And so it would pick me up, exit the highway, Interstate 75, pick me up and then we'd go on to, to south of town, to, to school.  That started in the sixth grade.
Speaker 1: So, so you were always, that's still in elementary school but you actually transferred to, oh, you know, the school--
Speaker 2: In sixth grade.
Speaker 1: --in sixth grade.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, and the name of that school?
Speaker 2: The Miami Valley School [Dayton, Ohio].
Speaker 1: The Miami, okay.  And so when you went to the Miami Valley School, what is the, first of all, is, is the teacher that referred you, are, are, they white or black at the--
Speaker 2: The teacher who referred me--
Speaker 1: Ellen--
Speaker 2: --Ellen Moore was white.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what were the composition of the class, you know, class at--
Speaker 2: At Miami Valley?
Speaker 1: At mi--yeah.
Speaker 2: Composition meaning?
Speaker 1: Well, the, the how many whites, how many blacks?
Speaker 2: Oh, this is, this is primarily white.
Speaker 1: It is primarily white?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But the school that you had come, come from?
Speaker 2: All black.
Speaker 1: All black.
Speaker 2: It's the neighborhood, this is right in the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how is that experience and how is that sort of different when you go to Miami Valley?
Speaker 2: Different, different level of expectations.  The, the, the standards of education, you know, it was a private school and it's as well-resourced as you could get.  Just a different environment, completely different educational environment.  Much smaller classrooms.  Much more hands-on teaching.  Much more interaction, much more intimate setting.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: More competitive by the way, much more competitive.
Story_ID: 156107
Speaker 1: Well, let me ask you about your brothers [Anthony McGuire and Arthur McGuire].  Had any of them gotten out of the neighborhood or were you the only one?
Speaker 2: I was the only one--
Speaker 1: You were the only one.
Speaker 2: --who had, who had been given that opportunity.
Speaker 1: Opportunity, okay.  So how are you navigating both worlds or are you?  And there's also I assume great pride in that.  Were you called, did you have a nickname?
Speaker 2: Growing up?  Yeah, I did.  How'd you know that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh you've done your homework.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your nickname?
Speaker 2: My nickname was Taki [ph.].
Speaker 1: So, Taki.  So what are people saying about Taki and, you know, and is there pride in Taki and, you know, that he's going to this school and--
Speaker 2: I think so, I don't know that, that, remember this is back in the, it was back in the '60s [1960s], right?
Speaker 1: Well, a lot of things are happening in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: A lot of, a lot of things.  I think maybe it was '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Oh, this is no, it's in the '60s.
Speaker 2: It's in the '60s so lots of things are going on.  You got--
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: --my brothers gone off to Vietnam.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: You have probably the height of manufacturing in three states, Ohio, Indiana, Kentucky.  And the neighborhood, notwithstanding it being modest and what they call working class, people did relatively well, they could contribute.  To move from, from, to navigate both worlds, I can't tell you how that happened other than that, that again if you walk by faith these things just, just sort of happen.  So I, it didn't work out for everybody.  We had several other people who came from the community, from the neighborhood, and it just didn't always work out.  I was blessed.  I still am so it's--
Story_ID: 156108
Speaker 1: So let me, let me ask in these, so what courses are you gravitating to?  'Cause you, we're talking about, is it, is Miami Valley [School, Dayton, Ohio] sixth, seventh, and eighth, ninth?
Speaker 2: It was sixth through, that was ooh, I think, it was kindergarten through nine early.  And then it eventually went up to twelve, so it's a K through twelve school now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: But in the early days it was, it was sixth through, it was K through nine.  Then a number of students, before it went to, it went K through, K through eleven, then K through twelve.  I would have been the first or second graduating class had I stayed at Miami Valley.
Speaker 1: But you stayed there through the 11th?
Speaker 2: Through the eleventh grade.
Speaker 1: Well, that's great, okay.  So--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: So had I stayed one more year--
Speaker 1: You--
Speaker 2: I'd a been the second graduating class.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I see.  So it was sort of building grade by grade at that point.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Okay.  So, we're talking about the '60s [1960s] and I think really at the time this, maybe you were, you know, you went there.  So let me ask you, so what classes are you gravitating to, 'cause this is a time there's, you know, there's a lot of tumult going on around the country--
Speaker 2: There are no classes, it's a basic curriculum.  You didn't, you didn't gravitate from one class to the next.  You mean, curriculum?
Speaker 1: I meant curriculum.
Speaker 2: No, this is, you, you take the same curriculum, everybody else takes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what, what classes though were you best at?
Speaker 2: I did okay in most of them.
Speaker 1: Math and science?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: And (unclear).
Speaker 2: When I finished, the reason I left the school is because I had a 4 point, a 4 point 0 average out of a scale of 4.  I was at, so that put me at number one in the school.  I was president of the school, and I was, and I was captain of the basketball team.  There was a teacher there whose name is Robin Melnick [ph.], who said that if you are as good as they say you are, then why don't you go test yourself against the big boys in the East.  And I said where are they?  And I took a Greyhound, well, actually I flew to Bradley Field, which today is Bradley International Airport and I took a Greyhound Bus around New England looking at boarding schools.
Speaker 1: With who else in tow?
Speaker 2: By myself.
Speaker 1: Had you--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: See and the folks in my neighborhood don't, didn't do a lot of flying.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: We just didn't hop on the airplane (unclear) no that was, I did it alone.
Speaker 1: You did that alone during the summer or your junior year or--
Speaker 2: Junior year.  Yes, it had to be early summer junior year.
Speaker 1: And so had you read about these private schools?
Speaker 2: No, I, Robin gave me kind of a list of the schools that were the better schools.  And there was also a teacher in, he wasn't a teacher, he was a, an alumni of, of the school that I eventually went to, who was one, who was the editor of the local newspaper, The Dayton Daily Newspaper.
Story_ID: 156109
Speaker 1: So, I wanna go back though, before we go to Hotchkiss [School, Salisbury, Connecticut].  So when you, your jobs you worked, did you ever work at, at the, the Navy base, I mean--
Speaker 2: Oh, I worked a lot of jobs.
Speaker 1: So what, what--
Speaker 2: Yeah, my first job, my first job was in the basement of Field's [ph.] Dress Shop where they had the, they had the dress boxes that were unassembled and they had the paper that you put into boxes.  And for a short while, a very short while, I had to assemble the dress boxes.  Where you assemble the box, you put the, you assemble the box, you put the paper and then you make a stack of boxes.  So you gotta understand in the basement of Field's Dress Shop, in the hot of the summer, it's just not a job that you, that's not one, but it was a job.  So I had to go work.  I graduated from that--
Speaker 1: Now, how old, how old were about, I think that--
Speaker 2: Well, I, what I'm saying I may violate child labor laws so, okay (laughter).  I was pretty young.  I think I was like eleven, twelve or something like that but you had to have a job, you had to go, you know, make your own money.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: I graduated from, from, from Fields Dress Shops to doing the windows at Petaskey [ph.] Jewelry.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: So doing the windows means that, you know, there's a display window so you had to make certain that the windows were clean, and there's also display cases in the store so you had to make certain that the display cases were clean, otherwise known as kind of janitorial services, right.  So I did that.  And that was pretty good.  I was above ground so anything above ground was pretty good 'cause that Fields Dress Shop stuff was, you gotta understand you gets warm down there, gets hot and all you're doing, there's nothing else around other than clothes and dress boxes.  And I'm thinking I may be a, you know, this is, this is just not intellectually challenging.  So they figured that I should probably be doing something else.  And there was this summer work-study program which was a great program, you could work and you get paid for it and it's called work study.  So I worked at Field's Dress Shop, graduated from that to Petaskey Jewelry, and then, then I got a job, I was gonna be a doctor, I was debating whether I was gonna be a doctor or a lawyer.  And so I, this 'Ben Casey,' who was a great television character, I took an opportunity to figure out this doctor's route.  So I worked at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base [Ohio].  Actually before the doctor thing I worked at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base as a day laborer.  A day laborer means that you worked on a construction, this is during their building housing at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, so I, I worked there as a day laborer.  One of the jobs was taking a backhoe and digging footers around new construction so they could put, pour concrete around to bolster the house, in the hot sun.  So I'd take the, the hoe and I'd dig around, dig footers around the house, and then they'd come and, and, or I would lay tile in the new home, 'cause so you'd have to lay the, you the, you get it cleared out, then you have to put the glue down and you have to put the tile on.  They didn't actually let me lay the tile 'cause, didn't, took somewhat of a more experienced hand than what I had.  But I did do all the, the basic work for laying the tile.  So I did the, as a day, you could, you would make pretty decent money doing the day laborer.  I graduated from being a day laborer to being a orderly in the hospital, 'cause then this got me closer to Ben Casey.  So I did the orderly thing and geez I could, I could DC IVs [discontinue IVs], I could take pulse, I could do all that stuff, I could change bed pans.  But I really got good at, at the hospital corners on the beds.  Oh, you get really good at this tight, military tight.  So I got to do that and I graduated from that.  So yeah, I had spent a lot of time at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: I'd say I helped build the Wright-Patterson Air Force Base.  You know, I kind of, kind of glossed up what I did there.
Speaker 1: So that, that was a big thing in the community though to have the military base there (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, Wright-Pat, big, oh yeah, sure.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Hey you got, you got a job at Wright-Pat you were kind of doing it.  But remember Wright-Pat was just one of the, one of the opportunities for jobs.  General Motors was very big in town.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: General Motors, DELCO [Dayton Engineering Laboratories Co.], Frigidaire.
Speaker 1: NCR too.
Speaker 2: And National Cash Register very big.  I can remember growing up, which is one of the memories, cash register assembly line.  So you'd go to NCR and you could see the very large, see the big windows with the big factory, big NCR factory.  And you'd see the cash registers on the assembly line.  I didn't get a chance to work at NCR though.
Story_ID: 156110
Speaker 1: So you're working these, these jobs and you're going to school--
Speaker 2: In the summer.
Speaker 1: In the summer, no--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --and then you're going to school.  I just wanna, so when, when you first went to Miami [Valley School, Dayton, Ohio], I mean Miami--
Speaker 2: Valley.
Speaker 1: Miami Valley, sorry--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --are you, it's clear that you are gonna be, you know, 'cause back then, I don't know if you're near school, at my school they tracked students.  Was there any tracking going on at that time do you know about?
Speaker 2: Tracking by whom?
Speaker 1: Tracking by grades.  Tracking by (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: But who, but who would track you?
Speaker 1: The, the, the school itself would track, maybe that would was more in public schools.
Speaker 2: It was probably more in public school.
Speaker 1: That was (unclear)
Speaker 2: I think Ellen Moore [ph.] probably tracked me and--
Speaker 1: And then you ended up getting that opportunity.
Speaker 2: And then, and then she had decided that I should go to this other school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so how many blacks are there at that school?
Speaker 2: Ooh, there were a handful.  About maybe a, a dozen or so.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Maybe, maybe a few more.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they had came from the right side of the tracks.  I mean they came from pretty well-off families.
Story_ID: 156111
Speaker 1: So how are you, how are you changing and who is mentoring you?  And, and are these--
Speaker 2: I don't know if there's a change or mentoring.  I, it just, it, the world has evolved--
Speaker 1: 'Cause the--
Speaker 2: --to that.  We didn't think about it as changing or mentoring.  Listen, I was a kid, I was, I was that, at that point, I was ten or eleven years old.  So you don't think about mentoring or any, any, there, there were, there were teachers whom I remember--
Speaker 1: Can you talk about--
Speaker 2: --who took an interest.  Robin Melnick [ph.] being one, first Ellen Moore [ph.].  Every step of my, my educational career there has been a teacher there that has been a major, pretty major influence.  Ellen Moore early, there was this Mrs. Rickman [ph.] also who was in the early days, should be third or fourth grade.
Speaker 1: And, but what were you starting to be aware of and, you know, around in the community are there other people you look up to?  I know that you mean you had mentioned Casey was your, you know, the Ben Casey as a, a TV (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: But 'Perry Mason' and 'Ben Casey.'
Speaker 1: Okay.  Those two.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, I looked up to Jesus 'cause at one point I wanted to be a carpenter.  So I got, you know, I actually have to give.  I seriously did before, before Ben Casey, I figured maybe I'm not gonna be this carpenter thing 'cause I didn't have much skills there.  But, you know, gee, gee, I looked to Jesus 'cause that was a great example.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Ben Casey and, and, and, and Perry Mason were a bit more practical.  So I would look to those examples but in the community I can't tell you that as a moral barometer, as a moral compass of how you live your life, as a man I looked to my grandfather [Leo Wilson].  I don't think there's, I, I have not, I did not then nor have I since then seen a better example of how you oughta live within the boundaries of right and wrong.
Speaker 1: So there, your grandparents are looking and they are proud of every sort of step that you're making?
Speaker 2: I would imagine so.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 156112
Speaker 1: So let's, so let's talk.  So you went on this tour your, the summer of your junior--
Speaker 2: Junior.
Speaker 1: Junior going into--
Speaker 2: Senior year.
Speaker 1: Senior year.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: And so what places do you go to see?
Speaker 2: [Phillips] Exeter [Academy, Exeter, New Hampshire], Deerfield [Academy, Deerfield, Massachusetts], [the] Hotchkiss [School, Lakeville, Connecticut], Choate [Rosemary Hall, Wallingford, Connecticut].  I may have, I may have applied to Groton [School, Groton, Massachusetts], I can't remember.  Then a couple others.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was that experience like, the interview process the, you know, sort of, you set up appointments?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you, yeah you set up appointments.  You'd go and talk to people.
Speaker 1: So what was the experience like, right?
Speaker 2: Just, you know, as a kid you don't really think of these things.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Uhh--
Speaker 1: Okay.  I, okay.  I've got that, okay.
Speaker 2: It is, you, you kind of go, but there was one experience I had though at Hotchkiss, the reason I ultimately decided to go to Hotchkiss, two reasons.  One remember I talked to you about the newspaper man in Dayton [Ohio] who had been an alumni of the school that I eventually went to called Hotchkiss, his name is Larry Newman [ph.].  And the other is, since school was out and there were very few people around the school at Hotchkiss, there was a teacher by the name of George Norton Stone.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] person, Yale man, as they would say back then.  And he was the one who attracted me to Hotchkiss.  And just--
Speaker 1: How?
Speaker 2: --just because he, well he spoke with a lisp, he cursed like a sailor, had a dog named Susan and a wife named Jodie, and he had a big personality.  And I was, and he took an interest.  And as you go around to these schools, it's, it's, it's an odd time to interview because most of the students are, although at Exeter, I did run into a person who coincidentally is one of my best friends in life now, who also we somehow got lotteried into being roommates in my freshman year of college, I ran into him when I was looking at schools.  That was at, he went to Exeter.
Speaker 1: And his name?
Speaker 2: [Dr.] Willie [Edward] Lawrence [Jr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's a doctor, now.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: One of the great cardiologists in--
Speaker 1: So, so you, you, when do you find out, do you, that you got in to Hotchkiss?  And do you think that the newspaper man had something to do with it?
Speaker 2: I'm certain he did, sure.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He wrote a (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I got into most of the schools I applied to.  I don't think, I don't think anyone said no to me.  Its special applications, so it was, yeah, I had done pretty well.
Speaker 1: Very well.  So you get in, so you, do you remember the day that your, do you have any memory of the day that your grandparents and your mother find out and what their saying and (unclear).
Speaker 2: I don't have any memory of that.  I do have other memories, educational memories but this one I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So what's, so you--
Speaker 2: But again this is not part of our vocabulary.  This is not something you kind of wake up in the neighborhood and say I'm gonna go to Hotchkiss.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: It just didn't happen.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: We didn't know anything about boarding schools.
Speaker 1: So but even preparing for it there's a list of items to take with you and bring.
Speaker 2: That was pretty exciting.  Right, that was pretty exciting.  Just go to the, I can't remember what I did, I probably didn't, 'cause my mother went and put all the stuff together.  I used to get these care packages, right?  They'd send all the, all the goodies from home.  That was, that was a, that was a fun thing.  That was great, it was wonderful memories of that.
Speaker 1: Yeah 'cause the schools would send you a list of items that you (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: They'd send you a list of items--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --that you have to get.  They also send a reading list.  I remember that.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Hotchkiss sent a reading list over the summer.  I had to read thirty-some odd books.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Story_ID: 156113
Speaker 1: And what were you thinking, you, in those days also it was, I mean you're really the first of in many ways, so there was great anticipation about performing well.  And I, and I remember reading that you were an immaculate dresser, that you, all of a sudden you saw people with these shirts with alligators on them.
Speaker 2: Oh, man that killed me.  I'm telling you something.  Coming from a neighborhood, remember you go, I never knew it was discount, I now know it was heavy discount.  When I arrived at Hotchkiss and I saw these kids with these short sleeve shirts with alligators on them that cost a lot of money, that to me was an event.  That was, I just said the world doesn't work this way.  I just don't get this.  Furthermore they sent those shirts out to get 'em laundered, then they came back really neatly packaged.  And where I grew up, you kind of did your own laundry and you learned how to iron and do laundry and, and do all the basics.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: That I had, I remember going to Hotchkiss, I had a three piece suit, man I was decked out.  And it was a, it was a brown jacket, a brown pair of pants, and a brown houndstooth check pair of pants.  And the great thing about that it was that new fabric that they had come up with they come put into suits, polyester.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: It was a polyester double knit, and I was doing it.  I had earth shoes too, big Afro, earth shoes, polyester double knit suit.  And it was brown, I liked that.  So I should have said brown is my favorite color 'cause I really like brown.  And that got me through this and, by the way, later I discovered natural fibers or the things that are gonna be, the, of the higher quality but the only natural fiber that hit my body which was cotton, was when you used to get the, when you splurge and got the 50/50 BVD underwear, 50 percent cotton and 50 percent polyester.  Man that was about the closest I got to that natural fiber.  And all the kids at school they had these chinos, these khaki pants with natural fiber, when that three piece suit.  And I had, I remember I had a beige pair of, apart from the suit, I had a beige pair of, of double knit slacks (unclear) bell bottoms that got me through a lot of stuff, 'til freshman year of college I figured this is not the way to go.
Speaker 1: That's good.  So you got with the program but you basically dressed that way the, you--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I didn't know any better.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: I thought I was doing it.  You couldn't tell me I weren't clean (laughter).
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: I didn't worry about all them kids with those, I said, I mean, I don't think I, this is a little waste of money here.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Put all that money into a shirt with a alligator on it.
Story_ID: 156114
Speaker 1: So how does this, how does this, this school, how does [the] Hotchkiss [School, Lakeville, Connecticut] immediately differ from [the] Miami Valley [School, Dayton, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: It's a whole nother level of wealth.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: Whole nother level of wealth.
Speaker 1: How about the student body?
Speaker 2: Much less diverse than, than Miami Valley.  It was, where Miami Valley may have had a dozen, dozen and a half, this, it was a, maybe a dozen at the most.
Speaker 1: You mean a dozen at the most in the whole school?
Speaker 2: Whole school.
Speaker 1: In the whole school, okay.  So who was in your class?
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: Calvin Bryant [ph.], Allen Glenn [ph.], I think her name was Queeny Rogers [ph.], maybe one other.
Speaker 1: And where had they come from?
Speaker 2: Where?  They'd been there for a while.
Speaker 1: They had been there for a while, okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Except for the two women.  And remember I went to Hotchkiss when it was the first year of coed.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's right.  I had, that's right.  That's right, I had read about that, that, and in fact, I wanted to ask you about your friendship with Michael Carroll.
Speaker 2: That's my man.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  One of the smartest guys I know.
Speaker 1: So he, he was, was he on the, the same floor where you were?
Speaker 2: Michael was on the same floor, Michael, Michael's room was right, right next to mine.  Michael finished number one in the class which means that's, I mean that's, that's a lot a, that's a lot of horsepower.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And he navigated.  He had come, he come, Mike came from the neighborhood of Rahway, New Jersey, and he had navigated Hotchkiss effectively since his ninth or tenth grade.  And really smart.  A lot of talent.  From the neighborhood, so similar values, neighborhood values, right, where the rules of the neighborhood, where your word and your handshake are what represents you.  God-fearing and God-loving, a different kind of religious experience, if you will but still respectful, which I think informed his conduct.  It gives you kind of a moral barometer, it's a moral fiber that gets created early in.  You don't often stray away from that.  Some do but you always have something on which to rely on.
Speaker 1: You know, what's interesting about that and I was gonna ask you because, you know, a lot of times people talk about Midwestern values as (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, I think they're very real.  I, I would, I am fortunate, blessed to have come up in the Midwest.
Speaker 1: 'Cause it's different than the East, and then you add on that wealth, you know--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --there, there's a difference.  So, so the two of you do well and you come from sort of a similar background.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: Mike went to a predecessor school here that, that existed in a different form.  But he was taught by a Franciscan Brother by the name of Brother Brian Carnegie [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  I did not know, I knew the, I knew the history of his involvement, he getting you involved with--
Speaker 2: De La Salle Academy [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Right, De La Salle.
Speaker 2: There was a school that was a predecessor school of De La Salle called Monsignor Kelly [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: I see.  So he was the beneficiary of that school?
Speaker 2: Mike Carroll was, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Mike Carroll, that's what I'm saying, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, and one of my longest standing friends.
Speaker 1: I see.  That's, that's, that's fascinating.  And he, same thing then, he did well, you were doing well academically.
Speaker 2: He did really well.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he did.
Speaker 2: For me it was kind of a transition.  Yeah I did fine but Michael, he brought home all the important prizes, the history prize, the China prize, the math prize, the, the highest grade point average prize.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I, I read where you also loved to sing and you--
Speaker 2: Well, that's Michael.  Michael says I love to sing 'cause I, that's the way I learned my chemistry, the chemistry table I used to sing it.  I think Michael got a little, a little unnerved by that 'cause I was.
Story_ID: 156115
Speaker 1: So what else, how was that experience?  How does that year sort of shape and change you?  What, because each experience--
Speaker 2: It opens your world.  It, it exposes you.  Although I have to tell you the Miami Valley School experience was also a great experience.  That's the first time I went to France was in, I was in Miami Valley.  This is probably ninth or tenth grade we took an excursion trip to, to Paris.  Now, of course, this is all scholarships so this is, somebody else is paying for this.  I mean we probably contributed all the, I had all the personal stuff but I, and probably a couple of dollars that translated into francs but it was a--Miami Valley opened my world, opened my eyes up to a, to a broader world than the neighborhood.  Hotchkiss expanded that world.
Story_ID: 156116
Speaker 1: So what are you thinking in terms of, of colleges at that point and--
Speaker 2: Remember at that point I wanted to still be either Perry Mason or Ben Casey, so I wanted to go to be pre-law or pre-medicine.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: I applied to six colleges.  I applied to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], Amherst [College, Amherst, Massachusetts], Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland], and Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois].  Johns Hopkins and Northwestern 'cause they have great medical programs, and the other four 'cause they were the, four of the best schools in the country.  And I was fortunate to get into all six.
Speaker 1: And did you go and visit those schools or how did you make your decision?
Speaker 2: I didn't have the money to go to those colleges.  I didn't I, I think at some point I, I appeared on the, the Harvard campus for some reason but we didn't have the money to go and kind of take a plane to go visit the colleges or (unclear).  I just--
Speaker 1: Let's see here.
Speaker 2: --by reputation.  And I almost went to, I almost went to Amherst.  So it came down between Harvard and Amherst.
Speaker 1: But why, why did it come--
Speaker 2: Amherst was just a great school.  And I can't remember what the interaction was, maybe it was the admission's director who talked so passionately about it but it was a great school.  Wasn't, is a great school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All of them are, I, I these were all great institutions.
Story_ID: 156117
Speaker 1: What was the town, also did you have much contact with the town of Lakeville [Connecticut] when you were at [the] Hotchkiss [School, Lakeville, Connecticut]?  Did you go out much into the town at all or were you mainly really on--
Speaker 2: Mainly on campus.
Speaker 1: Campus, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And the, and the headmaster there was a guy named Bill Olsen, right?
Speaker 2: A. William Olsen, the O.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so did you ever get yourself in trouble with the O?  No.
Speaker 2: I can't tell you, I can't own up to that.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: There were, there were, there were, there were one or two situations where there was some implication that I may have been involved but that is yet to be verified or yet to be confirmed, either confirmed or verified.  Certainly not confirmed by me nor verified by me nor anybody else who is remotely associated.
Speaker 1: You don't wanna share one of those instances?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was, there was this thing that, that was called the midnight scream.  And the organizers of the midnight scream organized or at midnight one night for all of the students to open their windows and yell at the top of their lungs to see whether or not we could wake up the town of Lakeville.  And so it was so well orchestrated that precisely at midnight when the scream began the O was driving into the school and so he heard the scream, the quartermaster, had no idea what was occurring so he quickly donned his robe, hopped into his car and drove up to the main circle.  And Michael [Carroll] and I could, from our windows, look to see the town of Lakeville, and so you could see lights in the town of Lakeville coming on at midnight.  And so the organizers were rather successful at the midnight scream.  Perhaps a little too successful in that the timing of the scream was also, coincided with the return of the O.
Speaker 1: So did you get reprimanded for that?
Speaker 2: I don't see why I would have gotten reprimanded for it.
Speaker 1: I thought you had a little role to play?
Speaker 2: I, you should go check your sources.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  (Unclear) (laughter).  I thought I read, I'm pretty, I don't know, admitting articles that were--
Speaker 2: I don't, no, I don't think there's any, I don't think there's any admission--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --other than having been there when it occurred.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I see.  I have heard that the two of you were masterminds of that but--
Speaker 2: Is that what you heard?
Speaker 1: Yes, I did.
Speaker 2: Has that, has that been corroborated or that's just--
Speaker 1: I think, I think it was.
Speaker 2: --by speculation.
Speaker 1: I think it was.
Speaker 2: Michael didn't corroborate that, I know that, so.
Speaker 1: I thought, I thought, I thought I read, read it in a source--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) you did, you didn't it's just, it is a long standing implication.
Speaker 1: --in a Hotchkiss school article. I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah it has long standing implications.  They, these people come up with stories that don't get corroborated but they have some validity to them so they maintain their integrity by committing them to paper and getting other people to say yes but I don't--
Story_ID: 156118
Speaker 1: Now, the other thing though, I wanna understand the, the size, like the class size [at the Hotchkiss School, Lakeville, Connecticut].
Speaker 2: Small.
Speaker 1: Small.  So--
Speaker 2: Relatively small.
Speaker 1: How--
Speaker 2: A lot of attention.
Speaker 1: How many students to a--
Speaker 2: I'd say ten to fifteen, twelve to fifteen at the most.
Speaker 1: And is this was your love of literature and English--
Speaker 2: Probably started there.
Speaker 1: It started there.  Now why there as opposed to Miami Valley [School, Dayton, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: I, I liked it at Miami Valley also but remember it's, it's a different, you get informed differently.  I liked, I mean I, the, the Miami Valley education was an extraordinary education.  The Hotchkiss education and what you get exposed to with the interaction between the student, the teacher, and then the literature, and it was a different level of, it was a different stage of my life so I was able to at that stage of my life appreciate it more.  So I was more engaged and, and how you interacted with the literature was, it was a different level of interaction at a later stage in life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So Faulkner and Shakespeare become two of your favorites or--
Speaker 2: That's in college, yeah.
Speaker 1: In college?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, those were my buddies.  William Cuthbert Faulkner and William Shakespeare, yeah, you know, those, those were my guys.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: They were my friends.
Speaker 1: Now were you also playing basketball through, you know, at Hotchkiss or did--
Speaker 2: I played basketball at Hotchkiss.  Yes, I was captain, I don't think I was, no I wasn't the captain of the team.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: I just, I was the highest scorer on the team so it was, I, I did pretty well then.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the year that you enter, the year you enter Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] is 1975; right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: September of 1975.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 156119
Speaker 1: I do wanna go back though, do your parents [Wiletha McGuire] attend graduation at Hotchkiss [School, Lakeville, Connecticut], and your grandparents [Leo Wilson and Mamie Wilson], did they attend graduation?
Speaker 2: At Hotchkiss, yes.
Speaker 1: Can you describe that day for me?
Speaker 2: It was great, sunny day in Lakeville, Mike [Michael Carroll] gave the valedictorian speech, had everybody in stitches.  It was a wonderful day.  In many, in many respects because this was the first time that my family had visited a place like Hotchkiss.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I think maybe they had come up, my mom had come up too when I was, when I started but this was a, it was a wonderful setting and, and it was just, it was a proud day.  Hotchkiss is a great institution, great institution.  And it was a wonderful experience.
Story_ID: 156120
Speaker 1: You enter Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and you, are you thinking at that point you're gonna major in English or you're not or at that--
Speaker 2: Oh, I was gonna be premed and prelaw.
Speaker 1: Oh, you were still gonna be premed.
Speaker 2: Premed and prelaw, absolutely.
Speaker 1: I see.  So--
Speaker 2: And you go audit these classes, you know, you can sit in for the classes, and during freshman week you can go and figure out classes you wanna take.  And, and I remember going into, it was either a biology or a chemistry class, beginning level and I thought I'd get there relatively early, by the time I got to this class the first ten to fifteen rows--I think he tapped you.
Speaker 1: That's okay.
Speaker 2: All right.  The first--
Speaker 1: I'm in the control of this (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's fine you, you, that's what's fine.  The first ten to fifteen rows were, were already filled by, by classmates who had those multicolored pens, those red, blue, green, and black, and I said okay.  This is, this, that was the first sign that that this premed stuff was gonna be somewhat of a different route.  And then the professor came in and started, he put this blackboard down and started writing something on the blackboard and, and most of the other students could follow it and they knew which color pen to apply to which note they were taking.  Most of this was hieroglyphics to me, notwithstanding my ability to have sung through the chemicals table when I was at [the] Hotchkiss [School, Lakeville, Connecticut], this was, it was a little bit, it was, it was a little bit more than what I thought I had signed up for to be premed.  And from that day forward I decided I wasn't gonna be premed.
Speaker 1: Was that your first semester of the first year?
Speaker 2: You gotta understand that was the first two weeks of the first semester of my first year.  It never got to the semester.  I declared victory early on not being premed.  So I, my, Ben Casey all that, that, that sent me to be pre, prelaw.  I just, I then yielded to, to the Perry Mason ambition.  And that got, got translated into me majoring in English and American literature.
Speaker 1: I see.  Now, I know history 'cause a lot of, you know, our politics, you know, you were, did you ever think you would teach or you really were thinking you would go to law school in the end?
Speaker 2: No, I was thinking law school.  But I could, you know, this is a great way to go.  Read a lot of books, and I thought I could write then, too, but that's a whole different story.
Speaker 1: Creatively?
Speaker 2: Just write period.  I thought I could write creatively.  I thought I knew a lot of big words, I just strung a lot of 'em of together.
Speaker 1: So who was in your class at Harvard?  Who, who comes in with you, the black I'm talking about black, I think (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, there were a lot of folks.
Speaker 1: Tell me who was (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: A lot of folks.  My, my roommates, [Dr.] Willie [Edward] Lawrence [Jr.], who is a doctor, Doreen Nunez [ph.], Claude Sloan [ph.], were roommates.  I'm not certain where they are now, we kept in touch but then kind of fell out of touch, but Willie and I are still in, in contact.
Speaker 1: And that's the person you met at [Phillips] Exeter [Academy, Exeter, New Hampshire] (unclear).
Speaker 2: That's a yes.
Speaker 1: So how long had he been at Exeter?  When did he go there?
Speaker 2: Well, I think he was Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Oh, he was Cleveland, from Cleveland?  Okay.
Speaker 2: We had a few people from Cleveland who eventually ended up at, at, from the neighborhood of Cleveland who eventually ended up at, at Harvard.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: He was there, Al Haymon was there.  Al Haymon was just--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Oh, Al Haymon was there, okay.
Speaker 2: He goes back with us, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  'Cause I was there.  I always heard about Al Haymon.  I mean my god, he was--
Speaker 2: Al Haymon, when he first got from--he had a pink Cadillac.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) everybody when I, by the time I got to law school, everybody was talking about him but I'm older, you know, you're, I graduated from law school in 1980.  Now was Debbie Wright [HM Deborah Wright], was she--
Speaker 2: Debbie Wright and I have the same academic background.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Exactly the same academic back, background.  We went to, we were freshmen together.  Well we were--
Speaker 1: I was gonna, okay.
Speaker 2: College together and graduate school together.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: She's one of my close friends.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Bill Lewis was there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Okay.  Okay.  Yeah, 'cause, you know, it's interesting.  I interviewed her aunt.
Speaker 2: [HM] Marian Wright Edelman?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 156121
Speaker 1: So tell me about the college, you know, about Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and the experience (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Great college experience.  Wonderful college experience.  In, in, in large part because I experienced so much of Harvard College, so many different communities.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Sure.  There was the, the black community, there was the athletic community, there was a political community--
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: --and then there was the, but, the, the private club community, four different, at least four different communities there.  Many of which didn't intersect.
Speaker 1: And not always people experienced that many communities too.
Speaker 2: Most people don't.
Speaker 1: So can we talk about each one of those four communities please?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: And what so, you can take them in the order you started.
Speaker 2: The black community?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Well, that was, that's a, that is, was, is and always will be fundamental.  And that's that, you know, that that's the, that's just by end of experience and culture, a natural convening community.
Speaker 1: But that's also an exciting, you mentioned some of the, you know, Debbie Wright--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Bill Lewis, you were mentioning some of the people who were in your class who have become lifelong friends.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: But I (unclear) on, on who are not from that community also.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Many lifelong friends who (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Like from (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --not from that community.
Speaker 1: Right.  That's really good.  But I wanna, I wanna talk about the black community a little bit around that time 'cause this is very exciting time in many ways, you know, you're young and--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --you're, you know, with all the other schools around, you know, there's a lot of--
Speaker 2: You mean, (unclear) like Wellesley [College, Wellesley, Massachusetts] and places like that?
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: Yeah, I frequent visitor of Wellesley.  I, the western suburbs.  Yeah, yeah I, I, I've been there on a couple of occasions.
Speaker 1: Well, they were after the Harvard man too and--
Speaker 2: You know, Harvard they were after Harvard men, but Harvard men were, you know, Wellesley women were, it's something they put in the water over there.  Those were some highly accomplished, very attractive, very together women.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: It sucks for the other schools around that didn't have that but Wellesley had a particular, particularly strong representation when it comes to this.
Story_ID: 156122
Speaker 1: So the other communities that you mentioned--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: So what were some of the other communities?  You mentioned the athletics--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) to the politics as an example.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is at the Kennedy School [The John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And this is one where you were introduced to some of the country's great politicians.  Dutch Morial [Ernest Nathan Morial] I can remember back, the great mayor of New Orleans [Lousiana].  And when, when Dutch came, this is, remember this is a time when you're first getting a number of, of black mayors.
Speaker 1: That's right
Speaker 2: And so to get exposed to that in the world of politics was, was, we actually could see in a way that, in a world where black representation had been denied for all the reasons that we know, to see these people who had been able to, to, to get to that level, to command the respect of the voting population to get them to that level was, was, it was encouraging.  It was up lifting.  It was certainly inspiring.  So you would see these politicians, you can, then you'd go and you go to debate but that was part of the political process.  At least you are at a much junior level at that level at the, at the college you thought you were actually practicing.  So it is a, it was a world of, of politics and, and governance and government.  And for people who aspired to be in public service, who wanted to be in government service that was a great training ground for that.  And many of them have gone on to do that.  Many people who weren't part of that have gone on to become part of that as well but many of them have gone on to do that.  That's, that was kind of the intro to politics.
Story_ID: 156123
Speaker 1: The other would be the athletic community, the basketball community, where I, I played a lot of basketball.  I played in the, in my freshman year and then decided that I wanted to have a broader experience and as a result of that, decided not to play varsity and instead played for a team called the Harvard [Crimson] Classics.  The Harvard Classics were a group of guys who either couldn't make or didn't wanna play varsity.  We played in a lot of different communities.  We played at the, the local prisons.  We traveled outside of the country to play.  And it was, it's a, Classics was a great experience.
Speaker 2: You traveled outside of the country did you?  (Unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Yeah, we played in Gibraltar.  We played in other parts of the world, mostly Europe.
Speaker 2: Who were you playing against then and how, how is this being arranged?
Speaker 1: I, it was arranged, John Harvey was a guy who arranged it all, and was just a, a great supporter for a number of us.  And it was, I'm not quite certain how it was sponsored, I think the university may have had something to do with it, other benefactors, (unclear) groups.  And it was a place where you could, you could take the game of basketball seriously but not take yourself too seriously.  If you scored too many points then Harvey would just yank you.  The only way you could stay in is play defense and rebound.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)
Speaker 1: You know somebody had to score but on occasion you'd, you know, but it was great experience.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Great comradery.  You practice once or twice a week, then on occasion beat the varsity.
Speaker 2: So what, so what friendships came out of there though that (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Oh, these are some lifelong friendships.  There are still email change for people who, who have, who had that experiences.  One today from a friend of mine in Nigeria, just this morning we exchanged emails.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: You know, the basket file, the, the athletic world once you, establish that bond, there's a bond that lasts for a long time 'cause there's a commonality.  There's that (unclear), you know, they say democratic merit-based commonality.  When you go to the courts, if I played down on the courts on West Fourth Street, they have no idea what school I went to, they could care less, if you got game, you got game, you got no game then, you got no game, you wait.  If you got game then somebody's gonna pick you up or you stay on the court.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: That community is one that understands the, the standards by which it operates.  It operates without referee.  People self-referee and, and you'll get into a debate but people respect the game in such a way that, that there are life lessons that get taught.  It happens in other athletic endeavors but especially in the game of basketball.
Speaker 2: And who do you, do you have any basketball heroes of that time?
Speaker 1: Oh, geez man back there, you had Walt Clyde Frazier.  You had the Doc, Dr. J. [Julius Erving]  Of course, you had the dean of them all who is Bill Russell.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So there are a number of them.
Speaker 2: And you to, and, you know, this mid '70s [1970s]--
Speaker 1: Yes, Kareem [Abdul-Jabbar] or Lew [Lew Alcindor]
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: But I mean there, I could get Pistol Pete Maravich.  We had a lot of 'em.
Story_ID: 156124
Speaker 1: Now you talked also about the, the private clubs.  So--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --what, what clubs were you--
Speaker 2: At Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] they have secret societies.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: At Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] they have eating clubs.  And at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] they have finals clubs.  So--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --and the process by which you get invited into these clubs is called you get punched.  Punching season is when the clubs invite you to, essentially interview you to become a member of the club.  That is actually when I, when I switched from double knits to, to something that was more natural.  And there was a friend of mine who was the manager of the basketball team, a close friend today, Mandy Grunwald.   Mandy Grunwald you will know because she and Jim (unclear) were instrumental in putting, in running President Clinton's campaign.  And Mandy Grunwald said, "McGuire, you, you actually need to change up your, your, your attire 'cause this is just not gonna work in that world."  And I think this was the first time that I'd ever known that I should have a non-brown and beiged striped shirt with a brown double knit tie.  That I should probably go with some more natural colors.  And so it was through Mandy's tutelage that I shifted my, my attire.  Something that was a bit more in keeping with what took place on the East Coast as opposed to the Midwest polyester.
Speaker 1: So what, what club do you, 'cause those clubs do they choose you or do you choose them?  How is the--
Speaker 2: No, no they choose you.
Speaker 1: They choose you.
Speaker 2: They choose whom they invite, who they punch.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: And I eventually joined a club that, where I was the first black.
Speaker 1: So what club was that?
Speaker 2: It was the Owl Club.
Speaker 1: The Owl Club.  Owl?
Speaker 2: O-W-L.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And can you talk about, 'cause each of those clubs have their own personalities, so can you talk about this club, The Owl Club?
Speaker 2: I can't describe the, the personality but there was a lot of comradery.  (Unclear) you go through college experiences, this is I guess the, the--
Speaker 1: But I'm saying they all have their reputations.
Speaker 2: They all have their reputations I'm not--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: So what was--
Speaker 2: --sure what the reputation of the Owl was.  I joined and, and integrated the club and had some, developed then and still have today some very good relationships, good friendships.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And you go through the experiences that are, that are really, and they're life lessons learned there.  When I got to be an officer, the first to integrate in the club, and then getting to be an officer at the club, and then going through the process of inviting others to the club, and you understand the dynamics of what are, where it's part of the social fabric of what takes place in the country and how to navigate that.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: How to be, how to, how to, how to integrate into it, how, how to, how to develop responsibility in it, how to carry out responsibility in it, and how to be a leader in that community.
Speaker 1: So who were some of the members of your club and when do you get punched?  Do you get punched?
Speaker 2: You get punched between, right after freshman year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so you're a member for the remaining sort of three years.
Speaker 2: You're a member for life.
Speaker 1: Nice.  So--
Speaker 2: So you have that.  I ultimately became the, the treasurer of the Owl Club.  Then the black community I also was the, the head of the African American Cultural Center.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was president of the African American Cultural Center.  I was treasurer of the Owl Club.  And I think I had a couple other leadership positions.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 156125
Speaker 1: I wanna go to the Owl Club first because you said something interesting in terms of, of us sort of navigating relationships--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --and how.  So can you explain more about that?  What are you learning at that point and, and you're entering, you're talking about even entering in a world now.  How, how large are each of the clubs?  'Cause each of them have their own houses.
Speaker 2: They all have their, they are relatively small.
Speaker 1: Like how--
Speaker 2: I forget the actual numbers, you probably, I, I wouldn't hazard a guess but it's a, it's a small percentage, a very small.  Remember I'm doing all this on scholarship.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I can remember when the presidents of the club convened, and there was a guy who was a president of the Owl Club, a guy named Henry Mueller [ph.], world class.  And at the time Henry had to exhibit a lot of courage to invite me into the club.  I had no money, and this is where the better financially resourced members of that community spend their time and resources.  I had no money, and I was the first African American to be invited to join the club.  Henry Mueller to this day, we, we maintain a friendship.  And the respect that I have for Henry Mueller, having taken that decision and had the courage to say he's gone be a member of this club, that courage was exemplary, was and is exemplary.
Speaker 1: So, is that a, do you know what, one thing I, I want to touch upon--
Speaker 2: It's a part of it, it's a part of the college experience that up to that point, you didn't have a lot of, that was these were all male clubs so at that point you gotta be aware of that as well.  You didn't have a lot of black folks being part of these clubs.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: There was a couple others that, that where you had some integration but certainly not in this one.
Story_ID: 156126
Speaker 1: But that's what I, I'm wondering, you have not spoken of any racial experiences to date, not one, in your description of your, your story, not one.  And I'm just wondering has that been totally absent?  'Cause you've not spoken of one.  Not one.
Speaker 2: You know, it's, it has not been absent and it is so ever present and, and it has been present since I left Irving [Elementary School, Dayton, Ohio], where for the most part, I am one of the only, if not the only.  And so what you have to develop early on is the ability to navigate a lot of different worlds.  Recognize that there's an anchor at home.  There is a foundation that is as solid as it gets, formed at home, formed with a value system that is an unassailable value system that gets reinforced at church.  That allows you to exist in a world where you can be a member, an integral member, and be integrated into it but not from it.  That world is persistent for most of my life.  It's not dissimilar to the world that I live in today.  So not to highlight what is a construct, it's probably more natural than not.  It's just the world that we live in.  It's a world that I've been a part of and I've had to exist in it.  I've had to compete in it.  In order to be here I've had to excel at it.  And so it's a part of what I do every day.  And perhaps it's as a result of that, that you don't see it highlighted.  It's a given.
Speaker 1: It's a given but sometimes people are not as successful of, of, of really navigating the duality of the, I mean you're, you're talking about, you're not talking about Episcopalian or Catholic.  (Unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, but I'm talking about dwelling in the secret place of the Most High.  See I'm covered.  So I'm okay with that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I understand, okay.  Okay.  I got you.  But I--
Speaker 2: Remember it says what, "No weapon formed against me shall prosper."  [Isaiah 54:17]
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: We're gone be all right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I see.  But were you going--
Speaker 2: They prayed a lot of prayers for me and they still do.
Speaker 1: I know.  I, no I--I mean if, I, I think that not enough is spoken of about the navigation of those, those dual experiences because--
Speaker 2: And so the, the, the--
Speaker 1: I don't think--
Speaker 2: --there are a number of examples of people who've done that.
Speaker 1: There are tons.  Tons.
Speaker 2: (Unclear)
Speaker 1: Hmm?
Speaker 2: There are what?
Speaker 1: There are lots of examples of it but I'm saying sometimes people are not as successful as others.  And I, and I think also because when you, when you enter into a club environment and even [The] Hotchkiss [School, Lakeville, Connecticut] which may have prepared you, that's a whole different sort of (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It's a whole 'nother level.
Speaker 1: It's a whole different level.
Speaker 2: Remember at each step there's been a different level, the, the level of, the expectations have increased every step, the level of competition.  The level of awareness of my colleagues at what's taking place around the world increases, some of it exponentially.  The Miami Valley [School, Dayton, Ohio], the Irving experience, the Miami Valley experience is very different than Irving.  The, the Hotchkiss experience is very different than Miami Valley.  The Harvard experience is very different to, to my, to, to, Hotchkiss.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Living in France is very different.  It, it, for the world has been expanded every step of the way.
Story_ID: 156127
Speaker 1: I remember very vividly a racial incident, a racial situation that took place when I was living in France and I went from Brindisi, Italy to Patras, Greece.  And took the train from Patras to Athens, and when I got into Athens at night, I went around to the different hotels trying to find a hotel room, even in the youth hostels, and I was denied a room.  I was denied a bed in the youth hostel because the, the people who ran the hostel said that if our other guests wake up the next day and see you here, it won't go down well.  We're gonna lose our, we're gonna lose the other guests.  And so I was able to find someone who would accommodate me in the, in the back room of a hotel where I slept during the course of the night and was able to shower and see the Pantheon [sic, the Parthenon] the next day.  Hopped on a plane from Athens [Greece] and went to Egypt where I was welcomed.  The same night in Athens, at every corner that I went to, looking around I was followed by someone in a car.  Some stranger in a car.  So you go through these experiences racially.  I can also remember going from a place called El Arish in Egypt, crossing the Negev, being welcomed in the desert by the Bedouin drinking chai, which is tea, by the Bedouins, and then arriving in, at the Israeli-Egyptian border and being (unclear) from the border to, to, to Jerusalem, the Israeli-Egyptian border and being (unclear) to Jerusalem and being welcomed at a place called Neve Schechter [Legacy Heritage Center for Jewish Culture]  for two weeks, where I was taken in by the Jewish community and, and treated as well as, as a family member.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: All these things are life forming and they also reinforce and reinforce values, they reinforce your confidence, they reinforce a world view that has to be expansive.  It has to be inclusive but you also have to maintain that anchor 'cause it will get shaken.
Speaker 2: That's right.  Excellent.  So now, when you talk about that experience in France was that the year you spent at the University of Nice [The Nice Sophia Antipolis University, Nice, France]?
Speaker 1: University of Nice, yes.
Speaker 2: Right, okay.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Yep, I had a fellowship, a Rotary Fellowship.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That was though, that was after graduation, right?
Speaker 1: That was between college and graduate school.  After I graduated from Harvard College [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) you took a year off?
Speaker 1: --and before I started graduate school.
Speaker 2: You took a, took a year off--
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: -and did that.  Okay.
Story_ID: 156128
Speaker 1: I, I wanna, before we leave Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] what, well first of all, the, the Owl Club--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --what are you, what do you learn in the Owl Club as you sort of progress upward?  How, what, what do you learn?
Speaker 2: You learn how to interact.  You learn how to lead.  I mean that, that was, and you learn how to, I, I search for the words.  Part of the process is when you're inviting other members in, there is a, there's an election process and part of the election process is the ability to deny someone access and you can deny someone access secretly.  And I can remember that there was one candidate whom some of us wanted and some other members of the club didn't want.  And I remember having a conversation, which was a very candid conversation, with the leadership of the club, including myself, as to why a particular candidate was not gonna get elected.  And to have that, and race played a factor, and so you ask the questions in a, in a side, what I'll call a sidebar conversation.  Members gathered in an election process, and you have a conversation about race.  There's a reason this person is not getting elected.  Somebody secretly doesn't want him to be elected.  Is it because they're black?  What's the intent?  When you're in college at that age, to have that kind of candid conversation about race, you then understand how to interact with people without filter.  And if you're gonna develop relationships, they have to be without filter.  These are the longest, these are the longest standing relationships that we have.  Because you then see the essence of the person, and what's requested and what's given there is candor.  Those instances, the more we grow up and the more we come isolated in our communities, those instances are fewer in between.  And in order to have them, in order to have those conversations, there's gotta be a mutuality of respect and trust.  You learn that early in settings like that.  I could have gone through Harvard College and had an isolated experience in one community that would have been okay.  I would have missed out on three or four other worlds.
Speaker 1: Well, a lot of the black students were missing out on those worlds too, in some respects some--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --some.
Speaker 2: Remember again I was also on scholarships so I didn't, I was trying to get as much as I could out of that.
Speaker 1: Now, let me ask but I mean I don't think, I don't think that missing out of the experience, it's just that people go to what is familiar to them and they sort of seek out and sometimes--
Speaker 2: I think people do go to, the people, we, we but, but that's natural, right?
Speaker 1: That's natural.
Speaker 2: It, the, the just as the black community does that, the Jewish community does that, the--
Speaker 1: That's right
Speaker 2: --the white community, the non-Jewish white community does that as well.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: It's just less visible.  Now you can't see a whole group of white folks over here getting together, that that's just, we don't, that's not highlighted as much.
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's right.
Speaker 2: The soccer team hangs out together.  Okay, just natural.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: The crew hangs out together.  We just so happen to be in our communities it's a lot more visible.  There's a black table, so black folks hang out at the black table.  It's pretty visible.  The jocks may be hanging out at the same table, you just don't, it's just a lot less visible unless they're--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --you know, visibly jocks, you know.
Story_ID: 156129
Speaker 1: Now what about the African American Cultural--
Speaker 2: Center?
Speaker 1: Center.
Speaker 2: What about that?
Speaker 1: Your role there and where did it start?  Was that started by--I thought, I thought it had been started by, oh god, her father, but anyway what about the center?  The new center started, I think, well the center is different from the department?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well it was different to department.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Very different than the department.  This was--
Speaker 1: Do you join programs though, right?
Speaker 2: You join some programs, it was much more of a convening center than it was a programmatic.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: We actually had a physical building so I had to go talk to the dean of students to make certain that we could a physical space where we could come.  And it, it, was, it was, how do you acknowledge the culture?  How do you give, how do you give an audience the culture, if you will?  And, and the Cultural Center did that.  It was not without some controversy but we did it.
Speaker 1: And what was the controversy?
Speaker 2: Just one, the existence of the Cultural Center, and two the mission of the Cultural Center, whether it was being radical enough.  These were the times when people wanted to divest of, of duress out of South Africa because apartheid was high.  I think there were members of the community who wanted to be a lot more aggressive and a lot more politically active.
Speaker 1: So you're, so who, who, who, who's in that camp and who's in your camp?  Who, who's in each of the, who's, who's in that camp?
Speaker 2: It was, you know, it was a, a few people in the more radical camp.  Then they had my crew that was in my camp.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  So, so you're, okay.  The, the--
Speaker 2: I'm probably more diplomatic than what they wanted me to be.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I understand.
Speaker 2: But I was okay.
Story_ID: 156130
Speaker 1: But anyway, so did you also study French, I mean, I know you have a love of this.  You were saying that, you know, you fell in love with [William] Faulkner and [William] Shakespeare and, and--
Speaker 2: I do.  I studied French when I was, I had studied a little bit of it at, well I first started French with Madame Aurie deCouer [ph.] at the Miami Valley School [Dayton, Ohio], which is when we first went to France.  I can remember that experience to when I was the one who was, who was asked to kind of lead the, our delegation in speaking.  I was pretty good at the language then.  And then I didn't, I, I took enough in college or whatever you had to do to place out of languages.  Then I, I took it up again when I went to France.
Speaker 1: So what are the teachers that are here, you know, 'cause you said in every place there's a teacher.  Was there a professor that you were particularly close to or that mentored you during that, you know, like to another, but, you know, that you, you admired or you were close to, and--
Speaker 2: Where?
Speaker 1: At Harvard, undergrad?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's probably, there, there were two.  Walter Jackson Bates [sic, Walter Jackson Bate], who was a great Keats scholar, and Jim [James] Engell, who was his understudy.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And Jim was my tutor and, and, and you all have tutors and Jim was the house tutor in, in English.
Speaker 1: So what--
Speaker 2: Old English.  And this is actually English, this is English, remember that Harvard literature stopped at T.S. Eliot.  So to get Faulkner in your, you would have to, you would have to go outside of the--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: --stopped at '[The Love Song of J. Alfred]' Prufrock or, or the 'Four Quartets,' these are all my friends, yeah, I know these people pretty well.
Speaker 1: So I also wanna know one other thing is what, what were you doing during the summers?
Speaker 2: Oh, during the summers of college?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Oh, I was unclear we just, I went back to to--
Speaker 1: You went back to--
Speaker 2: I went back 'cause I was in Dayton, I was, one of the real jobs that I had other than Wright-Patterson [Air Force Base], I worked at a law firm as a, what they call a page.  Great experience.  Coolidge, Wall, it was in Coolidge, Wall, Manisoft [ph.], Womsley and Lombard [later Coolidge Wall, Womsley & Lombard].  One of the most respected firms in the Ohio area.
Story_ID: 156131
Speaker 1: So let's talk about the, that year traveling, 'cause a lot of times traveling--so you studied at the University of Nice [The Nice Sophia Antipolis University, Nice, France] and you--
Speaker 2: Yep, Fac des Lettres [sic, Faculte de Lettres].
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Faculty of letters.
Speaker 1: Faculty of letters.
Speaker 2: Comment dire "les fac des lettres." [sic]
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: What about it?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I'm asking--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)
Speaker 1: --what experience was it, are you going to classes?  Are you (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah I went to class for, well the great thing about being in France is that every now and then somebody's gonna go on strike.  While I was there the students went on strike.  So that allowed me to, to travel even more.  I know every museum, I knew every museum from the Rijksmuseum down to the  Bredius Museum (?).  It goes from Amsterdam [The Netherlands] all the way down.
Speaker 1: So how did that, that, that you were there a year?  Were you there--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're traveling a lot.  What is your favorite country out of that, out of the travels that you experienced, I know you--
Speaker 2: I like France.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And the culture?
Speaker 2: I mean living on the, living on the Riviera, all expenses paid is, that's not a bad experience.  And my experience first was to, the reward first was to Dijon [France], you know, the mustard capital of the world, food capital I presume most.  And, and I wrote to the committee and I said after having conferred with my, my professors here at Harvard College [Harvard, University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], they think a year in Nice [France] will be better for me than a year in Dijon.  And so I went to, I went to Nice.
Speaker 1: So what else did you like about that experience though?  I mean (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: The number of people with whom you interact from different cultures.  I can remember, I can remember my first time on skis with a woman from Norway, Tona Skogen [ph.] and a guy from Sweden, Jonas [ph.].  They took me, and I obviously had no ski gear, I had some jeans and a, and a parka and a hat.  And this is in a place called  (unclear).  You can see from the beaches of Nice up to the mountains.  And they took me to what was double black diamonds.  I had no idea what double black diamonds were.  And I went sideways down the mountain until lunch time.  And right before lunch, they put me on the, you know, the if you ski they have the rope tows, and I kept falling off the rope tows and the French people at the bottom of the mountain were trying to get up the rope tows 'cause they'd have to stop the ski lift.  They got pretty angry so I slid as far down the mountain as I'd come up on the rope tow.  And then Tona and Jonas and I had lunch right at, at, at one of the, one of the spots on the mountain.  Then after lunch I skied down the mountain with my arms wrapped around Jonas and he skied me down the mountain and then I went to the baby slopes.  So you have this big African American guy on the baby slopes with the kids.  And I tried to explain to them that I played basketball and that I was somewhat athletic.  I don't think that went very far.  Please such really embarrassing moment.  I spent all afternoon there, though.  I, my falling was less frequent than what it had been when I was on the rope tows.  So that's one of the experiences that, that I, I, I had while I was living in France.
Speaker 1: But isn't, it's, it's, it's a wonderful experience to travel like that.
Speaker 2: Oh, great experience.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, well with this--
Speaker 1: I mean it's, it's life changing.
Speaker 2: You experience a different culture.
Story_ID: 156132
Speaker 1: So now, when you finish that, you know, that year, have you gotten accepted to, have you applied for in your senior year--
Speaker 2: In my senior year, I applied to 'cause I still--remember this is Perry Mason so I wanted to go to law school.  So I applied to law schools and I also applied to one business school.  I applied Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts].  The only reason I applied, there were two reasons, that I applied to business school.  One is given that I was an English and American literature major, there were six or seven essays, whatever the number of essays were that were required by the Harvard Business School application process, and so that give me a chance to go write about myself in a way that I hadn't before, right.  So that was actually pretty neat.  And the other, is because there was a pre-business tutor named Larry Jackson [ph.], Lawrence Jackson [ph.], who said, you know, half of the grade comes from cursing folks out.  So I said you mean I, seriously, literally in the classroom, half the grade comes from cursing folks out?  I said maybe I can get to this, you know, I know a couple of words so that I can actually have a discussion.  So I applied to Harvard Business School but I didn't wanna go to business school.  They called me up and said you're in business school, I said  okay, this is all very interesting.  And that was a pretty coveted spot.  And I got a two year deferral from business school.  I got directly into the law school.  And so you get a two year deferral, and I also, you have to apply separately for the joint program.  And when I returned from France, I wrote to the business school and said I, after having lived a year on the Riviera, that has given me enough experience or as much experience that I, as I would have gotten in any two year Wall Street program, and therefore I should be allowed to go to business school with my year in France, plus my year at law school, I should be well enough advanced to go to business school and so they said fine.  They let me in.
Speaker 1: So you did the dual degree program?
Speaker 2: I did (unclear), yes.
Speaker 1: And took (unclear)
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: And at that time is, those have become popular too, those degree programs.  So--
Speaker 2: I, you know, there are fifteen people in a class.
Speaker 1: Oh, (unclear)
Speaker 2: That was it.
Speaker 1: Well I said they were popular, I didn't say a lot of people did it.
Speaker 2: They may be popular, yes you did.  You sound like you're a trained lawyer--
Speaker 1: I said they were popular.
Speaker 2: --right.  Do you get--
Speaker 1: I didn't say that they were, a lot of people did it.  But okay, so did you do the, so with the first year--
Speaker 2: My first year was first year of law school my second year was first year of business school and the third and fourth years were combined.
Speaker 1: How was that experience?
Speaker 2: Great experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.  'Cause you're meeting those see--
Speaker 2: You're meeting people from--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --see my world has been a world that's always been expansive and, and I've learned so much from so many different people, and so many different experiences.
Story_ID: 156133
Speaker 1: So how is the business, 'cause I just went to the, I went to a nonprofit training program.  I loved the business school at (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, that business school is great.
Speaker 1: Oh, I loved it.  But I mean that's, they play little, you know, they, this was softball experience but the teachers I found pretty amazing there.  But--
Speaker 2: Great experience in a room of seventy, eighty people or so.  You, you formed some great relationships there.  I just got an email from one of my study group mates from whom I hadn't heard in a while.  And the reason that I came into this business, the reason was a classmate of mine in business school named David Anderson [ph.], David Leron Anderson [ph.], who had been an analyst at one of, First Boston I think, saw me in, in section, in the business school section and said I think you'd be good at this investment banking stuff.  And asked me if I were interested.  I told him I could get interested.
Speaker 1: So was that your, your, that's your first year out of, was it the first year--
Speaker 2: That was my first year of business school.
Speaker 1: First year of business school that you, you had a summer internship at First Boston.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what happens after your first year of law school then if you did the, you know--
Speaker 2: Oh, I did a clerkship in Dayton [Ohio].
Speaker 1: At, okay.  You did a clerk, okay I see.
Speaker 2: I went back to Dayton.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: First year of law school.
Speaker 1: I see.  'Cause really, it really sometimes that first year job out of law school is harder to get and (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause they don't wanna invest in--
Speaker 1: They don't wanna--
Speaker 2: --two years away.  So they figure they're taking a chance on you and--
Speaker 1: Right, right.  I had a different experience but that was just I don't know what the, Jenner and Block they were hiring first year students for some reason.
Story_ID: 156134
Speaker 1: But anyway so when you, so what is the difference though in the instruction between the [Harvard] Business [School, Boston, Massachusetts] and the [Harvard] Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Both Socratic.  Business school is, is I would say more practical.  Law school you're getting a lot of theory over at law school.
Speaker 1: Right.  I don't know what I was thinking.  You're in--what about all the courses and everything I mean are you--
Speaker 2: What about 'em?
Speaker 1: No, it's not like you have economics background or, you, you have an English background, English major.  So you do fine in the business school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did fine, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: You learn the stuff, you got a capacity, you can, you know, just 'cause I'm an English American literature major just doesn't mean that I can't learn the stuff at business school.
Speaker 1: No, that's true but I'm just saying, okay.  So you do, you do, so you didn't find one more challenging than than the other, you just found them different?
Speaker 2: I think early on in the first three to four months, business school was more challenging--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: --less natural.  It's 'cause I hadn't any experience in business other than Fields [ph.] Dress Shop.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) with the, with the hat boxes.
Speaker 2: With the hat boxes.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  See you said I can count the hat bo--hat boxes.
Story_ID: 156135
Speaker 1: So then, so you're, you're what is your summer internship or clerkship at First Boston like at that point, and who is, who's head of First Boston at that time 'cause First Boston was (unclear)
Speaker 2: It was Al Shoemaker [Alvin Shoemaker], George Shinn, Pete Buchanan [Peter T. Buchanan].  That was the group that was in charge there.
Speaker 1: And how large was the internship pool?
Speaker 2: Oh, this is where they had two summer positions, 500 people, two summer slots.
Speaker 1: I see, but they're doing a lot of M&A [mergers and acquisitions], they're, aren't they doing a lot of M&A work at that time?
Speaker 2: They were, yeah.
Speaker 1: They were (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I didn't know anything about M&A.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, right because you're--
Speaker 2: I was looking for a job.  It's, this is, I went to, I eventually, well I went to the, I interviewed and I got one of the two slots or so.
Speaker 1: And are Perella and Wasserstein there at that point?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Joe [Joseph Perella], Joe and Bruce [Wasserstein] were running the M&A group which is when I had first, that's when I first met Joe.
Speaker 1: You met him during that summer?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Joe and Bruce.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how do you meet them?  Is it a  (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, you know, you're in (unclear) and I remember then though there was a cocktail party that we had.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and I remember Joe being there and he was going around, and just a small group, and people, he was asking where people worked and when he got to me I said it looks like I work for the same place you work at, because the badges that we wore all had something that would signal that you worked at the firm as opposed to working at another firm.  I said it looks like I wear the same firm you work at.  I said well gee what'd I just say.  And we struck up a relationship there.
Speaker 1: So did you, did you like your summer at First Boston?
Speaker 2: I had a great time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Story_ID: 156136
Speaker 1: And so you come back, so I wanna ask on your first, your law school classes, I wanna go back to that first year of law school because that's when you're taking, you know, property and contracts--
Speaker 2: Oh you get some real, I had to remember but you go and ask questions.
Speaker 1: Contracts and criminal law and torts.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: So what, what, who are your professors that first years, do you remember?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember contracts, one of the great, one of the great, great minds Phillip J. Areeda [sic, Phillip E. Areeda]. Great antitrust lawyer.  C. Clyde Ferguson [Clarence Clyde Ferguson, Jr.] for civil procedure.  Weinberg [sic, Lloyd Weinreb] for--
Speaker 1: Criminal.
Speaker 2: --criminal law.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: What'd he say, "More of you will be criminal defendants than you will be criminal attorneys," (laughter).  Lloyd Weinreb, I remember that.  Yeah, I forget who we had for property.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: --and I, and torts.  Rules against perpetuity and property.  It took me a while to get that one.  And torts, little Brian Dailey.  Geez, I gotta say this is really theoretical.  So if you pulled a chair, if you pulled a chair from little Brian Dailey  and he falls and hits the water hose, and the water hose goes and breaks the glass and 'cause the glass breaks it sets a fire off whose liable?  I mean that you wouldn't, you wouldn't get that case in business school.  So should the parents of little Brian Dailey  be held responsible.
Speaker 1: Right.  So what are you, do you like law school at this point (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah, a good time in law school.
Speaker 1: You, so you like the theoretical part?
Speaker 2: Well, some of it, some of it.  Well, I liked the fact that you, you know, you could actually talk in class and, oh, that's reminds me I gotta return the call to one of my law school--
Speaker 1: Classmates?
Speaker 2: --classmates.  Sorry.  But keep going.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Oh, so what about Clyde Ferguson?
Speaker 2: C. Clyde Ferguson.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: One of the great minds.
Speaker 1: He was a great mind.
Speaker 2: One of the great minds.
Speaker 1: Did you like taking his class?
Speaker 2: Civil procedure?
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah, I liked civil procedure.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Yeah, sure.
Speaker 1: You know, I had him.  So okay, so--
Story_ID: 156137
Speaker 1: That summer, now you then work at Skadden Arps [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom], right? Am I right?
Speaker 2: I split summers.
Speaker 1: Oh, you switched summers.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you sometimes you can split it between the east coast of Manhattan and the west coast of Manhattan.
Speaker 1: Awesome, you--
Speaker 2: On the east coast and the west coast, I split it between the east coast of Manhattan and the west coast of Manhattan.
Speaker 1: So you did, I was wondering about that 'cause I saw that.  I, I split summers but I didn't know people split summers between--
Speaker 2: Within the city--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --east coast and west coast in Manhattan?
Speaker 1: I didn't, I've never heard of that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I, I don't think most people have ever heard of that (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: But how did you end up doing that, that's--
Speaker 2: Oh, it was great.
Speaker 1: No, no but how did that--
Speaker 2: How?  I don't know, they just let me do it.  Somehow I was able to convince 'em that this would be a, a good way to spend a summer.
Speaker 1: Well were you trying to make a decision between one versus the other?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was.  Between Skadden and Patterson Belknap [Patterson Belknap Webb & Tyler LLP].
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you still at this point, you--
Speaker 2: I'm still on the (unclear) and haven't decided whether or not I'm gonna go into the law or whether I'm gonna go into finance.
Speaker 1: I see, okay.  So which one did you like better?
Speaker 2: Between which?
Speaker 1: Patterson Belknap and Skadden, Arps?
Speaker 2: I had a great time at both.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, geez some people with them I still have relationships.  I remember at, at Patterson Belknap that's when I first met Dick Parsons [HM Richard Parsons].
Speaker 1: I see, that's right.  'Cause he would have been--
Speaker 2: Dick Parsons and, and Judge H. Tyler [Harold R. Tyler Jr.].
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And, and [Robert] Bob Patterson.  Bob Patterson's daughter and I, Anne Patterson, were in the same class.  My first summer in New York was spent subletting their apartment at 901 Lexington Avenue.  This is back in 1977.
Speaker 1: And the thing about, when you're, first of all there are a lot of, in these law firms and I think it's been documented, that a lot of the graduate, you know, the people who are getting in there that are African American are, are from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut]--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --maybe a little bit of other things but the other is that you're working incredible hours too?
Speaker 2: You're working what?
Speaker 1: Incredible hours.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it's the hard work ever.
Speaker 1: Right.  (Unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: And I had been working for a long time.
Speaker 1: So you had been doing that already?
Speaker 2: So.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: But this Skadden was the, you know, that, that Patterson was, was--I told you those people at Skadden it was who, [Donald] Don Drapkin, [Joseph] Joe Flom, this was on the frontier.
Speaker 1: It was on the frontier (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Morris Kramer, [Blaine] Fin Fogg,--
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: --Peter Atkins, all these guys were.  So and I, I still enjoy great relationships, as a matter of fact a, a person with whom I shared an office, Paul Schnell, was the one who invited me to join my first not-for-profit board.
Speaker 1: And which one was that?
Speaker 2: That was in the New Museum [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  New Museum-
Story_ID: 156138
Speaker 1: You know, I, I wanna ask you though about this period of merger and acquisition.  It's not that it never happened before but it was almost, this is the beginning of--
Speaker 2: Oh, it hadn't happened before.  That was a, that was, that was the early days.  That was the frontier of mergers--
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: --and acquisitions.
Speaker 1: So that, that's what I find sort of amazing about your career is where it started--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --and where it's taken and, and that you've sort of been at the, well you've been, not sort of, you were at the center of a lot of that.  So you graduate in 1980--
Speaker 2: Four [1984].
Speaker 1: --4.  (Unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: June of '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: June of '84 [1984].  And you decide, how do you end up--okay, 'cause the way the, the, the job market, it's the same both at the business school and the law school, right?  Or is it the same that--
Speaker 2: In terms of?
Speaker 1: --the recruiters are coming to campus.
Speaker 2: I had an offer from First Boston after I had been a summer associate, I had an offer.
Speaker 1: I see.  Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: Which is a little unusual--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --'cause they--
Speaker 1: It is a very, it is unusual.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess, I, I maybe I performed.
Speaker 1: And had you had offers from the other law firms too--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --or did you decide.  So what other law firms did you have offers from?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think I had 'em from probably from, I know I had it from Parsons [ph.] 'cause I spent a lot of time at Parsons  [Richard "Dick" Parsons] trying to get me to go to Patterson Belknap.  And then from the guys at Skadden [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom].  Those were the two.  I don't think I spent much time, and then the law firm in Dayton [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 156139
Speaker 1: And so let's talk about First Boston at that point in time.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: I'd like--
Speaker 2: That's the frontier.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: These guys were, they were out there.
Speaker 1: And it's, so when you say they were out there, there's a lot of activity going on, right (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: A lot of activity and Joe [Joseph Perella] and Bruce [Wasserstein] were, remember the Morgan Stanleys and the Goldman Sachs of the world were the firms that had the reputations, more relationships and the, and the board rooms.  First Boston had some good relationships but what Joe and Bruce did was they used their knowledge of the law and business combined with what was just pure talent, personality, and ambition to get into board rooms and the conversations that historically First Boston hadn't been in.
Speaker 1: But how did--
Speaker 2: You get--
Speaker 1: So you're saying they could, but how were they able to do that?
Speaker 2: Just, just pure knowledge, intellect, and aggressiveness.
Speaker 1: And so--
Speaker 2: And personality.  I mean these guys were they, they were, you should go back and read some of their articles.
Speaker 1: I did.
Speaker 2: They were trailblazers.
Speaker 1: Right, I did.  But I, what I, can you describe the two of them?  'Cause they were an unlikely pair in some respects (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Joe's a, Joe is, you know, a crazy kid from Newark who was ex-accountant.
Speaker 1: Accountant, that's right.
Speaker 2: Went to Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts], saw that a couple of other people were doing this thing called Mergers and Acquisitions, and decided to start the group at First Boston.  Hired Brian [D.] Young, Tom Hill [J. Tomilson Hill], and Marjorie [M. T.] Yang.  Over time discovered this whiz kid from Cravath [Cravath, Swaine and Moore LLP], his name was Bruce Wasserstein, and invited Bruce over to help run the group with him.  And that was the foundation of the First Boston Mergers and Acquisitions group back in the early, late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: And First Boston, how do you think that it happened there, because even the story of, of Perella being hired they said that, you know, they just sort of, he had an uncommon background, but they sort of thought okay that'll work and then put him in there, and then he really sort of took off and--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --you know, built his team.  But, you know, they said that, you know, what I read was that Perella was more intuitive and Wasserstein was the strategic thinker.  Did you find that?
Speaker 2: I, you know, it's tough to come up with these categorizations.  Both were talented.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Both Bruce was a great strategist, Joe is as consummate a banker as you will ever find.
Speaker 1: So you come in, how many are, just start out with you when you start at First Boston?
Speaker 2: It was a relatively small class.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: You know, these guys this was the, the bar was the highest bar you could achieve, you could get to in, in the world of finance.  These guys were, they were rigorous, being generous in my description, about who they brought on to their teams.  It was even more so when they developed Wasserstein Perella.
Story_ID: 156140
Speaker 1: Can you talk about your interview?
Speaker 2: Which interview?
Speaker 1: The one, the interview that you had--
Speaker 2: You mean to get the job?
Speaker 1: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 2: Which part of the interview?
Speaker 1: Well let's just talk about the interview in general.  Where, where does the interview, I mean there's a, hold on there's a quote up here, your statement but can we go to where the interview was?
Speaker 2: What happened?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: I lived, and this is the interview to get into investment banking; it's a summer position.  I lived off campus a ways away from the business school, much closer to the law school.  And I interviewed on, on campus, I remember this, with Chuck Ward [Charles G. Ward] and I forget the other person's name, whom I know it's just his name is coming to me now.  And I was invited, this is during the course of the day, I was invited back to the Ritz-Carlton for a cocktail party, what they told me was gonna be a cocktail party, and I had had a suit on for the interview, which was normal course.  They said, yeah you should dress as though you're gonna go to a cocktail party, and I didn't have a chance to go home to change, so they actually tol--they say you're gonna get a call back which, and I got a call back.  So I didn't get a chance to go home and change and I get to the Ritz, and I gets to the anteroom where kind of the smaller room before you go into what I thought was gonna be a cocktail party, so I get to this room and you wanna a beer, and so I popped a beer and they said why don't you just come with us.  One or two people, one person said come with us and so I said okay fine.  I get to a room, there's a group of people from First Boston, there's no cocktail party.  There are five or six people in that room.  And all but one left the room, a guy named Greg Malcolm, and he took his chair and he turned the back of his chair towards you and he sat, straddled the chair.  And he said, you got five minutes, use your best shot.  I said like what do you want me to say, I don't, and he says you got four minutes and forty-five seconds, you figure it out.  And I said Harvard College [Cambridge, Massachusetts], Harvard Law School, and the Harvard Business School [Boston, Masschusetts] pride themselves on taking the cream of the crop.  I pride myself on being the film off the top of the cream.  He said okay.  He said I got, I got half your class, call it 500 people for two positions.  Why you?  I said in the heat of battle, I will find a way to win.  So it is better to have me on your side than against you in the heat of battle 'cause I'll find a way to win.  And I was fortunate enough to get the job.
Story_ID: 156141
Speaker 1: So you get the job and when you're starting, 'cause I mean now they have all kinds of programs but this is sort at the beginning, and so what is the exp--how are you learning and what are, what are you doing?
Speaker 2: You learn by doing, you learn by kind of making mistakes and.  But I had had summer internship positions in college, there were some great programs there, Chemical Bank had a great program.  Chemical Bank had internships for minorities.  I can remember back in my junior year there was a guy named Nathaniel Francis Queen, Jr., who was a person who helped to run the program for Chemical Bank.  I remember I had an offer from then since my junior year of college.  I think it was junior, junior or sophomore, junior, and I, I--
Speaker 1: So you did work?  Okay.
Speaker 2: I had worked at Wall Street--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --worked on Wall Street before.
Speaker 1: I see, I did not, okay.  'Cause you--
Speaker 2: Different to working in investment banking but this is, and I decided I wasn't gonna go to finance or any of that stuff.  I didn't know anything about finance other than those positions.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: But you, when you get into investment banking, I, and I can remember the person who recruited me at the time, who headed the recruiting team from Harvard [Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], Dick Thornburgh [Richard E. Thornburgh] at First Boston.  And I, I on occasion run into him today.  And he, you know, they placed a bet, they took a bet on me.
Speaker 1: So what was your first year like there?  And who is, what are some of the deals getting done do you remember some of the big deals?
Speaker 2: Oh, this is as we've acknowledged, the frontier, this is back in the heyday of the paper forest products industry.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: And Sir James Goldsmith, Crown Zellerbach, Paul Bilzerian, Hammermill Paper Company, International Paper [Company], Georgia-Pacific [LLC], we were involved in practically all those deals.  And you're, it's an apprenticeship business, so I'm the junior, junior, junior there doing the analysis--
Speaker 1: Running numbers.
Speaker 2: --running the models, doing all of that.  And for me, given my background I, I had a lot a ground to cover in terms of learning.
Speaker 1: And so what, what are you, so you're working the hours, you're--
Speaker 2: Oh, a lot of hours.
Speaker 1: A lot of hours.
Speaker 2: A lot of hours.  I don't think I took a vacation my first year.
Speaker 1: And what, do you remember some of the, the, the seminal deals, I mean the important deals that you worked on?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there are some that I, that I gave you, you may have a, an accounting of others but--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So let, let's, let's, so, let's, so, okay.  Did you work on the or do you remember the, the Texas one on gas and U.S. Steel [United States Steel Corporation], was that one of your (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Texaco-Getty?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: I was a bystander there.
Speaker 1: You were bystander.
Speaker 2: But when it took place in the, in that, during the course of that summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what, and, and--
Speaker 2: I was, I probably Xeroxed something for that deal.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: But I can't tell you that, I mean I'll claim it 'cause I Xeroxed, sometimes--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: --I was on the floor when it was happening.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 156142
Speaker 1: When you're looking, what are you learning about how to be successful, you know, in this investment banking world?  What are, who, in the M&A [mergers and acquisitions] world, world who, who are sort of the, I mean one, you're working for the key, the key players.
Speaker 2: And as you learn from those people, you, you, and, you know, and this is in retrospect, you borrow from their styles.  You learn what the best people are and in each instance you're gonna find people who do something a little better than everybody else and so you try to learn from them.  You try to pair yourself up with them, notwithstanding how challenging and how difficult the experience is, you learn from it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But let me, why don't we take this opportunity to talk about the nature of the deal.  You know, how deals become deals, you know, what is, what is the average length of the deal, you know what are the, sort of the key things in terms of what, a deal being successful.
Speaker 2: Every, every deal has its own rhythm, if you will.  You first have to be in a position where the clients trust your, that you're gonna give 'em a (unclear). You have to it what we call the best content, which means you have to know the business and the space.  And then the content was M&A tactics as much as anything.  'Cause the best M&A practitioners were able to cross a lot of different industries.  There are certain who had industry specialization but for the most part you were an M&A generalists which mean that you should have the capability of doing any deal in any industry, any large public deal.  So first you have to establish your credentials and, and that happens at a more senior level.  So that the decision makers, the senior executives at the CEO, President, CFO, Treasurer level, say that this is the team that I wanna entrust my future to.  We trust that they got the best content they know and many tactics, they know our business well.  And this is what we're gonna go, this is our destiny's put in to that.  I don't wanna over dramatize it but in some instances that's the level to which it rises.  So you first have to have a baseline and understanding, you have to qualify yourself based on your intellect and your content, your experience.  And then you have to understand tactics.  How do you actually get a deal done?  The strategy part of that is the implication that has all the overall long term strategy to a given business, and you have to be able to articulate that to a board.  So you have to be able to articulate both strategy and tactics.  Tactics is how you go, how you actually get it done.  And you have to have the experience there, and when you're a junior there, you just need to take notes and understand how, how deals get done.  To originate these deals, sometimes these deals are three to four to five to six months in the making 'cause you have to go through the strategy first.  You gotta make certain that the boards are convinced, that management is convinced that this is something they should actually do and you have to pressure test that.  You gotta probe that.  You have to conduct as much diligence, as much homework as you can on the target.  If you're selling the business, you have to do similar amounts.  You have to decide what are, if you put up a for sale sign there are certain standards which we call Revlon duties today.  And Revlon duties say that if you decide to put a company up for sale, you have to offer it up to the, a bona fide, a group of potential bidders.  And you have to make that declaration.  You have to treat, it has to be a level playing field.  The laws and the rules of engagement were all set back in the '80s [1980s].  They've been refined over time, have been set by (unclear).  And in, in the, the length of a deal it can, depends on the complexity.  If it's a hostile deal it can take a while.  If it's a friendly deal it may take a little shorter.  If it requires regulatory approval it's gonna take longer.
Speaker 1: How many concurrent deals are people working on?  Is it like one at a time or you--
Speaker 2: No, you gotta--
Speaker 1: You're doing--
Speaker 2: Three or four at a time--
Speaker 1: Three or four at a time.
Speaker 2: --maybe five.  And the more senior you are the more deals you can--
Speaker 1: Okay.  You can handle--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --'cause you've got staff.  Okay.
Story_ID: 156143
Speaker 1: And practically every day I got a call from either Joe [Perella] or Chuck Ward--
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: --to come to Wasserstein Perella [& Co.].
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: I remember the day they left, I had an offer, not everybody at First Boston got an offer.
Speaker 2: I see, I see.  Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Very few people in fact got an offer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I was torn 'cause I had a lot of my friends at First Boston still.  A few people have gone with, with Joe and Bruce but that was, they, they handpicked the number of people they wanted to come over.
Speaker 2: So how many people did they handpick?
Speaker 1: It's a relatively small number.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Relatively small number.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I, and I, I got an offer the hour one of their being open 'cause Joe called me, I was in a meeting, I remember this, I was in a meeting in, in Connecticut at Bowater [Inc.] and the news broke, I was in a meeting with the, the top three, four guys at Bowater, and when the meeting broke, on the way back in the car, the managing director with whom I was traveling said that Joe and Bruce had left, and this is when you had the black cars that had phones in 'em and we put a call in to, I put the call in to my office and they told me that Joe had called, I eventually connected me with Joe and Joe says listen we left the firm with, I wanna tell you we want you to join us.
Speaker 2: And how long did it take you to make a decision?
Speaker 1: It took me a little while.
Speaker 2: So what, what were you considering?
Speaker 1: Staying at First Boston with all of my colleagues, and whether or not this Wasserstein Perella thing had any chance of, of succeeding.
Speaker 2: But there was a bloodbath going also at, at First Boston to or so it was--you know, that's how it was--
Speaker 1: Well, I, I don't know if it was a bloodbath.  There was a, there was a disagreement on strategy between Bruce and Joe and the then leadership of First Boston.
Speaker 2: But they felt, they were pretty much feeling nerves and they felt that they were bringing in the lion's share.
Speaker 1: They were bringing a lot of business.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: A lot of business.  So they decided to go set up their own shop.
Speaker 2: And if you had stayed what would your, what  would--
Speaker 1: Oh, who knows as I say what would my, what would have happened?
Speaker 2: What would have happened or--
Speaker 1: It's not clear.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 1: And, you know, you can't, you can't revise history.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I mean maybe you can but it reflects a level of inaccuracy that--
Story_ID: 156144
Speaker 1: So, who is the core group [at Wasserstein Perella & Co.] then or how many people do they start out with?  And when you say it took you a while are you talking about within months?
Speaker 2: Yeah, months.
Speaker 1: Of them leaving?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what would, what made your decision?
Speaker 2: Joe [Joseph Perella] and Chuck [Charles G. Ward] called me on a rather consistent basis, and I looked at the lineup of talent that they had gotten, not only from First Boston but from other places, and this was one of the most exciting opportunities that existed on Wall Street.  And I did a lot of consulting with people about how they perceived the opportunity and what came back was this is, the talent that they're bringing in is the best talent that exists, best talent that money could buy, and to be associated with that would, experience would, would only be beneficial short, immediate, intermediate, and longer term.  And it has proven out to be the case.
Speaker 1: So how many of you that start over there then within those first several months, how many?  And who are they?
Speaker 2: I wanna say twenty, thirty, forty people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At the most.
Speaker 1: And so you haven't done something like this before because it's really like, almost I don't want--
Speaker 2: Nobody had done anything like this before.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's almost like a start-up in that--
Speaker 2: It was a start-up.  This is, these guys were hanging on a shingle.  They were hanging out of a (unclear).
Speaker 1: (Laughter.)  Right.  Okay.
Story_ID: 156145
Speaker 1: So, so I wanna talk about some of the, the deals like, 'cause this is, is this 1988 that you leave?  Or 1989 (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Which?  '88 [1988].
Speaker 1: '88 [1988] that you leave.  Okay.
Speaker 2: That's, Wasserstein Perella [& Co.] was started in 1988.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so one of the deals were the, is it M-Heart Corporation?  Is that--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was your role in that deal?
Speaker 2: In probably each one of these deals--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I was a junior bearer doing the numbers and--
Speaker 1: Doing the numbers.
Speaker 2: --and, and--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: --and preparing the material for the board.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All the analysis for the board.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So at what point is it clear that, is it within the first year that this, this Wasserstein and Perella are, they're gonna be--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  It's pretty clear.  It's pretty, it was the, it was the highest profile team on Wall Street.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And are you the only African American brought over or not part of the team?  Who else is--
Speaker 2: That was it.
Speaker 1: That was it?
Speaker 2: But the inventory of folks on, and there were only two people who were doing this business on Wall Street then.
Speaker 1: And it was you and who else?
Speaker 2: And [William] Bill Lewis.
Speaker 1: That's right.  (Unclear) okay.  So you become then a manage, a partner, a managing partner.
Speaker 2: Partner managing director (unclear).
Speaker 1: Director there after three years.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what does that mean in that world?
Speaker 2: It means you just take on more responsibilities you--
Speaker 1: Are you bringing any business?
Speaker 2: You bring in and business in.  You were integral to helping to bring in business.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So.  What business, it's one thing to do the work, it's another to bring--
Speaker 2: Helping to bring in the work.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's, that's, that's, that's what Wall Street's all about, whether or not you can generate, whether or not you can develop relationships that translate into generating revenue.
Speaker 1: Right.  So what did you learn about that, I mean did you--
Speaker 2: Again it comes back to developing these relationships so that people view you as their trusted advisor and in fact you carry out that role.
Speaker 1: So what business did you bring in during that time?
Speaker 2: And you're asking me deals that we structured twenty years ago, thirty years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh gosh, okay.  Let me just go on then.  I'll go on then.  Okay.
Story_ID: 156146
Speaker 1: So let me add, so in 19, when you leave, why do you leave?  'Cause you leave actually two years after becoming--
Speaker 2: I know.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: [Joseph] Perella left in June of 1993.
Speaker 1: And why did he leave?  'Cause that is not well-covered.  Their leaving First Boston is well-covered.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And Joe left, I think they just had a difference in views about the strategy.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Joe left in June of 1993 and he started at Morgan Stanley in September of, September or October of 1993.
Speaker 1: And so when he started, where, where is Morgan Stanley in this (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, Morgan Stanley's at the top of the heap.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is, they are historically Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs were the premier M&A [mergers and acquisitions] franchises.
Speaker 1: But you said that there, there was, that they were based on relationships.
Speaker 2: Well, then talent too.
Speaker 1: And talent, okay.
Speaker 2: I don't wanna take anything away from talent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This entire business is based on relationships.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Okay.
Story_ID: 156147
Speaker 1: So you leave and you join, now, what, you leave and you join Merrill Lynch [Wealth Management], so--
Speaker 2: I did 'cause it was a way, remember for the first ten years of my career, I worked for Joe [Joseph Perella] and Bruce [Wasserstein].
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Since I started out.
Speaker 1: So you wanted to be--
Speaker 2: At some point you gotta separate from Joe and Bruce.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had an offer to go Morgan Stanley, different package than the package I got at Merrill, but an offer to go to Morgan Stanley, and had I gone to Morgan Stanley, anything I would have done at Morgan Stanley they would have said it's a result of Joe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So this is for me to get away from the training wheels and go to be on my own.  So I went to Merrill.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And one of the major things--
Speaker 2: I was recruited there Jack Levy and Mike Koeneke.
Speaker 1: I see.  Okay.  And so what was their reputation?
Speaker 2: Great.
Speaker 1: And what, what was their, how was their style different from Joe and Bruce?
Speaker 2: Merrill Lynch hadn't been in the, had, had any, any, any real acknowledgment in the, in the Mergers and Acquisitions business.  They had a great guy there in the leadership of Jack Levy.  In 1993, the end of '93 [1993] beginning of '94 [1994], they brought in a number of people from First Boston actually.  And we developed a strong group of talented M&A [mergers and acquisitions] professionals, and that helped transform the Merrill Lynch M&A business.
Speaker 1: But then you stayed there how long, you stayed there, stayed there for--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Stayed there until I got, remember there was an event that happened, just think about the events.  This is there were teachers every step of way.  When I went to First Boston that was kind of unconventional.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: When I left First Boston there was a phone call that I got to come to Wasserstein Perella [& Co.].  When I left Wasserstein Perella there was a phone call that I got an hour or two after Joe's departure was announced from Jack Levy who ran the M&A business at Merrill Lynch.  And then while at Merrill Lynch, I was consistently recruited by Morgan Stanley.  So eventually decided to go to Morgan Stanley and rejoin Joe and, and be part of that.  And I was at Morgan Stanley for two or three years.  I went in as a managing director.  And based on my performance I was elevated to co-head the M&A business, the global M&A business, which is one of the most, I think, coveted jobs on Wall Street, and I was asked to co-head that with some other guy whose name is Paul Taubman.
Speaker 1: At Morgan Stanley?
Speaker 2: At Morgan Stanley.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That was the Global Mergers and Acquisitions business.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But I want to, I wanna just sort of provide some context because at the time, no the repeal, oh no, the Glass-Steagall Act [1933, repealed 1999] is not repealed at that time, it hasn't happened yet.  So that happens a little later.  Right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: 1990 [sic, 1999].  Okay.  So what are some of the deals, what do you, first of all, at the time that you become Global Head [sic, Global Co-Head of Mergers & Acquisitions] you sort of become one in class in terms of African Americans, you become one in class.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: And ended at the Citi.  Bill [William "Bill" Lewis] is there, I mean I'm not negating Bill--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --and his role, but you, you sort of ascend higher at that point.  Sort of--
Speaker 2: Well, Bill ran the, Bill ran the banking business (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Banking, the banking business.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes, that's fine, right.  So let me, but both of you are--wait you and, Bill is where?  He's--
Speaker 2: He was at Morgan Stanley.  He left eventually--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --left Morgan Stanley to go to Lazard.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) okay.  That's right.  That's right.  So both of you were there.
Story_ID: 156148
Speaker 1: Okay, so let me ask you, during this period of time what deals are you most proud of that you did?
Speaker 2: The, the Nabisco transaction was a big deal.
Speaker 1: And that, that deal was--
Speaker 2: Carl Icahn went after Nabisco.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: And I was the lead M&A [mergers and acquisitions] banker on that deal.
Speaker 1: And that deal was of, almost a $15 billion deal.
Speaker 2: It was probably $15 billion, something along that line.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: It was a big deal.
Speaker 1: On that line.  And is this your first time in a deal where Carl Icahn is involved?  'Cause he was, is it, is it the first time?
Speaker 2: I'm thinking through that, Carl, there had been other instances I think where I was probably something that Carl did but directly, where Carl is directly on the other side and I'm associated, this is probably the first one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the person heading up of, you know, what, what I found interesting because this, you do a similar deal later than this but with, 'cause you work on another Philip Morris later, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, that's--
Speaker 1: That's much later.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But, but the thing that I found interesting about this, can you just talk about the nature of what Nabisco, why the Philip Morris and Nabisco deal made sense at the time, and who was trying to do what?  Can you talk a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah this, this goes on, if, if I remember the facts correctly, RJR [R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company] and Nabisco had been under the overall, back when the big deal was done, the, the take private deal back in the '80s [1980s] I guess it was, large leverage buy out.  And we split the, the tobacco up from the food company.  The reason it got to be so complex is because the heavy tax implications for selling the food business prematurely.  And the reason, the way that, that the deal evolved was because there was an outsider who came in, who instigated a, a transaction in the form of Carl Icahn.  The rules didn't apply to the sale of the food business.  And we eventually ran an auction for the sale of the food business, for the sale of the Nabisco business.  And Philip Morris bought it, great strategic deal for them.  We got a great price for the Nabisco shareholders.  Carl made off well, his investors made off well.  And we eventually left with the, the RJR business was primarily a cash business.  It had a lot of cash on its balance sheet.  It was, was and was a good business, sort of backup business from a cash flow generating standpoint.  And we will successfully sell the business to, to, to the Philip Morris people.  And they ran it well and then it got sold or spun off.
Speaker 1: So was the use of an auction, had you used that before and--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there are lots of-
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a public auction.
Story_ID: 156149
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And also, you know, this is back when we did Fort Howard.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: The going private of Fort Howard Paper Company.
Speaker 1: Fort Howard is before this deal?
Speaker 2: It was in 1987.  Fort Howard was before this deal, yes.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: So we took it private and in the process there is something called go shop provision which means that you're allowed to go and shop or can receive offers for a company where you've already decided on a deal like we had in Fort Howard which allows others to come in based on certain parameters, allows them to come in and conduct deals and to see if they wanna offer a better price.
Speaker 1: But that's, okay.  So what was relevance of that for Fort Howard then?
Speaker 2: That's where the provision, that's the early days of the provision of go shop.  Today you'll see--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --go shop and many are going private transactions.  So if you had a public company and you take it private, which means you take it off of the public market part, of the agreement that exists with your shareholders is the ability for you to receive, you and I have an agreement that allows me to conduct diligence.  If I'm a party with whom you haven't done, I'm not an investor in your company as you take it private.  That means that your advisors have, and you have the ability to open up the offer to the diligence of someone who might wanna offer a higher price.
Speaker 1: So I, I have a, a question.  In all this, what is, what is impacting what?  Is it the deal impacting the law or the law impacting--
Speaker 2: It is both.
Speaker 1: --the deals.
Speaker 2: It is the, it is a lot of this is being litigated in the courts of Delaware.  Which gets to [Martin] Marty Lipton and [Joseph] Joe Flom and the courts of Delaware litigate over the validity of the poison pill.  The structuring and the validity of a poison pill.  That happened in the '80s [1980s].  The height of the leverage buy out market as we knew it, was also the time where the Japanese investors were aggressively buying in, in the States.  Until they didn't in 1989, in a going private transaction of United Airlines where the Japanese decided they weren't gonna fund to go private, and the M&A [mergers and acquisitions] market slowed materially from 1989 to 1993.
Story_ID: 156150
Speaker 1: So in that time period that the M&A [mergers & acquisitions] work slowed, what is actually happening then?
Speaker 2: You're talking should, you're doing whatever you can to, to have a dialogue with the client.  You're deepening these client relationships.
Speaker 1: So you're saying up until that point the Japanese are extremely important to M&A work?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: I see.  More than any other country?
Speaker 2: More than any other country, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were pretty aggressive.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Especially in the [United] States.
Speaker 2: Especially in the States, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So what does, how important then, and when does, because you're talking at that point with a lot of your deals, how many of your deals are international deals at this point (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Most of them were domestic.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when do they become international then?
Speaker 2: We had some, some during that time where you get the Japanese buying Sony or some other (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: --I think it was Sony.  But you get them coming in and, you know, they, they are, they were pretty aggressive buyers then, some of public companies, some of private.  A lot of private assets were being bought by them then.
Speaker 1: I see.  Okay.
Story_ID: 156151
Speaker 1: And then would you say that, what about the, the, Unilever Group--
Speaker 2: Unilever.
Speaker 1: Unilever, sorry.
Speaker 2: What about Unilever?
Speaker 1: I mean that--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) Yeah, I worked on a lot of Unilever deals.
Speaker 1: Right.  Well the one, I thought you were senior banker on the General Electric [GE] account is that, was that (unclear)--
Speaker 2: On which one?
Speaker 1: The General Electric account and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And Coty [Inc.], Coty, Coty, sorry, Coty.  Well, I guess this is, well this was--
Speaker 2: GE is a different account.
Speaker 1: That's a different--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was the senior banker on G, at GE at the time--
Speaker 1: But it says--
Speaker 2: --M&A banker.
Speaker 1: --relating to the Universe Group sale of its fragrance division.
Speaker 2: No, that's separate.  I worked on behalf--
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: --of Unilever to sell its cosmetics, its, its, its fragrance business (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Unclear) to, to who, who?
Speaker 2: It was then to, it was to Coty.
Speaker 1: It was to Coty.  That's what I thought.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  And how did that deal, is that business that you manage and brought in or did you--
Speaker 2: I helped too as a member of, I was in, remember at, at Morgan Stanley--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --as, I was the co-head of M&A [mergers and acquisitions] business then, and we had a long standing relationship with Unilever.  And Unilever chose us to execute on what was a very important transaction.  That transaction was eighteen months in formation.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Twelve to eighteen months in formation.
Speaker 1: But this was a different business for you to that you had, you hadn't been in the cosmetics I don't think.
Speaker 2: Remember if you're an M&A practitioner--
Speaker 1: Anything, you're a general.
Speaker 2: You should be able to--
Speaker 1: You should--
Speaker 2: --execute on any deal--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --anywhere on the planet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You should be able to.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's a lot more, it's a lot more focused today but the, the more seasoned M&A practitioners you should be able to parachute them into any deal, especially for a public company, and they should be able to execute.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We've gotten a lot more specialized today.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: But the Unilever was a sale of the fragrance business which included the, the largest, what they call house in the fragrance business is Chanel.  The second largest is Calvin Klein.  So Unilever cosmetics included Calvin Klein, Bogner, Davidoff.  And I had sold this business a long time ago when it was part of Beecham Cosmetics.
Speaker 1: I see.  I didn't know that part.  Okay.  You had sold it and then--
Speaker 2: I sold it--
Speaker 1: Ahh.
Speaker 2: --a long time ago.
Speaker 1: How many, how many, of those situations have you been involved where you--
Speaker 2: Oh, oh a few.
Speaker 1: It's cause I, I notice that through the-
Story_ID: 156152
Speaker 1: Now I wanna ask who, who is important in these deals?  Is it important to know the business?  Like are you actually looking at the business from the bottom up?
Speaker 2: You have to know the business.  You have to, the, the business that you're selling, you have to get, you gotta get pretty involved in it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and you're looking a lot at the leadership and the board--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --at the board level too?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And these are all relationships.  You've got to know them, I mean someone's coming to you for the deal but you're looking up at those companies all the way up and down and you have a whole team and everyone's (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: We have a whole team that develops relationships.
Speaker 1: And everybody's developing relationships.
Speaker 2: If you have a company right, and you have a board of directors and you wanna make an acquisition, there are gonna be a lot of people out there who wanna be your advisors.  And it's incumbent upon me and my team to get close enough to you, to convince you that, one we know the targeted audience that you'd like to think about acquiring, and also to give you confidence that we can execute.  You're a CEO, your tenures gonna be however long, you're not gonna make a whole host of acquisitions but when you do, you wanna make certain that it goes flawlessly and that it is part of the, the execution is flawless and that it's part of the overall strategy.  'Cause you will then have to answer to the people who, who, to whom you're responsible on your board.  So the people whom you're gonna put in front of your board, are people with whom you have a lot of trust.  And you're gonna then commission them, assign them to go and execute on the transaction.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, were there any deals that did not go well for you?
Speaker 2: Sure, you don't read about those that don't get done (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: No (unclear) (laughter).
Speaker 2: There are lot of the, the vast majority of deals don't happen.  And what, what people who are not in this business don't understand is the amount of effort that goes into analyzing transactions that eventually don't occur--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for a, whole, whole host of reasons.
Story_ID: 156153
Speaker 1: Now, Morgan Stanley at this point also is going, starting to go through changes, mainly from its leadership.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in our, the, and so you're gonna ask me how did I get to Citi?
Speaker 1: No I'm not asking, I wanna ask about, because you're at a different level at Morgan Stanley than you were--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --at the--
Speaker 2: At Merrill Lynch.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And at First Boston--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --which is, that's a different thing when you're, you know, at a more junior level (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, when you're, when you're at--
Speaker 1: --when you're more at a more senior level.
Speaker 2: In this business, yes.
Speaker 1: So Phil Purcell [Phili J. Purcell], everyone is--is that how I pronounce it, Purcell?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  There's a lot, it, it reminded me of the same thing.  You know a lot of the--
Speaker 2: Excuse me.
Speaker 1: --grumbling that had happened with Buchanan [Peter T. Buchanan], but only a different type of, of person.  So how is that impacting you?
Speaker 2: Pretty directly.  I was pretty closely involved with that situation.  It was--
Speaker 1: Can you talk--
Speaker 2: --I was the banker who was the advisor to the board at that point.
Speaker 1: I see.  So if you were the advisor to the board and I think at that point who was, you're, you're the advisor to the board--
Speaker 2: On their poison pill and their staggered board--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and whether or not they were split.  This is the office of chairman and, and CEO.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And isn't, Dick Parsons [HM Richard Parsons], no, no, that's different.
Speaker 2: (Shaking head no.)
Speaker 1: No, that's later, okay.  So how does that work then if you're in that, that, that type of situation?  I mean can you just be, can you be honest at some point (laughter) I mean or not honest, I know you're being honest, but can you be candid, I guess is what I'm asking at this point since it's the past?  Can you be somewhat candid?
Speaker 2: Candid, it's complicated.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or it's not like that AT&T commercial, you know, where those kids are saying it's not complicated, it's complicated.  But that's--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So I can't ask you to be, okay.  Okay.  But what are you learning?  I can ask you that because that is a complicated sort of relationship.
Speaker 2: It is how you manage.
Speaker 1: Because you're an employee but you're--
Speaker 2: How you, how you, how you, how you get the best advice, how do you retain independence and give the best advice.  They get, it comes back to, it comes back to the foundation, right.  If you, the best thing about being an advisor is that you have to have truth, you have to have conviction behind your advice.  It's like telling the truth.  If I tell the truth today I don't have to get up tomorrow and remember what I said 'cause the story's gonna be consistent.  Advice should be able to stand the scrutiny of time, the best advice.  And you will find that over time the best relationships that you have, are ones that, notwithstanding the personal benefit or the firm benefit, it may not be in the best interest of the client, so the best advise that you, that often the best advice is to not do something as opposed to doing something.  In that situation you have to be candid.  And the candor is in, in given the experience that you've had, and given the insights that you've been able to develop, your advice is to do X.  Whether or not they take the advice is for their account but your advice is, which is how you retain and how you, how you maintain and, and maintain their respect.  How you develop and maintain their respect.  Just, the agenda is the agenda that's in the best interests of the overall franchise.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) but so, let's take you back to that time where you are called upon to do, give the advice.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: What was your advice in, in that particular instance?
Speaker 2: There were several different points where the advice had to be given.
Story_ID: 156154
Speaker 1: Can, can I ask about the Dial Corporation deal and the Kimberly-Clark deal?
Speaker 2: Which dial?  'Cause we did a few deals with Dial.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: Or Kimberly-Clark, we did a few deals  with--
Speaker 1: Well, well can you describe, can you talk about the deals that you're most proud of or that you enjoyed doing or, 'cause at this point I'm gonna be asking (laughter) when the deal is consummated and afterwards--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, I'll tell you what--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I'll tell you one.  I'll tell you one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you.
Speaker 2: Here, where which (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Oh, not here.  You can't then, okay.  If you--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You're gonna tell us, talk about a deal here, okay.  Let's, let's talk about you, just hold that because, but let's talk about why you made the decision to leave.  And Morgan Stanley there's a lot of, there's a, it reminded me a lot, I mean I don't know you can talk about the similarities or differences between First Boston, Morgan Stanley (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: It was a different, it was a, I was a lot less close to what was occurring at First Boston than what I was, than what was occurring at Morgan Stanley.  An hour after the changes in leadership were announced at Morgan Stanley, I--
Speaker 1: Can we talk--
Speaker 2: --got a call from Citi.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you have to talk about what changes of leadership were announced.
Speaker 2: The change in leadership of, of Vikram Pandit and John Havens leaving the firm, and Zoe Cruz and Steve Crawford being put in the position of president of the firm.  And--
Speaker 1: Now why, why did they leave?
Speaker 2: And, well I think there was a, there was a lot of debate on the leadership of Morgan Stanley that occurred, that began at the funeral of Dick Fisher, and that Dick Fisher [Richard B. Fisher] who was a icon on Wall Street and was one of the most celebrated leaders at Morgan Stanley, at Dick Fishers funeral, the only leadership member from Morgan Stanley who attend the funeral was Phil Purcell.  This started a, this, this reaction from the gang of however many, forget the number now--
Speaker 1: It was a gang of eight.
Speaker 2: The gang of eight, who felt that the leadership, the then leadership of Morgan Stanley was not reflective of the culture that they had built.  And so they, they instigated for more change.  So that created a, and then there was a, a letter or two from investors that also thought that there should be change at the top.
Speaker 1: And what change, can you be more specific about that, what, what was not representative of the company--
Speaker 2: The leadership.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Remember Phil Purcell was not a Morgan Stanley person.  John Mack had left the firm.  And the culture for these firms in the transition in management and leadership is something that had been time tested.  If you look at the culture of a Goldman Sachs for example, part of the scene of that culture is they have a transition in leadership that is accepted by the culture.  And the people who they transition from one spot to the next, rarely is it an outsider.  These are people who have either grown-up there or had a long history there.  The same thing with Morgan Stanley.  If you look at the history of Morgan Stanley up through Phil Purcell, the leadership for Morgan Stanley had come from internal candidates.  When John Mack left, and when Vikram and John left, Vikram Pandit and John Havens left, you gotta understand that, before Vikram and John left, when John Mack left, and at the funeral, at Dick Fisher's funeral, it was evident to the gang of eight that the history that they had created was no longer being represented by someone who was part of that history.
Speaker 1: With--
Speaker 2: And that's where the, that's where the, the campaign started to change the Morgan Stanley leadership.
Speaker 1: Yep.  And they were only, they blamed Phil Purcell for it.
Speaker 2: They did, yes.
Speaker 1: For a lot of the problems.
Speaker 2: Yes, they did.
Speaker 1: Morgan Stanley (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: And they blamed Phil Purcell for, for the changes in leadership that had occurred.  For the, the departure of Pandit and Havens and the, the then presidency of, of Zoe Cruz and Steve Crawford.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And plus Morgan Stanley wasn't doing well either right?
Speaker 2: No, Morgan Stanley was doing okay.
Speaker 1: I thought, okay.  But they said it, they, they were talking about poor stock performance and (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah, because they thought that the, remember again the strong, the part of the performance of any of these firms is the culture that you create.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the strength of that culture.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 156155
Speaker 1: So why do you leave?
Speaker 2: I left because I got a great opportunity.  An hour after the changes were announced, one hour after the changes were announced at Morgan Stanley, I got a call from Citi asking if I wouldn't join Citi, I wouldn't consider joining Citi.  And I debated for a long time.  I got a call from Citi every day for ten weeks.  Every single day from ten weeks, for ten weeks.  And at the time there was still some stability even though Zoe Cruz and Steve Crawford [Stephen S. Crawford] had been put into the presidency, there was some stability at Morgan Stanley.  But then you remember that the next leadership at Morgan Stanley also left in the form of Joe [Joseph] Perella and Terry Meguid  and others were departing.  And that created an opening for me to at least entertain a conversation with Citi.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And it wasn't as if I was looking to lead Morgan Stanley, notwithstanding the, the, the challenges that were taking place and, and all the noise in the system.  The opportunity that was presented to me at Citi was to come over and to take a even greater leadership role than what I had at Morgan Stanley.
Speaker 1: But lots of people were surprised about you taking the position at, you know, at Citi.  Or that's what I had read, that they were not, I think they were just surprised that that's where you, you know, you, I mean that this is where you came.  But--
Speaker 2: Meaning?  Just because, what, were they surprised because I left Morgan Stanley in that position--
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: --and came to Citi?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.  Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: It was a decent day job right.  Plus it's, it's what again, one of the most coveted positions that exist on Wall Street.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: I saw a world that was global where the footprint of Citi was larger and broader and deeper than any other firm that existed in this country and any other firm that existed.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: The responsibility was a larger responsibility than the one that I had at Morgan Stanley.  The brand was a different brand at least in North America, admittedly.  And I thought that if I could take the experience that I've had, if I can take my skill set, and if I were able to attract the right talent, that Citi could credibly be in a position of one of the premier advisors around the world.  That's the thought process that I had.
Speaker 1: So who did you discuss your decision with?
Speaker 2: That gets to be a small group.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) okay.  Can I mention some--
Speaker 2: Sure, you can.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I mean did Dick Parsons [HM Richard Parsons] play a role?  Did Joe Perella play a role, I mean who were the people you were discussing, were did, did, did you discuss that with?  Bill Lewis [HM William M. Lewis, Jr.], I mean who are you--
Speaker 2: All those people.
Speaker 1: All those people.  And so they're all, it was all unanimous or was it--
Speaker 2: They can't tell you it was all unanimous.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Story_ID: 156156
Speaker 1: There's another guy who you would probably, if you haven't heard of, you should have, who was in the world of business, in the world of philanthropy, in geopolitical context, person on whom each one of those people other than Joe goes to, you ever heard of a guy named Frank Thomas [Franklin A. Thomas]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I wanted to, you know, I'm sorry, it's I wanted to ask you when the relationship with Frank Thomas started because I don't honestly, when I was doing research I, I did not see his name but his name was mentioned to me and--
Speaker 1: Oh, Frank is like, you ever seen that, what was that movie '[The] Usual Suspects'?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Keyser Soze, my man is out there.  He is it.  Frank's the Godfather.
Speaker 2: So, so when did you first meet him because--
Speaker 1: Oh, I can't remember when I first met him but he is--
Speaker 2: He's the person that--
Speaker 1: Frank's the, everybody goes to Frank.
Speaker 2: Can you talk about his, you know, his role because really, you know, I know of him from the Ford Foundation.
Speaker 1: Frank Thomas is the, he is literally, he is the Godfather.  He is anywhere you go.  If anybody who knows anything about anything you mention Frank Thomas and Frank Thomas has touched them--
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: --in some way.
Speaker 2: So what, what was his advice to you?
Speaker 1: Oh, he's always balanced and thoughtful.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Remember Frank was the longest standing member of the Citigroup board.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: He was the one who navigated Citi through all of its troubles.  He was the lead director.
Story_ID: 156157
Speaker 1: So you came here [Citigroup] in 2005, right?
Speaker 2: July of 2005.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 2005.  And so what is the opportunity that presented here?  And what are they saying that you can do here?  And so let's, you know, that's where I would like to (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: It was, the opportunity was to run what was then, to co-head what was then the investment banking business.  So that was an expanded responsibility, an expanded agreement and it was global.  That included the leadership of the M and A [mergers and acquisitions] business.  So all the industries and the product, M and A product, the advisement product, I had responsibility for that as a co-head.  That was in July of '05 [2005].  The world changed significantly from that point to the time I was asked to be the sole head of the combined business of the corporate and investment banking, which happened in August of '09 [2009].  And from that point forward, you can see how Citi has fared competitively.  And today, unlike probably where we've ever been, we have a credible franchise, a credible competitive franchise.
Speaker 1: So you, when you came in as co-head, you came in as co-head with Bert, Alberto--
Speaker 2: Alberto Verme.
Speaker 1: And you had known him before, right?
Speaker 2: I knew him at First Boston.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was part of the Latin American team at First Boston.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he, he was quoted as saying that your first encounter you did not get along does he, do you  know--
Speaker 2: That was at First Boston.
Speaker 1: Yeah, do you know what, what that was?
Speaker 2: I think I was probably in a position of, of, managing resource allocation and I think he probably wanted to get some resources and--
Speaker 1: And you--
Speaker 2: --I, I maybe--
Speaker 1: Define.
Speaker 2: --wasn't convinced that he needed them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So how is, how is it to, to share?  So how was the division of responsibility?
Speaker 2: You, you, you're kind of joint and several.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You don't make every decision together but on the important ones you, you confer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then so you are reporting to John--were you reporting, who are you reporting to?
Speaker 2: I was then reporting to the person who ran the business--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --a guy named Michael Klein, who is the guy who recruited me to Citi.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was the, he was the first phone call.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: And Michael ran the business.  Highly talented banker, highly talented, very effective.  And Michael ran the business.  And then all the changes began to occur at Citi with new leadership at the top.  New leadership for the institutional business.
Story_ID: 156158
Speaker 1: So you were, so can you talk about that, you know, the changes that occurred 'cause you've just come from a place where there's (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: No, then it gets into, oh, yeah then it.  We had a nice run there for a few years and then, I think I've seen two, three CEOs of this company.
Speaker 1: So there's then a (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Chuck Prince, Vikram Pandit, Michael Corbat.
Speaker 1: Right.  And its--
Speaker 2: And two or three CFOs.
Speaker 1: So how is it managing in that whole, because then you also have, you also, also have the, the economic, almost well, the economic meltdown occurs in 2009.
Speaker 2: You had the crisis in, in--
Speaker 1: Right, 2009.
Speaker 2: '7 [2007], '8 [2008]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --that was started in 2007.
Speaker 1: '7 [2007], okay.  Okay.
Story_ID: 156159
Speaker 1: So let, let's, so what are the, you were talk, you were gonna talk about one of your deals and, you know, (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, one of the deals where that, that that happened at the height of the crisis was the, I think it was the $68 billion sale of Wyeth to Pfizer [Inc.].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It was a bit complicated 'cause I sat on the board of Wyeth.
Speaker 1: So how do you do a deal when you sit on the board?
Speaker 2: Because the, and it gets back to relationships.  The, the advisors reached an impasse.  I sat on what was a special committee of the board at Wyeth, to advise the board at Wyeth on what we should do with respect to an offer that we'd received from Pfizer.  And the advisors, the independent advisors to both the Pfizer board and the Wyeth board had reached an impasse, such that the CEOs had said we're not gonna have any more conversations.  The only opening was a relationship that I had with one of the advisors at Pfizer.  His name was Jack Levy.  The only line of communication between the two parties other than at the CEO level, was with me and Jack Levy.  And Jack Levy and I negotiated the final terms of the (unclear) of the Wyeth-Pfizer transaction.
Speaker 1: And Jack Levy you had already had--
Speaker 2: Jack Levy hired me to Merrill Lynch [Wealth Management].
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Jack Levy left Merrill Lynch and went to Goldman Sachs.  And he was the lead M and A [mergers and acquisitions] advisor to Pfizer on the Wyeth transaction.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And Jack and I negotiated the deal.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: I had to recuse myself as the board decided on the final decision when the, as the board made the final decision 'cause Citi[group] got involved to help finance the transaction.  As, you know, it was, a deal at the time at the bottom of the market, that it needed $25 billion worth of financing, and Citi put up I think five or so of that financing.
Speaker 1: And where did the other financing come from?
Speaker 2: There were four other--
Speaker 1: Four other--
Speaker 2: --financial institutions.
Speaker 1: --four other separate people in the deal.  Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: On the financing side.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I, I do wanna ask you but that was, that's is that the largest deal that you had worked on $68 billion?
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight's pretty big.
Speaker 1: Right.  I mean.
Speaker 2: I've done a few other.
Speaker 1: 'Cause it said that you had done $200 million in deals here, but sixty-eight, is, is I think, I mean, I haven't seen a deal that you've been involved in that was that, that large.  Am I wrong?
Speaker 2: That's one of the, I think the, the Time Warner split was well in the forties or something?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.  Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: So, it's been well over, it's been well over a quarter billion, half a billion dollars-worth of deals.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 156160
Speaker 1: So to hear you to describe things really you're describing a very small world--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --on top of where people are, they move positions, the relationships--
Speaker 2: They don't, I don't think they move as, I think I've probably moved more than, than many others just because the opportunities have always--
Speaker 1: Presented themselves.  (Simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --expanded for me.
Speaker 1: Now you also have moved from places that were having, you know, there was some, some type of--
Speaker 2: Some trouble.
Speaker 1: --trouble.
Speaker 2: Something was going on right.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  I mean, have you, but I mean others could stay but I'm just saying and, and in this instance but here there were troubles, here to when you're here.  But I wanna, I wanna ask about the, I wanna go back to ask about the Glass-Steagall Act [1933, repealed in 1999], and this is more I'm asking more contextually about of the lack of, you know, I want you to put your legal hat on sort of but, you know, that, things happened with the lack of regulation.
Speaker 2: They always happen with the laugh, lack of regulation.  I don't think it was as a result of Glass-Steagall, it's just that people didn't have the proper controls in place.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: And a few people that, the entirety of the Wall Street community shouldn't be indicted by the mistakes made by a few, a handful of people at each one of these firms.
Speaker 1: But do you--
Speaker 2: There were mistakes made.  I wanna be very clear about that and they were material mistakes that had damaging repercussions on many.  But there were also policies out there that enabled an environment of excess.
Speaker 1: Right.  That environment lasted, you know, a while.  But I wanna ask, do you think, I mean, did you see at all the writing on the, had, you know, on the wall?
Speaker 2: I don't think anybody saw that.  Listen and if you, it, what I think about this, you had the missteps on Wall Street and you also had missteps on Main Street where the used car salesman can go to be a mortgage broker--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: --and sell you a house today, that he sells you it for a hundred thousand dollars and tomorrow it gets valued at $250 thousand dollars and you go get a home mortgage loan for 50 thousand dollars to furnish a house and when the crisis hits, the house is worth $75 thousand dollars, and you're no longer employed.  That's not a good thing for anybody.  Not a good thing for the country.  Those are excesses.  There are excesses that, fortunately we lived to tell about.  For many people it's, it's a pretty difficult circumstances.
Story_ID: 156161
Speaker 1: So, where do you, okay.  So let's talk about you at Citi[group] now.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Because you do still a fair amount of international work right?  A lot of--
Speaker 2: Oh, I have, my responsibilities are global.
Speaker 1: Global.
Speaker 2: So where ever you can think about in the world, where we have an operation, we have, where there are large multinational corporations, I've got some responsibility for that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So a lot, so where are the centers of influence right now in that, in those worlds?  The Middle East is a big, big--
Speaker 2: When we think about in our world, we're the largest, North America is the largest still of what I'll call the episodic business.  North America is still the largest.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And then Europe, Middle East.  Europe; Middle East; and Africa; next, Asia Pacific; next Japan; and then Latin America.
Speaker 1: In terms of deal-making or--
Speaker 2: Just in terms of the overall available wallet of opportunity.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: For what we call that deal making business which is M and A [mergers and acquisitions] advisory, equity capital, equity, oh, and the capital markets business, that and equity capital markets.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: 55 percent of the, of that activity in terms of fee volume is in North America.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I didn't know that.  And so I'm sort of surprised about that because you hear so much about China and it's in, you know, it's (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, the reason that you hear about China is you look at the global Fortune 500 companies, seventy-three are in China, sixty-eight are in Japan, right, then you go to, then you go to Germany, France, and the UK.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Remember Japan is the third largest economy in the world.  China is the second largest economy in the world.
Story_ID: 156162
Speaker 1: So I wanna get to some of your other activities.  But I'd like to ask before we, you're still relatively young, quite young.
Speaker 2: I'd like to think so.
Speaker 1: Yes.  And what things, what would you like to do that you haven't done in the, or in the world of, in the world of M and A [mergers and acquisitions] work and investment banking?  What would you like to do?  And--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I've been blessed to do lots of things at a, at a level of competition that is probably at the highest level of competition.  So continuing to lead this business, as we have come through a crisis and survived the crisis, to now have a highly credible franchise, I take a lot of pride in that.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Knowing just how difficult it's been to get here, and knowing what it's taken to get here.  It's not been easy at all.  It's been very hard work.  And the ability to transform a business, to build a business.  Based on the experiences I've had in the past, I knew what it was like to build a business.  If you look at the standards that were applied Wasserstein Perella, these were the highest standards, the best talent that you could get.  Which then gets reflected in how the clients are reacting to you as advisors.  We've attempted to take that approach with those standards and apply it here.  And we've had some successes.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: I wanna have more but we've had some, we've had some significant successes so far in such a way that we're now respected in the market place amongst our competitors.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Because of the content, because of the relationships.  Less because of the balance sheet which we used to lead with.  Today we use our balance sheet to support our clients as opposed to leading with the balance sheet.  And that's a, that's a fundamental shift in how you can build and sustain a, a model of competition, effective competition and excellence.
Speaker 1: So you are saying that the clients you maintain, more important than the, the organization itself and it is important.  Is that what you were saying?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.  Clients are always first.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's what--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous) you have the relationships now.  You've been here, because you have the people who can develop those relationships.  They know the business, they have what we call the content.  They have a knowledge of the business, your business.  Someone who you will have a lot of respect for.  People who know your business as opposed to people who are coming in trying to convince you that they know the business, if you get people who actually know the business that's a different kind of interaction.  And you trust them.  You get people who know the business and you just say I don't know I'm a little skeptical about what their agenda is.
Story_ID: 156163
Speaker 1: What strikes me about you, is not only your ascent, and it is, you know, it has been this very, well it's actually it's been a very speedy but the tape, sorry, continuous ascent, sorry, I should be done with this hand, up but the other thing that I, you know, I'd like to talk about other parts of your life because you have been civically active as well in giving back.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: And you also have been very active in collecting or in the arts world.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Giving back and also, you know, the acquisition of a pretty amazing, you know, art collection.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: And I will, wanna know when did that collection, when did the collecting start?
Speaker 2: Oh, the collecting started twenty plus years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what was the first piece that you, you bought?
Speaker 2: It was a Hughie Lee-Smith drawing, a WPA [Works Progress Administration] drawing.  I think I bought it at an auction or something.
Speaker 1: And where did your interest come from, from that?  Because I, your collection is pretty impressive for someone starting, you know, like twenty years ago, I think, you know, because, (unclear) in twenty years, really?  Twenty years?
Speaker 2: Twenty, twenty-five years it's been.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So how did, why did, why did it start?
Speaker 2: You know, I, I, I can't remember why it started but what the standard that I set, and I, and I remember meeting with a curator, a young curator, who was beginning her career and, and in the art world, Thelma Golden, who's now the head of the Studio Museum [in Harlem, New York, New York], and I asked her to give me a list of all the artists out there that were kind of the standard-bearers in the community, and she did.  She put together a package, very professionally done, and I began to learn and I set as a standard, if I could, and I always thought about if I were to pull the collection together what it would be called and I think it'd be called something like preserving a legacy of excellence.  'Cause I've looked to see who the masters are in our community and who the masters were in the African art world as well.  And that's been the framework by which, under which I've collected.  So whether it's Benin bronzes or, or Bali mask, or (unclear) or that's on the African side.  Or in the African American world, the most celebrated, the one who began at the, the only one who went to, the first one who to the, to Paris and, and studied there, [Henry Ossawa] Tanner.  And so I, I look to the best, the best representation that the community had to offer and, and thought that was important that it be maintained as part of our community.  And so I've been blessed with the resources to collect and to support a lot of emerging artists.  And so it goes from Tanner and [Edward Mitchell] Bannister and [Robert S.] Duncanson to Mickalene Thomas and Chris Ofili and Lorna Simpson and Julie Mehretu and Glenn Ligon, or Hank Willis Thomas.  So, it, it attempts to span the, the calendar, if you will, Nok from 3 or 400 BC, Nok all the way up to, you name it, so.  I've been really fortunate to be able to do that.  And, and again it's just part of the blessings I've been given.
Story_ID: 156164
Speaker 1: You're going to be the way that museums, you know, show our, our work.  Though, you know, at the time that, you know, when you met Thelma--
Speaker 2: Thelma.
Speaker 1: Golden, she was not at the Studio Museum [in Harlem, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: No, no, no I've known Thelma-
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) now this is--
Speaker 2: --since she was--
Speaker 1: Was at the--
Speaker 2: --a junior curator at the Whitney [Museum of American Art].
Speaker 1: Whitney, okay
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  (Unclear)
Speaker 2: Which was second board that I joined.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had joined it simultaneous to joining the board of International Center of Photography.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is twenty-plus years ago.
Speaker 1: Right.  So you, you have, how have you chosen your board, and your board involvements, you know, and what you would be afterwards, 'cause from the Studio Museum to, well you're very active in De La Salle [Academy, New York City, New York], too, you know, (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Studio Museum it's, it's our, this is the only accredited African, African American museum in the country.
Speaker 1: That's the problem.
Speaker 2: That if you look at, and Mark Bradford is another emerging, if you look at the artists today that are represented by the galleries around the country that, that command the most attention and respect, and I'll include in addition to the ones I've talking about, you got Danny Simmons and Victor Matthews also, all of whom are, who are helping to, they're helping to drive the new canon, if you will, in their being, their being respected in such a way.  Mark Bradford or Julie [Mehretu], these people, or Mickalene [Thomas], these are really celebrated because of the art.  And this is pure art, right, so I respect that, I admire it.  I am inspired by it.
Speaker 1: But you also are helping give life to (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I guess--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --I'm fortunate, you know, I just, I, I put that in the context, right, I'm not an artist.  Maybe what I do, I'd like at some point convince myself that it's art but it's certainly a different kind of art than what they do, right.  The involvement in the institutions, that's the Studio Museum in Harlem.  De La Salle Academy is a school for gifted inner-city kids, sixth to eighth grade.  These are our kids.  This is me, right.  So what Brother Brian [Carty] is doing with those kids is changing their lives.  They otherwise wouldn't have the opportunity.  New York Public Library especially with the branches--
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: I remember coming up, and when you grow up in the neighborhood and you find places like the library where you can get a library card, I mean man you're like, you're, you're kind of doing something now, right.  You got a library card that gives you a sense of, of I don't if it's adulthood, gives you a sense of responsibility.  And so the libraries are very important.  Notwithstanding the, the, the advent of the Internet.  In a republic of letters, to have a library that is a central convening place, either the central library or the branch is very important to the community.  Very important to supplement what's taking place in the public schools.  Very important to teach English as a second language.  Very important to have a place like the Bronx Center where people can go that otherwise may not have a place to go other than school.  So the public libraries are really important.  New York-Presbyterian Hospital is very important.  Healthcare, how you navigate the healthcare system.  And the delivery of healthcare in many communities, that's important.  Carnegie Center for International Peace [sic, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace], very important as you think about policy, the local policy and it is the leader in, in global policy think tank.  So those are, those are, those are some of the instances or the way, and why I'm involved in those things 'cause I think they make a difference in the community.  Writ large, not just the African American community but the community writ large.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: They're essential to the community and they're, they're essential to how we compete as a country.  And how members of the community again, writ large are able to participate in the overall community.
Story_ID: 156165
Speaker 1: So when you look back on your, over your life and you think about your grandfather, Leo [Wilson ph.].
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: And your grandmother [Mamie Wilson ph.] and your mother [Wiletha McGuire] and the church that has provided the, the foundation--
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: --of who you are, do you think you could have envisioned--
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  No, I'm, this is not, you don't write this, it's not a Hollywood script.  This is not, again there's, there's, there's not a creative writer, there's not a statistician who would say I would be in this position.  Doesn't exist.  After the, and you don't make the correlation even though, even the most creative, the most remote of the frontier thinkers don't put this part in, they don't put this together.  Not coming from my neighborhood, not, not 1, not 120 Garst Street in Dayton, Ohio, going to Bethel Church of God in Christ at 1120 Germantown Street, that doesn't work, to be here, talking to you, no, mm-mm.  You gotta have the prayer, the, the, the prayer of the faithful's gotta be with you.  So, no.  I can remember when I graduated from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and this was back in Dayton, and I came home with that diploma, first and only time I saw my grandfather shed a tear.  We've come a long way from there.
Story_ID: 156166
Speaker 1: So Leo, you know, we have to talk about Leo and Crystal because--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, you got a boy.  So--
Speaker 2: My man, Leo.
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's a big deal.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you have been a very sought after bachelor, you know, for--
Speaker 2: Is that what they say?
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: Is that what they say?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, they do say that (laughter).  Some people thought that, that, that would never happen, you know, so.  But I would like to, you know, because that's, I mean you have a tremendous legacy but now you got a boy.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Got a boy, so.  What are your hopes and, and aspirations for him and, and how is your life sort of changing to and--
Speaker 2: Listen my hopes and aspirations are that that he's well-trained.  You know, the Word says "Train a child the way he should go and when he's gotten older he shall not depart." [Proverbs 22:6] And so if I can give him some of the benefit of how I've been trained, then Leo will be okay.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: Whatever he does, that's for his account.  I want him to be God-fearing and God-loving.  Respectful of, of, of his parents.  I want him to have a moral compass that doesn't expand the boundaries but exists with a, with a finite set of what's right and wrong.  To treat people with respect, especially his elders.  And to be a contributing citizen.  If he is gifted with talents of leadership and athleticism, then I'm okay with that.  That would be a blessing.  I hope he's got a jump shot.  He will have a jump shot, there's no doubt about that, he'll be able to rain 'em from three.  And the responsibility that he will have is not a responsibility of fulfilling my legacy or carrying my legacy, it'll be a responsibility to himself in terms of his standards of excellence.  In order to be competitive my standards of excellence have had to be unassailable.  As I've said in a couple of interviews, my margin for error doesn't exist.  A black man in this world doesn't have a large margin for error.  And notwithstanding advances we've made, I doubt that Leo's gonna have a large margin for error.  I doubt that.  He will have all the advantages that I didn't have, especially with the things that money can buy.  What will, what will determine a lot of how he fares, is what money cannot buy.  It's love, honor, respect, those things that allow you to navigate the difficult streets, the narrow streets, and come in on the other end.  Gone be some really hard times.  I'm reminded though of the song that was my grandfather's favorite song, James Cleveland used to sing it, "I've got off to no way start, come too far."  So if he can have that foundation, then he's gon' be okay.
Story_ID: 156167
Speaker 1: Now, what are your hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: I have a lot of concerns for the black community.
Speaker 1: You don't?
Speaker 2: I have a lot of concerns--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: --for the black community.  African American males, they, the community may be worse off today than we've been in the history of this country, notwithstanding the fact that we have a black president.  The Voting Rights Act, effected the repeal of that.  What's taking place with the Civil Rights Movement.  I worry about that.  I worry about the, the educational system not being effective enough to give the community the baseline that's needed to contribute to the, to participate in the regular way, regular way economy that exists today.  Half of the people graduate from high school, 50 percent.  And of the ones that graduate I challenge the ability to read at a graduating, at a 12th level.  I worry about that.  I worry that, I worry that Morehouse College graduates more African American males than all the Ivies combined.  I worry about that.  I worry about the competitiveness in Morehouse College or Howard that, those who used to be the anchors in the community.  I worry about that.  I can't solve all of these things, none of us can but we need to pay attention to it 'cause the situation is not improving.  So I worry about in, in very fundamental ways what's taking place with the community.  Part of the involvement that I have in these organizations is to provide an example, to give input such that the community does get represented, does get represented.  I'm not every man, I'm not every black man, I don't speak for every black man, I do have experiences that black men, that can be informative.  But this is, these are, these are hard learned lessons, hard learned lessons, that that you can't often share.  And I worry, I worry about the community.
Speaker 1: Now, what do you think our, our legacy, this generation 'cause we came after the civil rights and (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I don't know, I worry about the legacy.  I worry about whether or not we have the same, listen I am here because of the shoulders that I stand on, the Gordon Davises [HM Gordon J. Davis], the Frank Thomases, the, the Dick Parsonses [HM Richard "Dick" Parsons]the Ken Chenaults, so the people who went ahead.  I'm, I stand on their shoulders.  I stand I just wanna have a shoulder showing up for others to stand on.  To give them the time, to return phone calls and emails, to make certain that as we transition, there's somebody there on whose shoulders Leo can stand.  And so I'm really, really hard on the standards that we have to make, set and maintain.  I've seen this generation have a number of opportunities.  And I see the number of people who are no longer in positions of influence.  I see that and I worry about that.  I worry about that.  I worry about the next generation.  I worry about this generation or the generation that is coming after, whether or not there is too much a feeling of entitlement.  This work life balance, well I never had the opportunity to decide on a work life balance, it was work and more work.  It was a standard that you gotta set, which is still you gotta be better in order to be equal.  We, we don't get different, listen I'm fortunate to have three degrees from Harvard.  I, that doesn't mean that when the, they start the competition that that really matters.  It gets me into the competition but listen they're not, that's not gonna get me to the next step.  I worry about whether or not we recognize that, that those standards of excellence have to be maintained.  I come to, I wake up every day, go to work with a healthy sense of paranoia.  We need to inject a sense of urgency and a sense of paranoia.  'Cause while a few of us may have decent living standards and can vacation where ever we want and eat where ever we want, there are to, far too many of us who don't.  What, what did he [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] say in the letter from Birmingham, "We're inextricably woven in the garment of destiny." [paraphrase] I worry about that garment and whether or not our being inextricably woven is, it is what it was then.  I worry about that.  His vision has been realized to some extent.  Clarence Jones [HM Clarence B. Jones] is another one, I stood on his shoulders.  He was MLK Jr.'s lawyer.  So many others.  Just think about the courage that it took then.  I don't know if we have the same courage today.  I worry about that.  Maybe we've gotten a little too comfortable.
Story_ID: 156168
Speaker 1: So just two more, I think two more questions.  If you were, if you were to have a chance to relive your life, would you change anything?
Speaker 2: No, I wouldn't.  I wouldn't change anything.  Not, not, not one thing.  I'm blessed to be here.  So, I, I, yes, yes, as I said it's, I don't feel in no ways tired.  Come too far from where I started from.  Nobody said the road was gone be easy but I brought, he didn't bring me this far to leave me.
Speaker 1: Now, what do people describe as quintessentially Ray McGuire?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  I have no idea.  You have to tell me that.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) okay.
Speaker 2: I don't what quintessentially rhythm and rhyme just, I'm just a brother from Dayton [Ohio] representing the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) okay.
Speaker 2: That's what I do.
Speaker 1: I heard that, I had heard they had a big celebration when you came back?  Did you hear?
Speaker 2: In Dayton?
Speaker 1: In Dayton.
Speaker 2: I don't know maybe they had--
Speaker 1: I, I think--
Speaker 2: --a couple of people gather around.
Story_ID: 156169
Speaker 1: Now, I heard, but I want, I want to, the questions we ask are just to what, what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: A legacy of having made a difference.  A legacy of having cherished the gifts that I have been given.  A legacy of having, I guess, kept the faith.  This is, is a walk of faith.  Fulfilled the dreams of my grandparents who didn't have the opportunity, of my mother who didn't have the opportunity.  It's a very private legacy.  I, on every tombstone between the time you're born and the end there's a dash.  And I would take a lot of comfort in knowing that that dash has been used to help the lives of others, some better their, the condition of others.  To obtain a certain stature and respect, against the toughest critics, withstand that scrutiny.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's it.
Speaker 2: What they say it is not to the swift, to the strong but those who endure.  And I should hope that, that at the final call that he'll say well done now good and faithful servant.  I hope that.
