Story_ID: 534616
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, would--could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is John E. Moore, Sr. [HistoryMaker John Moore], J-O-H-N, E, M-double O-R-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what does your middle name stand for, the E stand for (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Edward is my actual middle name.
Speaker 1: Edward, okay.  And do you have any nicknames?
Speaker 2: Well, some of my family members call me brother.  In the old neighborhood, they call me Little John.  I think those are probably the only two.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 11, 1923 in Birmingham, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well I'm retired.  I've been blessed with twenty-seven years of retirement and I've had an opportunity to sort of do what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us the position you retired from?
Speaker 2: I retired as chief of civilian personnel at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base [Dayton, Ohio] in 1979, January of 1979.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is March 18th, I believe, of 2006 (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at my home, 23 Kimberly Circle, Dayton, Ohio.
Story_ID: 534617
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that we always ask, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Meat (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Oh, I love summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Southwest.  I go to Scottsdale, Arizona, to Las Vegas [Nevada] and sometimes to Disneyland [Disneyland, Anaheim, California] or Disney World [Walt Disney World, Orlando, Florida], Disneyland really.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I believe in what I call the three F philosophy, focus, function and finish, and many things don't get done because we do the focusing, we do the functioning, but we don't do the finishing.
Story_ID: 534618
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Ausro Moore] side.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Gertha Moore, G-E-R-T-H-A [Gertha Jones Moore].  Jones was her maiden name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: It would have been February 1st, 1900.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was she born?  Where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born I believe in Pulaski, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Pulaski, Tennessee.  That's the home of the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK], where (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, night riders.
Speaker 1: Right.  Now what do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?  Are there any stories associated with her side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, her father [John Jones] had at least six brothers.  And they were there in the Pulaski, Lawrenceburg, Tennessee area.  But their parents I guess were slaves, and they were all separated and dispersed.  And we don't know much about what happened to them.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they didn't really know what happened to their parents I guess.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: They were separated during the Civil War or thereabouts, or after during Reconstruction?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, sometime in that period.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah they were separated, the family, and sold off and we never really got that far back in terms of tracing that history, even though my son [John E. Moore, Jr.] made some stabs at it.  But he hasn't really gone down there and tried to review the records in the county seats.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories on that side of the family about Reconstruction or about that period of time?
Speaker 2: I really didn't get too much from my parents in in terms of what happened, even though both of my grandfathers moved to Dayton [Ohio] and lived with us, and died while they were living with us.  But they didn't really talk too much about themselves and their history.  Back in those days, children were to be seen, and you didn't talk--that is to say, seen but not heard, and they taught, but that oral history in our family didn't really get passed down.  They talked about the horses, and one of my grandfathers was in the drayage business, that's the trucking business, in Birmingham [Alabama], and he married two or three times, but he didn't want to talk about all that either.  So there's really not much that I know about the people on my mother's side or even less on my father's side.  Although when I did meet some of the relatives on my father's side who were about his age, it appeared that some of them may have even been related indirectly to some of the people on my mother's side.  Because I guess down in Tennessee in those days folks all knew one another, and so they got together.  But indirectly, some of the people on my father's side knew and were maybe even related to some of the folks on my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they were both from Tennessee?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Originally, I guess?
Speaker 2: Originally, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And we just had a reunion in Tennessee back about 1994, I think, and I met a lot of folks on the Jones side, and there was some other names, people I did not know.  But I met a lot of folks that--part of our family.
Story_ID: 534619
Speaker 1: Because it is Pulaski, Tennessee, are there any stories about the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] from your mother's [Gertha Jones Moore] side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, from my father's [Ausro Moore] side, more than my mother, I remember whenever I would talk about the Klan, my father would correct me, and tell me it was not the Klan, it was, they called it the night riders.  And he talked about them riding around and frightening people on the countryside, the black people, so he had had some personal experiences, which he didn't again like to talk about, but he was very much aware of the night riders, as he called them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did your mother, did she impart any stories to you about growing up in Tennessee?
Speaker 2: Yes, she had lived on a farm, and was educated in a church school there in Tennessee because they didn't have any public schools for them out in the country, and then at one point she moved to Oklahoma, and lived in Oklahoma for a while when she was a teenager, and then moved back to Tennessee and to Alabama with my--when she married my father, and then from there they moved to Dayton, Ohio, and initially we lived at 724 Springfield Street and then we lived at, it would have been 401 Springfield Street, and then there was a little house finally for sale for a thousand dollars at 226 Springfield Street, and they bought that house.  And they built onto it a porch, and a back porch, and a bathroom, and another bedroom, and a garage, which became a chicken house.  (Laughter) We were in the city but we raised chickens.
Speaker 1: That part of the city is kind of out by, you know, it's getting out of the city, I guess (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh at that time it was out on the suburbs.  I mean, it was on the edge because out on Smithville Road and Woodley Road and all those places, we would go out and pick blackberries in blackberry season.  And my mother would can those blackberries, and so it was at that time, just out on the edge of the city.  I mean you didn't have much in the way of some of the structures east of that area--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but all of the black people were sort of segregated there on Springfield Street.  Even though there were still white families there.  It was a mostly Hungarian neighborhood before blacks started moving in, and on the west side of Findlay Street, it was called Hunk Town [Dayton, Ohio], the blacks called it Hunk Town because of the Hungarian presence, and I can remember having childhood friends who were Hungarian and Polish, going to weddings and whatever their families were doing when I was a child.
Story_ID: 534620
Speaker 1: Now I wanna get back to that, but I want to go back and pick up your father's story, father's side--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Ausro, A-U-S-R-O, Moore.
Speaker 1: Now, that's an unusual name.  Is there a story behind that name?
Speaker 2: We've all asked that and he doesn't know.  We kid him, we say that he probably, somebody picked that off a tombstone somewhere.  But we really don't know that, and I know very little about his family, even though his father [John Moore], as I said, moved to Dayton [Ohio] when he was--at that time he was only in his sixties, but we thought he was old and he did pass while he lived with us, and he had a brother, Andrew [ph.], his name was John, and he had a brother named Andrew that we never saw.
Speaker 1: This would be a great uncle I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh, and actually my mother [Gertha Jones Moore] was his second wife.  So he had been married before but his wife had died young.
Speaker 1: You mean your grandmother, I mean, or--not your mother?
Speaker 2: My--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, yeah right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) my father, my father--
Speaker 1: So your mother actually was married, I mean your father actually was married before?
Speaker 2: Yeah, before he married my mother.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Yeah, and he had one son [Alonzo Moore] prior to marrying my mother, and he's about eighty-eight years old.  He's a half-brother who lives here, and matter of fact, in Dayton.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I really don't know--we don't know much about that family history.
Speaker 1: What is your father's date of birth?
Speaker 2: It would have been August, I don't remember now precisely, August 1897.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was he born?  Was he born in Pulaski [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: He was born in Pulaski too, I believe.
Speaker 1: All right now, did he go to school in Pulaski?
Speaker 2: Yes, he went to school there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Again, both of them went to a church school, and I think up to about the eighth grade.
Story_ID: 534621
Speaker 1: Okay, I was asking you about your father's [Ausro Moore] stories of growing up--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --did he have any stories about growing up in Tennessee?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Matter of fact, my father was a very quiet person.  My mother [Gertha Jones Moore] was a verbal person and did most of the talking.  He always talked about going in business.  He had ambitions, he wanted to go in businesses.  He never had the assets to do that, so that was really a real problem for him, and during the Depression [Great Depression] trying to find work, it was a difficult thing, and he worked for quite a while at the CO Motors Paint Company [ph.] on Webb Street in Dayton [Ohio], where all the black employees worked in the yard and the white employees worked in the warehouse.  And I remember carrying his lunch to the place where he worked, and I don't think any of them, black or white, had any more education or what have you than the other, but yet again that was one of the experiences that I recall as a young person, and noticing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they moved to Dayton--well your mother and father, when you look back and remember them, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think there's a little of both, but perhaps more so of my mother.  She had the patience, more patience than my father.  My father was ambitious, and I think I get a little of that from him.  My mother was more creative, and I got a little bit of that from her.  My father was a very prideful man and if you wanted to get a charge out of him, you questioned his integrity (laughter), but I kind of got a little something from both of them.  Temper, takes a lot to get me upset, but I think that, probably my mother, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did they give you--what was the reason why they moved to Dayton?  Did they know somebody here already?
Speaker 2: No, like--well they did know someone.  But like most people back in the early or the late `20s [1920s] or the early `30s [1930s], they were looking for work.
Speaker 1: They came up, and you said you were about one or so?
Speaker 2: About one, yeah.
Speaker 1: This is about 1924?
Speaker 2: Twenty-four [1924], yeah.  But all through that period and the early `30s [1930s] I mean people were moving--mobile.  There was one migration, and then the second wave occurred during World War II [WWII], where there were even more people that that moved.  But they did know one or two people who were cousins, and one of the people was a Jones, who was supposedly related somehow to my father, not my mother, yet he--my mother was a Jones.  So that's the reason I'm saying that back in those days those relationships were a little bit garbled and complex.  But they were pretty independent, and we lived with some folks--as I hear, remember the story, on the west side first, before we moved on Springfield Street, to the first place.  They roomed with some folks for just a very short period of time that were cousins.  But then they moved to the east side of town--
Story_ID: 534622
Speaker 1: Now I've heard it said, Charles Mosley Austin and some others around town have said that blacks in Dayton [Ohio] first lived on the east side before they moved to the west side.  Do you know anything about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were some blacks on the east side long before there were blacks on the west side, and some were even over there by UD [University of Dayton, Dayton, Ohio], that's what I'm saying, there were not very many, but there were a few over in the University of Dayton area.  But I guess as the city grew, and the banks began to control, and other leaders started deciding where people lived, then it was more controlled.  There were more blacks back at the time when I was going to Steele High School [Dayton, Ohio] before Sinclair [Sinclair Community College, Dayton, Ohio] was built, there where Sinclair is located, there were a lot of black people really downtown.
Speaker 1: That's Sinclair Community College, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm, in that area, those sites, Maple Street and some others.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now those areas of town, I mean there were--I remember when I was a kid there were houses in downtown before what they had what they called urban renewal.
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And a lot of houses had to make room for--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --razed.
Speaker 2: They were razed, and the people were relocated or moved for whatever reason to other exits of the city, and as a matter of fact, from a political point of view, the City of Dayton had an opportunity to annex all the land where Kettering [Ohio] and some of the other subdivisions are, but the elected officials at that time didn't have the vision or the need to expand.  So they didn't do it.  And then we ended up being surrounded with a ring of other little small cities like Kettering, and Huber Heights [Ohio], and Trotwood [Ohio] and Miamisburg [Ohio] and all these other cities, whereas in other communities like Columbus [Ohio], from a mileage point of view there's many more miles, square miles of space than you have in Dayton.  But it was because at that time, the elected officials decided not to do it, and we now have in this county sixteen different school districts, whereas in some of the other major counties in Ohio, you have, like in Columbus there are other small communities, but you have many more people in the school districts of the center city.
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about growing up.  Now you were one when your family moved from Alabama to Dayton, and did you know how they moved?  Did they come up by train, or by car?
Speaker 2: They had to come up by train 'cause they didn't have a car.  My family didn't have a car until I was about fourteen years old, and I became the first driver in my family.  We rode the streetcar, or the traction, as it was called, interurban, but we walked.  Like, I went to Washington School [Washington Elementary School, Dayton, Ohio], elementary school, and then to Wilbur Wright [Wilbur Wright Junior High School; Wilbur Wright High School, Dayton, Ohio] as a junior high, and I walked, and that was quite a piece, but we walked.
Story_ID: 534623
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Growing up?  Well, you know we had a milkman, a bread man, vegetable man.  You didn't--you went to school, and I can remember there being just one radio on the block when Joe Louis started fighting, and we were all congregated whosever house it was to listen to the boxing match or prize fight as it was called.  And then finally the rest of the families started getting radios.  So back in those days kids learned to read because there wasn't anything else to do.  And I can remember kerosene lanterns, lights, didn't have electric lights for a while.  When we got our house, that one thousand dollar house, wired for electricity, that was a real accomplishment.  And when we got inside plumbing, it was an accomplishment.
Speaker 1: Now that was when you were still a youth, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, yes.
Speaker 1: You were like, how old were you when you got electricity?
Speaker 2: I would say ten or eleven.
Speaker 1: And inside plumbing?
Speaker 2: About the same time because I can remember those old kerosene lamps, the kids would have to clean the globes because of the smoke.  You do that several times a week, and that was one of the regular chores.  And I can remember the men that smoked cigarettes.  My dad [Ausro Moore] smoked cigars.  But for my uncles and people who would come around, there was a little device where you put some tobacco in this little machine, and then by hand you would put a piece of paper, you would roll cigarettes for them.  So there were no cigarettes that were already rolled and ready to be smoked.  You had to roll those cigarettes, and the tobacco I can remember was for the most part Bull Durham.  You get a sack of Bull Durham tobacco, and you get a little packet of paper, and on one end of the paper like our postage stamps today, they would be already treated with a little mastic.  So this machine, you'd lick it with your tongue, put it in this machine, put some tobacco in, spread it out, roll it, and then you'd have a cigarette.
Story_ID: 534624
Speaker 1: So you were talking about them rolling cigarettes?
Speaker 2: Cigarettes, yeah that's one of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now smoking, now things are changing here in 2006 even as we speak, restaurants are banning smoking--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but in those days a lot of people smoked.
Speaker 2: Lot of people smoked, yes.  And I can remember some of the old timers, even the women, dipped snuff.  I don't know if you know what that is.
Speaker 1: Snuff is a tobacco product--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it--
Speaker 1: --I've never really, I've seen people do it, but I really--
Speaker 2: Yeah well snuff really was made from the fragments of manufacturing like cigars or cigarettes, and it would be ground up into a powder, and I can remember some of the people would pull their lip out and put a little chunk of bit of this snuff in there, and they would just keep it there.  I mean it was something that was satisfying.  I never understood it, but it was like chewing tobacco.  There were a number of people who chewed tobacco.  Which I thought was a terrible habit, but they would get a bag of like one of the tobacco, mail pouch tobacco, and they'd put a big chaw of that in their mouth and chew it, and then spit.  And I had a job as a youngster in a barbershop.  The deal was that I kept the barbershop clean for the right to shine shoes and keep the money.  So I shined the shoes and cleaned the barbershop.  And one of the things I hated, was I had to clean the spittoons.  These old guys would come in and get their haircut and even one or two of the barbers would use the spittoon after they chew this tobacco, and that was a terrible thing, I hated it.  It was the worst experience, one of the worst (laughter) experiences in my life, but I never forgot that experience, and it helped me decide that if I ever got an education and a job, I wasn't gonna do that.  But I did it for a while, while I was still in school, after school and during the summer for one or two years.
Story_ID: 534625
Speaker 1: You said you went to Washington School [Washington Elementary School, Dayton, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Elementary.
Speaker 1: Is that on the east side [of Dayton, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yes, they recently razed it in this current renovation of the schools.  That was one of the schools they closed, they had closed it sometime ago, but it has been torn down.
Speaker 1: Where was it?
Speaker 2: It was on East 2nd Street or 1st [Street] between Findlay [Street] and Irwin [Street].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So well, tell us about school, did you like school?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, I liked school.  I guess folks said I was a pretty good student, and I loved school.  But back in those days, again, you didn't have many distractions.  School was an everyday experience.  Kids didn't drop out like they did today.  Dropped out, I guess, many of them, in the tenth or eleventh grade because they could then go to work and get a pretty good job.  But I have to qualify that a little bit: if you were white.  If you were black you had a difficult time, and you ended up in one of the foundries, G.H.R. Foundry [Dayton, Ohio] or some such thing.
Speaker 1: Kuntz brothers had one I think, too.
Speaker 2: Kuntz was another, yeah, foundry, but the hard, heavy, dirty jobs where you went to work--and of course the automobile plants hadn't grown up at that time.  So finding work for black families was a very difficult thing.  Many of the women worked in private family.  My mother [Gertha Jones Moore], for the most part, was just a housewife.  She didn't have to get out and work.  I understand there was, if I remember, one period when she worked for a short time outside the home, but my father [Ausro Moore], he struggled and made a living as best he could, and matter of fact there were times, as I got to be a teenager when he left the city, he went to New York.  I can remember, he found work, but it really wasn't a good idea because by the time he paid his expenses where he lived, what he had left wasn't very much to send back home.  So by that time my brother and I, we were working after school, and during the summer, to kind of supplement the family income.  So work was--employment was a real challenge.
Speaker 1: Did he work for a long time at Walden Paint [ph.]?
Speaker 2: He worked there, but it got to the point at the paint company where he worked that it was just two or three days a week.  Then he had to find something else.  Well somewhere before he moved to Dayton [Ohio], he had learned to press clothes so he was able to work as a clothes presser.  Matter of fact, he later, what they called, dressed the windows, that is, put the clothes in the windows of like the Metropolitan Clothing Company [Dayton, Ohio] downtown, those display windows and--
Speaker 1: Did he get a chance to do those?
Speaker 2: Yeah he did those, and Dunhill's [Dayton, Ohio], he worked at Dunhill's, pressed clothes and did the windows and that type of thing, so he had learned to do that before he moved to Dayton.  That part of this life I don't really know about, but he had learned to do that.  But he had--he made a living as best he could, all along.  But he wanted to go in business.  That was the thing that he wanted to do more than anything else in his life, but there was no way for him to raise the money to do what he wanted, to have a dry cleaning business, but it just didn't happen.
Story_ID: 534626
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: I liked drafting, drawing and English.  I can remember winning an English or writing contest in junior high school [Wilbur Wright Junior High School; Wilbur Wright High School, Dayton, Ohio] and the winners were to go to Columbus [Ohio] to be recognized, and I was number one but they took number two and three.  Again it was that problem with color back in those days.  Matter of fact, extracurricular activities in the schools, you see in the east end there weren't that many blacks, so the classes were mostly white, and you didn't get to participate.  When I got to high school down at Steele [Steele High School, Dayton, Ohio], the guys were able then to compete, like on the track team, and I'm not sure, maybe football, but the whole education system got kind of complicated at that point.  That's when Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Early College High School, Dayton, Ohio] came on the scene, and the population had expanded by that time, and so they started with Edison [Edison Elementary School, Dayton, Ohio], of course, school, and some of the others, and it was a real segregated kind of situation here in Dayton [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how would you describe your personality when you were going to grade school?
Speaker 2: Well I didn't know anything else.  And I didn't have any real problems 'cause as I say I liked school, and I learned that if you did your work that for the most part the teachers respected you and responded to you, so I really didn't have any problems in school.  If I did have problems, if my folks [Gertha Jones Moore and Ausro Moore] found out about it, I had a problem.  I had more of a problem at home if I didn't do well because they felt very strongly about education because they didn't have the opportunity, and they wanted us to get an education.  I can remember, didn't have much money, so there was a family decision that one person would get music lessons, and my sister who is next to me, was the one that was selected to get the music lessons, and a lady came from the west side to the east side.  We had bought a piano, or my folks had bought a piano, and she took piano lessons, but there wasn't enough money for two or three of us to take piano lessons.  But those were some of the things that I remember, and my sister, that is, before the war [World War II, WWII], was the one that was selected to go to college.  She was the first one in the family to go to college.  She was younger than I was, and she went to Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 1: She was--okay, younger than you?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 534627
Speaker 1: Let's not skip high school.  I don't wanna skip through high school.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You went to Steele High School [Dayton, Ohio], right?
Speaker 2: I went to Steele High School for two years.
Speaker 1: And that's been--
Speaker 2: Yeah that was--
Speaker 1: --it's been closed for many years now.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I guess it closed in the '50s [1950s] or something?
Speaker 2: No, no, before that.
Speaker 1: Before that?
Speaker 2: Before that because they closed it at the end of '40 [1940] 'cause I went '39 [1939] to '40 [1940], and then the kids were dispersed to other high schools, and I went back to Wilbur Wright [Wilbur Wright High School, Dayton, Ohio], and was in the first graduating class because they made that junior high [Wilbur Wright Junior High School, Dayton, Ohio], a high school.  So I graduated from Wilbur Wright High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so you went there for junior high, and then for high school, Steele, but then in 1940, you went back (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I--
Speaker 1: --to Wilbur Wright, that's for high school?
Speaker 2: --went back after we came--I was in the first graduating class of 1941.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: And many of the teachers that were at Steele transferred to Wilbur Wright.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now well, when you were in high school, I mean, did you--how was it for you in high school?  Did you have a lot of friends, or were the black students a full part of what was going on in high school?
Speaker 2: I think there was a reasonable amount of participation in high school.  The thing that I remember about it at Steele was the fact that we were able to interact with kids from all over the city, from the west side, and Dayton View [Dayton, Ohio], and south, to the extent that there were people south of town, but that was a melting pot, and I had a lot of friends that had a good experience at Steele.  And it wasn't bad at Wilbur Wright, but most of us were disappointed that they had separated everyone in that year, and they made the high school, Steele High School, the board of education, and the reason that they closed it, the official reason, was that it was a fire hazard.  Well, if it were a fire hazard, why did they use it for a number of years following the closing?  So some of us still don't think kindly of who our leadership was back in those days.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were you in clubs in high school, that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Not me.  I mean, I was working, after school and during the summer, I was not in--I did participate a little bit in track.  I wasn't all that good and then again, I had to work, work was priority back in those days for me--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and for most of the guys that were black, but particularly in the athletics, the blacks were involved in Steele High School, and there were some I can remember one play that they had, where there were one or two African Americans that participated.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you run for any class offices or anything?
Speaker 2: No.  No.
Speaker 1: So you were a pretty quiet student basically?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was kind of laidback.  I mean, I had a lot of friends, but I mean, I wasn't involved in any extracurricular, as I said, activities, and most of the time I was actually going to work after school, or during the summer, it was just that simple.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But there were restrictions on the African Americans in terms of extracurricular activity.  I mean that was a given.
Speaker 1: Okay, it was something that wasn't said but--
Speaker 2: It was subtle.
Speaker 1: --you kind of knew it.
Speaker 2: It was kind of subtle, yeah.
Story_ID: 534628
Speaker 1: For instance, when the prom came, did you all go to the prom, or did you?
Speaker 2: I went to the junior/senior prom at Steele [Steele High School, Dayton, Ohio] which, I was a junior.  They had it at Lakeside Ballroom [Dayton, Ohio].  Now the general population could not go to Lakeside, to the Lakeside Ballroom at that time.
Speaker 1: The general popula- you mean black people couldn't go?
Speaker 2: They couldn't go, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So white (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I was able to go--
Speaker 1: Now let's explain what Lakeside is--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so people who don't know Dayton [Ohio] will know what it is.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Lakeside was an amusement park [Lakeside Amusement Park, Dayton, Ohio].
Speaker 2: It was an amusement park that had a ballroom as part of the--
Speaker 1: And maybe you can explain this too to me, there was another--a huge ballroom there--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and I was trying to tell someone recently about what Lakeside was.  Was Lakeside part of the Veterans Administration [U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs]?  Did they have any part (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it was--it had nothing to do with the Veterans Administration, although it was located almost adjacent to the Veterans Administration, but it had nothing to do with--
Speaker 1: The reason why I ask is because when you were a kid here in Dayton, growing up in Dayton in that era of the '50s [1950s] and '60 [1960s] that you went to Lakeside, a lot of the people that man the rides were veterans who may have a hook or an eye missing or something you know, they--
Speaker 2: Well some of the veterans probably frequented the park because that was something to do.
Speaker 1: Well I'm talking about--
Speaker 2: They may even work there.  But it was not an official part of--
Speaker 1: So it was a private--
Speaker 2: It was a private--
Speaker 1: --privately run facility?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.  And I think there were days or times when African Americans could ride some of the amusement--the same thing that happened at National Cash Register recreation park [Old River Park, Dayton, Ohio]--
Speaker 1: Old River?
Speaker 2: --Old River.  Yeah, you'd only go there one day a year if you were African American or black.
Speaker 1: I think they had the same thing with Inland's [Inland Manufacturing Division, General Motors Corporation] gun club.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes there were certain ground rules that were different, but when we had that junior/senior prom when I was a junior, there were about six black couples that went to that prom, and I remember taking a girl by the name of Evelyn Morrill [ph.] (laughter) to that prom, but I could probably not have gone the next day if I had went, there was an event there, I probably could not have gone.  But as a member of that class who had rented that facility for that day, then I was able to go.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So when you were--did you make the honor roll in school?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, I was a good student, really.  I was a good student.
Speaker 1: Did you focus on any one particular subject when you were in high school?
Speaker 2: As I say the drafting and the English were things that I enjoyed.
Speaker 1: Okay, and were there any teachers that really stand out now as being kind of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well one teacher, well I had several in elementary school [Washington Elementary School, Dayton, Ohio], but the one in high school that stood out was a fella by the name of Perc Welcome.  They named Welcome Stadium [Perc Welcome Stadium, Dayton, Ohio] for him.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: He was my drafting teacher at Steele High School.
Speaker 1: Welcome Stadium is a big municipal stadium located near UD Arena [University of Dayton Arena, Dayton, Ohio], it's still there right?
Speaker 2: It's still there.
Speaker 1: Still there, and that's where all the high school football games were played in Dayton at one time.
Speaker 2: And they play the University of Dayton [Dayton, Ohio] football there.  It's a joint effort now between UD and the Dayton Public Schools, but that facility is named after Perc Welcome--
Speaker 1: Perc Welcome.
Speaker 2: --and he was a good, he was a good mentor to the black men and boys because he kind of talked to them in terms of trying to pump us up, recognizing some of the economic limitations that we were going to experience.  For example, he told me that even though you're a good drafting student, don't get too excited about becoming a draftsman somewhere because it isn't gonna happen.  But don't despair.
Speaker 1: So he would advise you that you weren't going anywhere but don't worry about it?
Speaker 2: Well that's about the size of it, but you know, don't give up was kind of a message--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but he was very honest about it.  I guess that's the way he put it.  But that's what I remember about him, but he was--
Speaker 1: He taught at Steele?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: And then he transferred to Wilbur Wright [Wilbur Wright High School, Dayton, Ohio] too.
Story_ID: 534629
Speaker 1: When you were a senior in high school [Wilbur Wright High School, Dayton, Ohio] on the verge of graduation, now how many in your family?  It's you and your sister?  You have a sister and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have two sisters [Lillian Moore Moyer and Carolyn Moore Borum] and a half-brother [Alonzo Moore].
Speaker 1: Okay, and your sisters are younger than you are?
Speaker 2: Yes, both of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you were on the verge of graduation now what did you consider your prospects?  Did you think about going to college then, or did you think that you could?
Speaker 2: Well I wanted to go to college but I--there were no funds, so I did not go to college.  I went--I tried to find a job in town and--
Speaker 1: Now what year is this, is this 1940?
Speaker 2: That was 1941.
Speaker 1: Forty-one [1941], okay.
Speaker 2: I graduated in 1941.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So I found a job at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base [Dayton, Ohio] in 1941 and I was a--what you call a classified laborer.  I learned how to drive military trucks, and actually worked in the warehouse because the war [World War II, WWII] had just started and we were taking airplanes apart.  They would fly them in, I'd take them apart, pursuit aircraft, and putting them in boxes, putting them on trains to ship it to the ports, for shipment overseas so did that and pretty much until I went in the [U.S. military] service.
Speaker 1: So when were you drafted?
Speaker 2: I went in the service in 1943.
Speaker 1: Or did you volunteer or were you drafted?
Speaker 2: I volunteered.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's 1943?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-three [1943].  I was already in the draft but I went on and--
Speaker 1: Was that the [U.S.] Army, Air--
Speaker 2: Well it was actually the Army because there was no Air Corps--[U.S.] Air Force.  There was no Air Force until 1947.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it would have been the Air Corps [U.S. Army Air Corps] I guess?
Speaker 2: It was kind of mixed up.  They had the Signal Corps [U.S. Army Signal Corps], and the Army, and the Quartermaster [U.S. Army Quartermaster Corps] all kind of mixed up, so when I went in service, I was in the Army Quartermaster Corps--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but it was assigned to the Army Air Corps.
Speaker 1: Okay, now that's pretty typical of those days--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in terms of assigning blacks to the Quartermaster Corps.
Speaker 2: Yes, well, Quartermaster, engineering, port companies--
Speaker 1: It meant you were going to be doing a lot of loading and unloading.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, you--
Speaker 1: Handling supplies?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.  The Tuskegee Airmen, that's an anomaly, that was kind of an experiment, but the rest of us, we were in a segregated army, all white officers was my experience, and I guess I spent almost a year without a formal company.  I was in basic training or in a kind of a training mode in a company temporarily, and then they break it up and send you somewhere else, and I guess I had more of a risk in America before I went overseas 'cause they sent me to North Carolina for basic and from there to Augusta, Georgia, to Macon, Georgia and then to San Antonio, Texas.
Story_ID: 534630
Speaker 1: I guess the culture in those places, was that culture kind of like surprising and disturbing to you?  I mean, well, was it different from Dayton [Ohio] going (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --to North Carolina and Texas?
Speaker 2: Yes, even though Dayton had its segregation, like I went to a mixed school here.  When I got to the South, actually I got put in jail twice.  First time--well I didn't get put in jail the first time, I graduated from boot camp, basic training, and it was Christmas Eve, and I walked outside the gate.  I was gonna go to Greensboro [North Carolina], and I got on the bus and forgot, and sat down on the long seat behind the bus driver, and he drove about a block, and he got up, pulled his pistol, stuck it in my ear and said, used the N word, "Get to the back of the bus."  I said, "No that's not necessary, just open the door, let me off."  And I got off and walked back to camp and spent the holiday at camp.  And then they took us--in Augusta [Georgia] there was a disturbance of some sort, and they took everybody back to camp and I'm saying these things because this is the kind of environment we were in, and not necessarily because I'm bitter, but simply because these are the facts.  Someone had done something in Augusta.  And of course all of the G.I.s were within a two or three block area, if you were a black G.I. because that was the only place you were tolerated, and somebody had done something elsewhere in the area, and they gave everyone including firemen and civilian whites arms, even though we were in uniform, you know, and in town on pass.  We didn't have any arms or anything so they loaded us up on trucks and took us back to camp because everyone would see then.  They said that was the first time they took everybody on a picnic the next day, to kind of cool things down because the guys wanted to go back, kind of changed the scenery in Augusta.  But at any rate that was another real bad experience, and then next time I was in Macon [Georgia] and it was in the middle of the month, and I had gotten some money I guess, and a friend of mine from New Orleans [Louisiana], we went to a club.  You had to ride the bus, you didn't have any other transportation.  So after we left the club we came back to the bus stop.  And in those days the black G.I.s would get in the front of the line no matter who got there first because the bus opened and loaded up.  You could get to the back of the bus without having to squeeze by anybody, so we were the tour bus, only two blacks and Harry [ph.] were standing there in line to get on the bus, and two white men came down and said, "Them's the two," again, said, "them's the two Ns," and my friend just knocked the first one down and I said, "Oh my gosh," I said, "where's the MPs [military police]," I wanted to go--I wanted to get arrested.  But we were.  The MPs came, and they took us to the civilian jail, and they kind of beat us up pretty good, and then our company commander came the next morning and bailed us out so to speak, took us back to camp.  Turned out that they were two firemen that had an altercation with some other G.I.s, not us, and we didn't even know what had happened, but that was just the tenor of the times.  And when you were in these different camps at that time you were in segregated physical facility.
Story_ID: 534631
Speaker 1: In other words, there were separate barracks, there were separate little clubs where you could go for food, or you would have a little entertainment from time to time, and that was the same thing even in Chanute, I went to Chanute Air Force Base [Champaign County, Illinois], Chanute Field it was then.
Speaker 2: It's down in southern Illinois, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was in Chanute, Rantoul [Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Rantoul?
Speaker 1: --Illinois, and they had a separate training facility for black troops, for the truck mechanics and maintenance and all those kinds of things.  And then we went to San Antonio [Texas], and that's where our company was finally formalized and approved.  Overseas, and we went to the China Burma India Theater [in World War II, WWII], and we were put on a troop ship in California, took thirty days, and again we got second shrift, we were in the fourth deck, or hull so speak, of the ship.
Speaker 2: Was that the one that's closer to the boiler and all?
Speaker 1: That's all the way down to the bottom, that's absolutely right.  And it got so hot down there, you would get a towel and you had to wring it out.  I mean, you sweat so much, and so that was an experience going over.  And we stopped in Melbourne [Australia] and I'll never forget the experience in Melbourne--and we thought we'd least get off and be able to walk around on the deck, dock area.  They wouldn't even let us off the ship because at that time Australia didn't particularly care for people of color.  So we didn't--we were not even permitted to get off that boat, and so it was a thirty-one day experience on that ship, but we got overseas, and it was still a segregated kind of thing, but we did our job and we came back home.
Story_ID: 534632
Speaker 1: Our troop ship landed in Bombay, India [Mumbai, India].
Speaker 2: Now do you remember, before we go on, can you give us the name of the unit you were in, I mean, the official name of the unit you were in, and do you remember the name of the ship?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was the twenty--2161st Quartermaster Truck Company, and the ship was the USS Admiral Benson [USS Admiral W.S. Benson].
Speaker 2: Okay.  2164 Quartermaster (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Twenty-first [sic.].
Speaker 2: --twenty-one sixty-four?
Speaker 1: 2161st Quartermaster Truck--
Speaker 2: --sixty-first--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then the USS Admiral Benson, and at the time it was built as a new troop ship, with twin screws as they call it, and could outrun submarines.  And we went over there unescorted (laughter).
Speaker 2: It could outrun subs, really (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I didn't--we didn't believe that.
Speaker 2: That means twin propellers right?
Speaker 1: With twin engines, yeah.
Speaker 2: Twin engines.
Speaker 1: And supposed to be so fast, you know, well if you're sitting there in a submarine, it doesn't have to be moving if it gets you in its sights, but that was the propaganda (laughter) given to us.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't imagine they could outrun a torpedo?
Speaker 1: Oh no, no.  And there were several scares as a matter of fact.  We went over, there was bound to be a silhouette on the horizon, we had a few.  The [U.S.] Navy guys man the guns, they only had a couple of guns on that ship, thing, but luckily they weren't the enemy.
Speaker 2: So you arrived in India, in where'd you say?
Speaker 1: Yes, in Bombay.
Speaker 2: Bombay, okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Now this is unusual, and I think I haven't interviewed anyone I think previously, I know there's been a lot of them that--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --you know, were sent to India, America troops--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --sent to India.  Were there many American troops in India when you were there?
Speaker 1: Well there were quite a few, not as many as to Europe by any means.  Actually the war [World War II, WWII] or our involvement in India and Burma [Myanmar] was a diversion.  The general there was, they called him "Vinegar Joe" Stilwell [Joseph Stilwell].  But you go out to the Air Force Museum [National Museum of the U.S. Air Force, Dayton, Ohio], and you'll see a picture of him, and a little write up about the war and the fact that it was kind of a diversion--a political diversion at the time, but we landed there in Bombay, and we had all of our equipment, trucks and everything, came on a separate ship, but we had to unload all that stuff and unpack it rather, put it on trains.  And one of the most interesting things that we experienced was that in India they had different provinces, and in those provinces were different rail gauges.  So you would ride as far as the end of that province then you had to unload all that equipment, tie it down, load it on a different train, simply because it had a different track, and we ended up down in an area of Bangladesh, and there we transported supplies up to Burma Road.  We did that for about fifteen months I guess, something like that.  And then we came on back home.  But it was hot.  Malaria was a challenge.  We had to take every day a pill called Atabrine [mepacrine] to keep from having malaria, but I think a lot of the guys, matter of fact I think one of my problems now I may have gotten malaria because it only takes one bite, and we would sleep under a mosquito net every night, we were in tents, but you had a canvas cot, you tucked that darn thing in, but that was a real, real problem because you had so much rain, you had the monsoons, and you could be driving down the road and be dry and dusty, and have a huge rain, and then you have that much mud.  And then in an hour it was so hot it would just dry up again, you'd have the dust again, so that was a real, real problem.
Story_ID: 534633
Speaker 1: Just being in India was an experience at that time because of so much poverty, people dying of starvation, not able to feed themselves.  I went back in 1985, but with a church group, to review some church schools, and hospitals and the like, and things had improved immensely in terms of their agricultural programs being able to provide enough food, but the situation had gotten worse in a different way.  Because when we were over there during the war [World War II, WWII], there were only about 380 million people, and when we went back in '85 [1985] there were about 800 million people.  So the food production had gotten better and the distribution had gotten better, but there was still an awful lot of poverty, but people were struggling to get an education, and the caste system had been thrown out but it was kind of like anything else, still being practiced to a degree which was a--
Speaker 2: Did you feel a kind of a bond with the people in India, I mean in terms of an empathy with what they were going through, kind of, coming from the United States?
Speaker 1: Well, it changed I think my life because of so much poverty because when I got back to the states, even people on welfare were doing well because I saw people working the whole day to feed themselves for that day.  I saw orphans in the streets without parents simply because their parents had died earlier of some disease, and their children were left to fend for themselves.  So that level of struggle and poverty I think is what caused me to be so involved in the community, to try to help change things because I have been retired for twenty-seven years, and I've been as busy in retirement as I was when I was on an eight to five job, so to speak.  But I've been doing things I wanted to do that I hope have made a little of a difference here and there.  But that India experience really had an impact on me from an overall human condition.
Speaker 2: Okay, now I just wanted to ask another quick question though too about it.  I thought that maybe, I mean did you--were you treated any differently in India by the [U.S.] Army than you were over here?  I mean were you treated about the same, and if you were, then I mean did you--were you empathetic about how the Indians were treated by the British or by their own caste system?
Speaker 1: Well, it was pretty clear that the British were in charge because you would see so much poverty, and if you were out in a rural area, you'd come up on a building or a mansion, and that's where the British governor or somebody who would be living, but we were still under a segregated military system.  'Cause we still had white officers, but we had--we were busy, we were working.  I mean it was not a time for a lot of play, but the white military people generally had a little better situation in terms of facilities, and we thought, maybe even in terms of some other things.  We didn't really know, but it really wasn't any better.  I didn't--even though I had worked at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base [Dayton, Ohio], there were some that had made applications, for example, while we were over there, for warrant officer appointments, and the forms came back stamped for Caucasian only.  And when we read a little further, that decision was made at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, you know, it's not a coincidence.  But that was another experience to kind of show that things had really not changed very much.
Story_ID: 534634
Speaker 1: And I didn't see--and most people don't believe it, but I had not seen a black officer until I came back to Camp Stoneman [Pittsburg, California] in California on my return.  I had not seen a black officer, I didn't see any of the Tuskegee Airmen, or some of the other guys that had gotten in the [U.S.] Army in other units in America, but I had not encountered any of them in my whole military experience.
Speaker 2: Now did you know about the Tuskegee Airmen in those days?
Speaker 1: Every once in a while we would get a paper like the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier] or Chicago Defender or something, but it was remote.
Speaker 2: But it would just seem to me that you would be a good candidate for that.  I mean I've interviewed a few of them, and they were men who had good grades in high school--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and you know, they could handle the paperwork and all, they were a very bright group as a whole.
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh absolutely.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: And there were many more G.I.s that could have done what they did at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Army Airfield; Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama], but again, that was just an experiment so they just selected a few.  I mean there were not many in my outfit that were--that had a good high school education because in my outfit most of the guys came from the South, and some of them had a pitiful K [kindergarten] through twelve experience.  But there were some that were great.  I mean I had an IQ that was high enough, you know.  There were two or three other guys in our outfit, but one guy had an IQ about 140 you know so there were some bright, bright G.I.s that just didn't have a chance.  When we were screened, we were only screened for the Quartermaster [U.S. Army Quartermaster Corps] and for whatever was there.  I mean, that was predetermined.
Speaker 2: So just so many slots you could go into?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: They said, you were either gonna be this, that or the other.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, I often tell the story, I say to the former Quartermaster outfit, for a hundred guys, they'd take the first hundred that they encountered, and the first three would be cooks, the next would be supply sergeant or something else (laughter).  It was, it was not really an HR [human resources] kind of testing assignment or categorization, you just were gonna be there.  I mean the first three guys, they were gonna be cooks, they sent them off to two-week cooking school, and that was it.  It didn't matter whether they had any interest or passed any kind of test to show they had that kind of, you know, possibility.
Story_ID: 534635
Speaker 1: Any--any other stories from India that you can remember that you wanna tell us before we get you back?
Speaker 2: Well, just that there were a number of African troops also there, and those African troops were glad to see us, and sometimes they would--I don't say desert, but they would leave their companies, come over and we would put them in American uniforms and feed them, and they would hang out with us and work with us, and periodically their officers would come over and they'd line everybody up, and the only way they could figure out oftentimes who was African, they'd ask us to say something.  And of course those guys had either a French or Portuguese or some other kind of accent (laughter) and they would take them on back wherever they were, but they loved to come because they got good food, and they used to--just liked to hang out with the black G.I.s.  And in many ways though, their culture was more of, I don't know, maybe sophisticated isn't the right word, but they would come over singing like 'Danny Boy' and some things in the arts that our guys had never heard of.  So it was some cultural exchange so to speak.  I distinctly remember the African relationships that developed accidentally.
Speaker 1: Well what were the, I mean did it change your idea, any of your ideas you had about Africa, you know meeting African people here for the first time, sort of?
Speaker 2: No not really, but it seemed to me they--if they were in their own vehicles, they called the black G.I.s, Joe, "Hi, Joe."  We were all, "Hi Joe."  But we got along well, communicated as best we could, and talked about America and a little bit about Africa, but most of us had no concept of Africa.  As a matter of fact I think they knew more about America than we knew about Africa because the cultures there are very, is more so than they are here because of the tribal relationships that they have over there.  But there--we didn't know, our history here didn't cover anything about Africa, Wilbur Wright [Wilbur Wright Junior High School; Wilbur Wright High School, Dayton, Ohio] or Washington High School [sic. Washington Elementary School, Dayton, Ohio], you know, didn't talk about Africa.
Speaker 1: Just reflect back on that a minute.  I didn't ask you about Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar], but what was the--was Dunbar taught when you were in grade school, in high school, here in Dayton [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yeah we heard a little bit about Dunbar and George Washington Carver, that's about it, there wasn't much else.  In my history books I had.  And Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], they talked about Tuskegee and some of the agricultural kinds of things that happened there--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but that black history was very limited in the Dayton Public Schools.
Speaker 1: And did you--now you mentioned the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier] earlier--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --so you got the Courier?  Did you get the Defender [Chicago Defender] out of Chicago [Illinois] too?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah the Pittsburgh Courier, the Chicago Defender were the two newspapers that we would get.  I think it was a weekly paper, and they used to have a little box in there.  It was kind of like a baseball score thing in terms of number of blacks that got lynched in the South.  That was one thing that we all kind of followed with interest.  But there was news in those two papers that we didn't get in the Ohio papers or the Dayton papers.  But they were periodicals.  They were not daily papers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you were in the [U.S. military] service until?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-six [1946].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what rank did you have?
Speaker 2: Corporal.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you feel like fifteen months in India, or so?
Speaker 2: Rest of the time was here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In the states.
Speaker 1: Did you come back to--what did you come back to when you left?
Speaker 2: We came back to Camp Stoneman [Pittsburg, California] in California and then to Camp Benjamin Harrison--Fort Benjamin Harrison [Marion County, Indiana], and that's where I was discharged in.
Speaker 1: That's in Indiana?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Indiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I was sent home, I mean, it was like a week to be mustered out so to speak.
Story_ID: 534636
Speaker 1: You came back to Dayton [Ohio], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay now, what did you do here when you--were you gonna try to use the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] to go to school at that point?
Speaker 2: No, well that didn't happen initially.  The first thing was to get a job because I had married while I was in service.
Speaker 1: Okay now, well tell us how you met your wife [Hester Burton Moore]?
Speaker 2: I met her when I was at Wright Pat [Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Dayton, Ohio] before I went to the [U.S. military] service, I didn't get married immediately but I met her before I went, and she was working at the base.  So that's where I met her, and then we got married on one of my furloughs, and then I went back to service, and that time you had unaccompanied.  They didn't allow but just so many people, men to have their wives with them, and we moved around so fast 'cause like you'd spend--I spent six weeks I think in Greensboro [North Carolina], four weeks--four months in Augusta [Georgia], four months in Macon [Georgia], and maybe about the same in Texas, but and then you didn't have that much money either.  So she stayed here, and after we married--and then when I came back, the important thing was to find a job and I had reemployment rights at Wright-Patterson for thirty days, and I went to every company in Dayton looking for a job, and there was no job that I could find or anywhere that would accept me for employment.  So on the twenty-ninth day I went back to Wright-Patterson Air Force Base simply because I had to have a job, and I started as a clerk and I worked my way up grade by grade.  I started GS-3 [General Schedule], and I had actually about three different careers over--
Speaker 1: Now you were a clerk at what area?
Speaker 2: At the--in what was the central air documents office.  That was part of T2 intelligence, and all of the captured documents from the war [World War II, WWII] were being screened and translated, and the technical information shared with the defense contractors, and those were both corporate and university.  For example, the information that was shared which later the mission was expanded not only for the foreign material, but we collected all of the research information from our defense contractors and wrote abstracts on it, and redistributed it to the same or other contractors, and we had all of the major universities like MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], and Cal Tech [California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California] and BalTech Institute [ph.], Argonne National Labs [Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, Illinois], all over the country.  We had all of them involved in this information process, and I guess they're still involved.  We had to see to it that the people that received this information were cleared from a security point of view because so much of it was classified, and they had to have a need to know, but I was in that business and I worked my way up to a management analyst, and I had several supervisory jobs.
Story_ID: 534637
Speaker 1: And then about nineteen--let me see, '57 [1957], that's when I built this house.  They decided that they were gonna move to Arlington, Virginia, and I decided I wasn't going because I didn't want my kids, I had two children by that time, to be involved in that segregated school system, which I knew as a kid.  So I decided to take my chances and there was--there was five people left out of that pretty large organization at that time, and I was left here [Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Dayton, Ohio] in a liaison office, and I stayed there until 1960.  And in 1960, well I had been--I had helped to transition all the people and all those documents and equipment and furniture and everything else to Arlington.  In the meantime, I had made some presentations and somebody thought I did a pretty good job I guess.  So then they established a plans and procedures office in the personnel division for both military and civilian personnel.  So I was asked to head that office, and I did that for about six years, and kind of sort of at the end I became the first equal employment opportunity officer for the base.
Speaker 2: Now this is in nineteen--
Speaker 1: That was in about--well, 1960s when I went into that plans organization, and then about 1965, I did the equal opportunity program job, and I did the planning job for a little while concurrently, and then they moved the planning part, and I just did the equal employment opportunity thing until 1972, and then I became chief of the personnel office.
Story_ID: 534638
Speaker 1: Now you said earlier, I don't want this to get away, but you said you built this house--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --this house that we're in right now.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: This is in an area of Dayton [Ohio] called Madden Hills; it's a lot of black professionals live here.  I've heard similar stories, people build their own homes.  I mean, so tell us a little bit about that because that's a lot, you know--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --'cause not everybody can build their own homes.
Speaker 2: Well this was a real happening for me and for many blacks because I built this house before the houses up on Argonne Drive or so on--before Pineview [Dayton, Ohio] really got started because if you remember they opened up Westwood [Dayton, Ohio] and then Residence Park [Dayton, Ohio] and this was beginning to open--
Speaker 1: I know the areas.  I guess the difference because I can remember as a kid looking at this because I didn't, it didn't become clear to me, I knew something was different about this but--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --Westwood, parts of west Dayton going up, going west on 3rd Street all the way out to Residence Park, were areas where white people had already built their homes--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --were living in them and then they vacated for one reason or another as black folks migrated into the city in droves to get these jobs in the factories--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --and they moved further and further west until it was all black.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now here, though, it's a little different in the sense that you actually were building your own (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 1: --homes in subdivisions--
Speaker 2: Right.  Well--
Speaker 1: --I know there's areas here with names that have all historical figures like Douglass [Avenue] and Tubman [Avenue] and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Well in my case, when I came back from the [U.S. military] service, I bought a house; my first house was in Edgemont [Dayton, Ohio] on Swisher Street [sic. Swisher Avenue].  And on Swisher Street that Edgemont area was just changing because white people lived in the house before I bought it.  But the interesting story was that while I lived in the house, I saved enough money.  I had half enough money to build this house but I could not get a bank, I bought the lot, paid cash for it, but I could not get a bank to loan me enough money to build this house.  So at the time I had started school, I was in the University of Dayton [Dayton, Ohio], night school when I did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now when is this?  This is like what year?
Speaker 2: --this was in 1957.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I had gone to night--oh I was out of school.  I started school in--on the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] in 1946 or '7 [1947] when I got back from service, and I went to night school until 1955, and that's when I got my degree.  But coincidentally I had met one of my professors, Bart Schneider, who was a principal owner of Central Savings [Central Savings Association, Dayton, Ohio] on Ludlow Street and I saw him and told him that I was having difficulty getting a loan to build my house.  He said, "Well John [HistoryMaker John Moore], come on down," said, "we can take care of that."  So I signed two or three papers and we were done.  But I had enough money in Homestead Federal [Homestead Federal Savings and Loan Association, Dayton, Ohio], half the money to build it up, but they would not loan me any money to build this house, which was I think a significant historical thing.  And then there were a number of people who came to figure out how to do it, you know, contractor wise and so forth.
Story_ID: 534639
Speaker 1: You were just telling me that when you got your bank loan from Central Savings [Central Savings Association, Dayton, Ohio]--
Speaker 2: Central Savings, yes.
Speaker 1: --it kind of opened a floodgate of people trying to get these loans to get their houses?
Speaker 2: Well yeah.  It indicated to a number of particularly the professional people that maybe there was some hope, and then coincidentally the Pineview [Dayton, Ohio] project was an experiment in the banking industry because they did not believe that black people would pay their notes because they saw them on a stereotype basis as not having sufficient income, steady income, to pay a note.  But remember, those houses or houses back in those days didn't cost a hundred dollars.  If those houses cost fifty-five, sixty, seventy thousand dollars, I mean that was kind of where they were.  For the record, this house only cost about twenty-four thousand dollars as it was initially built, I've added on to it and finished the basement and done a lot of other things, put a sun porch on, the carport, and one thing or another, but it only cost about twenty-four thousand dollars back in those days, and that was considered a lot of money.  But it was still not available from the traditional lending institutions, and I can remember in 1964 I was chairing a bank--not chairing--chairing a church building project for McKinley [McKinley United Methodist Church, Dayton, Ohio].  We were gonna build an educational building onto the sanctuary, and that cost about a hundred and--only about $160,000, but we couldn't get a bank loan in Dayton [Ohio] in 1964 for that church loan.  We had to go to Hunter Savings [Hunter Savings Association] in Loveland, Ohio, to get a bank loan, and we had to have enough members of the church to sign personal notes to guarantee the amount that we borrowed, and we paid it off ahead of time, but again from an economic point of view and an historical point of view, the availability of money was a real barrier, has been a real--is still a real barrier for economic development in the minority community, even though it's a lot better in terms of housing, even in terms of businesses, in fact, you know, you've got a good plan and you've got a little money to put in it yourself.  And churches particularly have been able to build new buildings all over west Dayton now and they're getting loans.  But it's been a slow process in order to have that happen.
Story_ID: 534640
Speaker 1: You started school in '56 [1957] or '57 [1957] you said, no, '55 [1955] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I started, I started but it took me nine years.  I started in '46 [1946].
Speaker 1: Okay, right, right you said '46 [1946], and you came out in '55 [1955].
Speaker 2: I came out in '55 [1955] right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  University of Dayton [Dayton, Ohio]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now University of Dayton is a Catholic school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --(unclear) Catholic school in the city.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Especially in those days it was the premier educational institution around here.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's for sure.
Speaker 2: There was no Wright State [Wright State University, Dayton, Ohio] at that time.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It didn't have all the buildings and complexes it had.  It had two major halls, St. Mary's [St. Mary's Hall] and St. Joseph's Hall [St. Joseph Hall] and Armory [Armory Building] and some temporary facilities that had been constructed during the war [World War II, WWII].  So it wasn't all that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was the University of Dayton.
Speaker 2: --huge, that was the university.  And we went--I went at night so I didn't have any traditional campus experience.  I go back, they call me back on alumni things, and I don't know folks.  We had a fraternity experience but that was off campus.  The Alpha fraternity [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] had a undergraduate chapter; there were up to maybe a dozen people at the highest peak during those nine years that I was involved.  But that was our social life, was the fraternity, and it was off campus, and most of these guys were G.I.s so they were married, had families, and so it was a very different experience for us as compared to young people who go in and don't have any families, they stay on campus and so forth you know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but I had a good experience.
Speaker 1: What was your major?
Speaker 2: Business administration, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So--
Speaker 2: And then I went on--at the time they had a Ohio State Graduate Center [Ohio State University Graduate Center, Dayton, Ohio] here, which was before Wright State was built, and I guess I had almost enough credits to graduate, but I'd gotten involved with my work and all that, and I just was so tired of school because that night school was a drag in terms of time and your family, and so my life had changed, and so I didn't finish that.  But I started doing a lot of educational kinds of things through the base [Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Dayton, Ohio] because I went to I don't know how many special programs there from a training point of view.  But anyway I went to the Ohio State Grad Center for a while and then 1979 rolled around and I decided that I was going to retire.
Story_ID: 534641
Speaker 1: Now wait a minute, now, let's talk about the job first before we retire (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'll ask you now, you were director of--
Speaker 2: Civilian personnel.
Speaker 1: Yes, civilian personnel at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base [Dayton, Ohio], which employs a lot of people.
Speaker 2: Yeah we had about--I was responsible for about fifteen thousand people, and then we had a cadre of about six or seven hundred in Battle Creek, Michigan, and we had a number of people that I was responsible for that were scattered in New Jersey, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], around the country but not any huge numbers, but we were responsible for their personnel servicing.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that includes the defense electronics, supply (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no it did not.
Speaker 1: No, no it doesn't?  Okay.
Speaker 2: No, that was separate.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was not responsible for them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just base people and these that were in the remote locations.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then in times when they didn't have military staff assigned because they got transferred pretty often, I was often responsible for the military personnel programs for like six or eight months at a time, so that was another very different responsibility.
Speaker 1: What was the--I guess President Truman [President Harry S. Truman] integrated the armed services [U.S. Armed Forces] in 1948 and the [U.S.] military, those who I talked to who have been in the military, you know, see a dramatic change in it from what it was in World War II [WWII] than what it had become I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, there's been a significant change in the military since 1941 or '2 [1942], and it really though didn't get integrated until the Korean War, when General Ridgway [Matthew Ridgway] kind of got in trouble and he had to move forces around a bit, that it truly became an integrated military system.  But they were I think much quicker to make changes that were progressive than in civilian communities, and I can remember in 1940--1965 when the Executive Order 11246 was signed, and that was the instrument that forced the [U.S.] Department of Defense and the government to really get serious about integration.  So that happened in 1965, but it was kind of like the slow and with all the deliberate speed that we had in the Brown v. Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], [U.S.] Supreme Court decision, even though Truman signed the bill [Executive Order 9981], it took a while for it to really get implemented.
Story_ID: 534642
Speaker 1: Tell me about your duties at Wright-Patterson [Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Dayton, Ohio] in terms of the personnel duties, how many people did you supervise?
Speaker 2: Well, I had about up to 140 people that were directly under me and those people were involved in recruitment, employment, training, staffing, and equal employment opportunity was part of that.  So anything that involved the needs of the employees was my responsibility.  Employee relations, labor relations, there were nine unions that many people don't know that we had nine labor unions out there that we had to negotiate with.  It wasn't as stressful as in the private sector because we didn't have to negotiate on wages.  You'd negotiate on about anything else but the wage issue was always set, except for the blue-collar workers.  Now there we had to do surveys of similar employees in the particular trade in the community and then negotiate a bit around those numbers periodically.  But the labor negotiations and labor relations was really an interesting part of the responsibility.
Speaker 1: Did you have any stories about those days that you can share with us?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: You don't have to name names if you don't.
Speaker 2: No (laughter).  Well the one union had to do with like the clerical, and another one police and fire, just like the city [Dayton, Ohio].  I know at one point there were some problems in the community from fire point of view and we had mutual assistance pacts or contracts with some of the surrounding communities like Fairborn [Ohio] and the like.  Well at one point our firefighters decided that they weren't gonna go if they were called to support anybody in the community, and that was a direct intent to get more money I guess, but we had to sort of stare them down and I got to the point of telling the fire chief that if they didn't agree, and I had talked to folks in Washington [D.C.] so I had their support and the base commander's support, that if they didn't agree that they were gonna be fired the next day.  And they finally backed down, I think it was around midnight on a given night, and they saw the light because we were serious, and I was serious.  And that was my recommendation because there was really no reason other than that there were a few people in the fire department that wanted to flex their muscles and kind of show that they had you know power to do what they wanted to do.  So that was one that I remember that and that was--
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: That would have been about 1975 maybe.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when Gerald Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.] was in the White House [Washington, D.C.] I guess.
Speaker 2: I don't remember I think.
Speaker 1: Yeah Ford, Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] came in '76 [1976].
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah about 1975.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But we had pretty good labor relations.  I learned to deal with the leadership of the unions.  And I think a lot of it had to do with my own personal experiences.
Story_ID: 534643
Speaker 1: If you were African American or black, you, you were sensitive to problems and complaints, and like if we had a reduction in force, we might have a hundred formal complaints that would go to the United States Civil Service Commission and all, and people would be angry and so forth and so on, but you learn to talk to folks and hopefully get them to understand the limits from a legal point of view.  Because most of the time in the federal system, the laws were pretty clear, the rules were pretty clear, not laws necessarily, but rules, and people had the opportunity to see them, they didn't always agree with them but it was pretty clear what the numbers were.  But there was always people who would test.  We had folks like in the equal employment opportunity area, Jessie Gooding and Schneider Garland [ph.], and I mention those names, and a number of others who were pretty vocal, and they would challenge the leadership, and they were often right in looking back.  They did a service because they raised the consciousness, I suppose, of some of the leadership on employee level, rather than 40,000-foot-level, to do some things that were progressive, and by the time they got to me, the leadership, they were glad to deal with me after having to deal with some of the folks that were out there, really.  Matter of fact, representing the minority community and women, and about that time the whole issue of women's rights was a problem, and I can remember, this was before I became chief, the guy who was chief of the--on the R&D [research and development] side of the base [Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Dayton, Ohio], he decided that women shouldn't wear pants, and if women showed up in pants he was gonna fire them.  Well I advised him not to do that because the women did show up in pants on his staff and he had to back down.  But I mean that was the mental attitude of some folks again back in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], I mean there were different thought and practices that were expected of women.  And like women as the supervisors, and manner of dress, all this was interesting, and I know in one instance the women wanted to be millwrights, but millwrights were really just high class laborers, they moved furniture and did some really stressful physical work, and I'll never forget the civil rights guys marched in my office and were upset because we were putting these women in these menial jobs and I said, "Well just wait a while."  So I asked some of the staff to bring a couple of women in who had gotten these jobs, and at that time I guess they were making twelve dollars an hour, which was a whole lot of money, and these women told the civil rights guys to back off and get out of our face because we want these jobs.  I mean, they paid more than they were getting in the kinds of jobs that they had had before.  But those were some of the things that occurred in terms of change, where women were not expected to wear pants.  Women were not expected to work at certain kinds of jobs.  So we had a formal women's program just to help do some of the cultural things that were necessary to get people to recognize that there needed to be some differentiation and acceptance of women as same as with minorities.  So those were some real stressful experiences for a while.
Story_ID: 534644
Speaker 1: Now the base [Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Dayton, Ohio] was--during the war [World War II, WWII] it was one of--well, I think women for the first time from what I understand in this area got a chance to work at the [U.S.] Air Force base during the war--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --because of lack of men.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, that's right.
Speaker 1: My mother even worked on putting bombs together at the Air Force base (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah but in the offices I mean in terms of the dress that was a kind of a code thing that was different.  Now the women that worked and did the kinds of things that your mother did, they wore pants or overalls or whatever was necessary, but women still were not first class individuals at the base, or anywhere else in the military structure, but they were able to get jobs that minorities were not able to get, particularly in the professions and in the technical kinds of areas, there were some disparities there.
Speaker 1: Can you see--do you ever think about what it might have been if you weren't in that position for those years, would things have gone backwards you think or would they been--I mean, how would things have gone?
Speaker 2: Well I'd like to think that I was fair because I was responsible for everybody.  I liked to think that I was fair but I did things that were, I hope, progressive like summer programs, after-school programs.  I was able to advocate for significant dollars to have minority--or programs that engage a number of minority students on the base.  I mean some summers we would have as many as a thousand kids in one place or another working, and we tried to get the supervisors and employees to give them more than just make-work kinds of things so that they would learn something.  They would understand from a career point of view what an engineer was, or what a technical person was or what an administrative person did.  They would get some sense of what would be needed in order to become a professional or technical person.  And I like to think that I was able to do that and perhaps more than--well as a matter of fact I'll share with you that after I left, folks had told me that the budget for those things was cut in half.  But I was very aggressive in terms of getting funds.  And not only funds for the base, I was able to work with state representatives, Dayton Public Schools, school officials from Clark County [Ohio] and from Greene County [Ohio].  When we had these student kinds of programs, and we had money that came from them to help with the collaboration, and so I had to intentionally embrace those kinds of community programs in order to get some of the things done both from a community point of view and from a base point of view.  And that's what kind of went away when I left.  Because for those kinds of things you gotta have someone advocating for them, or people just do what they want to do or what they've done traditionally.
Story_ID: 534645
Speaker 1: Since I retired, I've been doing a number of things that try to increase or encourage diversity.  Matter of fact, I'm chairing a Dayton Foundation [The Dayton Foundation, Dayton, Ohio] diversity program right now, and one of the subprograms of that is the construction industry.  You'll see all these schools going up around this community but you'll see very few minority contractors.  So part of the challenge that I'm involved with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And we just saw Wogaman School [Wogaman Middle School, Dayton, Ohio] up the hill.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but you won't see many minority construction workers over there simply because of either the union or the construction people who are doing prevailing wages that are not union working on those projects, they may have contracts that require X number of minorities, but nobody's checking.  So I've been pushing there, and I have decided that it's a lot easier to get something done in the private sector because they don't have all the barriers that the folks in the public sector have from a construction point of view, so I have been able to get the president of the University of Dayton [Dayton, Ohio] and now I've got about another half dozen major organizations like the hospitals and Sinclair [Sinclair Community College, Dayton, Ohio] those facilities people now are meeting with me, trying to find ways to partner minority contractors with majority contractors who are larger because all of the minority contractors are at one, are small and can do subcontract work but not general contract.  There's only one general contractor in this area now.  So we are now pushing to get minority contractors not only in the construction and rehabilitation area, but in the maintenance.  I mean there are millions of dollars spent in most of these corporations and institutions on maintenance, where they just pick up the phone and call somebody.  It's not bid.  And I've got some matches at the University of Dayton already and one other outside of the University of Dayton, but the 22nd we're having a meeting with some of the minority construction folks and majority folks and we're trying to get them to make to make love to one another so things will be different.  So that's one track is to strengthen the minority contractors.  The other track and reality is that we need to create and train more minority construction workers, and when you drill down and figure out what's happening or not happening, there is still difficulty getting through the union process which is a three to five year process to get your journeyman card, and there is a separate track that is non-union, but most of this community, they don't know about it, there's no entry point.  We've got an ISUS [Improved Solutions for Urban Systems] program where dropouts are being retrained and trained in the building trades.  They've been doing houses as a matter of fact.  But they are really not trained to a level of journeyman through that program.  So we've got to find a way to put more people in the pipeline.  And then I'm involved in that with the county and with general contractors and with the universities and other facilities people.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But somebody's got to really bring the parties together, get them to the point of making concessions to do things differently, and then the other side of the coin is, you got to get the minority potential folk into the programs, and in the construction area for example it's very difficult because they don't get exposed to it, there's another piece of that same program where I've been involved with the tool and machine association, there are about four hundred small family sized businesses in machine tools, or now it's called machine and manufacturing association and we have about twenty of those companies who have agreed to hire minority employees and of course most of them had been small, family-owned, white, and so Sinclair Community College, the Urban League, they've been cooperating so we're building a kind of a process to get more people, either young people who haven't been in the machine tool area, or people who want to be retrained and move into that area.
Story_ID: 534646
Speaker 1: Yeah, you were just getting ready to say something you learned about volunteering.
Speaker 2: Well, the thing I've learned about getting anything done, it's all dependent upon leadership, and leadership has to be focused, and that suggests there has to be interest on some person's part, like your mother wanted a gym.  I mean she shepherded that through the process, or made a process to make it happen, otherwise it would not have happened.  And that's what I've learned, and then especially the years that I've been retired, had these twenty-seven blessed years, and I've chaired things.  I've learned how to do that pretty well.  As a minority person sometimes that gets to be kind of tricky when you're chairing The Dayton Foundation [Dayton, Ohio] or the United Way [United Way of Greater Dayton, Dayton, Ohio] or Sinclair Community College [Dayton, Ohio], that takes a bit of skill, put it that way.  You don't do it quite like anybody else.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, I didn't ask you this but did you have a mentor at Wright-Patterson [Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Dayton, Ohio] that kind of helped you?  Did anybody extend themselves to you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No, I just scratched my way right on.  I took every grade one at a time, GS-3 [General Schedule] right on up to a GS-9, and then you jumped two grades at a time.  And I got to the 15 [GS-15] level, which was the highest regular civil service grade.  You could get a kind of what they call it a super grade, or SES [Senior Executive Service], but you had to go to [U.S.] Congress almost to get that.  But it was just scratching all the way up, and you asked me about extracurricular activities while in high school, well same sort of thing later, I had no real significant extracurricular activities.  I worked and worked and devoted myself to my family, but it wasn't a whole lot more than that really.  I mean, there were no long fishing trips and all that sort of thing.  I did arrange to take my children and family on a vacation each year some place differently because I thought that was mind expanding.  I thought travel would open their eyes because having been in the [U.S.] military I knew how much it impacted me and my thinking to know there's more than just Dayton, Ohio or wherever you are.  So we traveled.  But in the supervisor arena, I learned that if you got yourself to top leadership level that you could help define the direction of the organization, and also what the priorities were going to be.  And if you got to that point then you were in a power position, and that's very important in terms of getting things done.  It takes a lot of work, or took a lot of work for the way I do it because I'm doing more than or I do differently than say some other person in my same spot.
Story_ID: 534647
Speaker 1: For example with youth I'm spending a lot of time, you took a note on there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I noticed we were saying off-camera that I counted sixteen organizations you're currently volunteering for--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and as a board member and active participant, and there are at least that many more that you used to volunteer for--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --that you moved on to something else, but that's a lot of--
Speaker 1: Well it takes a lot of multitasking.  I've got a little office back there, and I've got paper everywhere in this house, where there's a telephone, and several.  The one thing I don't do, I won't use email because by the time I read all my mail and the reports and the agendas and stuff for all these other things, I don't wanna be controlled by another electronic device.  Now I've got a telephone answering machine that I have hooked up, and I use a computer if I want to research something, I go on the Internet in a minute.  But I know that if I were to get into email even though it's a convenience, in terms of convenient communicating with people, that's taking me to a level I don't need to be.  I'm stressed or stretched even now even as I've cut some things out just trying to keep up with all the committees because when you get to be say a leader of an organization, you got a lot of little committees.  Now if you're gonna be effective, you gotta know what's going on, or you got to help, or you got to be there, and that's the thing that is really a challenge.  And I had started an organization here with Charity Earley [Charity Adams Earley] called Parity [Parity, Inc., Dayton, Ohio] in 1989 which is chartered to improve conditions in the African American community.  And that organization, I just stepped down as co-chair about a month ago, and actually William Gillespie replaced me on that because I've got to get to the point of chairing some of these younger folks and I'm beginning to have some physical problems, not beginning, I've had them for a while.  I've had nine back surgeries.  I've got prostate cancer, right now I'm in remission.  Diabetes, I mean, so I take so much medication you may hear me slurring my words a little, even now.  But I gotta keep going because if I stop, start feeling sorry for myself, then I'm probably gonna punch out of here.
Speaker 2: You sound pretty good right now.
Speaker 1: Yeah well, you know I'm conscious of when I am slurry, but I have slurred my words since I've been talking to you (laughter) and I know it.
Speaker 2: All right.  Okay.
Speaker 1: But any way--
Speaker 2: That's a lot of activity.  So you've been getting up going to work like you were being paid.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, if I showed you my calendar, I have one meeting this week, 7:30 in the morning because that's the only time I could get that particular group together, and then other times, you know, like the temporary contractors, only time I can get them is six o'clock in the evening you know.  So whatever time I can meet with you that's when I do it.  But I really have gotten into a lot of things.  I chaired the Human Services Levy Council here in Montgomery County [Ohio] and we combined human service levies, six of them into two over a period of years, and we passed all of them, and we increased it a couple of times, so that was a real challenge.
Story_ID: 534648
Speaker 1: I did some consulting.  I helped reorganize the Dayton Public Schools when we had a superintendent called Richard Hunter here, and he either fired or convinced all of his assistant superintendents to resign, and so I went down and helped him and then I guess in ninety days we hired eleven top administrators, nine of them with Ph.D.s.  And I set up panels with top business executives or educators and we advertised nationally and we reseated that whole--Dayton Public Schools organization, that was in 1985.  I had retired and I did that on a consultant basis.  Let's see, Jerrie McGill [Jerrie Bascome McGill].  Did you know Jerrie?  I don't know whether you know her or not (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Jerrie--okay.
Speaker 1: But anyway, she was a superintendent just before the one we have now, Percy Mack.  She's the last of that group because they all attrited out over the twenty-year period, but all of them left Dayton [Ohio], with the exception of three that were division level people, and became superintendent somewhere else in this--in the country after they left here.  So that was an interesting experience to reorganize Dayton Public Schools.  That was a significant thing, but at the end of the reorganizational period which was about nine months, that superintendent decided he was gonna go back to North Carolina.  When the board [Dayton Board of Education] brought him here they were split in terms of their vote to accept him, and I guess they had given him a hard time, and then to reorganize was also a pretty traumatic kind of thing because some of the board members all had different ideas of how it ought to be formatted, but we did finish that reorganization, and I spent the last month trying to repair the relationships in the community because people were angry at him for leaving because they had so much invested in him.  They supported the reorganization and everything else.  But then I've had the opportunity to serve on two bank boards, so I learned a lot about finance that I didn't really know before.
Story_ID: 534649
Speaker 1: One interesting experience, Jim McGee [James H. McGee], who--James McGee was the mayor who just passed, he appointed me in 1972 to The Dayton Foundation [Dayton, Ohio], and while I don't talk about it too much, they sent a representative to the mayor and asked if he really meant to appoint me to the board, meaning a black person, and Jim in his inimitable voice said, "Well it's my appointment, isn't it?"  And they said, "Yes."  "Well then that's who I want."  So I stayed on that board and made some real good--well actually there were five people on the board.  Only two I believe came back to the first meeting that I attended, and but the chair of the foundation at that time was Dave Rike [David Rike], the Rike Company [Rike, Hassler and Company, Dayton, Ohio], and we became friends and everybody else--
Speaker 2: Rike, that's R-I-K-E?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he owned that--his family owned that department store on the corner of Main [Street] and 2nd Street, it was a big store.  But I brought information about both minorities and poor people because the foundation made allocations of money to projects all over the area, and I was able to bring some information because they didn't know anything about really what was happening in the community, so I brought some information that was valuable, and we had a good relationship, and I ultimately became chair of The Dayton Foundation, I stayed twenty years.
Speaker 2: Now when did you become chair?
Speaker 1: About 1990, '91 [1991], yeah '90 [1990], '91 [1991].  And then I was chair of the United Way [United Way of Greater Dayton, Dayton, Ohio] and it's interesting, I was appointed as a result of the nomination, and the head of that nominating committee was John Harewood, I don't know if you knew John or not--
Speaker 2: I think he was--
Speaker 1: --he was an educator.
Speaker 2: --yeah, his son's an actor, right, Dorian Harewood?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, absolutely, but the point is that we occasionally now get a chance to influence the lives of other people, and had I--had John not been chair of that nominating committee I'm sure I would not have been appointed.  There hasn't been another black president or chair of the United Way since.  And had Jim McGee not been mayor I would not have been appointed to The Dayton Foundation.  So those are significant historical events in my opinion, and it shows why there needs to be some leveling of authority, you see because Jim had authority by virtue of his position, John had the authority by virtue of having been appointed to that nominating committee, so that doesn't mean that John would not have and did not appoint other people to other positions, and that Jim didn't, Jim McGee didn't appoint other people to other kinds of things, but it shows that you get some fairness when there is diversity in the leadership arena in my opinion--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --because I've been able to do some leveling as a result of having been in some leadership roles that would not have otherwise happened.
Story_ID: 534650
Speaker 1: You were recognized for your involvement with the--on the board of Sinclair Community College [Dayton, Ohio] too I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --there's a building [John E. Moore, Sr. Technology Center, Dayton, Ohio] named after you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell us how that happened and what was that like?
Speaker 2: I don't know how that happened (laughter).  I just worked very hard as chair, and there was some things that happened during my tenure, thirteen years on the board and I was chair for five, and I had just resigned simply because my wife [Hester Burton Moore] had started having some serious physical problems.  But I was able I think to influence the culture of that school.  We kept the tuition perhaps lower than anybody in Ohio, which I thought was important for people of lower income ranges, no matter their color or sex or anything else.  I mean I thought that was important.  And then we made some changes in terms of direction.  I think that that community college is recognized as one of the premier community colleges.  You look at the qualifications of its staff and there're probably more Ph.D.s or as many Ph.D.s percentage wise there as you'll find at some of the universities in the area.
Speaker 1: Now it's a huge impressive modern facility (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --for anybody that sees it.  I mean I don't know how many are there, at least I would count, at least fourteen, fifteen buildings--
Speaker 2: Twenty.
Speaker 1: --twenty buildings, all right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  The one that they named after me was the twentieth, but we were able to get some political support from the state and locally and from the community.
Speaker 1: This is a college that started out in the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association].
Speaker 2: It was a YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] college.
Speaker 1: It was there until about nineteen--until the early '70s [1970s] I know.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, but we had some good leadership, the presidents had been superior, super people, and progressive, and that's been a important thing, and we have championed lower income folks.  Because you see schools like University of Dayton [Dayton, Ohio] right now are elitist not intentionally but simply because of the costs.  I mean a poor kid can't go to University of Dayton unless they are able to get a full scholarship, or a significant scholarship, simply because of the pricing.  And even Wright State [Wright State University, Dayton, Ohio] is out of reach for a number of students.  So what's happening now based on what the leadership has done with Sinclair, anybody who wants to go at least to a two year program, which gives them the opportunity to transfer, they can almost get a tuition free program at Sinclair somehow.
Story_ID: 534651
Speaker 1: There are so many scholarship opportunities.  Now I was one of the founding members of the Dayton-Montgomery County Scholarship Program back twenty-plus years ago, and we now have a corpus or scholarship fund of about $12 million dollars, and that income gives us roughly five to eight hundred thousand a year depending on how the stock market goes.  And every youngster in this county can get on at least a thousand dollar scholarship from that program if they have a 2.5 average.  And of course some of the public schools now, that gets to be a real challenge for some of those kids.  So one of the things we did, was we permitted a number of them that have made progress in their high school programming in the last two years, if the teachers or principals would write a letter suggesting that they had made progress and were potential students, that they could at least go to Sinclair [Sinclair Community College, Dayton, Ohio].  And I'm also on the board, as you might know, of all of the Mound Street Academies [Dayton, Ohio], I'm vice chair of that board, and we have about 350 young people there that had dropped out that we're trying to salvage each year, and we've got a number of them into Sinclair when they graduate.  So that's been another very positive program.  We filled up the Schuster Center [Benjamin and Marian Schuster Performing Arts Center, Dayton, Ohio].  We only had 106 graduates at our last year's program, but I tell you normally you can't get parents and relatives out, but they filled even the balcony of that theatre for that program.  So if people can find a place where they're loved and where the education is tailored because each student there progresses at his or own pace, and there is--there are computer based programs that are designed in each subject area.  And we've got an excellent staff of teachers who put their arms around these kids and they recognize that they bring a lot of baggage.  For example, in the class a year ago, it was about 350 students, half of them females, there were eighty babies represented, and some of them had more than one child, but they were there trying to get an education, which is the significant thing, and most of them made it through to the end.  So that's where I get my motivation really, is when we get some outcomes that are positive for folks.
Story_ID: 534652
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  What are some of--now you've already answered to some degree, but what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community at this juncture?
Speaker 2: Well one of my con- hopes is we increase the number that stay in school through high school at least and then go on to some sort of higher education.  Not necessarily college, but they need to have a skill of some sort.  And so my hope is that every kid at least gets a high school education and then if possible, and it is possible, go on to get either some sort of skill training or college training and I know that there are many handicaps, there're many barriers but if you're determined you can do it.  And this is the speech I give to young folks.  We had a young man at our last recognition program that was at the time nineteen, but when he was seventeen and he was in a foster situation, he convinced the authorities to let him be responsible for his siblings, I think there were three other siblings, and this young man had enough whatever, they granted him that right.  He found housing for them and later bought a house, between seventeen and nineteen, and he's in college and he's just a remarkable person and we found testimonies from so many of these kids, in especially the Mound Street Academies [Dayton, Ohio], where they succeed against some fantastic odds.
Speaker 1: Now these are the stories we don't hear about.  We hear about people shooting each other (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah well--
Speaker 1: --but you don't hear these kinds of stories.
Speaker 2: --now we got these young ladies that have babies, that they're coming to school, and they're getting at least a high school education and for whatever reason some of them didn't finish high school because they--some of them were bored.  Some of them had personal problems.  There were cases where the mothers kept the kids home to care for the other kids because they wouldn't or couldn't.  They're all kinds of crazy stories that we hear about and know about that are the reasons that young people don't make it.  They come from dysfunctional families.  We've got a thousand young people roughly in this county [Montgomery County, Ohio] who are in foster situation.  Can you imagine being in a foster situation and having to change houses or homes maybe five or six or seven or eight or nine times?  You know from the time you get in until you are emancipated at eighteen.  I mean, this is reality and that's what motivates me.  Because we got systems that work as long as the people stay in that system and can be screened in.  But our systems screened so many people out, and we've got to find ways to have enough flexibility to accommodate those people that don't fit that set of rules that you draw, and that so often is drawn from a political point of view.  I mean we are now struggling with the Leave No Child Left Behind [No Child Left Behind Act of 2001] requirements.  If we were to listen and comply with the next year I think it is, we have to fully comply with the No Child Left Behind rules, we'll probably have to close down Mound Street Academies where we're helping these kids because they have a 98, let's say a 95 percent attendance thing.  Well we take a kid that ain't going at all with a zero attendance, and bring him up to 85 percent, and that's fantastic, you see.  But the rules say, you know, you gonna be put in one of these categories where you're in a emergency situation as a school, and there's a whole series of such rules in the No Child Left Behind Act which have not been funded as a matter of fact.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so we as community people have to kind of push back and we're now--we've got our own set of recommendations for changes or for exceptions to these rules so that we can continue to do what needs to be done as opposed to what the perceptions are of the people who may be somewhat remote, not close to the real problems.
Story_ID: 534653
Speaker 1: As you look back on your life, is there anything that you haven't done, I mean, that you have done to this point that you would not have done or done differently?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know that I would have done it differently because I learned that much of what you do is what the Lord and the fickle finger of fate sort of frame for you.  I mean so much of what happens to me in my life has not been planned.  The opportunities that I've had most of them have not been planned.  I didn't plan to be the chief of personnel.  I didn't plan to be involved with The Dayton Foundation [Dayton, Ohio].  I didn't plan to be involved in the United Way [United Way of Greater Dayton, Dayton, Ohio].  Matter of fact, I just believe that the Lord just sort of puts me at least in places, and sometimes I think he's funning with me (laughter).  I don't know why I'm there.  I know that people plan their careers.  They become physicians or lawyers or whatever and that's nice, but I also know like having been involved in personnel at the base that most people were in positions that they did not plan for.  We hired thousands of engineers, and half of those engineers were not doing engineering.  We had people in procurement jobs that were engineers that didn't plan to be there but that's where they wound up and that's where needed--their skills were needed.  So much of what happens to people didn't happen because it was planned.  I suspect if you were to look at your life, you would say, or your colleague there that you are wherever you are doing whatever you're doing more by the fickle finger of fate than by your planning to be an IT [information technology] kind of person or an interviewer or a media kind of expert.  I don't know what you planned, but I bet you took a circuitous route to get where you are.  Most people do.  And so in my case I guess if I could have controlled it I would have made it easier (laughter) because most of the things as an African American that I've done have been somewhat of a struggle.  You know when black folks talk about their struggles, well there're all kinds of struggles, some of them obvious, some are more subtle.  And I've had to compete intellectually with people of all stratas.  I've had to learn how to relate on a personal level with people at all levels, but yeah if I had a druther it would be that all of it could--much of it, not all of it, much of it could have been easier, but it's okay.  I came out of it I think a bit of a stronger person than would have otherwise been the case.  I would have hoped that some of the opportunities would have been achievable without so much effort whereas my colleagues all times got to where they were--
Speaker 1: Now you alluded just a few times now, I'm probably remiss, I haven't like pursued it more like I should, but what you said, you had no mentor at Wright-Patterson [Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Dayton, Ohio], nobody trying to help you, you had to kind of scratch up every rung on the ladder by yourself.  Were there any other black employees there or did you--was there any solidarity between those employees or was there any, I mean?
Speaker 2: Well there were black employees there but not over at that time, not in a position higher than me to help me.  I was the--probably close to the highest person there.  There was people in procurement, few, that came on and matter of fact recruiting was my job.
Speaker 1: Was there a ever time that you felt that you--just felt like it wasn't any use or?
Speaker 2: Oh I felt lonesome a lot of times but I mean I don't think I ever got to the point, I didn't give up.  I mean, that would have been a tragedy; I did not give up. I mean, that's kind of my personality.  I mean people that know me will tell you that I'm probably one of the most determined people that you ever met simply because that's not an option.  If what I'm trying to do makes sense and is the right thing to do and it's possible, I don't, I just don't give up.  And that may be a fault, it is a fault because I don't know that I'd have an ulcer, I don't know that I'd have some of the pains I'm having, but you know, I'm eighty-three years old so I've been blessed.  And I know some eighty-three-year-old people that are in nursing homes, in wheelchairs.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And I'm not doing that yet.
Story_ID: 534654
Speaker 1: So when you look back on all the things you've done to this point, I mean what would you consider now to be your legacy?  I know you've received awards and that sort of thing, but what would you consider your most outstanding accomplishment?
Speaker 2: I don't think it's any one thing.  I think all of the things I've done or tried to do would be my legacy as it relates to trying to improve the lot or the community, and in that community, I've reached out to lower income people, not just black people but white and black.  I've worked with the church, was a mission kind of thing, and I dealt with mission folks, the Appalachian community as well as the black community so it's been a kind of unplanned energy directed toward folks that haven't been able to help themselves and to improve conditions.  Now I had a management job of a whole work force of all kinds of people, and some of them were almost rich but still there were things that needed to be done to improve the culture of that organization.  For example, when I became chief of personnel [at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Dayton, Ohio], there were organizations that didn't have many women or minorities in them within the total structure.  Well, I was able to help get that changed.  So I guess if I look back, I'd say, being a change agent would be a good description of what I've tried to do both while I was employed and since that time.  And my volunteer work, I will not take a volunteer assignment just to manage something that's already there.  But if there are things that can be done to improve conditions of a community or an individual or a set of individuals, then that's where I wanna be.  That's where the action is.
Story_ID: 534655
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your family.  We haven't talked about your family, your children and grandchildren.
Speaker 2: Well I've got two children.  My son [John E. Moore, Jr.] is a graduate of Bowling Green State University [Bowling Green, Ohio].  He went into service right out of college, ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], and he retired as a colonel and worked for Dayton Power and Light [Dayton Power and Light Company, Dayton, Ohio] for maybe ten years, and he just retired from that, and his wife [Debra Plousha Moore] is an executive in OhioHealth, so they just relocated from Dayton to Columbus [Ohio].  That's where she's employed.  So he has two children, one's in law school and one is changing jobs right now.  And I have a daughter [Joyce Moore Ard] that is a procurement specialist for the [U.S.] Department of Defense in Washington, D.C., and she has two children, and the young man [Jahmal Ard] you saw here is one, and then she has a daughter [Nicole Ard], and she's assistant to the city manager in Leesburg, Virginia.  So the children are all doing--only four grandchildren, they're all doing all right.  He's going to ITT Tech [ITT Technical Institute].  He did go to Sinclair [Sinclair Community College, Dayton, Ohio] but he's in the media business.  If you go through here you'll find as much stuff as you brought in here or more in terms of equipment.  Now going backwards, my mother [Gertha Jones Moore] and father [Ausro Moore], about eighth grade education.  My mother was a housewife, but a very creative, bright woman.  For example, if she was gonna make a dress for my sisters [Lillian Moore Moyer and Carolyn Moore Borum], she would look at it, and not being able to afford a pattern, she'd find newspapers and paste it together and make a pattern just out of her mind's eye, and she'd finish the most beautiful garment you had ever seen.  And so that's the kind of creativity she has, and then I guess she would be the family wise woman, not wise man, because everybody brought problems to her and she fed the relatives.  I mean, our house was always open to relatives that were traveling through, and nobody came there didn't eat.  Probably same thing with your family, and I slept on the floor many times because there was a visiting relative coming in, and my father, he was a very industrious kind, but he worked, you know, you find it in the--and he lived to be ninety-six.  And my mother, she lived to be eighty-eight and my wife, we celebrated sixty years.  You saw the pictures, she was in the nursing home.
Speaker 1: What was your wife's name?
Speaker 2: Hester, Hester Moore [Hester Burton Moore], she was a Burton.  She was from Springfield, Ohio.  She came from a large family.  On the television those are her sisters that are there, but we had a great relationship and marriage.  We both loved to travel.  We traveled a lot.  And she worked at Wright Pat [Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Dayton, Ohio] for about twenty years and she said, "As soon as my kids are out of college," she said, "I'm gonna quit."  And she did.  When they were, when they graduated and of course when they graduated they didn't have any student loans or anything, we paid all of that and she volunteered.  She did most of hers in the church.  So we've had a great, great life and I certainly miss her.  She died December the 14th, 2004 so it's been just a little bit over a year, and as I just say I miss her.  Because sixty years you become pretty attached to somebody, and she always supported me.  I wasn't always around going to school in meetings and all that kind of stuff but she was very supportive of what I was about at any time, and we coordinated what we were gonna do, and the children were always priority, and that's my vision of families.  But that's not the reality of families any more.  So I learned to accept whatever individuals would want to do as being their values and standards and try to help when and if I can.
Story_ID: 534656
Speaker 1: Now is there anything we haven't asked you that you think you need to address before we ask our last question?
Speaker 2: Well, there are a lot of just incidents you know that I don't think would improve like I've already shared with you, but I have met a lot of people along the way, and I believe that two things.  One, that even the people on the bottom, most of them want to be somebody at some time in their life, but maybe life hasn't been kind to them.  All those folks that you see that are in the shelters, most of those people if you sit down and talk to them it may have--they may have a mental health problem, that's a different story, but if they don't have a mental health problem, most people want to be somebody, and can be encouraged to do more.  On the other hand, the flip side of it, I met a lot of people who are successful leaders that are remote from the rest of society, and most of them want to do the right thing, but sometimes they get misdirected, they get caught up in their own importance sometimes because of the money and power that they acquire along the way, and when you hear about the Enrons [Enron Corporation] and all that kind of stuff, those guys are not in touch or the leaders at that level, many of them are not in touch with Joe Average, and don't understand or even appreciate the lives of those folks and sometimes make wrong decisions.  But if the right person or persons are able to get to them to share with them maybe an alternative or an option, I think most of them would like to do the right thing, but it's all contingent upon getting to that person, and the right person getting to them to talk to them.  You know, some of those guys don't have any church involvement, so there isn't any religious standard, so if there isn't any religious standard, there probably are no values that are there to prick their conscience.  I'm sure that you two guys, your consciences would be pricked if things weren't going well and you saw a situation even on the street, but some of these folk had been so remote that they don't even get close to some of the problems that are literally out there, and that's what I learned with at The Dayton Foundation [Dayton, Ohio] because if the people who are on that board are generally rich people, or as we put it often, people of privilege, and people of privilege need to be challenged but you can't--I learned you can't hit 'em on the head with a baseball bat, you have to find a way to communicate and to get their support to change whatever.  So I guess I wanna say that we need more change agents to level the playing field, now nationally, from a political point of view, I don't want to talk politics because that's not the purpose but we, we've gotta have leaders that think about leveling the playing field for Americans, and not always just for the economic interest of the moment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That may be irrational or a long winded kind of response or not very crisp, but that's where it's at.
Speaker 1: That's a thoughtful response.  The last question is similar to legacy in a way but it's a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: He tried (laughter) to make a difference that's all.  Real simple.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much for your time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 534657
Speaker 1: This is a photograph that was taken at the new World War II Memorial [National World War II Memorial] in Washington, D.C.  A fella by the name of Vince Corato [ph.] who is the president of Shipka Construction [ph.], flew me and his construction manager, who has retired, up there because we were World War II [WWII] veterans and he had an interest in what was happening in World War II.  And around the memorial there are sayings or poems or descriptions that represent each state.
Speaker 2: And that is the plaque that is on the building [John E. Moore, Sr. Technology Center, Dayton, Ohio] that was named for me at Sinclair Community College [Dayton, Ohio], and that happened about 1999 or 2000.  I think it was 2000.
Speaker 1: I was making some remarks and thanking the leadership for the recognition on the outside of the building.
Speaker 2: And this was the time following their unveiling when some folks were complimenting and congratulating me at that time.
Speaker 1: That is my granddaughter and I at Mount Vernon [Mount Vernon, Virginia].  We were having a little trip and that was one of the stops along the way.
Speaker 2: This is a picture portraying my daughter [Joyce Moore Ard] on the right and my granddaughter in the upper left, second row, and some of their friends, college friends.
Speaker 1: This is a Sinclair graduation program probably 1970--no I'm sorry 1989.
Speaker 2: At the time I left The Dayton Foundation [Dayton, Ohio], and they had a reception for me, and the man on the right is the late John Berry [John Berry, Sr.] of the Berry company [L.M. Berry and Co.], the Yellow Pages, and the gentlemen in the middle there, on the my left, is Jesse Philips, of Philips Industries, and he has passed.  And the lady is also a--we were all board members at The Dayton Foundation and the lady is Mrs. Whitney, Betsy Whitney, and her husband's [Leon Whitney] in the insurance business here in town and she's very active in the community in a number of ways.
Speaker 1: Okay, the lady in this picture is Mrs. Ann Greene, and she has been or was--she's passed as well, but she was a very active philanthropist, and she's the person who saved the Victoria Theatre [Dayton, Ohio].  Think all the leadership in Dayton [Ohio] wanted to raze that building and close it and she personally put not only finances in it and raised other monies, but she ran it and was in charge for about a year and a half on a pro bono basis.  So she was really committed to that arts program and to other things in this community.
Speaker 2: This is my late mother Gertha Moore [Gertha Jones Moore] and my father Ausro Moore.  I think that we were recognizing her birthday at a family gathering.
Speaker 1: What year?
Speaker 2: About 1984 or '5 [1985].
Speaker 1: That's a picture when I received an honorary doctorate of humane letters from the University of Dayton [Dayton, Ohio], and this gentlemen on the left is the president, doctor--or Brother Ray Fitz [Raymond L. Fitz] and his provost at the time.  And that was 1998.
Speaker 2: These represent part of the board membership of the Mound Street Academies [Dayton, Ohio] and the person, I'm on the left, and next to me is William Gillespie.  The next person is Fred Smith.  He is the retired chairman of Huffy Corporation [Dayton, Ohio] and the chair, and the young lady is Cathy Ponitz, the daughter of David Ponitz [David H. Ponitz], who is pretty active and the former president of Sinclair Community College.
Speaker 1: Two children when they were very young.  That picture was probably about 1950 or '51 [1951].  Oh, I'm sorry.  On the left is John Moore, Jr. [John E. Moore, Jr.], and on the right is Joyce Moore, now Joyce Ard.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And this--you ready?  This is my late wife Hester Burton Moore, and we were married for sixty years, and she expired December the 14th, 2004.
Speaker 2: That's me, 2000, I think.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That picture was made at the time they dedicated the building for me at Sinclair Community College.  That was a great event.
Speaker 1: That is my wife and I, about 1970.
Speaker 2: This is my son John on the left, his wife Debra [Debra Plousha Moore], his son Chip [John E. Moore III] in the middle rear and Phillip [Phillip Moore] on the right.
Speaker 1: And this is my daughter in the center and my grandson.  My daughter's name is Joyce, my grandson's name is, oh Jesus (laughter), this is terrible, Jahmal [Jahmal Ard], and Nicole [Nicole Ard] is my granddaughter.
