Story_ID: 29527
Speaker 1: Good evening.  I am Denise Gines with The HistoryMakers, the interviewer.  And Scott Stearns is the videographer.  If you would, let's start by you stating your name and spelling it for me, please?
Speaker 2: Okay, my name, my full name is Ronald Elbert Mickens, R-O-N-A-L-D, the usual way of spelling Ronald, Elbert, E-L-B-E-R-T, and Mickens, M-I-C-K-E-N-S.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: February the 7th, 1943.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the location of your birth?
Speaker 2: At home, but (chuckle), but my home was located in Petersburg, Virginia.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Is the 11th of December, [2007].
Speaker 1: And tell me your occupation?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, when people usually ask me that, they usually put it in the form of, "What is it that you do?"  I tell 'em I do whatever I want to do.  I am formally employed as the distinguished Calloway professor of physics, but within that framework, I teach courses relating to physics, to mathematics, the history of science.  But in general, I can essentially teach anything I wish.
Speaker 1: Okay, excellent.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: And tell me the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: It's in my office in the Cole building on the campus of Clark Atlanta University, and we're located in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.
Story_ID: 29528
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you five "People Magazine" type questions.  What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: And your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Well, at my age, any time I can get up in the morning.  I mean I have no, you know, summertime, it's hot; wintertime, it's cold.  I have no favorite time.  I just, as my grandfather used to say, "I just want 'em to keep coming."
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  And do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I don't take vacations.  What I try to do is every single day have some fun and get some work in.  Now, my wife [Maria Kelker] has a different view.  She wants me to take vacations, but I never take vacations.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Not really.  You know, I spent eleven years as a vegan, and so, and my daughter [Leah Maria Mickens] is a vegan.  She eats nothing that, for which animals have been touched, nothing that had advanced intelligence of any kind.  So, you know, we eat a lot of vegetables and stuff like that.  But, oh, let me get back to the vegan thing.  That eleven years, the reason why I dropped or stopped being a vegan, I was hungry for eleven years.  I mean there's something about meat that will fill you up (laughter).  I was healthy then, but I was, but I have no particular, you know, cabbage and corn and all that kind of stuff, I can eat it.  Now.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite phrase?
Speaker 2: A favorite phrase?  "It wasn't me."  (Laughter)  And often, (laughter) usually two or three times a day, I have an opportunity to say that, "it wasn't me." (laughter)
Story_ID: 29529
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, we're gonna start by talking about your ancestors, and can you go back to your great grandparents?
Speaker 2: I can go back to my grandparents.
Speaker 1: Grandparents, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about your father's parents [Rosa and Willie].
Speaker 2: Well, I knew of them and we had regular contact with them.  But I grew up, my immediate family consisted of my two brothers, who are twins, my parents and my mother's parents.  So I know more about my mother's family, at least the grandparents there.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you know your grandparents on your father's side?  Do you know their names?
Speaker 2: Well, if you're asking me, do you want me to tell you right now?  The answer is, no, I can't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I probably could figure it out, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, I know that.  Yes, my, his mother was named Rosa, R-O-S-A, and his father was named Willie.  That's with two "L's", W-I-L-L-I-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's all you know about them?
Speaker 2: For the time being, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, I know a few other things, yes, but I'm being, yeah--
Speaker 1: What do you know?
Speaker 2: Well, for example, my fath- [sic, grandfather] Willie Mickens worked for the city, and I used to see him, you know, he was a laborer, during those times.  And, but he worked mainly, at least in the summertime, putting down tar and gravel, you know.  In many of the cities during that time, they didn't have asphalt, they would put tar down, and then put gravel over that.  And often, I would see him doing that.  And we would, you know, briefly talk and so forth.  I don't know whether you've ever walked on a street that had tar and gravel, but in the summertime, if it got hot enough, the tar would not quite melt, but it would become sticky.  And if you walked on it, your feet would stick to the tar.  So that was interesting.  (Unclear) and it seemed like it was very hot in those days.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what about your grandmother Rosa?
Speaker 2: She stayed at home.  I believe she had about fifteen kids.  I have a big family.  My father had about fourteen brothers and sisters.  Each of them had about fourteen kids and except for my family.  I have only two brothers.  I mean I have literally hundreds of cousins.  Every time I go home, I see people, you know, I've never seen before.  I mean there's probably a lot of them I have no interest in seeing, but (laughter) I saw them anyway.
Speaker 1: Rosa and Willie, where did they live?
Speaker 2: They lived in Petersburg, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, also.  So did you visit them very much?
Speaker 2: Oh, we certainly visited them on the holidays and, you know, probably one or, once or twice a month, yeah.
Speaker 1: And do you have any other stories to share about them?
Speaker 2: Not really, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 29530
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, we're gonna talk about your grandparents on your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And their names are?
Speaker 2: James Williamson and my son is named after him, and Daisy Williamson.
Speaker 1: Okay, and they also lived in Petersburg [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Right, we lived with them.
Speaker 1: They lived with you?
Speaker 2: Yes, and we had a three generation--
Speaker 1: Okay, in the same house?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my brothers and I, my mother [Daisy Brown Mickens] and father [Joseph Percival Mickens] and her parents.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So tell me about your grandparents. Since you lived in the same household, share some stories about your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother basically stayed at home and worked.  That was during the time when, you know, the women cooked three meals a day, big meals, except my father usually cooked breakfast, and my grandmother cooked dinners.  And I'll get back to that in a minute about my father cooking.  My grandfather at that time was probably in his seventies.  He was very old, you know, but he was alert.  And up until about three years before he died, he was very active in the church.  He was among that generation, he had a college degree, and he taught, though it never was clear to me, full-time or part-time at what's now called Virginia State University [Petersburg, Virginia].  When I was growing up, it was called Virginia State College, and I think before then, it was probably Virginia State Normal School.  So he was educated.  He also had a beautiful handwriting.  And he would write all this stuff out in these beautiful, I remember on, you know, probably two or three times a month, when someone died, he would be the person that they would seek out to write the obituary.  One, he had a beautiful handwriting, and he could say all the nonsense that people want to say about the people that they didn't like when they were alive, put it in the newspaper to make 'em sound like they are interesting and good people.  So he would do that (laughter).  But he was the one who I probably interacted best when I was growing up because he taught me, you know, the elements of astronomy.  When I was three years old, he began to teach me how to read and write.  And by the time I was four, I was playing checkers with the old men.  Those were the days before you had TV.  So, you know, entertainment was always based in the community.  And he would tell stories of Br'er Rabbit.  In fact, I never got any of the conventional children's stories, you know, fairytales.  And so I'm ignorant of most of these things.  Even when my kids were growing up, you know, they had what?  Bernstein bears, nobody had Snow White and all that kind of stuff.  So we would sit out at night.  During the summertime, it would be incredibly hot in the house.  And we'd sit outside.  So you had two choices if you're sitting outside.  You could either just look around and swat mosquitoes or you can look around and swat mosquitoes and talk.  And so he did a lot of talking.  He talked about, and also my grandmother.  She was born right after the Civil War [1861-1865].  She was a young kid, and she remembers the Night Riders and things of that sort.  But my grandfather mainly talked to me about science, about what it means to be a scientist and how does one distinguish scientific knowledge from other kinds of knowledge.  And so we had, you know, lots of interesting discussions.  And that also I think formed the basis of my wanting to be around people who were much older than I.  I mean, you know, why be around somebody my age?  I didn't know anything.  And they probably even knew less than I did (laughter).  So, you, you know, you go with the people who had the knowledge.
Story_ID: 29531
Speaker 1: The stories about Br'er Rabbit, what stories do you remember that he [grandfather, James Williamson] told you?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, what I suspect is that he just made up stuff.  I mean, you know, there are conventional Br'er Rabbit stories, you know, where the rabbit is always trying to outfox someone.  I mean they were sort of, I mean it wasn't understood precisely what was being said there.  But they were always, you know, the rabbit was always caught in some kind of predicament and it seems like the end was near, and, you know, and then the rabbit got out of it, you know.  But I don't, they were certainly not the conventional stories.  They were just stories, he was a good talker, as we used to say.  And he just made up stories.  He could tell the same story, you know, five or six different times, and it'd be a different story each time, I mean, even though it would start out exactly the same way.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he'd talk a lot about science to you?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Now, you said your grandmother [Daisy Williamson] was born right after the Civil War [1861-1865]?
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did she share any stories about the Night Riders that you mentioned earlier?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we, yeah, she used to talk to us a lot.  Again, she talked about growing up in the country.  The Williamson family, and I guess the Brown family too, but the particularly, the Williamson family, had, they owned lots of land.  And, but the circumstances were such that there were other people who wanted to frighten them off the land or whatever.  So they were relatively brave people, but she used to talk about the Night Riders who would come along, you know, late at night with the robes on and things of that sort.  But, but we also talked a lot about folk medicine.
Speaker 1: Okay, what did she tell you about folk medicine?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, not only did she tell us about it, we actually experienced it.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, for example, every, and I think every winter we had to take turpentine and sugar.  You've never heard of that?
Speaker 1: [No audible response].
Speaker 2: You're young.  Camera, over there, you heard of turpentine and sugar? (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I've heard of both separately, not together.
Speaker 1: No, no together, yeah, I--you have a big spoon, you know, and they would, you see the thing is, these were true scientists because I'm sure that I have some relatives who would kill, who died (laughter) from putting too much turpentine.  So by the time they got to me (laughter), they had honed it down.  But you take this stuff, anything that's in your body that's crawling, like worms, that stuff comes out.  Trust me it works (laughter).  And we would, one of the things we would take it for is worm, you know, that many kids don't get now.  But during those days, worms was a problem.  And you'd go sit on, to verify that this stuff worked, you would sit over a little pot.  And the worms would actually come out of your body, in your stool.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: You know, it's actually quite interesting in some sense, both horrifying and interesting at (laughter) the same time to see that these little things that are crawling down there in the pan were actually in your body.  That's why I never, that's why I always ate the worse food and everything cause there'll, if they wanna stay in there, I'll give 'em the worst possible thing.  But, you know, but she would, you know, and there was all of these, for example, if you cut yourself, what she would do would be to take a spider web and put over it.  And it would stop the bleeding, you know.  So, again, you know, this is what I'm calling folk medicine.  And, you know, several times of the year when, you know, flu season would come, they would give you these various roots and things that you had to drink, and, you know, I don't know whether it worked or not.  I mean one is, I think there was only one black doctor in the whole, colored doctor in the whole town.  Secondly, if something serious happened to you, it's not likely you would go into the hospital anyway.  So this is sort of the evolution of the people who made it, you know.  But there were all kinds of things like this, you know.  You don't have money, you can't go to a doctor, then you try things.  And this is what they tried on us.  And I think we came out of it relatively, you know, healthy.
Story_ID: 29532
Speaker 1: What about church?  Were your grandparents [James Williamson and Daisy Williamson] involved actively in the church?
Speaker 2: Yes, they were.  They were actively involved, but they never forced us to go, which was interesting.  At the age of seven, I decided that there was no God, and that view has just continued.  I mean I don't even think about it.  It's not even a question I have to think about.  But, no, we, when we went to church, it was mainly for social reasons or other more devious reasons.  There was a movie theater located directly behind the church.  And by the way, everybody walked in those days.  The church was about two miles away.  But there was a movie theater.  And the movie theater would open when the church was out.  Now, you're familiar with Baptist churches.  There's no need saying we're gonna start at 11:00, we're gonna be finished by 1:00.  Well, you might be finished by 2:00 or you might be finished by 2:30.  So, you know, the movie theater wanted people who were paying.  They didn't just wanna show a movie.  So they would open whenever the church let out.  And so I would do things like, when the collection would, you know, the collection dish would come by, and I would put in a dollar and take out five quarter, you know, things of that sort.  I mean it's, so I mean there were some, you know.  And twenty-five cents in those days was actually a lot of money cause it only costs, I think twenty-five cents to get into the movie, and then you had popcorn.  And then I needed some other change for the rest of the week so (laughter), that was my experience in going to church.  And I never, it, I never was able to get into or at least reach the point of view where I believed whatever the preacher was saying had any relevance to anything.  First of all, it was very simplistic.  And there were a variety of reasons for that cause many of the ministers are not educated.  So that's no big thing.  But it just never seemed to me, other than at a pure emotional level, that it had any relevance for me.  Not that it didn't have relevance for other people.  It just didn't have a relevance for me.  And I was willing to allow him to continue with whatever relevance they could pick up out of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, let us move on to your mother--
Speaker 2: Oh, one other thing about church though.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: You know, nowadays, the only part of the chicken I eat are the wings, and that came out of the church experience in the following sense.  My grandparents were very heavily involved in the church as I mentioned.  So every Sunday there was some high official coming by.  Now, in those days, we had, we, you know, raised our own chickens and all that.  But the church people had to eat first, and then the women ate because the women were serving the church people.  And then the kids ate so that what was left was chicken feet, chicken neck bones, chicken backs (laughter) and wings.  So, to this day, I hate the meatier portion, but that hate is in some sense purely abstract because I never had the experience of eating (laughter) these things (laughter), you know.  But I don't like chicken breasts now or thighs or whatever (laughter).
Speaker 1: But you decided that everything--
Speaker 2: I decided, that's right (laughter), it's because I'm left here with these chicken--have you ever eaten a chicken, I mean, when you have a whole chicken, and I'm saying you couldn't throw anything away.  When you cut it, you cut it such that the neck was attached to the little back portion of it, and, you know, it was actually quite good, I mean full of fat.  It had skin.  You can make it crispy and you have biscuits.  I mean it really is good.
Story_ID: 29533
Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me about your mother.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Did she stay at home?
Speaker 2: My mother, for part of, part of the time in Petersburg [Virginia], well, she worked for the wife of a white lawyer.  And from what I can gather, it was mainly for companionship.  It's an interesting kind of situation.  This white lady was at home by herself.  She had this big house, I mean a huge house at least, by our standards, and basically nothing to do.  And my grandmother [Daisy Williamson] would wash clothes for her.  And my mother would basically just go there, as far as I can tell, cause I used to go with her on a, and they would just sit there and talk, you know.
Speaker 1: Tell me your mother's name before we go on.
Speaker 2: Daisy.
Speaker 1: And can you spell it?
Speaker 2: Same, (unclear), D-A-I-S-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what level of education did you mother have?
Speaker 2: I think she finished high school, but of course, you have to remember now that, you know, if you look at 1915, you know, our whole concept of high school and whether you finished high school or how you finished, it was not quite--see, nowadays, you have a high school that you go to.  And there are some (unclear) where people were.  Things were a little bit looser during those times, you know.
Speaker 1: So tell me, share some stories about your mother and your interaction with her?
Speaker 2: Well, surprisingly, you know, when you live in a multi-generation family, you end up interacting with one generation and not so much with the other generation.  Most of my interaction was with my grandparents [James Williamson and Daisy Williamson].  And I had very little interaction in the conventional sense with my parents [Joseph Percival Mickens and Daisy Brown Mickens].  I mean, you know, we spoke and we did all that.  I called my mother, Boots, B-O-O-T-S.  And I called my father, Joe, J-O-E.  My grandparents, I called mama and I called papa because we were, cause my parents, my mother on occasion would go up north and work, and then get money and come back.  So my grandparents, you know, my mother's parents were there all the time.  You know, when you grow up some, you know, it's like a little duck, you know.  A duck sees a dog and it says quack, you know (laughter), mama, you know.  So, and I think that was part of it.  But, no, you know, she was very concerned, you know, about me.  I remember when I was in high school, she wanted to make sure, do you know how to dance, you know, cause I was relatively, publicly quiet anyway, you know.  Keep that stuff quiet.  And so she, you know, I had to dance with her just to, you know, and there probably were some other reasons, you know.  I mean I always, you know, during those times (unclear), you know, "That boy had better not be homosexual."  But, you know, yeah, I mean, so you know, you, it was never said that way, but your parents were always, you know, "Do you dance?"  "Are you talking to women?"  You know, all those kind of things.  But, of course, she was, you know, interested in things like that.  I was very athletic.  In those days, size didn't, was not important.  You had to fight.  I mean if you wanna get really whooped, that is, don't fight.  And it didn't matter.  All you had to do was fight basically once and put up a good showing.  The person who got or the people who got picked on all the time were the folks who didn't fight.  But again, those were the days in which the worse you could do is break your wrist on somebody's head.  You didn't have to worry about guns or knives or things like that.  I was just, you know, everyone played football.  We played, we played supposedly, touch football on concrete which really meant we played regular football on concrete.  But you did.  Those were the things that people did.  We had a community.  That community included things like, you can walk into anyone's house, suppose you wanted some sugar, you could just walk in; I mean knock on the door, if no one came, you'd walk in, you could get it and walk out and no one ever thought that you were in there to steal or whatever.  That was just the way it was.  People would come into our house that way, and we'd go into other's houses that way.  So it was a very safe, safe community.  You certainly wouldn't do that now, walk into my house unannounced, you're gonna be dead (laughter).  I'm gonna let you walk in and then shoot you inside (laughter).  My lawyer tells me don't shoot 'em outside, let them be inside (laughter).
Speaker 1: Your, so you said that your mother went off, maybe went north to work sometimes?
Speaker 2: New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Okay, she went to New Jersey?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, right.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: She had a sister in New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what type of work did she do there?
Speaker 2: Oh, my guess is that it was probably, you know, she did sewing work, so it was probably something involved in making clothes or probably waitress (unclear).  I mean clearly those are not, in the South at that time, if you worked outside of the house, it was either in the fields or in someone's kitchen.
Story_ID: 29534
Speaker 1: And your father [Joseph Percival Mickens], what did he, what was his occupation?
Speaker 2: He was a carpenter.  Now, when I say carpenter, I mean he did all kinds of things, you know, helped build houses, you know, woodwork, plastering, bricking, you know, all of those kinds of things.  But it was a very hit and miss kind of, you know. I mean he never was a master carpenter in the sense that we were now.  He was always, you know, as a laborer, but where you did all those kinds of activities.
Speaker 1: So are there any stories that you could share about your father?
Speaker 2: Not really, not really.
Speaker 1: Okay, now tell me about your siblings?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Tell me about them?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, I have two of them, brothers.  You know, it's interesting.  You know, I've done a lot of interviewing, and one of the things I've discovered is that people oftentimes when they don't really know what their name is, at least legally.  One of my brothers discovered after about forty years that what's on his birth certificate and what he's been using for forty years, not the same thing.  I have two brothers, Carrol [Lee Mickens] and Calvin [Lee Mickens].  They were born roughly one years and six days after I was born.  I was born on the 7th [February, 1943].  They were born on the 13th [February, 1944].  Again, all of us were born at home.  One story I do remember hearing all of the time, at least from my grandmother, was that when they were born, I think it was Carrol, was having difficulty.  Calvin must have been out.  Carrol was having difficulty.  When he got out, he wasn't breathing and so the nurse asked for a bottle of corn liquor, and she stuck her finger down in it.  And then she stuck it down his throat, and he started coughing and came to life, as they say.
Speaker 1: Okay, you said that your brothers, one of, which one of them didn't know their name?  What as the difference on their birth certificate?
Speaker 2: Oh, he knew his name.  It just wasn't the name on the birth certificate.  That was Carrol.
Speaker 1: How was it spelled on the birth certificate?
Speaker 2: I, well, he spells his name, C-A-R-R-O-L, and I think it was spelled with two 'L's.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But you know, that was quite common because, you know, if you're born at home it probably meant that you, there was some midwife there, and they may or may not know how to spell things.  So they put down what they think.  And so that might have happened.  Unfortunately, I wish they had some innovative way of spelling 'Ronald', but I've looked, checked mine and it's spelled exactly the way I've been using it.
Story_ID: 29535
Speaker 1: Okay, now you were born during World War II and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Petersburg [Virginia] is the site of Fort Lee, and
Speaker 2: And lots of Civil War, it's also, major Civil War [1861-1865] battles took place there, the crater [Battle of the Crater], for example, is one of them.
Speaker 1: Tell me what it was like to grow up in that military town?
Speaker 2: We didn't really, you know, perceive it to be a military town.  You know, our neighborhood, I mean there were some ladies across the way that were very friendly with lots of soldiers (laughter).  And we saw them, but I mean, you know, when you see it when you're two, and you see it when you're three, it was just, we, you know, military towns, soldiers tend to concentrate in particular places.  And our area was not one of those, except for the ladies who were very friendly across the street (laughter).  So I mean, for example, let's elaborate on it.  You had the military base there, but there was also a crazy house for colored people.  You know I don't know what they called it, Virginia State Asylum for Crazy Colored People or whatever.  And, but then you also had all of the, you know, major tobacco companies now.  You know, so that when I was growing up, you had, you could either work at Fort Lee.  You could work at the nut house or you could work, you know, at the cigarette place.  Oh, there was one other.  In Hopewell [Virginia], there was a chemical plant.  So that was it.  I mean, and so you saw people doing these things, but you very seldom saw soldiers as just soldiers.  I mean the military is no more than five miles away, but it really was not, you know, when they came to town, they didn't come to our neighborhood.
Speaker 1: So the people in your neighborhood worked in these various places you just described?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean you were high on the hog if you were out at the nut house.  That's what we, I mean you really were.  I mean, one is, you know, you just had crazy people to deal with (laughter).  I mean, hey, that made home life nice when you got back here (laughter).  You had this other kind of crazy people (laughter).  You made a good salary, and I know on occasions, two or three times a year, people would just go out and steal whole, you know, bags of flour and everything.  So I mean it was, you know, (unclear).  You know there was Brown, you know, it was, I think it was called Brown and Williams, they made tobacco products.  That was, you know, well paying.  And so that within the community, the only people who placed higher than them were probably teachers and ministers.  I mean there were so few lawyers and professional people that, you know, they didn't really count.  I mean, of course, you had Virginia State College [now Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] there which, I don't know whether you've been to Petersburg or not, is on a hill (laughter), up on a hill, and they were sort of, you know, unequal and, you know, and separate on top of the hill.  But that was it.  It was a very, you know, actually, it was a very pleasant place to live in.
Story_ID: 29536
Speaker 1: What was your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Good grief, you know, thinking back, you know, sixty, almost sixty-five years, I don't, I don't have any earliest childhood memories.  I just sort of remember things, and it's hard to just put it within the stream of thought as to when it occurred.  I mean I remember being young and playing checkers.  I remember being young and being taught by my grandfather [James Williamson] how to read and write, and, you know, various kinds of mathematical games, but it's just hard to say I was two, three, five, six or whatever.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What did you and your brothers [Carrol Lee and Calvin Lee Mickens], how did you all play together?  What types of games did you play?
Speaker 2: They would beat me up.  I mean they're twins, and not only that, but and I'll show you some pictures later if you want to, at the age of three, we were the same height.  And after that, they were taller than I.  In fact, they're over six feet tall now.  So (laughter), you know.  That's one way to learn how to fight, when you've got two people (laughter), you know.  But we had, it wasn't so much that the three of us played together, but we had, it was a neighborhood.  And there were probably twenty people, twenty of us, you know, mainly, you know, I mean the girls played with the girls and the boys, but we played football together.  We played baseball together.  We played basketball.  I mean everyone, it was expected that, you know, size and ability, you know, didn't really play a big role.  It was expected, but, you know, but what else could you do?  I mean, so everyone was expected to play and everyone did play.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What were holidays like at your house?
Speaker 2: I guess the, well, there were three holidays that played a significant role.  One was Easter.  The only thing I remember about Easter from a traumatic point of view was that Easter was always associated with clothes and it was always associated with my father [Joseph Percival Mickens] buying me clothes that I didn't want.  What he did was, he bought the clothes that he wanted (laughter), what he thought was nice.  And you know, when you're young, you know, you wanted all this different stuff, and he bought me old men's clothes, you know.  And Easter was also associated with going to church.  There was the Fourth of July, Fourth of July, lots of food, lots of drinking, and by the way, in my family, I don't ever remember a time that I didn't drink, at any time.  I don't ever remember an age when I did not drink.  And that was one of the things that was expected, you know, always let the kids drink, you know.  So, you know, we never had people who became alcoholics.  Now, it may be that they died before (laughter), you know, they became alcoholics, but I mean, all I'm saying is that most of us acclimated to drinking.  So it was expected, for example, Christmas, my father would make eggnog from corn liquor.  And these real, it's amazing we didn't die cause he used real eggs.  I mean, you know, oftentimes out of, in the back then, chicken coup and, you know, some milk, and most of it would be corn liquor.  And that's good stuff, that's good stuff.  And so I'm sure that Christmas is very interesting, but after you drink three or four of those things, you know, (laughter)--
Speaker 1: We're talking about a child.  We're talking (unclear) (simultaneous) age--
Speaker 2: That's what I'm talking about (laughter), about four or five.
Speaker 1: Four or five age.
Speaker 2: Yeah, every day, everyone in the community did that, you know.  Oh, I'm sure there were some churchgoers that didn't, but I mean even in those days, I don't even believe the churchgoers, you know, yeah.  But that was just something that everyone did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just like during the summer, one of the, it was quite common every Friday for my father to pick up two or three bushel baskets of crabs.  You know, we lived not that far from the ocean, and people would bring them in.  And he and my grandfather built, just from spare pieces of wood, tables, and he put newspaper down and just dumped, you know, maybe a hundred, you know, small crabs.  And you'd have screwdrivers and all this other kind of stuff, and you just sat there and, you know, they drank beer.  But they would always allow us to sip beer, you know.  Well, that's some good eating.  I mean I don't know whether you ever tried to eat crabs, these little small crabs.  So it's good eating in some sense, in the abstract.  You really don't eat that much crab (laughter).  You spend a lot of time (laughter) trying to get to the crab.  So, yeah, I've forgotten what the question (laughter) was.
Speaker 1: We were talking about holidays?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (laughter).  And Christmas is, again, the same thing.  Christmas was, we would normally get one, what I would call, toy.  But otherwise, Christmas was clothes and not many of those, draws and socks and (laughter), and you know, the usual kind of stuff, you know.  But I remember in some sense, my best ever, goodest of all Christmases, and that's when my parents bought me a chemistry set.  I must have been about eight years old.  And that was something that I really wanted.  You know, you ever think back, which is, what was the best Christmas?  I mean it wasn't, it was one of these little small things, but the thing I like about that Christmas gift, the chemistry set was that you could actually kill yourself with this stuff.  See, nowadays, you know, they give you these chemicals that you can swallow and nothing happens.  It's basically Kool-Aid, but in those days, they gave you things where you could actually blow off a face or you could set the house on fire or you could, you know, maim yourself (laughter).  And that was good. I mean fortunately, you know, most of the destructive power ended up being directed toward the house, but there were some close (laughter), you know, but that was fun.  I mean it was, I mean you could mix stuff up, and it would actually blow up.  I remember one time, and I'm not sure what happened, I mixed up some powdered metal with some sulfur.  It was basically gun powder, and it went off in my face.  But fortunately, it was in a test tube, and I was sitting like this and it went down and blew a hole in the floor, and it missed my face because it was directed, almost like a gun, and went up to the ceiling.  But that was, I mean that's how you get--people talk about how do you interest kids in science?  Give them some dynamite (laughter), I mean really, you know, some nitroglycerin (laughter), some acid.  I mean then, well, at least the ones that survive, they will be in science.  But now, you can't get that excitement out of a video game (laughter), I mean, no, no.  There has to be some real danger there (laughter).
Story_ID: 29537
Speaker 1: So you spent a lot of time doing experiments?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, in addition to playing football--
Speaker 1: Football.
Speaker 2: --and reading and all of that.
Speaker 1: Did you ever listen to radio?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean actually radio was, in particular, they had soap operas, every Monday through Friday, there were soap operas.  There was actually one or two black soap operas.
Speaker 1: Do you remember which ones they were?
Speaker 2: I think it was called, one was called 'Beulah.'  Soap operas in those days were fifteen minutes.  But everybody would listen.  On Sunday, when 'Amos and Andy' came on, everyone would listen to 'Amos and Andy,' you know, all, the whole neighborhood.  I mean you could, you know--
Speaker 1: What about 'The Shadow?'
Speaker 2: I remember 'The Shadow,' but it--
Speaker 1: Not so much?
Speaker 2: You know, not, not, yeah, I read a lot of comic books, but no, it was mainly the, you know, those soap operas, 'Beulah' in particular, that was quite interesting.  And there's one little tale I wanna tell.  I mean it's not a tale in the sense that it's a lie, but when I was growing up, the library was segregated.  And the colored portion of the library was in the basement.  And very few people used the library.  I mean, not, when I say very few, most whites didn't use their portion and most blacks didn't use their portion.  And so, but I would go there almost every day.  This is during the '50s [1950s], and if you remember then, rocketry was a big thing.  And there was catalog in the colored portion that would tell me what was upstairs, and the librarian, the colored librarian, nice lady, she'd go up and get them.  And I still have, she gave me lots of books.  She says, the white people aren't reading these books, black certainly aren't, or colored people.  She says, you take them.  If I've got, I still have at home a lot of these books from that time.  And I remember one book, I must have been about nine years old, it was a book entitled 'Advanced Calculus' by Woods, a very famous book as I later came to discover.  And I actually got into two or three pages of it, but after that, there was just no one around to really help me.  I mean I could have been a genius, you know, just, you know.  But that was, it was just interesting.  Several years ago I went back to my hometown.  The library is still there except they took down the colored sign.  But I went around to various sites and took photos and all those kinds of things.
Speaker 1: What other types of books, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, one other thing about the library, when I was in high school, we desegregated about four or five different places.  My mother [Daisy Brown Mickens] was very upset because she thought that she would lose her job.  And it was sort of a standard thing.  But the interesting thing was that in Petersburg [Virginia], nothing happened.  A hundred students from the high school, and I must have been, I don't know, as a sophomore, marched over to the library and just filled it.  Nothing happened.  No one called the police.  No one, we just filled it.  And then the day after that, it was integrated.  No one ever said anything (laughter).  I mean it made the front pages, but no one, and so I said, you know, why didn't you folks tell me?  I could have come here before (laughter), I mean, you know.  I mean I expected at least, you know, some beatings or maybe a random lynching (laughter).  I mean, you think I liked being down in the basement (laughter), you know.  The same thing happened with the integration of the City Council.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna get to that integration, but we're jumping too far ahead.
Speaker 2: All right, we're jumping, okay.
Speaker 1: But just to finish the thought about the library, you said your mother thought she was going to lose her job.  Why so?
Speaker 2: Oh, because there was this very prominent picture of me on the front page, along with other folks.  Anyway, there were about a hundred people, but a mother can pick your picture out of a, you know, and she thought that, well, when it got back to her employer, that they would, you know, fire her from the job cause there apparently were people who were fired from engaging in these kinds of activities.
Story_ID: 29538
Speaker 1: All right.  Tell me about your elementary school.  What school did you go to?
Speaker 2: Oh, I went to, we lived in the same block as the elementary school.  I, to be quite honest, I don't remember the name of it.  I mean I could provide you with it later.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers there that, or you can tell me anything that you remember about going to, high school teachers that might have influenced you or?
Speaker 2: Well, throughout all of my education prior to going to college, we had excellent teachers because many of the teachers had advanced degrees, master's degrees, but obviously, they couldn't, you know, their teaching had to be confined to elementary school.  But I remember that they, both elementary school--we didn't have middle school.  You went the first five grades and you went basically, it was a junior high school, but it was part of the regular high school.  So we didn't really consider it to be junior high.  But there was a great stress on mathematics, English and reading.  But as far as I, you know, remember back, I had excellent teachers.
Speaker 1: Why do you think that in that part of, in that city, the teachers had master's degrees and were very well educated versus some other places where teachers, some teachers only had a high school diploma or--?
Speaker 2: Right, well, you have to remember now that if you look at Petersburg [Virginia], if you draw a radius of fifty miles, there was Virginia State College [now Virginia State University].  There was Union College, there was Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia].  There was Virginia State in Norfolk [Virginia], which became Norfolk State [University].  I mean there were a number of other places, schools.  So from that perspective, there were a lot of educated people.  And it was expected, at least among the better students that they would go off, go somewhere and at least get a master's degree.  So that was the expectation.  But, of course, there was also the expectation that most people were not gonna do that, and, you know, it's not like we have nowadays where everybody's student, you know, is brilliant, you know, don't know anything, but they're brilliant (laughter).  They're above average.  In those days, it was quite common for someone to say, look, hey, that girl needs to stay at home; you just gonna waste your money, if you send her off to college".  Send that boy off to college, or the reverse.  You know, I mean it, you know, you sent people to college who you thought would actually be able to appreciate it and who through the work prior to that had demonstrated that they could do college work, not just because--very few people went to college.  Even from the perspective of getting a job because what kind of jobs would you expect.  At best, the best job would be a civil servant job, and even in the '50s [1950s], you know, if you were in civil service, more than likely, you were someone, what's the name, you know, who would carry messages, a messenger.  I mean, you know, you were not going to be, for most people, a head of a department.
Speaker 1: So in elementary school, since your grandfather [James Williamson] had a great influence on your reading and writing, you were pretty advanced as a student?  What type of student were you?
Speaker 2: In fact, when I, I was doing script before I went to school.  And the teachers at about, I think the second or third grade or second grade maybe, were shocked cause I had to learn how to print.  I didn't know how to print.  The interesting thing there is that I, that's all I do now is print.  I write all my papers and everything, I print, you know.  But it was a variety, some reasons for that, yeah.  So, but I was basically, throughout my prior college experience, I was advanced.  But we had very good schools.  I mean my high school was--you don't want me to get to that?
Speaker 1: Not yet.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 1: What about the books that you used in school?  Did you have, I mean a lot of southern schools, the white schools would pass the books down to the black students, the black schools?  Was that the case where you were?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't think so.  No, I don't think--Petersburg was a very interesting place, even though it was in the Deep South.  And see the thing is, it's hard for me not to skip ahead, you know.  I don't remember, I mean all of the books that we had as far as I could tell were new books.  But that might have been because most of our books, books were not provided to us.  You had to pay for them.
Speaker 1: Interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that was a major source of difficulty for lots of parents, you know.  But clearly, in high school, all of our books were bought.  And I'm almost certain that in grade school, it was the same thing.  These were not, books like you see now, where, you know, the state issues them, and, you know.  No, these were new books.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers that you remember from your elementary years that influenced you?
Speaker 2: Yes, there was a Mrs. Hill who, she taught English and mathematics.  And she was very good.  I can't remember any of the others.  The only reason I remember her is not only was she a good teacher, but later on when I became a paperboy, she was one of my customers who gave good tips (laughter).  Yes, money has a tendency to, you know, sharpen your mind (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me some other activities when you were in elementary school?  Like you said, you were a paperboy?  Was that--
Speaker 2: That's a little later.
Speaker 1: That's a little later?
Speaker 2: And that's a long story.
Story_ID: 29539
Speaker 1: So, you went straight from elementary school to high school?
Speaker 2: Right, we had the first five grades at the elementary school, or at least what I'm calling elementary school.  And then the high school was located about two miles away, and it was composed of two or three different buildings.  They didn't really call it middle school.  It was just part of, we just called it Peabody High School.  And the middle school or the, you know, the first, you know, sixth, seventh, eighth grades, I don't really remember anything significant there except that I was heavily involved in science and math projects.
Speaker 1: At the high school level?
Speaker 2: Well, sixth, seventh and eighth grade and became even more so in high school.  In Virginia, there was an organization of black science and math teachers.  And this had started I think back in the '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s] and what they would do is, they would have, you would have, the contest would include eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh and twelfth.  And so you would have math topics or subjects for each of them, eighth grade math or it might be algebra I, algebra II, and each high school would have a run off.  And then you would go to the city, and then the state contest would be held on one of the historically black college campuses.  And they would give out awards.  So I, beginning in about the seventh or eighth grade I went, and in most cases, I won.  I was number one.
Speaker 1: Did--
Speaker 2: I had good competition.  I mean they did their best, but I mean, you know, hey, only one person can win.
Speaker 1: Do you remember anything about what you presented to win?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that?  2430
Speaker 2: There was one science topic that involved the special theory of relativity.  You know, when I was going to the colored library down in the basement, I used to, I just started reading, what is that?  'Encyclopedia Britannica,' I just started at "A", you know.  And after about five pages, I switched over to "R" (laughter), "relativity", you know.  And I started reading about [Albert] Einstein's Theory of Relativity.  Actually, you can present all of it just using algebra.  You don't have to use any advanced math.  So, you know, it, you know, I knew the mathematics of it.  And so what I did was formulate a theory of what happens if you went faster than the speed of light.  Basically, Einstein's Special Theory of Relativity is centered on the fact that there is a maximum speed that you can transmit a signal.  And you get certain kinds of interesting results out of it.  I mean nowadays, we call that Tachyons.  So I wouldn't say that I discovered Tachyons.  My guess is almost every young person who studied science and who studied relativity, when you look at it and you play with it, you come up with that.  But I remember taking the project over to Virginia State College [now Virginia State University].  And there was one professor there who eventually was, became my professor at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], and he was just quite amazed that I had come up with this.  But, and I guess some other science projects, but mainly what I was involved in was just mathematics, various topics in mathematics.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you graduated from high school, when you went to high school, what year was this?
Speaker 2: Well, I finished in '60 [1960].  So--
Speaker 1: Probably '57 [1957]?
Speaker 2: Probably '57 [1957], but again, keep in mind now, that you had these lower grades and upper grades basically in the same complex.  So it's hard to, you know, I mean, people did call one part of it high school, but then on the other hand, they didn't say that the other was middle school either.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I finished early.  I mean I think I was seventeen when I finished.  And the reason is that during that time, the teachers had nothing to do during the summer.  And the black community got together and said, look, let's have summer school.  In summer school, in those days, you didn't have to go because you failed.  So I went to two or three summer schools and took three or four courses, and so I finished early.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you stated earlier that you knew at about seven or eight that you wanted to do something in science.
Speaker 2: Well, probably before then.  I knew at seven and eight that I didn't believe in God.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But prior to that, I knew I was gonna do something in science.
Story_ID: 29540
Speaker 1: Okay, and so at this point now, when you're getting ready to leave high school, what are you thinking?
Speaker 2: Well, when I finished high school, I had no idea what I was gonna do.  My father [Joseph Percival Mickens], like many people at that time, thought I should go into the military.  I mean, you know--you know, you look around, and you know, you have a son who says, "Hey, I'm gonna be a scientist," 1960, and you say, "Eat, think, eat, you remember, five o'clock every day" (laughter).  So he wanted me, 'cause that was the standard kind of thing.  I graduated from high school in June of '60 [1960].  I had full fellowships to Virginia State [University, Petersburg, Virginia] to Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia], to Norfolk State [University, Norfolk, Virginia], to Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia], and I decided I was not going to any of them.  My view was, I'm gonna get the hell out of Virginia as soon as I can.  I had no idea what I was gonna do.  In July, I was, I just happened to drop by the high school.  And the guidance counselor there asked me, well, "What are you gonna do?"  And I sa- I told her the same thing.  She says, "That doesn't make sense.  You know, you--." She called up someone at Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] because she was a graduate of Fisk.  And I was there when she called them, and I talked to the person, and the fellow says, "Come on down.  We'll pay for you to come down to Fisk."  But that was just for the summer.  You know, this is right after Sputnik, and they were trying to get people interested in science and all of that.  So I went to Fisk.  At the end of or near the beginning of August, I was offered a scholarship of four hundred dollars, out of maybe twelve hundred dollars.
Story_ID: 29541
Speaker 1: Before we get to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], I just wanna step back a little bit and talk a little bit more about your high school days because you told me before that you were a paperboy.  So let's talk a little bit about that.
Speaker 2: Well, when I, at, I guess at about the age of nine, I discovered, well, it was not so much that I didn't have any resources, my parents [Joseph Percival Mickens and Daisy Brown Mickens] didn't have any resources.  And I needed some resources.  So I decided to become a paperboy.  And my first paper route consisted of about fifty people.  Over a period of about two years, I acquired almost 500 customers.  And at that point, it just became complicated to both take the papers, as we used to call it, and collect money.  So about a block from where I lived, there was a family of, I think Puerto Ricans.  The father had a truck, and he had two sons, roughly my age, and so I employed them.  I paid them to pick up the papers and to deliver them.  And so I spent my time collecting the money, and then I would pay them a regular salary.  There were several other things we did.  In those days the papers came in bundles of fifty, and they were wrapped in copper wire, actual copper wire.  And we would go around to all the sites because the truck might drop a hundred of these bails, and we'd collect all the copper wire and take it to the, oh, what's the name of this place that buys scrap metal?  Scrap yard or whatever you call it.  Anyway, and they would buy it at that time for nineteen cents a pound.  And we could, in a week, you know, make fifty dollars because there was lot of, and paperboys would take the, you know, there would be two of these wires.  They would just cut it and leave it, and we knew all the sites.  We would even go into the white people's section and get their copper wire.  And we'd get all the copper wire and sell it.  So that was quite interesting because, you know, you can just think about it.  You know, you're ten years old, you're eleven years old, and you actually have people that are working for you.  And, you know, you, and one of the good things is that they were good workers.  And when I say good workers, in the sense that they picked the papers up, and my policy was that you would never roll a paper and throw it in a yard, that you, every paper had to be placed in a mailbox or in the door.  And that had good consequences at Christmastime because with 500 customers, in addition to getting about 250 pairs of socks (laughter), I would also get, you know, roughly five hundred dollars in cash, which I, think about it.  See, during that time, that was a lot of money, and that was because people appreciate it.  The other paperboys, they would throw papers out, it'd be raining and the papers would blow away.  So just this little extra, I mean, one of the things I discovered from that experience is that, you know, if you wanna have a successful business, then what you have to do is satisfy an unmet need, and the unmet need in this case was people not wanting to run down the street picking up their newspapers, not having the newspapers, you know, wet and things of that sort.  When I, I think my junior year in high school, I gave it to this family, you know, I mean I didn't sell it, I just, because, you know, I mean they clearly knew how to do it.  And I'm not quite sure how, I think they kept doing it for at least another four or five years.  I think I was in college when they gave it up.
Speaker 1: So you said that they were Puerto Rican.
Story_ID: 29542
Speaker 1: What were the other nationalities of the people who lived in your community?
Speaker 2: Oh, we had, I mean not many, but there were a lot of other, you know, we had some Chinese, Filipino, just, you know.  I mean at that stage, you know, in black communities, everyone could live, you know.  I mean, where else are you gonna move? (Laughter).  So it was, no, that was, I mean our neighborhood was actually, in terms, I hadn't thought about it in that sense, but it was actually quite international where there were all kinds of, and you see, the other thing is that, remember you mentioned earlier about the military base.  And there were people who had families who didn't wanna live on the military base, who lived out in the community.  And so this also led to having different kinds of people come together.
Speaker 1: And did they attend the same schools that you did?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So, when integration started taking place, I mean was it a real integration of black and white or--
Speaker 2: That took place after I left.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But let me tell you what happened.  There were two high schools, one Petersburg High, which was located downtown [Petersburg, Virginia].  And then there was Peabody High.  Peabody High was the older of the schools.  Peabody High was established in 1870, and it was, it lost its title as a high school in 1970.  And it was one of the comprehensive high schools in the whole state of Virginia.  I mean I'm one of the products.  I had, I actually had calculus when I was there, and this was back, you know, because you had teachers who made the decisions that there were certain people who were going off to colleges.  And we, you know, the technique that they used in mathematics, we had very good books.  They were small books, but I remember in my math class, we worked out every single problem in the book.  You had to go to the board and you have to explain it.  So I had a very good math preparation.  In fact, when I went to college, I didn't have to take calculus.  I placed out of it.  So the high schools, the year after I left or two years after I left, they decided to desegregate.  But what they did was, and as I said, in some sense Petersburg was more progressive than most, what they decided was that they were not gonna have students go to either of the high schools.  So they built a complete separate high school, about five miles from either one of them.  And so you didn't have, well, one is that cut out a whole thing about loyalty, well, you know, this school or that school.  And so that worked quite well.  My, I don't know, yeah, it must have been--my brothers [Carrol Lee and Calvin Lee Mickens] graduated two years after me.  Remember, I was a year ahead and so I don't think they went to the integrated high school.  It must have been a couple of years after that.  But you had none of those problems of desegregation that, you know, I mean even, I don't remember any violence in Petersburg at all.  (Unclear) I mean I gave the example of the library, just-- or the city hall, people just said, okay, you know.  I mean not that, you know, I'm sure there were people there who didn't like it, but it never got to the point where there was public violence.  To give you another example, when I was in I guess eighth, ninth, tenth grade, we had a police boys club.  I think that's what it was called.  Now, picture this, so you go into, the police station was down below, city council was the room above.  Blacks or Negros sat on the left, whites on the right, and every Saturday, they would have these movies.  As far as I can tell, there never was any animosity.  Christmastime, they gave out toys and bicycles.  Well, what they did was, every, they had exactly the same thing for both groups.  So there were two bicycles given.  There were twenty cameras given, ten to this group, ten to the, you know, all this kind of stuff, you know.  So they, you know, in some sense, tried to approximate, at least when I was growing up, this separate but equal.
Story_ID: 29543
Speaker 1: Okay, you were telling me something about a soap--
Speaker 2: Soapbox derby?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Right.  You're familiar with soapbox derby, I assume?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: It was decided, the city of Petersburg decided, and I think I must have been ten years old because I think the category, I think that's the youngest category at ten.  But they were gonna have a soapbox derby and somehow, I'm not sure how it was decided, that I was gonna be the Negro entrance (laughter).  But anyway, that's what happened.  And I went to some type of, there was a meeting, a big meeting and there were blacks and whites there.  And they were demonstrating how to build these things.  In principle, the boys are supposed to build these things.  You gotta be out of your mind to think some boy could build a thing like that, you know (laughter).  But anyway, they demonstrated how to build, and they had a raffle to decide who was gonna get it, and guess who got it?  I got it.  You know, so not only was I selected, I also didn't have to go through and build these things.  I participated in it, I think it goes from ten, I think it stops at fourteen or fifteen, every year.  I got better.  The first year I lost the first heat, and I finally got to the point, you know, where I would win two or three laps, and every time you'd win, you'd get a prize, and you know, the further you go, yeah.  The second year, my friend next door also was in it.  But I don't really remember any other Negro (laughter) being involved, at least the times that I was in it.  But again, you know, we would go to these meetings and I'd be the only black.  Or when Herbie was there, we'd be the only blacks there, and people were just excessively friendly.  I mean, well, I shouldn't say friendly.  They clearly were not hostile, you know, which is different.  But they, you know, when we had meals, all of us ate together.  They didn't separate, I mean that never came up, you know.  And that was probably one of the first times that they had, in some public sense, meals of--I'm sure there must have been other times. But I mean it never was an issue.
Story_ID: 29544
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So we can now move on to your getting to go to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] or you actually went down there--?
Speaker 2: Yes, I, as I told you, I had these four fellowships, scholarships to three or four Colored schools, and I decided I wasn't going.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I mean, and it's not that I had anything against them as being Colored schools.  I wanted to get out of Virginia.  That's my whole thing.  I had never heard of Fisk before.  So I went down, and this is a science program, and we had calculus and we had chemistry, we had physics and all kinds of stuff.  But at the beginning of the summer institute, they gave us a standardized exam, and I made ninety-nine percentile on the standardized exam.  I, I blew 'em out as they say.  Now, the thing (laughter) that's interesting is that at the end of the summer, they gave us exactly the same exam as before, and I made 92 percentile (laughter).  So I know this has been a negative sort of experience.  I came in here (laughter) (unclear).  But that was interesting.  But, no, it was a very good institute.  And, in fact, at least half of the kids returned to Fisk as freshmen at the, that's when school started in September.  But out of that experience, one of my instructors, Dr. Samuel Massie, who was at Fisk, he actually left that August and became president of two or three colleges and ended up at the Naval Academy, as professor of chemistry.  And he offered me a small scholarship.  My mother [Daisy Brown Mickens] paid the rest, for the first year, but after that, it was very clear that this was a major strain on her.  So fortunately, I was able to get jobs at Fisk that involved work in the laboratory or science space things.  So.
Speaker 1: Let's see.  The president then was Stephen Wright.
Speaker 2: Stephen Wright.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember him?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And can you tell us anything, in any interaction with him?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, generally, the interactions were pretty good, but you have to remember now, you have some--well, when I went to Fisk, I'd spent two years, the last two years in, they had a dormitory for bright, male students.  Given that only about twenty percent of the students were male, that basically meant all the students.  But, and he, where he lived was up the street from us.  And so, of course, you know, when you get twenty-eight bright students, every, all of our meals, or at least dinner, was served to us every night.  And we would sit around tables and various professors would come in.  We would have visitors and we'd talk about various issues, and so it was quite, quite nice.  But (unclear) we  would pull various pranks.  I mean, for example, in the basement we had a series of small rooms, and we had a stereo.  That was big in those days.  And we got a note one day from the president who said, "Gentlemen, the other night, passing by your dormitory I observed young ladies coming out, lots of music and so forth."  So we wrote him back, "Well, if you stayed in town more often, you'd get accustomed to it." (Laughter) We didn't sign it, of course.  You know, but now, I remember him as, I mean those, it was only memories like that.  I mean in those days presidents didn't interact very much with students except on special occasions.  We had him, I think, come by at least twice to participate in dinner discussions and things of that sort, but, you know, except for chapel and so forth.  I mean I went to chapel every Sunday.  The person who was dean of the chapel was Lawrence Jones, who was a theologian.  I mean his sermons were exercises in philosophy, the philosophy of religion, you know.  And for three years, I was in the choir.  So I was there, and, in fact, Lawrence Jones and I for a number of years kept in touch with each other.  He eventually left Fisk and went to Union Theological Seminary in New York [New York].  He was also acting president there for a while.  And then he retired from there, and he went to, I think Howard University [Washington, D.C.] where he became dean of the School of Religion there.  But he was very interesting, and he saved me on a number of occasions.  I mean he truly saved me, you know, not from the point of view of sin, although that was probably part of it, but (laughter), you know, sometimes you get in situations and someone comes along and just gets you out of it, saying if you stay here, you're gonna be in bad shape.  Let's put you in there, that's how I was able to go to Europe in 1963.  He was able to take me out of a situation that was life threatening from the psychological point of view.
Story_ID: 29545
Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me what you majored in at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Well, I went there to major in mathematics.  The mathematics department was very weak.  At least I thought it was weak, so I decided to try chemistry.  And I didn't like the laboratories.  I mean, you know, I think that during my previous days of blowing things up and setting the house on fire, that I, you know, my spark for chemistry went out.  And so I decided on physics.  So I ended up majoring in physics.
Speaker 1: Who were the heads of the departments at that time?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Dr. Theodore Love was head of the mathematics department and Dr. James Lawson who twenty, thirty years later became president of Fisk, was head of the physics department.  And I think Dr. Elliott, and I can't remember his first name, was chair of the chemistry department.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you developed a strong foundation in calculus and differential equations, nuclear physics.  Tell me if I'm right and stop me if I'm wrong--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --analytical mechanics.
Speaker 2: --sounds good to me (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) But, so I wanna talk about what some of these things mean because as we go on, we need to have an understanding of them.
Speaker 2: Right, well, let me first of all give you some idea, at least my notion of what science is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Science is a way of looking at the world in which you provide answers that can become part of the public domain.  And by "public domain," what I mean is that if you understand what the rules are and if you follow those rules, that you will get the same answer as I, you know.  I mean a very simple example is called the Betty Crocker example.  You get this stuff in a box, you know.  It tells you pour in a bowl, put some water or milk over it, stir it and put it in the oven.  And you expect to get the same thing every time.  Science is like that.  Science is public knowledge.  It's knowledge that does not depend upon one particular view of how the world is.  And what that means therefore, is that not everything is scientific.  Not all knowledge is scientific, but scientific is a special kind of knowledge.  And the various fields that science is broken down into deal with particular aspects of this physical world.  For example, in physics, you can make predictions relative to where the planets are gonna be tomorrow or a thousand years from now.  Actually, you can do even better.  You can make what are called retro dictions.  And retro diction, that means you can tell where the moon was a month ago and so forth.  And people have done this, for example, to try to verify specific kinds of historical events that have also taken place at the same time certain astronomical events have taken place.  So science is a particular way of looking at the world and interpreting it, such that it doesn't really depend upon one's individual views.  And that doesn't mean that in order to get that individual views and prejudice and things that would come into it, but once it gets established, you know, then, you know, it's something that stays there.
Speaker 1: Okay, explain some of the different aspects, like differential equations.  Is that something that you work on?
Speaker 2: Well, one way of thinking about mathematics is that mathematics is a language.  It's just that it's a very sophisticated language.  You can define mathematics as the, and some people have, the science of patterns.  You see various things and from that, you try to figure out if there is some meta rule, there's some rule that will tell you what these things are.  For example, let's take a simple example.  Suppose you pick any two numbers.  If one number is even and one number is odd, then on a little reflection, if you add them together, and it doesn't matter what the numbers are, when you add an even number and an odd number, you have to get an odd number.
Speaker 1: Okay (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, and so that's, but that's mathematics.  Note that it doesn't, that's a statement that's true independent of what numbers you put in there, yeah, because an even number is anything that's divisible by two.  So an odd number is not.  So if you add the two together, you get an odd number.  So that the essence of mathematics is to, well, there're two aspects.  One is where you're just trying to look at patterns themselves and not relate them to anything.  Fortunately for us, almost all of the mathematics that we know about, it turns out we can relate them--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to things.  Another aspect of the use of mathematics, particularly in its role as a language, is to help us to understand various aspects of the world.  For example, suppose you wanna predict what happens if you throw an apple into the sky.  Well, there are rules, Newton's laws, that will, you know, tell that.  What mathematics in this sense does is, instead of having a table that one second late is this distance or two seconds late is this distance, what mathematics does is give you a single formula, such that you specify what the time is in the future, and I'll tell you where the apple is.  And so it's a very concise, note that this is very concise.  You just have this one, little single formula as opposed to this very large table that gives these things to you.  And one of the other advantages of mathematics, particular in its role to model phenomena, is that you have the logical structure of mathematics to rely upon, so that not every possibility will occur.  Once you believe that mathematics can describe a certain phenomena, the logic of mathematics will dictate what the future is for that system, so that not every possibility can occur.  And that's why people use mathematics, you know.
Story_ID: 29546
Speaker 1: Okay, so, talk about the different types of, well, the classes that you took at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and how it relates to the work that you do now?
Speaker 2: Well, when I was at Fisk, I took basically all of the mathematics courses that they had there, but I also took courses in economics.  I took a lot of courses in history.  One reason why I took extra courses was that I was, it was suggested to me that I'd be a good person to be inducted into Phi Beta Kappa.  And Phi Beta Kappa, the degree, you can only have a liberal arts degree an AB degree.  If you look at my degree from Fisk, it says, physics AB.  What I did was, now the AB degree means thirty-two hours.  But I actually took fifty-some hours in the sciences, but the way you could get around it is that every course you took over thirty-two, you could balance it by something outside of the science.  And so I took a lot of these other courses.  But that also fit into my whole view that in order to be successful, you have to be aware of many different areas and that, you know, you just can't know science or you just can't know history or philosophy, but all of these things are different aspects of this unity of knowledge.
Speaker 1: Was that the reason why, to be a part of Phi Beta Kappa, you had to have a liberal arts degree to balance everything out?
Speaker 2: Right, you couldn't do that unless you were, yeah.  But it was fun to me.  I mean my general view is that, you know, why do you have to be good in one thing?  Why can't you be good in a lot of things?  And what I did was to demonstrate this to be the case.  I mean the best revenge is to do it (laughter).
Speaker 1: Who were some, were there other teachers at Fisk that helped you along the way or encouraged you to go one way or the other as far as classes to take or did you have an advisor?
Speaker 2: Yes, but not, I mean that, my advisor, I mean, for example, in physics you almost know what you have to take, and being a small school like that, that basically means you take everything that they offer (laughter).  I mean they offered the bare minimum, which was more than sufficient for what was needed.  And, you know, I had an interest in economics.  We had to take, you know, some social science courses.  So, and we, you know, I took courses in international relations and things of that sort.  So, I took a psychology course, I think maybe two psychology courses.  So, yeah, it was just, I wanted to know, to learn about and to analyze a variety of different fields, you know, and some of those things were just nonsense.  I mean it's amazing, you know.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Like what?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, much of what's in psychology is nonsense, you know, I mean it's, it is (laughter).  I mean when I was growing up, they would just say, look, that boy is crazy (laughter).  He gets violent, hit him (laughter).  (unclear) not trying to reason with him (laughter).  He crazy, I mean, (laughter), and you keep doing that, and you're gonna be crazy (laughter).  But I'll tell you an interesting story.  This actually happened (laughter) (unclear).  One of my, one of my former friends, I'll put it that way, and you'll see why, this was when I, oh, I must have been about thirty years old.  She called me up late one night, saying "I'm gonna commit suicide," and I asked her, "Why are you calling me then?"  I said, "Did you call your mama, cause I'm sure that if you commit suicide, your mama will call me."  And I said, "Now, do you think that I," I said, "Now, if you're really wanna commit it, you know, you know me, and you know I'm not gonna try to convince you not to do it (laughter).  So why are you calling?"  So I said, "You must not be," "Oh, yes I am."  And then she slammed the, she didn't commit suicide, but she's never spoken to me since that time (laughter).
Story_ID: 29547
Speaker 1: So now, it's 1964, and I wanna talk about, did you have any feelings about in '63 [1963], when [John F.] Kennedy was president, any feelings about the Vietnam War and about Kennedy's death?
Speaker 2: Well, the Vietnam War for me, personally, didn't show up until I got to graduate school.  But I remember in college, I was supposed to meet a young lady.  We were going out to lunch, and then, you know, I came out of the student union, and I saw all of these people just sort of wandering around, crying.  And someone said that the President had been shot.  It didn't, that statement didn't have a big impact one way or the other to me.  But clearly, there were lots of people around who were extremely upset.  And for about the next three or four days, the campus, you know, effectively shut down.  I mean there were classes, but, now, I mean when I say I had no feeling, I mean to me, you know, I read a lot of history, and leaders get killed.  And this was just a leader that got killed.  And I think in this country something like twenty percent of our presidents have either been killed or assassination attempts made on them.  So, and currently, that number is probably even higher.  So that's part of not only our history, but the history of many countries, that leaders, you know.  Now, I felt bad from the point of view as to, you know, Kennedy, as president, there was a certain feeling in the country, independently of whether that feeling had any basis in reality or not, I mean I felt bad about that.  But personally, I wasn't upset at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, the Vietnam War had an impact with me right out of college because a number of my friends who were college graduates were drafted.  But I had decided I wasn't going.  And just to make a long story short, I got seven induction notices, and I didn't go.
Speaker 1: And nothing happened?
Speaker 2: And nothing happened.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Again, that's a, I don't know whether you wanna hear about this.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: Okay, the, that war was set up such that anyone with any degree of intelligence could at least postpone their going in for four or five years.  The first thing, if, you know, I was classified 1A.  The first thing that you could do is that, the letter would usually come to say something like, Dear Mickens, you are to report at 6:00 a.m. on blah, blah, blah, whatever the date is, in the city courthouse or whatever, in Petersburg, Virginia for induction into the Armed Services of the United States.  I said, no, I wasn't gonna do that.  The first thing you could always do if you didn't live in the city in which you were supposed to report, was ask for an extension.  Well, you know how the government works.  By the time, you got that, effectively, you had to start all over again.  That normally took about six months to do.  So I went through a couple of those.  Then I got one just before I went to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And my argument then was that the Ford Foundation and other people had put all this money into my training and therefore, it would be in the interest of the United States if I was able to make use of that training.  So that got me out of that.  The last one was when I was at MIT, 1968.  I received it on the 24th.  See, by this time, they had caught on to me (laughter).  I received this on the 24th of December.  And I was to report for induction on the 2nd of January.  And their conclusion was that there's no way that he could round up his resources to do that.  Well, it turned out I was able to round up.  I immediately sent off letters to, I think, what was the black senator, Ed [Brooke], from Massachusetts? (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Ed Brooke?
Speaker 1: Brooke, yes.  I wrote to him, and I wrote to, I think Kennedy was a senator then.  In any case, they said no.  They would not intervene on my behalf.  I then went to someone at MIT who was a former general in the Air Force.  And what he told me was, look, he says, Mickens, I will guarantee you that if you go into the military that, other than basic training, you will never have to fight.  I said, I'd go with that latter part, but I'm not going into the military.  So I had people who were calling me up, wanting me to go to Canada.  Actually, I got, so what happened was that I got, they did go with my game of extending.  I said I wanted to be inducted in Cambridge, Mass [Massachusetts].  So they sent that to me.  So I went up to Canada.  I mean I had some friends that invited me to Canada.  Now, you know, being from the South, and someone inviting you in Canada in January, (laughter) where there's snow and everything (laughter), I decided getting off the airplane, I'm not going to Canada (laughter).  I mean even if the weather was good I probably wasn't going.  But I had a lot of reasons why, philosophical and other reasons why I wasn't going into the military.  But I continued my tactics, and I eventually turned twenty-seven.  And at that time, the rule was that if you're 27, you wouldn't be inducted.  So, that's just sort of, but I got a letter back from my draft board, and what they said was, you are the only person, white or colored, from the city of Petersburg, who has not fulfilled their call to duty.  I wrote them back.  Yep, you're right (laughter).  So what point are you trying to make here (laughter)?  I have all that information.  That's what I wrote.  I said, yep, you're right, you know (laughter).  So (laughter).
Story_ID: 29548
Speaker 1: It's 1964, let's go back to 1964.
Speaker 2: 1964 right.
Speaker 1: And you have the highest academic average in school's history, in Fisk's [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] history.  What does that mean?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  I think that's something that somebody put down.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: You know, I can, one, is I doubt, I had a high academic record, but I doubt if it was the highest.  In any case, it is of no relevance, you know.  But I, you know, what I discovered, you know, through my life, I was once sitting at a table where there were a couple of ladies talking about me.  I mean, and it was just interesting hearing someone talk about you, in which you say, yeah, this is interesting.  I, who, I mean I asked them, who is that person you're talking about (laughter)?  That's a very interesting person (laughter).  No, but I don't think, no, I, what happened, was, you know, during that time, there was a lot of civil rights activities going on.  SNCC [Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee] had effectively moved out of Atlanta [Georgia] to Nashville [Tennessee].  In fact, they basically moved on our campus [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].  And that's an interesting story in which all I can say is, much of what is written and what actually happened--
Speaker 1: You wanna tell us?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.  Some of it is libelous, so whatever.
Speaker 1: Well, is there anything you can tell about the time?
Speaker 2: What I can say is this.  I got, I had an opportunity, I had a chance to meet Stokely Carmichael, almost all the people, you know, that were involved in SNCC.  And I was involved in certain of their activities.  But there were lots of demonstrations.  There were Fisk students who would, every day go downtown and march and do, you know, there was violence that was taking place and things of that nature.  So, my decision was to stay in Nashville.  And that's how I ended up being at Vanderbilt University [Nashville, Tennessee].  But as an undergraduate I had taken classes at Vanderbilt University.  So when I went there, I mean I knew all the people in the physics department.  I mean it, this whole racial thing, it was of no, I mean in terms of directed towards me, it was of no particular interest to me.  I mean my view always is that, look, hey, people can think, people can always think of some reason to not like you.  That's no big thing.  I never allowed people to touch me.  That's a different thing.  For about eight years, I carried a gun.  In fact, I carried a gun full time up until they started searching you on airplanes.  You know, that's when people started hijacking things.  And I would have used it, you know.  But so that's why I stayed there, but in terms of, so there were a lot of things that was going on.  One of the things I did was to, how do I wanna put it?  I was, one is I always stayed in the background.  It's some crazy folks out there (laughter), I mean crazy folks I was working with.  And so I was able to acquire certain goods and services.  At that time, also Fisk had had an open campus.  Fisk would bring in students that were kicked out of other schools, you know, like Tennessee State.  Tennessee State was a state school and, you know, the president and people there had a lot of pressure on them.  So there were also people from Chicago [Illinois], basically criminals, had moved (unclear), you know, because Fisk really had an open campus at that time.  And so one of the things that I did was to sort of mediate various kinds of disputes that took place.  I mean when you have basically an open campus like that, there are lots of situations that can lead to disputes among different kinds of folks.  But one of the most amusing things, you may not remember, but there was quote unquote "a riot in Nashville."  There were two young students, Fisk students.  The male was a football player, and other than the fact that he was a good football player, he certainly, you know, did not display any inkling of intellectual abilities and deep thought in terms of his actions.  One of the things that occurred is one night, they decided to go to a service station with a six-pack of coke, I assume that the cokes were drank before, they drank them, and fill 'em with gasoline.  Well, of course, see during that time, police were following everybody.  I mean that was no big thing.  And, of course, they were stopped, and they were arrested.  And that sort of escalated into probably fifty or sixty police coming on the Fisk campus.  They claimed at that time, that Stokely Carmichael had instigated that.  Now, the interesting thing was that I was at a party over on Vanderbilt University's campus.  And at that party was Eldridge Cleaver, Stokely Carmichael, and I'm trying to think, there was a person, my friend, John Steven (ph.), went to Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  The minister for education of SNCC was his friend.  But we were at John's house, partying, you know, but it was an intellectual party.  We were sitting around.  So I assume all those names you know, Eldridge Cleaver--
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: --all of that.  And it was only later when we, that we heard about all this stuff that's taking place at Fisk, that we went over in several cars.  But Carmichael and those people had absolutely nothing to do with what went on.  There were some pictures that were sent around the world.  In fact, one of them was sent to Vietnam, the University of Vietnam sent us this, they took a picture--I don't know whether you've ever been to Fisk or not, but they have these stone walls.  Someone took a picture of the stone wall.  If you don't know what it is, it possibly could be a building that was blown up, but it was just part of the stone wall, saying, Fisk University raised to the ground by the racist police (laughter).  It was so funny (laughter).  And so that's why I'm a little bit cynical when I read about, I mean, I've been in enough things where I know what the truth is and what came out.  But, no, it came out the next day in the newspaper that Carmichael had come to campus, and these other people, and they had, you know, incited the students to riot and all that kind of crap, you know.  That was, none of that happened that way.
Story_ID: 29549
Speaker 1: Okay, so you graduated from Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and went immediately into the Ph.D. program at Vanderbilt [University, Nashville, Tennessee], right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Who was the president of Vanderbilt at that time?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think it was [Alexander] Heard.
Speaker 1: Heard.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, and tell me about your time while you were working on your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: I had fun.  Well, remember that I had already, as an undergraduate, I was taking courses over there.  And the chair of the department who became my advisor, I had invited as president of the physics club, I had invited him over.  And he, good ole, southern boy--
Speaker 1: Who was this?
Speaker 2: Wendell Holiday.  In fact, we've maintained, he died a year and a half ago, but we've maintained our contact throughout the years.  I mean in some sense, it became interesting because he was my mentor.  Then in later life, I became his mentor, and I'm, you know, I call his wife once a month, and, you know, I, you know, she considers me like a son.  I mean it's, it's just interesting.  But what he told me was when I went there, he says, do physics.  He said, whatever else you do, I don't care about.  I don't care about one way or the other.  And that brings up a very interesting event.  My last year at Vandi [Vanderbilt University], I took a job, well, I had a full, I had a Woodrow Wilson Fellowship that I used for the first year, and I had a Ford Fellowship for three.  So I finished in four years.  So I didn't need any money.  But I still needed more money.  I took a job at Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee], and we were not paid.  And I went to see the department chair and says, look, hey, you realize that I took this job because I needed money (laughter), and I'm not getting any money.  So he says, well, okay, just be patient.  So I waited two weeks.  Then I went to see the dean, and I went by the president's office.  I didn't see the president's office.  So after a month, I called the governor's office.  Now, keep in mind, this is '68 [1968].  Of course, you know precisely what happened.  I got fired on the spot.  The next day when I went to my office, all of my, well, I didn't have that many things, just some books, was outside.  The key wouldn't work.  Now, I don't know whether this was, whether this was just done with purely coincidence, I went out to my car and somebody cut my fan belt.  Now, that I can attribute to nature, but I don't think that was nature.  And my check, apparently, I was the only one that got paid (laughter) for about another month, you know.  But that just gives you some of the attitudes.  People were, you know, when I called the governor, I didn't talk to the governor.  I talked, I'd say, look, you know, I took this job because I needed money.  Secondly, I said, now, I was told that I'd be paid at certain intervals, and I have not been paid.  I said, now, is this the way you folks do the University of Tennessee [sic, Tennessee State University]?  You know, I mean, cause that'll just eliminate several schools that I'll work at (laughter).  Anyway, I got my check, and I was basically--oh, but that's not the end of it.  The chair of the math department, I don't remember his name, wrote a letter to my advisor at Vanderbilt University, saying all kinds of stuff, all lies.  And so my advisor just came to me one day and says, look, hey, I got this letter.  He says, you wanna read it?  Do I have to?  He says, nah.  He says, I said, what does it say?  He said, well, I don't believe it so unless you wanna read it.  He said, okay, and that was the extent of it.  I ran into this fellow later who was chair of the department, and he admitted that it was lies.  I said, okay, all right.  But I was just, you know, during that time, particular blacks who worked at black schools, you know, I mean they would tolerate not being paid and all of this.
Speaker 1: But you were--
Speaker 2: I had, well, you know, they were a little bigger than me.  I mean they probably had some reserve fat.  I was, I only weighed 114 pounds, I mean (laughter), you know.  I couldn't do that (laughter).
Story_ID: 29550
Speaker 1: Okay, so your time at Vanderbilt [University, Nashville, Tennessee], at home, what was going on at home?
Speaker 2: When you say--
Speaker 1: In '64 [1964] and your grandfather [James Williamson]?
Speaker 2: Let's see, I think he had died.  I don't remember the exact dates, but, well, of course, you know you had these events of, the desegregation events that took place in Petersburg [Virginia], but all of those things were very, I mean I don't ever remember anybody telling me that there was any kind of violence or real protests against that.  So.
Speaker 1: Well, I meant at home, in your household, with your grandfather.  You said your grandfather had passed away in '64 [1964]?.
Speaker 2: I don't, I have it written down on that little sheet.  I just don't--
Speaker 1: Okay, I know that you were very close to him--
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, when he died, I stopped talking to him.  So, you know, (laughter), who else is left (laughter), you know.  But the other thing too, you have to remember is that, I mean I was very heavily engaged in research.  I was heavily engaged in a multitude of other unspecified activities.  And I was doing a lot of traveling, and so it's, you know, it's very hard to keep up an active, and you know, the, when he died, he must have been in his '90s.  I mean there's a certain stage where, you know, just because of old age, and also interests and other things too.  When I say interests, I mean, you know, when you're young, there is something, we could engage in something cause there was something he had that I wanted and we could talk about it.  But, you know, when someone is ninety-five, ninety-six, I mean he was very active and healthy up until near the end.  The last three or four years, he was sick, he was bedridden, and you know, you can't carry out--
Story_ID: 29551
Speaker 1: What was your thesis paper about?
Speaker 2: Ah, what was it about?  Well, let's see.  (Laughter) Well, what I, let me just give you a little background.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: By the time I got to the point where I would write my dissertation, I had already written about twelve papers.  And, in fact, the Vietnam War and things were, I didn't have a great interest in getting out of graduate school, even though I finished relatively early.  What happened is, my advisor in July of '68 [1968] told me, he say, Mickens, you're finished.  He says, if you're not out of here by August, you'll have to get somebody else.  So I asked him, I said, well, how long should I take to write my dissertation?  He says, well, how much time you got?  (Laughter)  So, what I did was, I sat down, and I wrote it up in one week.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: I basically just took my papers and, you know, tacked them together.  I mean what I did was very mathematical.  And so, and my dissertation was about fifty-one pages long.  I have a copy of it over, well, some, thought I had a copy.  I guess I threw them away.  So, no, I started on a Monday.  I wrote one chapter a week [sic, day].  I already, one reason he wanted me to get out is that I had this National Science Foundation Post Doctorial fellowship to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], which is a very, in those days, very rare award.  So he says, well, you gotta get out.  So I wrote it up, and, but the specific topic--let me give you an analogy.  Let's suppose that you wanted to find out what's in a box.  But you don't know, you know that there's something in there, and let's suppose that you can't open the box, but you have to determine what's in the box.  Basically, my dissertation research was an issue similar to that, you know.  And if I give you a box with something in it, I mean you could shake it.  The shaking will give you some information.  You know, clearly if you had pennies in there, that would sound differently than if you had dollar bills. So there are a lot of things you could eliminate, you know.  You could put it in water.  You know, if it floats, then it means that whatever is in there, at least it's small enough and may, clearly not dense enough so as to cause--so there's a whole, so the idea is that you probe this box using different things.  If you have access to it, and if you're sophisticated, you might try things like, you know, hitting it with a stick or something to just see what sounds come out.  If you have more sophisticated instrumentation, you can take an x-ray, you know.  And you can do various things.  So my dissertation dealt with a situation in which I had a black box.  It wasn't a physical black box and I wanted to use mathematics to try to determine what's in that black box, you know.  The mathematics of it I don't think I can explain (unclear) cause I always tell the students, you know, if we could explain this stuff mathematical in a very simple way, we definitely would not be learning calculus.  There's a reason why we learn calculus (laughter) cause we can't do it in anything else (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so can you tell us about some of the research that you had done up until this time?
Speaker 2: You mean this current time?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Oh, that time.  Well, what I was doing up until that time was just looking at other black boxes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, it is a very mathematical topic and I don't think I can, you know, I mean, in some sense, the mathematics is beyond calculus, so it involves a theory of complex variables and things of that sort.  So it, but it was basically the application of certain techniques involving an area of mathematics that we call complex functions.  You're familiar with com--you know, we have integers.  You have, then you have rational numbers like one half or three fourths.  And then you have real numbers, you know, things like pi.  And, but it turns out you can generalize that concept, you know.  Think of numbers as being a string, you know, the real numbers as being a string.  Well, a complex number is, take another string, tie a knot in it and put it perpendicular to it.  So you can think of a complex number as having these two strings, okay.  And actually, that metaphor is quite good because what happens is that you can take a, well, tie three strings together.  So you can see that this whole concept of what we call number, you can generalize, you know, that ordinarily in our daily lives, we use this one string, but you can have two strings or you can have three strings or you can have many strings, you know.  So it just means that, you know, these things can be generalized.  And what I was doing was actually, looking at a situation in which I had two strings, trying to describe something because one string wouldn't do it.
Story_ID: 29552
Speaker 1: Explain, your Ph.D. was in theological--
Speaker 2: Theoretical physics.
Speaker 1: Theoretical.
Speaker 2: Yeah, theoretical elementary particle physics.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us what that is.
Speaker 2: Okay, suppose you have a piece of iron.  You have an iron bar and you cut it in half.  Well, you just have a short iron bar, and you cut that in half.  Okay, the question is, can you always continue cutting it?  And what do you get?  Do you reach a stage in which you have something that's not iron?  You know, in other words, is there a smallest unit of iron?  And the answer is yes.  That's an atom, okay.  Now, the question is, suppose in some sense you could split that atom.  You know, you chop it.  Do you reach something that's different from an atom?  The answer is yes.  You can get nuclei electrons.  Then you could ask that about the nuclei.  Can you (unclear)?  And so what elementary particle deals with is what are those fundamental--do you need to stop?
Speaker 1: Go ahead. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, but you're not supposed to pay attention to that?
Speaker 2: Well (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: So, what elementary particles deal with is trying to understand these various levels.  See nature is actually separated into various levels.  That's why we can do science, you know.  You have, let's say, the level that we deal with, the so-called macroscopic level.  Then you have a level below that, the atomic level where you have atoms and molecules where they're important, and then you have a level below that where you have the nucleus.  It turns out that the, that you can actually chop open in some sense, using that metaphor, the nucleus.  There's another level.  We call those things quarks, you know.  And so nature is separated into these various levels, and what elementary particle physics tries to do is to deal with this bottom layer and ask the fundamental question.  Is that the end or is there something else?  Now so far, you know, I mean it appears that that's the end.  But it may not be because we thought it was the end when it was up here, and then we got here, we thought it was the end.  So we don't know, but that's one of the fundamental things.  What is the structure of the material universe?  That's what elementary particles deals with.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's why they call you atom smashers (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Right, except probably it would be better to call them them nuclei smashers cause it's really the nuclei that are being smashed.
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about the energy that's used?  It's high energy to get to that point and when they use acceleration at that point?
Speaker 2: No, an accelerator is just a microscope.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know.  What do you do, okay let's take a little magnifying glass.  You got a magnifying glass, which I use now cause I can't see this tiny print, got a magnifying glass.  And what does it do?  It takes things down here, and it makes it larger.  All right, now what you can do is you can look at microscopes that they have in the laboratory, and what will that do?  Well, you can see little tings crawling around in there, and it makes you wanna heat your water (laughter).  Then there're other microscopes, for example, where you can see, you know, single cells and things of that nature.
Story_ID: 29553
Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about accelerators?
Speaker 2: Right.  And as I was, I made the statement that an accelerator is just, is just a microscope.  It turns out that there's an inverse relationship between the energy.  I mean think of microscopes now as objects that produce, objects that have some energy or detect the energy.  It turns out that the smaller an object is, then the larger the energy is required in order to see it.  And so, for example, if I wanna see what's in the want ads, I have a little hand magnifying glass.  If I wanna see a cell, then I have a optical microscope that's about this large.  If I wanna see things that are parts of the cells, more than likely I may have to go to an electron microscope which would be as tall as this room.  And if I wanna see, you know, really down deep into the nucleus, I need an accelerator.  And usually, the more, the larger the energy of the accelerator, the larger the accelerator is.  And so there is this correlation between the size in some sense of the accelerator and the objects that you're trying to see.  The bigger the accelerator, on average, that is, then the smaller the object that you can see because the larger accelerator will, in principle, allow you to have a larger energy.  And you can actually write down a mathematical relationship that gives that to you.
Speaker 1: So that's why people go to, like a Fermi-Lab?
Speaker 2: To Fermilab [Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Illinois], for example, or they go to CERN [European Organization for Nuclear Research] you know, because they have very large accelerators and therefore, they can produce particles that have large energies which can be used to probe other particles.  And since you have this inverse relationship between energy and size, the bigger the energies, the smaller the distance over which you can probe something.  So you can really look inside these sub-atomic particles.
Story_ID: 29554
Speaker 1: So you wanna talk about some of your work?
Speaker 2: No, but I will (laughter).  Let me tell you this joke, but it's not really a joke cause I was there when it happened.  A very famous physicist, Paul Adrien Maurice Dirac, some of you might have heard of him.  He was at a conference and he was at the board writing something down.  And so afterwards, Professor raised (unclear), says, "Dr. Dirac, there is a point that you made that I didn't understand."  And so Dirac just looked at him.  So about a minute later, I mean Dirac still hadn't said anything.  And so (professor?) said, "Are you gonna answer my question?"  And he says, "You didn't ask me a question.  You made a statement.  You didn't understand something.  If you wanna ask me to explain it, then ask me to explain it."  Anyway, (chuckle), you asked me a question, and I don't remember, about my work.  So, my current work?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) Why?  Currently, I'm working on a variety of topics.  One of the most interesting deals with the mathematical spread of diseases, particularly so-called periodic diseases.  Anyone who has children know what a periodic disease is.  These are the things that start cropping up, usually in October, November, January, December, you know.  An example is measles, and they're periodic because if you plot their incidence versus time, you know, they give you something like a sine wave.  One of the issues that we're dealing with is mathematically modeling these things, and there're reasons why you want mathematical models.  One is that if you have a good mathematical model, you can do things to the model that you can't do to a human being.  For example, you might wanna investigate various strategies for giving, you know, we have a very effective measles vaccine.  It's been around for a long time.  In fact, one measure of its effectiveness is that, you know, it's the same one that we've had for about the last thirty, forty years.  But we know that measles has not been eliminated, and one reason is that, you have to vaccinate effectively ninety-five percent of all the susceptibles.  A susceptible is someone who can catch the disease in the vernacular, okay.  It's impossible to vaccinate ninety-five percent.  One is our common strategy or the common practice is to start out with young kids.  Well, there are parents who don't want their kids vaccinated because of the very, very, very low probability that something bad may happen to them. There are others who won't do it because of religious reasons.  And that brings up some interesting ethical questions.  Should you have a subgroup in your population who for whatever reason, refuses to carry out an action that has a major impact on the society as a whole?  But in any case, these kinds of issues, what, you know, when you ask, is there another kind of vaccination strategy?  The normal one is where you vaccinate young kids.  Are there other strategies that can be used for vaccinations that would eliminate it?  The answer is yes.  But the mere existence of a strategy doesn't mean that you can carry it out.  It may be unethical, at least for our society, and so one of the things you do with these models is to look at various kinds of strategies and then you can hand this off to somebody in public policy, and they can decide well, we can't do that because the society would not allow this to happen.  I mean one of the strategies that we've looked at and it will work, is called the big bang strategy.  What you, remember what I said, now, with young kids you have to vaccinate about ninety-five percent of them.  That's very tough to do.  What you can ask is, let's look at the total population that it has potential to be susceptible.  That extends up to about the age of, I don't know, twelve, fifteen or whatever.  And you could stand on the corner with your needles, and you could ask somebody, prove that you have been vaccinated.  And if they can't prove it, if you, just stick 'em.  See, that's not likely to take place, even though that's clearly a strategy that would eliminate.  Now, one of the things you have to keep in mind is that what's unethical for this country, is not necessarily unethical in terms of how it can be applied to other societies.  When small pox was in the process of being eradicated, what people did was basically use a policy.  Someone discovered with small pox, you go in, you know, you treat the immediate people.  You go out ten kilometers and you do them.  They didn't ask people whether they want it done, you know.  So, what a model will do is to allow you to play with things.  If it's a good model, you can see, well, if I carry out this policy, this strategy for vaccination, I'll get a certain result.  And you can also compare it with the economics, you know.  So that's one of the things that, last, summer before last, I and several other persons organized a workshop at Snowbird, Utah, up in the mountains.  Hey, I mean, you know, scientists, we can't be in the inner city doing, we got to be in the mountains and skiing and drinking liquor and all that kind of stuff (laughter).  And the book is out.  I mean I don't have a copy with me, but we brought in graduate students.  We brought in MDs.  We brought in people, there were folks from Africa and other places and just asked, you know, just talked (unclear) very general things.  One of the things that a mathematical model is, oftentimes, mathematicians go crazy.  They go off and write down, they work in a world that's perfect, but one of the things you have to ask yourself is, are the things that you'd like to know in order to fully describe the model, can they be measured?  And so that's why you need to bring in people who actually get data and they can tell you what some of the limitations are.  And, you know, so that was actually a very good, very good workshop.  So, that's called mathematical epidemiology.
Story_ID: 29555
Speaker 1: One of the other things that I'm working on is non-linear oscillations.  Everybody oscillates, shake, rattle and roll.  That's what an oscillation is.  I mean, everything shakes.  I mean in life, you know, 99.9 percent of the things shake because what?  It's, if it's monotonic upward, it becomes unbounded or it can be monotonically downward and go to zero, and even at zero, it shakes.  For example, a prime example of something that shakes is your heart.  And we tend to think of the heart as having some regular heartbeat.  That's not true at all.  There are all kinds of frequencies that are in it.  There are many situations in which you'd like to have control over things shaking, okay.  And sometimes you can use shaking to control things too.  Example, when you were young, you probably had a broom or a beater stick you put on the end of your finger.  If you just left it there, what'll happen, it'll fall off.  But if you oscillate your finger in the right way, it'll stay up.  It's call parametric oscillation.  What you do is, you take a state that's unstable, and by unstable, I mean if you put the, and it falls off, and you just apply a little force, and this is the interesting thing, you don't have to do very much for, you know, you can train, just a little force and put it in a stable state.  Take, for example, an automatic pilot, you know, the plane.  You know, the plane is flying along, hits a little turbulence one way and goes up.  What you'd like for this thing to do is to go down and damped out.  You know, you don't want this thing to be doing like that.  And, but that's just a non-linear, that's another example of an oscillatory state.  So, but we're looking at, many of our examples comes from engineering.  And so we've constructed mathematical models for new kinds of differential equations to describe these phenomena.
Story_ID: 29556
Speaker 1: Let's see, now what else am I looking?  My, I do work involving, in the area of the history and the philosophy of science with regard to African Americans in particular, but just in general.  I mean you take someone like [Elmer] Imes there.  Imes came from a very interesting family.  Back in the early part of the nineteenth century, his grandparents were freed people.  And it's not even clear that they ever came over here as slaves.  They might have come as indentured servants, in the mountains of Pennsylvania.  His parents met at Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio], both of them got degrees from Oberlin.  They became missionaries later on.  He had two brothers.  He became a very well-known physicist, but he had one brother who went into theology, actually, back in the '50s [1950s] I think he was dean of the chapel at Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee].  He had another brother who went England and made two or three fortunes and, well, I can't say he drank them away.  But anyway, he made two or three fortunes, which implies that there was a time where he was between fortunes (laughter), you know.  Very famous so, one of the things I'm interested in is, you know, how do families, you know, I mean what's, what's the social context in which families like that can live and survive and so forth.  Or you take Willie Hobbs Moore who was the first African American woman to get a Ph.D. in physics, and that wasn't--for a long time, people thought Shirley Jackson was this person.  And--
Speaker 2: Well, talk about Shirley Jackson, she was at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] when you were there doing your post doctoral?
Speaker 1: Yes, I went there in August of '68 [1968], and she had just finished MIT that June.  And so she entered the graduate school there.
Speaker 2: Well, maybe she was the first African American woman to be--
Speaker 1: From MIT.
Speaker 2: From MIT.
Speaker 1: Right.  None of us, for a long time, she was stated as being the first to get a degree.  She was the second.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I always tell people, I say what you need to do is start off at three.  You're probably the third because there's been a lot of passing, you know.  I mean at Vanderbilt University [Nashville, Tennessee], I mean there are a whole bunch of folks, colored people back in the '50s [1950s] and the '40s [1940s], they were passing (laughter), you know.  If you look at my family, I have people in there you'd never even think that they had any blackness at all in them, you know.  There's some interesting stories there.  Well, you take Imes wife, who wrote, you know, her two most famous novels are 'Passing' and 'Quicksand,' and they're about roughly what you think it is.  In one case, you know, you had two sisters.  One is passing, and one is not passing.  One is married to a white fellow.  Now, think about all the consequences, okay.  What happens if you have children?  I had a whole lot of orange juice (laughter).  So, but you can see, you know.  So, yeah, I mean it's, and all these things get tied together because the Imes family currently, they're basically broken off into two branches.  There's one branch that identifies with being white and there's another one with being African American.  But it has nothing to do per se with skin color, you know.  It has to do with ethnic identification.  So you have, you run into all these complicated things and when you read about particular, Imes wife, Nella Larson, she had a very, her background is very murky.  Her father was from the Virgin Isles, I believe, and her mother was white.  And she had a sister.  Now, Nella was light, fair skinned, but she was not white looking.  Her sister was.  When Nella's mother remarried, for whatever reasons, and I've heard various, two or three different stories, she didn't take Nella with her.  Now, that's how Nella got to Fisk and presumably, that's how Nella met Imes.  You know what professors do.  Professors marry their students.  I don't know whether he did that, you know.  If you're at the University of Alaska, good chance you're gonna marry an Eskimo.  You marry who's around.
Story_ID: 29557
Speaker 1: Okay, so, we talked about your current works, but let's just step back a little bit and when you finished Vanderbilt, where did you go?  Oh, wait, there's one other person.  You met James Young.  You wanna talk about him?
Speaker 2: Oh, Jim Young is a very interesting character.
Speaker 1: You met him at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], right?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  When I went to MIT in '68 [1968], it turned out that, I think he was that year.  The next year there was another black fellow who came to do a post doc.  And then Jim Young, who was a graduate of MIT in the '50s [1950s] was visiting.  I guess they were trying to court him to be on the faculty.  So for that very brief couple of year period, there were three people in the physics department at MIT.  Jim was a very competent scientist.  He's done a lot of interesting work, still alive.  You know, on occasion, we talk, and we've had lots of interesting (laughter) experiences together, along with a number of other people.  You remember I told you that when (Clarence?) was coming down, most of our discussion was off-camera there.  There are just some things that don't need to be in the public domain, at least it won't be in the public domain by me anyway.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But you know, you see, when you have situations where you, where they're interesting people, where you have intelligent people, folks interact with each other.  And when histories are written or when biographies are written or when autobiographies are written, what people write about is what they want you to know about them.  They don't write about what actually happened.  And there are a variety of reasons as to why they may not do it, you know.  So, let me just leave it like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So after Vanderbilt [University, Nashville, Tennessee], tell me what happened after that?
Speaker 2: I applied for the NSF [National Science Foundation] post doc.  I didn't really expect to get it and I got it, which in those days, that was a big thing cause they didn't give that many and a little ole colored boy from a southern school.  So it was, well, one reason, I guess why my advisor wanted me to get out.  And so I went to MIT.  That was sort of in some sense the mecca in terms of elementary particle physics.  So I went up.  I went to the Center for Theoretical Physics there, and as I said, I had, Shirley [Jackson] is one of the first persons I met when I was there.  That was also at the start of the Black Students' Union and the start of her career, you know, I mean, as a public figure.  So that was, those were interesting times, you know.
Speaker 1: How did your white counterparts work with you?
Speaker 2: Well, one is, I'm basically a lone wolf.  I mean even now, I get people, you know, I get a lot of people who write to me that they wanna come work with me.  I tell 'em I, stay where you are.  We have telephones, you know, email.  I, no, I, well see, all the people who were there, I knew by at least profession, the name.  So it was just a matter of meeting 'em personally.  I didn't have any problem, but on the other hand, you know, just go back to Vandi [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee].  Right after me, see when I was in graduate school, at least the first year, there were no other blacks.  And then later, some came after me.  I had absolutely no problem.  I mean one is, most people's problems are self imagined.  I mean if you don't touch me, then I don't have a problem, you know.  And if somebody knows that they can upset you, all they have to do is to do a little thing every day, and you'll never get any work done.  So, you know, I wasn't afraid of, they would all say, well, you're the only one there, weren't you?  Like I said, grandpa said, remember Alaska, when you're around Eskimos, eat blubber (laughter), you know.  I, it didn't bother.  Well, it, I had the experience of working over there, and going to classes with the students there when I was an undergraduate.  I knew at least half the physics department, you know.  Then it just became a question as to, you know, how I'd react to stuff.  And you know, I, so my stay there was quite nice.  I mean I dated while I was there, and, you know, there were professors outside of the department that I became very friendly with, and all kinds of stuff because I don't let that stuff bother me.  I mean, you know, I'm not gonna allow, in general, somebody's else's reality to upset me.  It doesn't make sense 'cause there's always someone around that can do that.
Story_ID: 29558
Speaker 1: So after MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Well, after MIT, I decided to go back to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] because remember this is, you know, still you had a lot of civil rights stuff going on, and there was, particularly, at many of the black schools, there were lots of student demonstrations, you know.  We're a black institution.  We don't want any money from white folks.  Okay, right, all right.  That means you don't want any money (laughter), you know.  Okay, right.  (Laughter) So keep in mind what you're saying now.  I want some (laughter).  When you write them the letter, say send it to Mickens.  No, but I mean you had all, and see Fisk has always been liberal.  They've always let people, I mean really.  I had been to lots of schools in this country.  I have never seen a school as liberal as Fisk, at least during those days.  They really tolerated a lot of stuff.  And so I decided I wanted to go back, and well, one is, you know, I knew the people.  I knew the students.  I knew what was going on.  And so I went back for a couple of years.  Then I went back to MIT for about a, what?  About a year and a half, and then I went back to Fisk.  Then eventually I got fired from Fisk.
Speaker 1: Who else was in the department in physics?
Speaker 2: So when I went back, my major professor was President Jim Lawson, and he became ill.  Then they hired someone else, someone who was just totally without scruples, you know.  And we had daily battles.  I mean, when I say daily battles, I mean, you know, we'd walk down the street, and I'd, and I'd say something insulting, but I'd say it in a sophisticated way.  And I'd let him think about it for twenty minutes so he could figure out it was insulting (laughter).  We're on a college campus now (laughter).  So a couple years later I went on leave, and I had determined by then I was, I said, I'm not going back.  So I spent a year at Vanderbilt University [Nashville, Tennessee], and then I spent a year, fifteen months out in Colorado.  Actually, I would have stayed longer because my son [James Williamson Mickens] became very ill.  Colorado is far from every place.  Trust me, it's not, you think, oh, it's close to California.  Colorado is far from every place.  So I decided, but what happened is, the president told me to return to Fisk or I'd be fired.  So I didn't respond.  So he put the motion before the board.  The board members, there were thirty-seven board members.  Two voted to fire me, one voted to keep me on and the rest abstained.  So, I just, well, I couldn't say I left cause I wasn't there, you know.  As I said, my son was sick so, and my wife [Maria Kelker] was in Florida.  So we decided that Atlanta [Georgia] would be a good place, since it's sort of close to everything.
Speaker 1: So what year did you leave--?
Speaker 2: Fisk?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Oh, good grief.  Well, let's, you know, I sort of wandered around.  I, I mean I came down to Atlanta on sabbatical, I think in '79 [1979], and then I went back to Fisk for a year and then I went to Vanderbilt, and then I went over to JILA Joint Institute for Laboratory Astrophysics out in Colorado.  I mean it was, you know, I mean you can pick any of those dates for when I left, I mean (laughter).
Story_ID: 29559
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, so what date did you go to Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen, I think it was 1981.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what do you do, you came to Clarke?
Speaker 2: No, I was at Atlanta University [Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Atlanta University.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me about Atlanta University at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, Atlanta University did not have a physics department.  As you know, it was only a graduate school.  And so in '79 [1979] when I was down on sabbatical, I set up, they had a grant from the NSF [National Science Foundation], the physics program.  And by the time I got back, they needed a chair.  I hired some people, and so I became chair, and I was chair for a year and a half, and then I resigned in the middle of the year basically because there were people who thought they could do a better job than I, and I agreed.  That's what I put in my letter.  So, it turned out they couldn't, but that's all right.  The advantage was that it wasn't me doing it.  And so I've been, you know, been here [Atlanta University] since that time, mainly doing research and some teaching.
Speaker 1: And you teach physics?
Speaker 2: Right.  And mathematics.  I mean I, mostly what they look, what I do in my courses is mainly mathematics.
Speaker 1: Between teaching and research, which do you love best?
Speaker 2: I don't think you can do one without the other.  And one is, my course load is relatively light.  So it's, you know, I did teach one course a couple of years ago that had seventy students, but I think they were trying to be sarcastic with someone, but anyway, they didn't--no, I don't think you can, great, if you look, for example, at people who are considered to be great scientists, at least in physics, most scientists have really pretty dull people, I mean particularly, mathematicians.  And I tell my mathematicians friends, you folks need to learn some jokes or something, get a book cause I doubt if you could sit down and figure out any on yourself, you know.  But, no, but if you look at, I mean, for example, if you look at people, now, you have to understand, what is a great teacher?  A great teacher is someone who motivates you, and as I always tell my students, I am not a teacher.  You know, I'm not here to present you with facts, even though that may come out, those facts.  What I'm here to do is to give you the benefit of my experience and to see, at least at this time, what are the things I consider to be important and to put you in a position where you can acquire some of these abilities.  But as a teacher, my success depends upon you being better than I.  And see, if you can't do any better than me, nothing has changed, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, even though you don't consider yourself a teacher per se--
Speaker 2: And there're probably a lot of students of mine who would agree with that (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, I don't know about that, but tell me about the textbooks that you have authored?
Speaker 2: Well, most of my books, even the ones that in some sense that can be considered textbooks, I don't really consider them as textbooks in the conventional sense.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Normally, I, when I teach a class, I mean I normally don't even prescribe a textbook.  I mean my view is that look, stuff is in the book.  If you're interested in it, you can go sit down and read it.  In life, you're not gonna be given a problem that you can look up in a book.  If it's written down, and if it's in some sense logically correct, and all that kind of stuff, you can learn that yourself, because that's how I learned.  You know, I mean (unclear) in graduate school, most of my courses I took as reading courses.  You know, in one month I can learn as much as a whole semester.  Why should I waste my time, you know?  So, what I do in many of my courses is that we just, we get problems directly out of the literature.  You know, I'll walk to our library or go to Georgia Tech's [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia] library.  I see some interesting, you know, article.  One of my techniques for teaching is the following.  First of all, most students are not gonna read outside of class, even graduate students.  So what I do is, fortunately, I have long classes.  So what I do is, you know, I'll bring in a paper, and I'll give it to 'em.  I say okay, you have half an hour, break up into groups, read this.  And then when we come back, I'll just arbitrarily pick someone and say explain what's in there, you know.  What is the issue?  Why did they think that issue is important?  And what did they do about it?
Story_ID: 29560
Speaker 1: Yeah we were talking about your books. So tell me about your books?
Speaker 2: Well, I have three kinds of books.  There's, there're two or three books that are edited volumes.  And they deal with my work.  These are research books, and they deal with my works from the perspective of how other people use them.  So, for example, my last book came out last year, or year before last, and it consisted of fourteen chapters, each chapter written by a separate set of researchers who used some of the techniques that I have created.  And I have two books like that.  I have several other books that deal with a particular type of mathematical topic.  Back in the '80s [1980s], I wrote a book on an area that's called 'Difference Equations,' not differential, but different equations.  And actually, that was the first book in a modern sense that was written, I don't know, I don't wanna say a century, but, you know, thirty, forty years.  Since that time, many other people have written books on that subject from different perspectives and so forth.  My assumption in writing that book was that this is a subject that could be learned by high school students, and, in fact, they could.  You know, maybe if they went to Einstein U or if they were good old-style students, they could do it. But it's been generalized into a second volume.  The second volume is actually about twice as large as the first volume, and I put in lots of applications.  Then I have a series, I have one or two books where I write about, one book is where I have written extensively about the geneses of a field that I've created called, nonstandard finite difference schemes.  And there'll probably be another one, that was in, I don't know, ten or fifteen years ago.  So we're ready for another volume on that.  I've done lots of new things since then.  And I have two books, probably only two books that could be considered textbooks in the traditional sense, or maybe just one.  One book came out two years ago.  It was on mathematical methods for the engineering and natural sciences.  And that could be, that's a good, you know, good textbook for the topics that it covers.  The book on Bouchet, Edward A. Bouchet was the first African American to receive a Ph.D. or at least in North America, on any subject.  And it was in physics, and he received it in 1876 from Yale University [New Haven, Connecticut].  In around 1999, the 120th anniversary of his receiving that degree was coming up, and no one seemed to be doing anything about it.  And so what I decided to do was to gather together a number of scholars who had written on Bouche or who had written on issues related to Bouche's life and career.  And so that's how that book came about.  In fact, I ended up getting thirty thousand dollars from the Sloan Foundation to buy copies so that every state university in the United States and possessions and things of that sort, and all of the historically black colleges have copies of that book.  One of the other things I did during that same period, in 1999, the American Physical Society, not physical ed, but Physical Society, physics.  By the way, recently they tried to change the name to physics, and somebody said, ah, we know, ignorant people, (unclear) anycase, they were celebrating.  They had their centennial celebration here in Atlanta [Georgia].  And what I did was to, I raised almost two hundred thousand dollars since no one else was doing it, to create a, actually two copies of a display that went on tour around the country.  Those pictures there indicate some of the, that picture there is, there was a new museum that opened in San Jose [California], ninety million dollars.  And this was one of the first exhibits that went in there, and the people in the picture there, folks who were on that display.  This was seven panels and each panel, oh, I don't know, maybe six feet or six and a half feet by about three feet.  So it's a pretty big display.  And there was a book that went along with it.  The display was called 'The African American Presence in Physics,' and there was a, we had a little extra money left over, and so I wrote a little booklet, about eighty pages, you know, that gave brief summaries of the lives and careers of some of these people.  So that's, I think that covers most of the publishing kind of activities.  I still write with ink pen or a ballpoint pen.  And I print, and all of my scientific manuscripts and all of my books are done this way.  I often have people say, oh, why don't you use the computers?  You would be much more, what do you call it, productive.  I said, well, now I've written fourteen, fifteen books or edit.  How much more productive do you want me to be?  You know, but there are things that you can do in terms of writing things on a sheet of paper that I think lends itself to being creative that you can't do at a computer.  You can doodle.  You can do all kinds of stuff, that you either have to wipe off on your screen or do all, you know, yeah, so.
Speaker 1: But you do use a computer, for other things?
Speaker 2: Well, I have other people to do it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you use it for nothing?
Speaker 2: You know, I just recently started reading emails.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Primarily at the point of eliminating all of them (laughter).  But it's only been in the last two months that I've begun to read emails on that thing, yeah.
Story_ID: 29561
Speaker 1: Tell me about the National Society of Black Physicists?
Speaker 2: Well, let me give you the history to it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In 1972, Jim Young and I, cause I'm not sure whether I was at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] then or had just left.  Anyway, what we decided was that there are certain African American physicists who have had a major impact on the African American physics community, not so much through their research.  They didn't do much research, but through their impact in terms of influencing others to go on to get degrees.  There was [John McNeile] Hunter, at Virginia State [University, Petersburg, Virginia] who had, I think thirty-five students go on to get Ph.D.s, Donaldson at North Carolina A&T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina], and [Halson V.] Eagleson at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  And so we decided to have at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], where I was, a celebration, you know, just a party.  Hey come gossip, you know, have the young people who hadn't heard of these folks find out about them and so forth.  And that's what we did.  And we had, we had essentially all of the black physicists with Ph.D.s to come.  There were about fifty-some people.  And we held this at Fisk.  It was a one afternoon, one-day affair.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the people who came?
Speaker 2: Oh, of course, Jim Young and I were there, Rutherford Atkins.  The three honorees came, Joe Johnson, almost all of the, Harry Morrison, you know, he's dead now.  He was from, at the University of California, Berkley.  But basically all of the older physicists and by older physicists, I mean those who had gotten their degrees prior to about 1970.  Jack Davenport [sic, James] at Virginia State, Jim Davenport, and so forth.  Two years later it was decided that, we decided well, this sounds like a pretty good event, you know, good alcohol, I mean, good quality stuff, you know, good fun.  We met with each other, and by the way at Fisk, you know, we had the news people come in.  So it was, we appeared on TV, and it was in the newspapers, very well publicized.  The next one I believe was '74 [1974].  We met at Howard.  And there we, I think it was Jim, who were the people?  Jim Lawson, Warren Henry, oh, and a fellow who was president of two colleges, "B", "B", his name begins with a "B", [Herman] Branson, Branson.  So we celebrated their lives and careers.  And, you know, and he, in that case there must have been, I don't know, five or six hundred people there.  So at that point, there were several people, we had a couple of conferences at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  And by that time, we had regular programs.  We had a day of scientific lectures followed by a banquet.  By the time it got to Morehouse, which as a couple of years later, and we had two of them, I think, back-to-back, we had two days of lectures and a banquet.  And, of course, you know, human beings being social animals, someone came up with the bright idea of let's form an organization.  You know, prior to this time, there was no organization.  It was basically me and a couple of other people, folks like Carl Spight and Jim Young and so forth.  So at a meeting at, in Baltimore [Maryland] at Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland], it was decided, and I think this was '78 [1978], to form the organization.  And in my view, since then, everything has been downhill.  The original intent was not to form a formal organization.  The original intent was to celebrate members in our community to let them know that we appreciate their efforts, you know, and have some fun and gossip and do all those kind of things.  When you start forming organizations, then you start forming groups who have different agendas.  So at the end of twenty-five years, I have, you know, met with some, I don't know, five, ten years ago, I have cut all my, I've cut the organization.  I have no interest in what they're doing.  I do not attend their meetings, and I tell them, do not tell me what you're doing.
Story_ID: 29562
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there anything in your career or in your life in general that we haven't talked about that you would like to talk about?
Speaker 2: Oh, that I'd like to talk about?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well, I guess the only thing we haven't really talked about in depth is that I enjoy teaching.  I enjoy interacting with students.  You know, you have people who come to you and you have some of them who are all, you know, I'm brilliant, and they think that they're brilliant, and you have others who are very shy.  And you know, and you have to sometimes give them a reality check.  And, you know, you see students who go out and have successful careers, and, you know, you see the historical continuity.  And that's what I enjoy, I mean, in addition to my own work, you know, and I must say though that my wife [Maria Kelker] has played a very large role in this, you know.  I mean I can't conceive of having been married to anyone else who would have tolerated me (laughter), and she constantly reminds me, no, she doesn't constantly remind (laughter), just on occasion.  No, she has a Ph.D. in political science, but she has devoted her life to other people, to our kids.  I mean our kids have turned out well because she's never had a regular job in the conventional sense.  Now, she's, you know, she was a girl scout leader when my daughter was young.  She'd, you know, give her services away doing taxes.  I mean organizations will pay somebody two thousand dollars for taxes, but they won't give her anything cause they know she'll do it for free.  So she's that kind of person.
Speaker 1: What's your wife's name?
Speaker 2: Maria.
Speaker 1: And what year did you get married?
Speaker 2: We got, let's see, she was a Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] student, like I said, professors marry their students, okay (laughter).  We got, what was it?  Seventy-seven [1977], I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: August the 13th.
Speaker 1: And your children?
Speaker 2: When were they born?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Look that up.  I haven't--(laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, tell me your children's names?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) James, the oldest, I don't know these dates.  On my calendar at home, I write, on January the 1st, I write down all, I'm circling the birthday cause I can't remember these things (laughter).  James Williamson, named after his grandfather, Mickens.
Speaker 1: You have one son?
Speaker 2: Yes, and one daughter.
Speaker 1: And what's your daughter's name?
Speaker 2: Lea, L-E-A, and that can be pronounced Leaha, and it can be spelled with an 'h' and not, but hers doesn't, Maria Mickens.
Story_ID: 29563
Speaker 1: When you look back over your life, is there anything that you would change or anything that you regret?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I'm a pragmatist.  I mean if I was idealistic, I could say, oh, yes, I wish I could change that.  No, not really.  I mean I know I can't do it.  Therefore, I don't wish for it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, you know, I mean if I, probably from practical level, hey, I wish I were rich, you know.  But I mean if you wish to change things, do something in practice.  I mean the stuff that in some sense of fact, I mean it's clear that there are circumstances which if I'm now confronted with them, I would do things differently.  But it's no need of me worrying about whether, you know, I can't.  And even now, if the same situation would be in some sense different.  So I, I don't give much thought to it, you know.  I'm just, you know, hoping for about another thirty more years of good health, particularly, physical and mental health, you know.  And, you know, I wanna see my kids grow up to be good people.  They're already good people, but I mean good people.  And, you know, but as I said, I think I have an exceptional family cause they have put up with me, cause I've heard a lot of people say, I wouldn't put up with you if you did that.  For me, that's good (laughter).  It's good that you don't have that opportunity (laughter) to not have to put up with it (laughter).  I wouldn't let you do that.  Oh, really.  What makes you think anybody is letting me do that now (laughter).  So, so any other things cause we're--
Speaker 1: Are there any messages that you would send to the future generation?
Speaker 2: Yes, you people who will make a whole lot of money, I'm at Clarke Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia].  Send the money.  You're (laughter), this is what I tell my students.  I want you to go out.  I want you to succeed.  You don't have to send me the letters, just send me some money (laughter), you know, and preferably bills, no checks.  I (laughter), so I don't have anything, you know, I'm having fun, and I've had fun for a long time.   And I wish that there were more people who could see intellectual activities as things that can provide them with great joy, with great fun, and that it also provides you the opportunity to meet all kinds of interesting people, to go to all kinds of strange and interesting and weird places.  And in the end, you know, say that at any point, it's been real, it's been fun.  I don't have any regrets except being poor.  I'd like to experience being very rich for about forty years in good health.  But other than that (laughter), I'll cut it down to thirty-five years (laughter).  And I mean serious money.  You know, when I pray for money, I pray for like, trillion dollars.  I mean my chances of getting trillion dollars is about the same as getting a million, so you might as well go for it, go for the real money (laughter).
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's not for me to say.  I don't really think about it.
Speaker 1: You don't think about it?
Speaker 2: I, what I'd like is just like, you know, see, you need to ask my students, you know.  What I'd like to be remembered, if you have to put it that way, as somebody in which folks said that it was interesting being around him, you know.  That's it, it was, yeah, that's about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there anything else that you would like to talk about?
Speaker 2: Happy hour (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: Didn't you say you all were gonna treat me to happy hour (laughter).  Well, I'm going by myself then (laughter).  No, that's about it.
Story_ID: 29564
Speaker 1: Okay, this is a picture of my mother.  And my mother is standing up on the right side of this photo.  This photo includes six friends of my mother and was probably taken on the edge of the athletic field of what was probably Peabody High School or at least part of the grounds of Peabody High School, located in Petersburg, Virginia.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of myself and four, I guess  you could call them African American physicists.  I'm in the back row standing up.  The person to my left or the left most person standing up is, was a graduate of Fisk University.  His name was Howard Foster, and for a long time, he was chair of the combined mathematics and physics departments at Alabama A&M.  The person standing up to the right, I can't really think of his name right now.  He has a PhD. in Physics, and he's from Panama.  At the time, he was a post doctorial student at MIT.  The person sitting down, currently deceased, is Jason Gilchrest, PhD. in Physics, I believe from Howard University, and this photo was taken in his office at North Carolina A&T.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of me, Ronald Mickens, probably taken when I was about 13 or 14 years old in the back portion of my yard.  And I'm holding in my hands, one of my model airplanes.  I believe it has a gasoline engine, and this is one of the few times in which I look like I'm dressed up, dressed up as far as I'm concerned anyway.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Next.
Speaker 2: This is a picture that was taken of me, and I'm in, I'm sitting down in the car, soapbox derby.  I must have been either 10 or 11 years old at the time.  So we're probably talking about, oh, 1954, and that was the first year they had soapbox derby in Petersburg, and it was integrated.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Next.
Speaker 2: Here is a picture that's taken at a mathematics meeting, I believe, in Baltimore.  I'm standing on the right with the blue shirt.  Cathy Lewis is the female.  She's a mathematician.  She has a PhD. in mathematics.  I can't remember off hand the, it's one of the schools that's in Kentucky.  But she's a professor of mathematics there.  The person in the middle is James West.  He's currently at John Hopkins University, doesn't have a PhD., but he's a world-class physicist and engineer, and he's a member of the National Academy of Engineering.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  All right, you wanna describe this one.
Speaker 2: This is my long-time collaborator, Aba Gumel, G-U-M-E-L.  He's from Nigeria, but he's currently in Canada.  He heads an applied industrial mathematical modeling group there.  We wrote four papers together without ever meeting.  This photograph is the first time we met, and it's taken at Princeton University.  His main area is mathematical modeling of diseases.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION:
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is a photo taken in August of 2006.  I'm standing and seated is Dr. J. Ernest Wilkins, who received his PhD. in mathematics at the age of 19 from the University of Chicago.  He entered the university at the age of 14, and five years later, he had all three degrees.  He's world-class mathematician.  He's a former president of the American Nuclear Society.  His career spans three or four different areas.  And he's, his birth, he's about 84 years old.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
VIDEOGRAPHER:  This picture was taken on top of, I'm not sure what the name of the mountain is, but it's the ski area behind Snowbird, Utah.  All of the people there were members of a conference that I helped organize on the mathematical modeling of disease.  The only names, that's myself on the left.  The third person is Aba Gumel from Canada, and all of the others are scientists from around the United States and Canada.
Speaker 2: This is picture of, this is a group picture of Dr. Jeronus Wilkins and his wife.  They're seated below.  Wilkins had just retired from Clarke Atlanta University and was going to Chicago.  Vera, the (unclear), his wife to be in a couple of months was, is beside him, both of them from Chicago.  The people who are standing, that's myself on the left, my wife, Maria is next to me, and then two mathematicians, the Bozman's, Dr. Bozman, Sylvia is at Spellman College, and Robert is at Morehouse College.
Speaker 1: This is a photo taken a long, long time ago of myself and my son.  That was probably taken 25 years ago.  My guess is what, 1979 or maybe 1980, let's see, anyway about 1980.  It was taken in Nashville, Tennessee in my den, and so this is my son and I bonding together.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next.  Good, okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: Here's a photo that was taken, uh?
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Go ahead, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is a photo of myself.  I'm standing in front with my two brothers and my father.  Carrol is to the left, Calvin is in the middle, and my father, Joseph, is to the right of me.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  That's the (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.
