Story_ID: 10702
Speaker 1: I want you to state your name and spell it for us, and I want your date of birth and today's date and your profession.
Speaker 2: Now? My name is George J. McKenna, III. McKenna spelled M-C capital K-E-N-N-A. I was born in New Orleans, Louisiana on September 6th, 1940. Today's date is July 24th, 2001. I'm an educator by profession.
Speaker 1: And we're at the Beverly Hilton Hotel. And I don't know what the address is.
Speaker 2: Julie just scoot a tiny bit right.
Speaker 1: 9876 Wilshire Boulevard [Beverly Hills, California].
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Okay, thank you.
Story_ID: 10703
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite color is.
Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Favorite food?
Speaker 2: Red beans and rice.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Excellence has nothing to fear from observation.
Story_ID: 10704
Speaker 1: I'd like to start with your father and maybe your grandfather and great--do you remember much about the first, the second, and I mean, you're the third, but--,
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I do.
Speaker 1: --can you talk about your family on your father's side?
Speaker 2: My father's side of the family came, originally, I suppose, from Ireland. I'm not sure what--how far back. And through slavery, we were integrated into the black community. We are the descendants of some slaves who were property--people who originally came from Ireland. George McKenna, Sr. lived to be 102 years old and died in the early '90s [1990s]. He was an uneducated man, but a brilliant man.  He only had a third grade education; he was a letter carrier in New Orleans [Louisiana] by trade. The whole family grew up in New Orleans. My grandfather built a home himself with his friends and it was a three apartment building, a two-story building which we thought was huge at the time. And he raised his two sons, my father, George McKenna, Jr., and his brother Warren McKenna. The two brothers had families, so we were all in this one building as a triplex as one family.  My grandfather learned to do many things by being self-taught. He was a bricklayer, a carpenter, an electrician, auto mechanic. He didn't do these things as a profession, he did them as an avocation and he was a very learned man. He taught himself much about the world through reading and he insisted that education be a part of his family so both of his sons, both George McKenna, my father, and Warren McKenna, my uncle, became college professors at Xavier University [of Louisiana] and each of them spent fifty years each at the university and were in some ways legends in their own time. They spent longer there than anyone else there. They're both deceased now. My grandfather was a very religious man, a very dedicated man, a very disciplined man. He got up very early every morning.  When I was a kid and I had a newspaper route, he'd beat me up. I'd have to get up around 3:30 in the morning to go throw the route and get back around five [A.M.] and go back to sleep. He'd be up waiting on me. He was always an early riser. And he is one of my heroes. He was almost a superman in his own way. The things he had to put up with and the things, the stories he'd tell us.  And when he was 100 years old, he remembered way back very clearly and had little short-term memory. A funny story was that he was 100 years old and he remembered when he was three years old, he said, "I remember having a yellow suit on and they held me up so I could see the first electric car."  He was talking about the trolley with electric cable on top that ran throughout the city of New Orleans. They were called the streetcars at that time and there's still one that runs there with a cable car, like in San Francisco, the cable car, the trolley car we called it, and he remembered that clearly, he said he was three years old. That was ninety-seven years earlier, but he didn't remember whether he had just had lunch or not. He said, "Did we have lunch already?"  We had to tell him "Yes, we did." It was amazing; his lifetime was an amazing critique on progress. When my father--my grandfather was a boy, the finest form of transportation he knew of was the same form of transportation that a caveman used. It was an animal. The automobile hadn't been invented; the airplane hadn't been invented; telephone was brand-new; there was no radio. And in his lifetime, from the time he was born 'til the time he died, the world changed in ways that I guess geometrically, would never have been possible, you know, with the progress it had made in any other span of history over 100 years.  He went from walking and riding an animal to rockets and laser beams and heart transplants and people on the moon. He was still skeptical as to whether or not they really got to the moon. But my grandfather was the basis of the McKenna clan. And strangely enough, curiously enough, the McKennas had lots of boys and there were very few girls born in our family. I have no family, I have no wife or children, but my brother has a son and my cousins have boys and there are lots of boys that are born in our family, so the McKenna name is carried on. But I am the third now, and always I wasn't proud of that because they teased me a lot, about being the third, when I was in high school. I went to an all boys school and they called me strange names because of that, it had a different pronunciation and we'd get in lots of little scraps over that, but I'm very proud of it now because I realize what my grandfather stood for; well respected man in his community and for years.
Speaker 1: What year was he born?
Speaker 2: He would have been born in 1890 and he died in 1992. When I became fifty in 1990, he was exactly 100 and I told him I was catching up with him. I was half his age at that point and I said, "You give me another 100 years, I'll close in on you."  He laughed. He was a firm man, but he had a good sense of humor. He loved children, he loved flowers, he loved to work. He had a strong work ethic.  He was never without something to do. He got up every morning and looked for something to do, even when he could no longer do it very well, he wanted to fix a ceiling, he wanted to patch a wall, he wanted to lay some tile. He wanted to repair, fix something. He wanted to do his gardening. When his reflexes failed him, he still wanted to things. He never had a day when he didn't want to work. He died in the hospital.  He told us never to take him to a hospital because he was afraid of dying in hospitals, but he did because he had a blood clot on his leg and when they took him in, he couldn't survive, but he didn't die of old age. He was strong 'til the day he died. And alert, he knew exactly where he was. He had no dementia at all; very interesting man.
Story_ID: 10705
Speaker 1: You grew up then in the same household the whole time with your grandfather [George McKenna, Sr.]. Was that--
Speaker 2: In the same, yes, in the same--
Speaker 1: Complex.
Speaker 2: Within the same complex. We had walls separating us, but we were all right next to each other, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had that sense of extended family?
Speaker 2: Absolutely. And the ritual was to spend evenings on the porch and people would pass by and say "Hello", "Good evening", and everybody would speak to everyone. And it was segregated back then and even though there were white people who lived in our community, at a certain age, we didn't play with them any longer. So the schools were segregated, the restaurants were segregated, transportation was segregated, housing was segregated. So I grew up in a segregated world where people called us strange names. And we believed we belonged in the back of a bus. Not all of us believed it, but we acted like we believed it because we did that. We couldn't drink out of the water fountains unless it said Colored, we couldn't use the restrooms unless they said Colored.  We went to the movies, we had to sit in the balcony, and on and on and on. Even through my college years at Xavier [University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] as an athlete, I was an athlete as well, when we traveled to other states and played in the black league. So we played in the black colleges, we all played against each other. I went to Xavier which is a small black college, Catholic. The only one of its kind in the country.  And we were in the same conference and league with Grambling [State University] and Southern [University and A&M College] and Tennessee State [University] and Florida A&M [University], so we traveled around Alabama and Georgia and you could see the segregation there as well; and the oppression, especially in the rural towns that we had to face. My grandfather remembered all of that oppression very well and he had stories to tell about lynchings and beatings and how people had to survive in New Orleans which was not as progressive as other parts. New Orleans was not as progressive in the civil rights movement as were other cities in the south.
Speaker 1: But New Orleans wasn't as oppressive as in Alabama or in Mississippi either, was it?
Speaker 2: I don't know because I didn't live in Alabama or Mississippi. I think it must've been a little more oppressive, but--I think a lot of it had to do with the fact that there were a whole caste system in New Orleans of light-skinned blacks that were treated somewhat differently by white people and then began to treat themselves differently in relationship to black people, so there wer almost--the darker complexion black people.  And there was like this buffer and so in order to pick on black people, you had to pick on all black people. Well some of us in that lighter complexion category had more education and were not as easily oppressed and we fought back in different ways that sustained the entire community. In ways that were different than in other communities. And unfortunately, it set up this caste system that we bought into and we separated ourselves for foolish reasons based upon complexion and there are some remnants of that even today when I hear children talk about light-skinned and good hair and foolishness like that. But that's what we inherited in those days of oppression and segregation.
Story_ID: 10706
Speaker 1: Are you Creole?
Speaker 2: I guess yes. I'm called Creole, right.
Speaker 1: So, you know, I've heard--sir I just want to ask this question because I've heard people refer to Creole as actually a culture and a separate race. I've heard--and I'm wondering if that permeated your growing up?
Speaker 2: Not mine. Some people who call themselves Creoles did it from an elitist point of view. I learned that it could be an embarrassment to consider yourself a different race--certainly you're not a different race. It was a different culture within a culture. It was very clannish and it was based upon your physical appearance which was a very racist thing to practice, but it was. There was even something called a paper bag test that if you were darker than a paper bag complexion-wise, you were not allowed to enter certain places within the black community. You couldn't join certain clubs, certain fraternities or sororities etcetera, etcetera; and certain social and pleasure clubs where the Mardi Gras was part of that process as well. And there was a caste system, unfortunately, which didn't start disappearing until the '60s [1960s] with the Black is Beautiful movement and Black and Proud which I was so glad to see come along. But yes, I think my--the group to which I belong are called Creoles, but I've never felt that--I've never personally felt that that was different than the black community.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I'm even told in terms of food and also the speaking, you know, that there were some speaking, you know, difference in speaking.
Speaker 2: Well, there are people in Louisiana who speak a dialect, that's more rural--Cajon (ph.) they're called, which is Cajun. I never learned it. My grandparents could speak the patois. I've been to Haiti and to the Caribbean and I've heard some of it that sounds familiar to me, some of the words. I can--I know what they're saying but I don't know why I know what they're saying because it sounds familiar to me and some of the words are interchangeable.  And we use a word like banquette which is the sidewalk and a galerie which is a porch. And I've heard these words before and then come back in my memory of having heard that as a child. But being segregated, no matter what complexion you were, was still an offensive condition to be in.  But my parents were educated as well, so my grandfather [George McKenna, Sr.] educated both of his sons [George McKenna, Jr. and Warren McKenna] and they made sure that all of us were college educated so from that point on, all of the McKennas have been college-educated. We all have college degrees, even down to the nephews and the nieces of the second and third generations. We all have college degrees.
Story_ID: 10707
Speaker 1: Now your father [George McKenna, Jr.], was he, did he live in the shadow of your grandfather [George McKenna, Sr.] in a way?
Speaker 2: In a sense, but he was his own man and he became a professor at Xavier University [of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]. He was a professor of sociology and economics. His brother, my uncle Warren [McKenna], was a pharmacist and also a professor at Xavier and they both helped Xavier build itself. For years they were almost legends, as I said. Anyone who received an education in New Orleans could only go to Xavier or Dillard [University] and so the McKenna brothers were part of that culture of educated black people who spent their lives educating people. He married my mother [Leah Metoyer McKenna] who was also an educator. She was a school teacher, became a principal of a middle school. She was the first African American principal of a middle school when they integrated New Orleans in the late '50s [1950s].
Story_ID: 10708
Speaker 1: My mother's name was Leah Metoyer. M-E-T-O-Y-E-R or pronounced Metoyer in French. Leah Metoyer McKenna. My mother was a wonderful person. I loved my mother dearly. She died recently. Soon thereafter my father [George McKenna, Jr.] died, about less than a year after she died. She was a very brilliant woman. She was valedictorian of her class in both high school and university. She went to Xavier [University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], she met my father at Xavier, so they were Xavier graduates together. I went to Xavier. She became an elementary school principal, put me in school too young, but it was like babysitting, so I was in school before I have any memory. I have no memory of not being in school since I was two and a half or three years old.  There were no laws down there to prevent you, so she taught me to read at such an early age, I don't even remember not reading. I don't know what it's like to not read. And just kept me in school and she taught me herself in the seventh grade, most miserable experience of my life. Probably hers too, but she never said so. To have your mother as your teacher and you go home and say my traditional line "I have no homework tonight." It was very disconcerting when I realized she knew I was lying again. But I did well in school. I was fairly precocious and I liked my teachers a lot. I gave them a lot of fits 'cause I was all over the place. I think I must have had attention deficit disorder. I couldn't sit still, I still can't to this day. This interview is very difficult for me to sit in one place because I'm an animated person. But I love school, I always did.  I think my teachers liked me too, but they were always getting me in trouble 'cause I ran my mouth a lot and I was always laughing and fooling around. I was very young and immature. I graduated from high school when I was only sixteen and I entered university when I was sixteen and turned seventeen in my freshman year. So, I was somewhat socially behind all of my other colleagues but my mother was the foundation.  When I think back on it now, I don't really understand how my mother did what she did. My mother went to work every day of her life unless she was sick. Then later, she had a third child. She had two children, my brother and I were one behind each other. I was the oldest and he's next behind--he's a physician in New Orleans, my brother Dwight [L. McKenna].  And then my brother Stephen [J. McKenna] came fifteen years after and she was over forty years old when she had him and she cooked for us every day. Every breakfast we ever ate was cooked by my mother and every dinner I ever ate was cooked by my mother. My father didn't cook at all and neither do I so we were chauvinist in a sense, but my mother spoiled us that way. She insisted on taking care of us.  And even when I moved away and would come back to the house after she had retired, she was always trying to feed me. When I saw her on her deathbed, she had had a heart attack and she was on her last legs and she was tired of these IV [intravenous] fluids in her arms in the hospital. She couldn't move her arms, they had her tied down so she wouldn't injure herself. She was lucid and she asked me to scratch her head 'cause she couldn't reach her head.  She said, "Oh, I need to wash my hair when I get out of here."  She's planning on coming out, but she never did. And talk about cooking and what she was going to cook and she was going to cook those red beans and rice 'cause she knew I loved red beans and rice and she never made it and I miss her to this day. Anyway, my parents gave me a good foundation. My father was a stern man, my mother was more loving.  Probably fairly typical, I suppose of families in those days. And I understood that education was the only thing they could give me to protect myself. They couldn't--I couldn't inherit anything, they had no business to give me. My father put all of his money in the bank. He pinched every penny he had and I tried to work my way through school as well by having jobs and scholarships and anything else I could get to relieve the financial burden. 'Cause my younger brother, the one under me, he went to medical school and that was a great burden on the family financially which they sustained. So my mother was a tremendous woman and she was a great bridge player. She'd come from her club meetings and always win. She could do it very well. I learned how to play bid whist. That's our version of bridge. That's the best I could do.  I'm a good bid whist player, especially when you let us cheat, you know, I have a partner that knows how to cheat. We'd always beat everybody. It was--I think I minored in bid whist in college. I cut more classes because of good bid whist game than anything else. I was late for chemistry more times because of bid whist and those who don't know. I'm sure that most black folks appreciate this, but bid whist is not so much about the cards as it is about the conversation. If you can't handle the action that goes on in a bid whist game, you haven't been sitting down because your best friends will talk things about you and your family and your ancestry during a bid whist game that makes you want to cry unless you can fight back verbally and hang in there with them because it's a lot of fun. And so I've always enjoyed the black experience and I went to segregated schools.
Story_ID: 10709
Speaker 1: Can you tell me what schools you went to, you know, what your elementary and--.
Speaker 2: Yes, I went to Valena C. Jones Elementary School. That's named after a woman and the principal was a tremendous educator named Fannie C. Williams; old black woman wore a bun on the back of her head and rang a bell out the window to tell you what time to move to classes. My mother [Leah Metoyer McKenna] taught in a school as well and in New Orleans, it was one of the premier segregated schools. I went to elementary school at Valina C. Jones and got a great education there and then went to Saint Augustan High School which is a Catholic school that was built right across the street from my house which almost compelled me to go there. And it was only two years old when I went there, so I was in the third class and my brother [Dwight L. McKenna], the year behind me, was in the fourth class, so we were in the first graduating class of that school which was built in the '50s [1950s]. I graduated in 1957 from high school. Saint Augustan High School was an all-boy's, all-male, all-black Catholic high school. It was the only one of its kind in the city of New Orleans and probably in the state of Louisiana, to my knowledge at this point and had a tremendous academic program. The Josephite fathers and the lay people that were there, I mean, we were, we were--it gave us tremendous experiences.  We were turning out presidential scholars within the first five years. Our valedictorians were going to Notre Dame [University] and our upper graduates, we were going to college in great numbers and we had championship athletic teams. I was a pretty good athlete. The older I get, the greater I used to be, but I did play on the championship basketball team and I played baseball as well, a little semi-pro ball, I ran track, and played a little football, and went to college playing basketball as well. I went to Xavier University [of Louisiana] after graduating from Saint Augustan High Schoo--we called it Saint Aug--and spent four years at Xavier and majored in mathematics and went from there to get my master's in mathematics at Loyola University in Chicago where I learned that cold weather was not for this child. And so I gravitated towards California where I still am today because I did not want to go back to the South and face the segregation. And what I thought was a backwards mindset. That we were not as progressive as I thought we could have been, especially in the Civil Rights Movement, which I can't blame anyone for that. It was just me being young and frisky. I wanted another adventure and I didn't want to do it in New Orleans, I wanted to step outside of being a McKenna, who was known to have expectations because of his family. I wanted to be independent and free of that. And I would travel back and forth, so I never separated myself from New Orleans, but I did live in, and I've lived in Los Angeles since 1962, which is where I am now.
Story_ID: 10710
Speaker 1: You talked about your grandfather's [George J. McKenna, Sr.], you know, his memory, his earliest memory. What is one of your earlier memories of growing up?
Speaker 2: My earlier memories of growing up were childhood pleasures. I remember running barefoot in the summer time and I loved it. I remember the park down the street where I learned to play ball and learned to swim. We were segregated. Actually, I didn't really learn to swim in the park, I learned to swim in Lake Pontchartrain, but later, I took some lessons at the park. They just threw you in the lake and you had to swim.  You swim to survive. I'm not a very classic swimmer, but I'm a good swimmer. There's stuff in the lake when they throw you in there. Some of it's alive, some of it's not and so you have to be a survivor. I had a great childhood. Every day was a play day. I loved school. I loved the neighborhood in which I lived [in New Orleans, Louisiana]. It was a close neighborhood. People of all backgrounds lived in that neighborhood.  And I had great friends that I made as a child. I don't think of myself as being oppressed as a child, even though I lived in segregation. I did not know that I did not have things. I thought I lived in a big house until I went back and looked at it and realized, how did we grow up in such a small, you know, one bedroom, one bathroom, all these people congested in these separated apartments that we had. But we were better off than most.  That house that I grew up in eventually we donated it to Saint Augustan High School [New Orleans] which is right across the street as I indicated. And they've torn it down now, so it now longer exists. And we donated it to the school so that they could build something, perhaps a chemistry lab or some science program or something that we'd like them to use it. And they're going to, at some point, build on it.  But my earliest memories were of being a protected child, being a loved child. I had an extended family, my uncles, my aunts, the whole neighborhood. I mean, everybody got a piece of you when you lived in New Orleans. If you, you know, acted out down the street or didn't speak to someone, you'd hear about it on the way home. They might smack you on your behind, you might get your butt smacked four or five times on the way home, by people that weren't even related to you, but they knew they could get a piece of you, you know, and so it was okay. Nobody ever complained about that, nobody called it child abuse, you know, if you got caught picking some fruit off of somebody's tree in the back yard, they'd throw things at you and run you out and call your mama and told them you were stealing peaches off the tree. But we did all those little frisky things as kids. And I enjoyed my childhood very much. It was a great time for me.
Speaker 1: Are there any like smells or sounds that you associate, or images that you associate with your childhood?
Speaker 2: Yeah. If I ever smell it now, I'd know it when I smell it. It's the smell of rain before it comes. In the South it rained a lot and we got used to be able to smell rain before it comes. It has an interesting smell to it, you can tell it's in the air. That's the smell. And fresh cut grass because it was very lush down there.  You didn't have to water the grass, nature did that for you. The smells and sounds of cooking, the hearing crabs boiling in a pot, hearing things sizzle. We'd gone, we'd go crabbing and bring home buckets and baskets of crabs and I could hear them cooking and the smells of a kitchen full of seasonings. I love hot food, hot sauce, and seasoned food. I always have, I grew up on it. Seafood was my soul food. Shrimp and crab and gumbo, a good plate of gumbo make you rest the rest of the day (laughs). Those are things that I remember quite a bit.
Story_ID: 10711
Speaker 1: We all take attributes from our, you know, our parents, and so I'm asking what are you like, you know, what do you have from your father [George McKenna, Jr.] and what do you have from your mother [Leah Metoyer McKenna]?
Speaker 2: I think I have my mother's sense of humor and love of life. My mother had a great sense of humor. I think I have my father's tenacity and his frugal nature. He was a penny pincher and I find myself being a penny pincher. I don't need expensive things. My brother teases me about you probably got the first dime you made.  Maybe I do, I don't know.  I don't know what it looks like, but--I also think I have my father's discipline but I also have my mother's creativity. I have an interesting combination of things in me. I was given violin lessons as a child which I hated. I taught myself to play the piano, so I can't read music, I just make it up as I go along.  And I have this great appreciation for the arts and I love sports as well. I was very physical as a child. I used to get into a lot of fights. I'm not very big, but I was always defending something. Never started a fight in my life but I don't know how to back off of one neither. I have an old saying that if you beat me up and pick on me you probably won't ask for a rematch 'cause it's going to cost you something to take my money from me. You're not going to do it twice.  So, I'm pretty tenacious when it comes to that. But I think I also have a sense of caring and compassion that I think I got from my mother--for people. My mother was a giver. She was a very, I think, a blessed person who enjoyed giving to less fortunate people. She loved being a school teacher and a principal, especially in the poor community where the kids didn't have much 'cause she knew that that education was the only thing that could set them free, get them out of those, that poverty and those raggedy shoes they would wear to school and had nothing to eat and I mean, in the war years, in the '40s [1940s] when I was a very young child, I remember that they served us horse meat in the colored schools, in the black schools--we were called colored in those days--and white kids got beef and hamburger meat. We got horse meat in our red beans at the public schools. That's what they served us.  We got used textbooks, we had no new textbooks. My mother taught us how to read very early so every textbook I had from kindergarten through elementary school were used textbooks. Even at Xavier University [of Louisiana] we had used textbooks that we recycled. I became an expert on used textbooks.
Story_ID: 10712
Speaker 1: You were saying--.
Speaker 2: When I got a new textbook in law school and I realized I was disadvantaged with a new book. Because in fact, in law school, it's advantageous to get a used book from an A student, especially if you have the same professor in the class because the stuff is already highlighted; there are notes on the side in the margin, you know, and a few little things in the book that have character, it's got some tears in it, little ketchup, maybe a French fry or two.  You know, so I went and looked for used books from good students, especially, and I learned how to do this, but I already had become accustomed to using old textbooks because that's what we did in the segregated schools. It was called separate but equal, but surely it was not equal. But that girded me for later on in life because that taught me that segregation in and of itself did not stop you from getting a great education which helped me in ways that other people were not helped when I came to Los Angeles [California]. When I became a principal of a high school, this was a school with no white children in it, but a Crips gang had been born ten years earlier in this country, on the campus of George Washington High School and they changed the name to George Washington Preparatory High School.  But when I entered that school, the excuses I got from white and black teachers when I said, "Why is this such a desolate outcome for these children? These test scores are ridiculous; the dropout rate is ridiculous; the truancy rate is ridiculous"; on and on and on. They said, "Well, you know, because we're segregated." These are people that had never been segregated; I had.  I knew that integration and desegregation have nothing to do with quality education. What you have to do is remove educational discrimination and that condition can exist no matter what the complexions of the players are, be they black or white. And it's all based on what the teachers do. In segregation, my teachers were segregated too. They rode the back of those same buses.  They knew that through this process of education, superior education, the little George McKennas of the world would set the rest of them free. Because it would have to be my generation, and along with them--have to give everybody that credit--they would come along and whatever it took for us to do, to move society to a new agenda, to not believe that we had to be so contained and a lot of human resources were wasted by under-educating and mis-educating the African American, black, colored, Negro community for years and years and years. I just segued that quickly into today. I'll go back and answer your questions but I'm writing an article now and I've been trying to get some things out about the concept of reparations for me and I'm biased because I'm an educator.  The most realistic form of reparation and the most morally appropriate form of reparations and the most economically justifiable and governmental justifiable form of reparations is 200 years of guaranteed superior education for any descendant of a slave in America, no matter what age. Because it was only education that was denied us to keep us enslaved. All the things that we had in slavery that were given to us because we were property were given to us free.  We had free clothing; we had free housing; we had free food; we had free transportation; we had free law enforcement--it was brutal, but it was free. We had free recreation and you know we had free procreation. Even the slave owner got in on it every now and then. That's how some of us got diluted the way we are right now in terms of our complexions. He had himself a good time, okay, with our great-great-great-grandmothers and whoever else.  But the one thing that was never free was education. It was so un-free that it was so expensive, rather--put it another way, if you gave it or received it, you could lose your life. If you taught a slave to read or if a slave learned to read without the permission of the master, okay? Now if education was that important then, it still is now. And if American government made that commitment with all its resources to deny us, the only reparation that is fair is to give us a superior education so that no child of a slave, no descendant of a slave, should ever be behind grade level at any grade, no matter what it takes. One to one, whatever it takes. May the day that tells us if you're reading on grade level by the fifth grade you don't need to have reading classes anymore. You just learn to read more complicated material. You don't need reading classes, you learn to read.
Story_ID: 10713
Speaker 1: But why are we so far behind in public schools? We don't need additional alternatives. We don't need after-school programs. What goes on from eight to three is really what's important. This notion of we need to build up the after-school programs.  Keep the schools open 'til ten o'clock at night. Yes, all of that's true, but what goes on from eight to three is the fundamental crux of what a child gets in education. How'd you and I get educated if we had to wait for after-school programs to educate us? Now we can recreate after school, but how much, you know, pedagogy do I need in one day?  As a child, from eight to three is where the rubber meets the road and that's what we've not been willing to commit to. We kept talking about all these excuses about why we can't educate children. So my segregated background put me at an advantage in some respects when people would tell me in California, the reason these children don't do well is because the school is all black and if we had some white children in the school, they'd do better. I'd say, "You are so misguided because all I know are black classmates."  I never had any white classmates from kindergarten through my baccalaureate degree; I never had a white classmate. Some of my teachers were white because they were clergy, they were nuns or they were priests, but most of my teachers were black. They didn't mis-educate me, I mean, I had a superior education, I believe. And to this day--when I went to Loyola University in Chicago [Illinois], I wasn't behind and I was able to handle the curriculum, I understood I may have struggled like everyone else did, I mean I didn't know everything, but I had enough foundation to learn what I needed to learn. So my premise is that the educational system which is what I've chosen to invest my life in, particularly public school educational system, is probably to me, the fundamentally most powerful institution on the planet because if America is the most powerful nation on the planet, what institution controls the minds of its people more than the public school system?  You've got to come through me to get wherever you're going. If you don't come through me, you've got to pay to go someplace else, but you still have to get your children educated. The law says you got to send your children to me; I'm the public school system. Or send someplace, some alternative to this. And I don't believe that the new movements on vouchers and charters are altruistic, I think it's economics.  They're trying to get some money out of the system, right? So out of dissatisfied people, they'll find their way to get money. So my thing about reparations is give us education. If you gave me the forty acres and a mule, you know, the mule died, the forty acres been built on top of, you can't get it back. But you give me an education and I know what to do with the forty acres that you built on now, see. I've used this analogy; you talk about dangerous young men in the ghettos, dangerous young men in prison. And young men in prison are no longer dangerous because we know exactly what their schedule is. We know when they recreate, urinate, defecate, fornicate. We know all of that. When they're dangerous is when one young man has his law degree and he knows a sister with an architectural degree who knows another sister with a law degree who knows another one with something in commerce who knows another one with a contractor's license and they meet at an unknown place unannounced and plan to build or rebuild and buy the neighborhood. That makes them dangerous to some people, you see. That's the kind of dangerous young men and women I'd like to create who are so vested in a knowledge base that they have the same audacity our ancestors had when they dare called it a college and it was a shack and they were denied education.  They said, we're still going to get an education. We're going to build this place and call it a college and we'll call ourselves educators and teach ourselves what they won't teach us and then build the fraternities and the sororities where people today say we are racist for having black fraternities and sororities. Please, it came out of the unwillingness for them to let us into anything else. We had to survive.  We understood the nature and value of the power of education. Today, unfortunately, some of our educational opportunities are being wasted, especially--and I see the demise among the young men within the last fifteen or twenty years--I have seen the absence of enthusiasm on the part of African American males for higher education. Even at the high school level.  They are not tying their manhood into their academic achievements any longer. They're finding it to be less masculine, which I think is foolish. So we need strong male role models to come back to those schools and teach young men that it's appropriate to combine your manhood and your mind and not thump your chest and think you're going to be a money maker as a test of your manhood.  And so for me, education is beyond just reading, writing, and arithmetic. It's also a fundamental philosophy of what to do with this education once you have it. And that's what I've spent my life doing in public schools. I've worked in public schools for forty years.
Story_ID: 10714
Speaker 1: You were taught black studies in a way that people aren't taught anymore, right?
Speaker 2: Actually, we didn't have even courses in black studies when I was a child. We had typically European American history but depending on who taught it to you, they'd tell you about what black people had been doing at the time. So it was almost an oral history, it was not in the books. There was nothing in the textbooks about what black people were doing during the Revolutionary War, you know, when Napoleon was doing what he was--what were black people doing?  That came later, after the black empowerment of the '60s [1960s], civil rights movements, all those kinds of things. And I'm today still learning about black history but I was given oral history about what our people did and what, where we came from and who we were supposed to be and our teachers would tell it to us verbally tell it to us, my black teachers would tell it to us.
Speaker 1: So what were some of those stories they were telling you?
Speaker 2: Well, they'd tell us about what the disadvantages in the segregation system were and what slavery did and how people struggled to get education and therefore give you a pride in the fact that you were now in the presence of people who had struggled so far, like they'd tell you their own stories. What they had to do to get this education. When you're sitting in a teacher's classroom, you're talking to a college educated person.  That was an unique situation in the segregated South. Most of us did not have college degrees while all of our teachers did, so the teachers were revered in the community. And when they began to tell stories of how they went from where they were in those same little--running barefoot in the summertime--men and women, to be college educated and how they got that education either in those segregated schools or they went up north and got educated, those were inspirational stories. And they were all individualized but connected because we had the same common burden, our complexions. And the burden wasn't our complexion, it was the way America treated us because of our complexion. You see the misnomer is that you're disadvantaged because you're black. Not really, you're disadvantaged because the way people treat you, you see? A  person in a wheelchair has a circumstance. How you treat that person creates the handicap, see?
Story_ID: 10715
Speaker 1: Now when you were growing up, did you have, did you feel any pressure because you were the oldest or was there a certain role that, you know, you felt expected of you?
Speaker 2: Well, I was the oldest of one brother [Dwight L. McKenna], so I didn't have to really demand a lot from a bunch of siblings and my brother and I had the regular squabbles, you know, I think he looked up to me. He respects me to this day and I love him dearly. And we'd, you know, we'd have our usual wrestling matches and fights but I always stuck up for him so being the eldest--I was the eldest, there was not only my brother, but my other two cousins who were also boys, Warren Junior and his brother Aaron.  We all grew up in this house together we're all brothers and cousins and I had to fight the fights so when someone would pick on one of them, you had to fight George. I had to come to the rescue, so I had a lot of fights. I didn't win then all, but I won most of them, and as I told you, no more rematches. You fight me you have to get bruised a little bit. So we had to be physical in those days, but with our friends it wasn't anything malicious, it was just that normal childhood struggle for territories boys do, I suppose.  Which is not right, but that's what we did. But being the eldest, I didn't feel any additional pressure because my parents always demanded that education be in the forefront, for all of us, so none of us were thinking about anything but getting educated.  The question was not whether we would go to college; the question was simply where you have a future and what would you major? But we really had no options. But my grandfather who had no education at all, he would have been extremely disappointed if we didn't go out there and get that sheepskin.
Speaker 1: Well now you were--did you gravitate towards math and science in high school?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was pretty good and I was an English minor, but math and science always fascinated me and quite honestly, to be truthful, I was lazy and I liked playing bid whist and playing basketball. Now truth be told, when you major in math, you don't have book reports to do, you don't have term papers to do, you just answer the questions and you leave and you're done and it came easily to me. I didn't have to do a lot of studying, you know, I didn't have to interpret the poems and do a lot of research. There were no research papers to do. You just solved the problems and I've always been a good problem solver, so you give me complicated problems and I solve them, turn in my blue book, I'm gone. And along I had a lot of what I call free time. So, I have to admit I was lazy in that respect but since math came easily to me, it wasn't that hard for me.  I struggled more in French. I had a great accent, but I couldn't write in French. I could translate it from French to English, but I couldn't write it. I struggled with pretty low grades in French which would frustrate my teachers. How can you be so brilliant in one area and so dumb in another area?  I couldn't figure it out to save my soul, but when I'd read the French, my accent was perfect because in Louisiana, you know, you already have a sort of a flat, you know, accent and you can pronounce the words properly with a French accent, but it was all a fake. I didn't learn the French very well.
Story_ID: 10716
Speaker 1: I'm talking about, you know, about when you were towards adolescence, what were you dreaming of becoming at that point? Did you have--?
Speaker 2: Never thought I'd be a school teacher. I didn't want to be a school teacher mostly because my parents [George J. McKenna, Jr. and Leah Metoyer McKenna] were school teachers. But what happened when I went to Loyola University [Chicago, Illinois], I earned a teaching fellowship so you got paid, your tuition was paid and a little stipend to teach. So I'm teaching and I fell in love with it. I backed myself up by getting a teaching certificate in the state of Louisiana but I never thought I'd be practicing teaching and just as a back-up 'cause you still didn't know what we could be. And I didn't know where I'd wind up and I wound up teaching at Loyola University and found out the magic of teaching. So when I came to California, I took a test to be an engineer for IBM [International Business Machines, Inc.] and they never called me back. I know I got a perfect paper, I didn't miss a question, but they never called me back.  'Cause a friend of mine who had gone to college with those working for IBM as a computer programmer, but they never called me back, so I said, "Well, I'll get a job as a teacher"; fell in love with it. Worked in a high school; actually worked at Jordan High School in Watts, California. I was there during the Watts riots in 1965. I saw Los Angeles change in ways that it would never have changed if that event hadn't happened. And it came from a fluke. A guy was beaten up by the police one night and the city just went up in flames for about two weeks. It was 1965 and I was actually teaching at the only school in Watts and still the only high school in Watts and it was a very interesting time.
Story_ID: 10717
Speaker 1: I want to understand, so you went to Xavier [University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana]. That was expected, that was tradition. You are a math major.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And what were you thinking about being a math--was it easy, was this once again, it was easy?
Speaker 2: I did not know what I was going to do with math. I thought about computer programming, engineering, sounded like something I wanted to do.  I had no clue. When I graduated, I went to graduate school with still no clue as to what I would do with all this math. And I wound up teaching which I thought was a wonderful thing. Didn't make a lot of money, but it was fine because I loved what I was doing. So my creativity was able to be used in the classroom and my knowledge and discipline in math was able to be used. I was one of the few people in the whole L.A. [Los Angeles, California] Unified school district who was African American with a master's degree in pure mathematics. Pure and applied mathematics, that's why--I didn't take education courses in graduate, I took pure and applied math. So I had a lot of information that I could share with kids.
Speaker 1: Now when you spent the year at Loyola [University, Chicago, Illinois], I know you talked earlier about it being really cold and you know, and you said, forget about this. But were there other things, because this is your first time really outside your cocoon environment--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And I'm wondering how that--it was a year I thought it was?
Speaker 2: One year. I spent one year in Chicago.
Story_ID: 10718
Speaker 1: Being away at graduate school [at Loyola University, Chicago, Illinois] helped me to grow up. I was living on my own for the first time in my life, out of my mother [Leah Metoyer McKenna] and father's [George J. McKenna, Jr.] shadow; on my own, paying my own way; getting my own food everyday; my mother no longer cooking for me, spoiling me and saying "Baby, can I get you another ham sandwich?" and me saying, "Yeah," you know.  So it was a rites of passage for me and then fighting the cold weather in Chicago, I'd never seen snow in my life and found out what zero degrees was, that it really existed. As I told you, I thought it was just some number. And it really is a condition that no human being should ever have to live in and I found myself trying to survive zero degrees. So after that year, I felt I could be on my own and then I went to Los Angeles on my own.  And didn't have much money in my pocket; saved a little money, I had a newspaper route that I had kept all though my college experience. Got up every morning and threw newspapers for a few years and bought an automobile so I could get around and been on my own ever since.
Speaker 2: But, you know, wasn't it in Chicago that you first start teaching? When did it click? When did--do you remember the moment where you said, wow, I sort of like this?
Speaker 1: Yes, it was about maybe around Christmastime. When I'd been teaching from September to Christmas, I was teaching undergraduate courses to freshmen at the university. And when I came back home and went back, I was enthusiastic about the teaching. (interruption)
Speaker 2: Maybe they're thinking that--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right. I came--I returned back with enthusiasm from Christmas, concerned about my students and what they were learning, you see. And I also realized that I was teaching no black students, no math students who were African American, were at Loyola University that freshman year. None. And I knew that somebody had to go into high schools and get them ready for going to college and I realized that could be something I could do.  And when I went to California, even though I took that test for IBM, I knew I could teach. I was beginning to learn how to teach. And teaching is more than just knowing subject matter. You've got to be able not only to inspire, but to explain. 'Cause if you're the only who knows the math and you can't impart it to the students, then they're still mystified because math, actually, is the easiest subject in the world to learn, but it's the most difficult to teach because it's so sequential. Once you get the algorithm mastered, you can work all the problems and then the aha goes on, you see? But somebody's got to explain that to you and help you through with either Socratic method or whatever method you're going to use to help them do this kind of reason.  Actually, the math is a segue because you being a lawyer. When I went to law school, the mathematics background I had hurt me for a few minutes, the geometry that I did then, the syllogistic reasoning, I wanted to come to a conclusion. And in law, you don't come to conclusion. You have to explore all the options. I was always looking for an answer and the professors would throw it back at me, you know, there are too many options here, well from this--from the plaintiff's point of view, from the defendant's point, from this point of view, from observer's point, what are all the options you can explore?  And I want to get an answer. He's guilty because of the tort is this or the--and it took me a while to figure out I was too conclusionary which is what math tries to get you to become. What's the answer?  X equals something. So I had to learn from that, but the, you know, the training was very good for me. But in that, I figured out that education was something that I was good at because I can explain things. I'm a great teacher.  It's the only thing in my life I've ever been confident in bragging about, if you can call it bragging. I might not be much of anything else, I mean people have great opinions about whether I was a good principal or not, whether I was a tyrant, whether I was a great superintendent, whether I was, you know, ineffective with board members and politicians and all these kinds of things but I never had one student ever tell me, "McKenna, you can't teach this." They always told me I was the best teacher they ever had. And I'm still a great teacher.
Story_ID: 10719
Speaker 1: So you're at Loyola [University, Chicago, Illinois], you just decide one day "I'm going to L.A."? I mean, I know you said you didn't want to go back--
Speaker 2: Not really--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not really. I had a girlfriend whom I eventually married. She went to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and I went to L.A. and we divorced after about five or six years, it was six years and I never got married again and had no children. But she had come to California, she was studying at USC [University of Southern California], so that was an inducement. It wasn't all persuasive, but it was--at least I knew somebody, you know, somebody I was very fond of.  It was the only girlfriend I ever had so it was puppy love and it turned into marriage, you know. We didn't know what we were doing. I was barely old enough to vote; she had to get special permission to get married because you had to be twenty-one to be an adult. Neither one of us knew what we were doing. We got married and did the best we could and it didn't work. But that's what brought me to California and also too, a lot of Louisiana folks migrated to Los Angeles, so there were other family members, extended family that I knew out here. I have an uncle and an aunt that live here. I stayed with them for about six weeks and a cousin who had been in the [U.S.] Navy. So I had a place to stay and a place to get to before I got my little apartment. First little apartment I had was where the bed pulled out of the wall, seventy-five dollars a month. I thought it was great.  I'd never seen a bed pull out of the wall, you know, come out of the wall, put it back up.  I thought it was cool. I told my mother [Leah Metoyer McKenna] I had a bed that pulls out of the wall. I was celebrating. She says, "Oh, you got a cheap apartment." I said, "No, it's cool. The bed pulls out of the wall."  I'm twenty-two years old, I don't know any better. I thought I was in great shape. Anyway, that was my beginning and I've been in education ever since.
Story_ID: 10720
Speaker 1: You're living in what part of L.A. at this point?
Speaker 2: The black community in South Central Los Angeles [California]. I've always lived there.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay. And, but this, the L.A. environment is different from New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Speaker 1: I mean, Chicago [Illinois], I won't even consider that, but it's a different environment in that way. So does it take you some time to sort of get a feel for it because it's so different even black people, you know--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, there was no, well the black community in L.A. was much smaller. See New Orleans, most of the city was black. Chicago, there's a whole south side that's black. You get off the el train on Cottage Grove [Avenue], you know, there's nothing but black folks around there. But L.A. is so spread out that you can't--it was hard to find the clustering of black people. And so I would find myself going to places in Los Angeles and knowing no one which was new for me because in New Orleans if you went to a big event, you know somebody. I didn't know anybody and that was new for me, trying to get accustomed to being in a community where you don't know anybody and nobody knows you and you can be anonymous. Nobody meddles, you which was great for me. Nobody called my name, "Oh, you're George McKenna's boy."  Nobody knew that.  Or, "You're little McKenna's son." Nobody knew that and I liked that. I liked that anonymity. And one of the things I found disconcerting when the movie ['The George McKenna Story'] was made about me, I lost some of my anonymity. I've always treasured my privacy and I found it uncomfortable people walking up to me asking me for autographs and interrupting me at meals because they knew a movie had been made about me and they recognized me and things. It doesn't happen much anymore because time has taken care of that a little bit, so I'm back to anonymity and I like it like that. But I did find that a bit uncomfortable for me because I'm not a person who likes a lot of public attention. I'm in the public a lot but I'm a more private person.
Story_ID: 10721
Speaker 1: You're here in 1960, was it--
Speaker 2: Two.
Speaker 1: 1962 and so you said, you were talking earlier about the Watts [Los Angeles, California] riots of 19--but 1962 you had a job where first?
Speaker 2: Teaching.
Speaker 1: I know teaching, but what school?
Speaker 2: It was at Gardena High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I spent one year there and then I went to Jordan High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And from there I stayed there about six years and left there to go into administration and eventually work my way in--up to various schools, I was in about eight or nine different schools before I became a principal, taking various jobs, promotional things from here to there--counselor, dean, assistant principal, you know, registrar, those kinds of things. But I was at Jordan High School in Watts. It was a wonderful experience, I loved it. It was like a rabbit in a briar patch.
Speaker 1: Now why? Tell us why.
Speaker 2: Because the students were African American and Latino. There were no white children in the school. They were needy. It was just like being home. It was the closest thing to being back in New Orleans [Louisiana]. The kids were poor, they were needy, they were smart, they needed hope, they believed in what you told them, you could inspire them.  And let me tell you the difference, and I tell teachers even that to this day. If you choose to be a school teacher, there's a difference in the way children look at you when you teach children of affluence than if you teach children of poverty. When you're a school teacher and you teach children of affluence, they look at the teacher as someone they have to tolerate to get where they're going.  They're respectful, but they're tolerating you. When you teach children of poverty, they look at you as somebody they'd like to become. That's a big difference. And they hang onto you in a personal way because their respect level is a lot different. See, when you have affluence, you know you're not going to be a school teacher. You don't think about it. Your parents don't even tell you that.  You have to listen to your teachers, but if you don't get a B average, they'll come down with a lawyer and attack the teachers' methodology, because you can't use that B average to get into UC-something or other--UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles] or where ever. When you're poor, you're depending on your teacher a lot more and I mean, you realize that you're probably the strongest influence on this child's life, particularly by the time they get to high school 'cause that's the period of time that'll make or break them. They'll become a dropout, or they'll become a graduate and it's on you. And you have to make a great investment in them, you have to visit their homes, you have to sometimes take them to your home. You have to, you know, take them to the park with you, you have to bond with them.  You have to give them a reason for coming to your class everyday even if they don't go to someone else's class 'cause if they come to yours, maybe they'll go to the one before yours and the one after yours as well. You can have influence on their lives and I found myself very happy when I was teaching in a classroom. Even when I was a principal I was very influential in the lives of the kids 'cause I didn't spend a lot of time in my office, I was on the yard with them and eat lunch with them, and find out what they're talking about, what they're doing, develop a lot of programs that'll be helpful to them. The pure counseling programs who use a Big Brother/Big Sister programs, the community service programs we engaged in--all kinds of things we did at Washington Prep to turn it into a preparatory school so that poor kids could call themselves 'preppies'. That was my mission, and also my own struggle against the bussing program because we were mandatory integration and using voluntary bussing and kids were being bussed from the inner city to the San Fernando Valley in Los Angeles. Well my mission was, you don't have to go anywhere to get a superior education. But I had to aggravate the system a bit, I had to even aggravate some of the teachers and some of them took not kindly to that so many of them left and I hired new teachers. 'Cause I demanded that they give homework, I demanded that we do lesson plans, and so forth and so on.
Story_ID: 10722
Speaker 1: With the Watts [Los Angeles, California] riots, you were saying that had an extreme effect on you and you never articulated--
Speaker 2: It had a great impact on Los Angeles and on me. I think it changed Los Angeles more than any other thing, any other event 'cause people left. The white community bailed out of where they used to live. Washington High School, for example, which is not in Watts, probably in 1965 was 95 percent white children. By 1970, it had zero white children. In five years the whole community changed.  They ran away and the gendarmes and the police, they thought the black--wherever you found black people, they thought that was Watts. They were all the way down in the Crenshaw [Boulevard] area where I live today. They had National Guard all the way up in the Crenshaw malls and stuff. It had a great impact on me, I realized how oppressive Los Angeles really could be. That being in Los Angeles and in the educational system was not any better, and sometimes worse, than the educational system I left in New Orleans [Louisiana].  I thought we were disadvantaged in New Orleans with used textbooks. What we did have was superior instructors. See, the instruction you get comes from the instructor. That is the great test for public education, the test of the instructor. How good are the instructors that you get? No matter how much computerized education you put in schools, you can put every computer from kindergarten through twelfth grade.  I would hate to think that children will remember with fondness their third grade computers and can't remember their teacher's names 'cause we've computer--and believe that that's really teaching. It's a supplement to teaching. So I figured out that I wasn't so bad off in the segregated South. Certainly because I was segregated, that wasn't the worst, I despise segregation, but education that I got was focused and it was purposeful from people who knew that I needed to be educated because it was in their best interest to educate me because the whole community needed people like me and my generation to come out with college degrees and go out and fight this battle called segregation in the South which was the law of the land, okay? In California, we thought we were free, so it's okay to mis-educate children. And that was the problem. There was no investment in the African American child being educated 'cause there was no benefit or--and there was no penalty if you didn't educate him. He just didn't get educated, but the community didn't visibly suffer. A riot says, we got a problem here and we're suffering. We're not rioting just because we enjoy violence, we're oppressed by a lot of things in this community. We can't get insurance, there's no markets in our neighborhood, the housing is too expensive, we can't get a good education.  I mean this stuff just came out, all this frustration of being black in Los Angeles and still living in the ghetto. John Buggs, a noted sociologist who died a couple of years ago, after the Watts riots he gave a speech. I'll never forget, it was 1967. He said he had done a study of the adult population of Watts and he defined an adult as anybody who is twenty-five years of age or older, and he said up to 40 percent of them, of that population, had never seen the Pacific Ocean.  That's how parochial they were in terms of the confinement in their neighborhood. So they didn't get out, you see? So they were dependent upon what was in that neighborhood and what was in that neighborhood was the schools, you see? And that's how important we were in that educational process.
Story_ID: 10723
Speaker 1: Now when you were, you know, before George Washington [High School], and you know you're working your way through the different schools and their systems there, I want to ask you about how you were able to make a difference, you know, and do you believe a teacher can make a difference with their classroom working within a system? And I just want, you know, because in George Washington, you were head of it, but I'm just saying--.
Speaker 2: I was the principal.
Speaker 1: Right, you were the principal, so I'm saying, you know, in those other environments, what were you learning or what things do you remember, if you can just tell people, you know, things that you saw, successes and then other things, you know, that you felt limited because you were operating, you know, under someone's other administration.
Speaker 2: Well, that there are too many stories to tell you. There are too many kids that you do save because you're a teacher.
Speaker 1: Can you give me some examples?
Speaker 2: Well, students that I taught that went onto college; students that I taught that I kept from committing suicide; students that I taught that we kept from having abortions when they didn't need to have an abortion, they could put the child up for adoption; students that we taught how to read and how to calculate; students that I taught that their mothers came to school because of them and got into adult education and got educated because of that.  A student that I met when I was a principal who was actually living out of his automobile, and I gave him mine and he was in the movie ['The George McKenna Story'], actually, and he became student body president. They didn't even put that in the movie, it wasn't necessary, a young Latino kid. You save lives when you're a teacher and you do it everyday. You almost do it so frequently that you don't remember.  It's like being a doctor who does heart surgery everyday, you can't remember all of it. You just know you've been fixing hearts all your life and that's all you do. And it's such important work. The frustrations that I've had are that sometimes you can't reach the parents of the children and so you've got to pull them in. To try to offset that, I even had a piece of legislation passed that I wrote.  It took me ten years to get it passed, but it's now a law in the state of California. It's a release--it's a bill that allows you to be released from your job. It started out with four hours per year per child, it's now up to forty hours per year per child--from your employer to visit schools during the day with no penalty to your job. And it came to me from the observation that I had of our criminal justice system.  We get subpoenaed to go to court, we have to go. We get called for jury duty, we have to go. The employer holds your job for you while you're there, right? So if we can build in support for the criminal justice system, why not an equivalent support for the educational justice system? It was my contention if we had more support for the one, we might not have as many clientele in the other.
Story_ID: 10724
Speaker 1: My great frustration has always been the absence of parental involvement in the education of children. They sometimes, some of the parents, out of ignorance or just maybe even malice, drop their kids off in kindergarten, hope to pick them up twelve years later in twelfth grade and do nothing in between. They don't come to school. And school is not even encouraging for us to come to school.  Even powerful, affluent people don't come to school as often as they should. You take school teachers themselves. You ask the average school teacher when is the last time you physically saw your own child being taught during the school day past the third grade?  Most of them haven't. The rule is, send me a report card. Tell me what you did today. What did you learn today? The child says "Nothing".  "You have fun today?" "Yes". "What went on in school today?"  "Nothing." "You had a good time?" "Yeah." Nothing. You don't get anything. When parents don't get involved in the school on a regular basis, schools suffer. That's why that phrase I have, "Excellence has nothing to fear from observation", that's what I keep telling teachers. If I have these parents here on a regular basis--which is what I did at [George] Washington [High School], we started a family room, a parent center, we forced the people to come to school, called them every day, come to school, come to school. So my idea of utopia is that every classroom would have a parent and a different parent everyday sitting in the back of the room smiling while the teacher is teaching.  You see? Now the teacher has another set of eyes in there who are not captive, to whom you can't give a grade.  The parent's giving you a grade in their mind and in the community, and you have a tendency to stand and deliver more solidly, I think. And then to sometimes mis-educate for a couple of days, or maybe forever for children. So I had a lot of success both as a classroom teacher, as the dean of discipline--what I learned about discipline, you don't have to beat on kids to get them to change their behavior.  In the early days, sad to say, I was guilty of corporal punishment because that was the law--you could give corporal punishment so the teachers would come down and since I was in charge of discipline in a middle school, a junior high school, I'm swatting little boys on the behind knowing that that stuff doesn't work. I took more swats than anybody. Swats do not change children. I've been the "swattee". Swats are therapy for the swatters, makes them feel like they're doing something but when you're thirteen years old and you're silly and you're laughing, after you get swatted, that stuff is still funny. It doesn't change anything, it just teaches you how to take a swat. It's just some barbaric thing we were doing then, but I was participating in that, so I learned that you don't have to do that to modify behavior, especially with young males. You can do it with a love agenda, which is why I indicated to you I have some discomfort with the methodology of bullhorns and baseball bats which some other people espouse. You don't need to break up gangs with bullhorns and baseball bats and oppression. You can do it with a love agenda and the love agenda that I talk about doesn't have a lot to do with emotion, it has to do with a behavioral construct. If you really love me, you will act like you love me because I can turn on a radio and hear woo, baby, baby from a stranger and get emotional about it. It doesn't mean anything. But when you really love me, you stop me from doing things. You ask me and you require that I do other things. You have demands on me and you hold me accountable and you keep me from harm's way, even when I want to do it anyway. See, that's the kind of love thing that teachers--and many great teachers do this regularly. I met some great teachers in my life. Some were at Washington High School, some were at middle schools and other high schools I worked at. I know them by name, I remember. Some have gone on, are not here anymore. But I met some great teachers in my life and I had some great teachers. I still remember some of my great teachers. Most of them are dead now but I remember them, fondly.
Story_ID: 10725
Speaker 1: You don't believe in the, you know, rapping the--you know, that there's not enough discipline--I mean the old way--.
Speaker 2: I believe that there is a place where you can use physicality with children, but it shouldn't be for pain, it should be for to get their attention. I mean, if I could use my voice and get your attention, I got you. If I need to hit you on the hand to keep you from touching the heater, I'll do that. But I don't need to keep on hitting you to get my frustrations out. I mean, that's abuse.  I wouldn't tell a parent not to, you know, pat a child if they have to, to get their attention. But these beatings that I see children get where they come with all kinds of marks on them. How many licks does it take for you to get their attention? And after you beat them, what did you prove? Did it make you feel better because somebody did it to you, and that's the sad part.  Whenever we talk to these parents who beat their children, the only reason they did that is that's what would happen to them and they thought they turned out fine. But that's violence. See, I'm a believer--I'm also on the board of directors of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference [SCLC]. I've done a lot of reading of [Mahatma] Gandhi and [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and they got it from Jesus which is not a religious statement. I'm not a very religious person although I think I'm fairly spiritual.  You know, Dr. King defined violence as anything that denies human integrity and leads to a sense of hopelessness or helplessness. And by that definition, a song on the radio can be violent, when we disparage women and make a profit, you see. Homelessness is violence, hunger is violence, red-lining the community, racism, sexism, ageism, elitism, classism, all violence. I mean, you become a soldier and you honor peace, justice, and non-violence, you know where to attack violence.  And so I had community service projects on my campus. My football players were painting graffiti off the walls of the houses around them, the school because the gang-bangers had put them up there. Some of these same gang-bangers were on my football team and they didn't quit it until that kept going on day after day. Every Saturday they'd go out and paint. They'd put it up, we'd go paint and say, "Well."  They were painting off the same graffiti that they were putting up afterwards so they had to give up because I wouldn't give up. So they stopped writing graffiti because they'd have to go paint it off again. I mean, I knew they were doing it but I had to keep impressing them that we will keep coming out here. So I have always tried to use public schools and persuade public schools to be useful in terms of a total emancipation of the community. I do believe schools should stay open longer.  I mean, imagine if schools stayed open at night, 'til 7:00, 8:00 and the library stayed open, you could do studying.  We don't do that. We have yellow busses that transport kids to ballgames and band concerts in the middle of the night, all night long. The busses will roll early in the morning, bringing them here and there. Ever seen any busses that bring kids home from studying in the library at 7:00 at night, Monday through Thursday?  No. It's not because we don't have any busses, it's not because we don't have a library, it's not because we don't have drivers. We just don't have that as an agenda. But I have to say to people who teach urban children, when you give them this thing called homework, if you give it, assuming you give it, when they go home to that place they call home, they can't do that thing you call work. They bring it back to you tomorrow and when you wonder why they didn't bring back homework, you realize you almost want to give them a pat on the head and a kiss on the cheek just for showing up if you ever visited their home. If you ever had to go to the projects and they live on the 35th floor of the projects, you understand how tough that is when the elevators don't work? Now that's not in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], but that's anywhere the projects in L.A. only go to the second story, but I know what they're like in Chicago [Illinois], you know, and throughout the--and just poverty in general.  You don't have to be heroic about the projects or desperate about it 'cause there's some wonderful people that can come out of anywhere. But the schools shouldn't be demanding a certain type of children that come to it as a condition of the schools being effective. The parents send us the best kids they have, now it's up to us and the question is "What are we willing to do about it?"  Are these children valuable enough or are they the disposable community because they're poor and they're of color and they're not powerful and we keep them powerless with this mis-education.  That's my mission, to change the educational system's responsiveness to our children as opposed to demanding that the children come in a different condition. We have a lot of work to do in early childhood education, but we also have a lot of work to do at the high school. You take the average urban high school in America where black children are predominant, the ninth grade class will be three times larger than the senior class and we don't find that shocking.  Now if that's normal, then we should be about the business of creating an appropriate abnormality so that there are as many seniors as there are ninth graders, that that whole ninth grade class makes it to their senior year.
Story_ID: 10726
Speaker 1: So do you think that the schools can replace societal ills or they can replace the family or that they can serve in a role as a family?
Speaker 2: Never said that. I think the schools can do what the schools have never done, educate people to be better family people. You see, who do we blame if a child comes from a dysfunctional home? What barrier does the teacher now have? Look, it depends on perspective. If you perceive the schools as replacing the family, then you will always begin to say schools should not replace families I would agree with that, but it's a matter of perspective. Let me give you a perspective. When I die, you people will say "Oh, he's gone." My perspective will be "Oh, you're gone." You understand? That's a perspective. When a teacher gives grades in the classroom and kids get A, B, C, D, and F, those grades from the perspective of some people reflect the intelligence of those children. For me, as a teacher, it now reflects what the teacher must do for everybody that didn't get an A.  Not to say "He's smart and he's not." Now this tells me what I must now do. So when kids come to us from dysfunctional homes, that's not their fault, but it's now our responsibility. Now what are the resources we need as opposed to saying "It's too bad."  We know, we just stamp a stamp on your head "Dead child walking," 'cause we know you can't learn anyway. Why don't we just stop being hypocrites, just label them really early on 'cause his mama isn't and his daddy wasn't and never was and so we talk about poverty and dysfunctionality as one of the barriers. Schools are more powerful than the community. We set standards. Look, parents set standards in their home. We set standards for the whole community. A child comes from a home with two or three siblings, maybe four or five--I don't know, whatever--he comes to school, he's got thirty kids in the classroom. The teacher makes all thirty stand up and say, now he learns group behavior.  Yes, some are more difficult than others, but a good teacher--look, I'd rather give a good teacher sixty students than to split them thirty and thirty and give thirty of them to a sorry teacher 'cause I know thirty of them were doomed. You give all sixty to the great teacher, all sixty have a chance. So it's the quality of the teacher and that's where we've missed it in America. The quality of training that we give teachers when they come out of college.  Most of the people that come out of college are not trained to teach urban children, it's on the job training. So we have to re-train them, they have to learn on their own. Kind of learning to play by ear, you know, there's new music so you just learn to play by ear. I have not given up on public schools. I don't wish public schools to replace the family. But I think the public schools are more a determinant of what society is like than society determining what the public schools are like.  We don't use this excuse until society gets itself together, the schools just reflect.  That's crap. The schools shape minds and values for twelve years with no interference from the parents. When you were in school, there was no TV on in the middle of the day. The teachers had your mind and your most formative term, childhood. And they shaped you for twelve years before they turned you loose. Now what they did in those twelve years, yes, your parents helped.  But the teachers were the ones teaching you from eight o'clock to three o'clock. Your mama didn't spend from eight o'clock to three o'clock on any day teaching you. That's seven hours. When you went home, your parent didn't set you down for seven hours and control what you thought and give you work to do. They just asked you to do what the teachers have done. We are so powerful, we've taken it for granted. And then we decry that we need more empowerment. And this notion that we're not powerful, that teachers need more authority--to do what?  To determine where they park in the parking lot? How much money they make? If you tripled our salaries, and I'm not just--teachers need more money--but if you tripled all the salaries, what impact do you think that would have on test scores? Would they move at all? They might go down. What's the correlation between the teacher's salary and student achievement? Now people will say "Well, better people will come into teaching"  I don't believe that.  I think the best people are the ones who are there now 'cause they want to teach. I want people who want to teach, not people who are mercenaries. I'll teach because it pays enough.  Well, how well will you teach? We don't have that built in yet, where how well you teach determines you much you make. And how do you determine how well you teach? You should measure by student achievement. They say, well, you know if you teach poor kids you can't get the same outcome as if you teach affluent kids," and that may or may not be true.  I think it has a lot to do with the input that the teachers give to the process. But when you look at holistic education, you're talking about empowering the parents as well. I mean, imagine parental education going on simultaneously with the children's education. I mean, some of the models I use in school can be used across the country. Take any school, take all the kids in the schools that do well, they form a group they call Children That Do Well.  Ask their parents to come to a meeting. They form a group too they call Parents of Children Who Do Well. If you ever just try to get those parents together, nothing to do with the PTA [Parent-Teacher Association], Booster Club, any of that. Just get those parents in a room and say, look, dearly beloved, we need your help to converse and help train some other parents who don't know what to do whose children are in this school that you may be telling your children to avoid them because you may think they're riff-raff.  But they want their children to learn and on a scale of one to ten, ten being the worst case, start with the ones first who want some help. And on Tuesday nights or Saturday mornings you and I can sit and you can tell me, you live in the projects just like I do but your kids are doing well and mine are not. What are you doing that I can learn from?  And then we exchange phone numbers and then we bond and then we start changing behavior and we keep it coordinated through the school. Now if we galvanize the community around empowering ourselves to help our children get better educated while simultaneously educating ourselves. That's what schools could be doing. Yes, we need to focus on reading, writing, and arithmetic but that's an isolation. There's more to life than that, right? I mean, some of us get to be in the White House and still can't spell. It doesn't mean they can't function in the White House.  So, being perfect spellers is not necessarily what I'm trying to get to. I'm trying to get them involved in the educational process where they see this as an empowerment activity because so many of you kids are dropping out. The young men are not going to college any longer unless they're profitable to the universities by bringing their athletic skills. My alma mater is Xavier University [of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana], 75 percent female right now.  Right now.  Now does that mean the girls got smarter? No, doesn't mean the boys got dumber either, just means they don't go to college anymore. So where are they going? That's a good question. So that's my mission, to empower the public schools to empower the community. Public schools must work no matter how many alternatives we come up with, Catholic school, private school, vouchers, charters, home schooling, leaving the country, whatever you want to do.  The majority of people will still be educated in the public schools. And if the public schools still turn out predatory people, everybody else will become prey, no matter how well-educated you are. Matter of fact, it's easier to prey on people who have stuff when you have nothing of yourself. Why would somebody with nothing prey on somebody else with nothing?  Nothing from nothing leaves nothing. But affluent people can't sleep at night if there are predatory people in the same community. 'Cause they can get to you and you don't want that to happen and that's what schools are all about.
Story_ID: 10727
Speaker 1: You went to George Washington [Preparatory High School, Los Angeles, California] in what year?  19--
Speaker 2: Seventy--'79 [1979] was my first graduating class--I went midyear, '78 [1978] and '79 [1979] and I stayed there ten years.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you--'79 [1979] to '89 [1989] --so when you went, this was your first time you were a principal?
Speaker 2: Correct, it was my first and only *principalship. I spent ten years as a principal and then I went to become a superintendent.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was this--did you feel, did you have any sense that this was your--you were embarking upon something that you would gain so much notoriety?
Speaker 2: Absolutely not. Never had a clue, I knew that I was being sent there because the previous principals had been struggling and they needed somebody, you know, and the last principal I think had left under some duress and had, you know, the community was up in arms. They wanted somebody. I was on their list so they threw me in there.  I was a rookie and that's generally, in education we know this, that's the assignment you get as a rookie, you get the toughest school. The seasoned principals, they never get to get sent to these schools, so they sent fresh meat--here, go get them--right? With no plans, just go in there, hang in there. I made it up as I went along. I had one good supervisor, though, an administrator named Phil Jordan, a white guy, who was very, very courageous, I think.  I give Phil his credit, he came up with this concept of the prep school model and he put it together both at the elementary, middle, and high school and we had formed a triad, what's called a triad. An elementary feeding into middle which fed into Washington High and we had this concept of a pipeline. We really didn't stay there long enough to really see twelve years of it. I spent longer at my school than the other guys did at theirs, but we had a concept and we all bought into it--standards for excellence in this school. We had dress codes, we had standards that teachers must call home when kids were absent. We reduced the--let's give you an example. The average absence rate at Washington High when I came to the school was 30 percent. That meant on any given day, 30 percent of the kids were home. So you're only educating 70 percent on any given day. So you're talking about overcrowded classrooms; that's on paper.  In the room, and they'll ask about it after lunch, who's actually in the building, right? Nobody's in the classroom. On a football game day, after lunch, hardly anybody's in the building, so why--how are we educating children? We implemented some programs of forcing people to call home and they didn't like it, but we started calling home--I helped do it too, show them we could make it happen--calling home on the first day of absence of every child of every class and then you may get six phone calls in high school. The kids started coming back and those classes that we did it, we reduced the absence to 7 percent. One time it went down to 4 percent. We could hold it there by just making phone calls but acting like we cared. A study was done in Chicago [Illinois] a few years ago on absenteeism of ninth graders in high schools.  I think they spent $87,000 on this study. You know what the conclusion was? What's the most significant reason which ninth graders in America are truant? Or maybe in Chicago. And the overriding reason was because they can be. 'Cause nothin' happened that was significant enough. So you had to make it personal. You had to tell kids, I miss you.  I want you in my class. I'm the teacher's room with the empty seat and put peer counseling programs in place where kids go get the other kids so if you're thinking about dropping out, my friend and I, your best girlfriend if I can find her, we'll come and harass you. We'll aggravate you, we'll call you in the morning, we'll tell you, we love you, we'll help you with your homework until you give up fighting with us and come back to school and stop taking every Tuesday and Thursday off and leaving early on Friday.  See?  But you got to tell me why it's important for me to save you.  And that's the mission, that was my message to my kids, wherever you get, you can't get there alone except maybe to heaven.  But you got to take somebody with you to college, you got to take somebody with you across that graduation stage.  The pronoun is "We", not "I" shall overcome. The pronoun is "We." So if you're out there by yourself, you're not doing any overcoming, you're just temporarily struggling to keep your head above, you know, you're just one step away from the bear who's going to eat everybody.
Story_ID: 10728
Speaker 1: I know you said you were making things up as you were going along instead of sort of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.
Speaker 1: But what things, when you look back on it that you did that you did right, you know, that were critical things in your success that even though, you know. I mean was it--.
Speaker 2: The thing I did right was the toughest thing, evaluating the teachers fairly which means the ones that were not teaching were told they were not teaching and were not left comfortable. That did not make me popular. But I had to advocate for children and the ones that were doing well, they were told that too so they expanded what they were doing.  Okay?  I could not save those kids without the quality of teaching being improved. Now some of the teachers stepped it up, most decided to leave rather than serve my message which might have meant that they were capitulating or something, they'd rather bind together, band together and run away. But my thesis on that is that mediocrity always needs a lot of company.  Excellence can survive on isolation. Excellent people can always be loners.  Mediocre people, they need a lot of company 'cause they can't survive all by themselves. So when I see all these people talking about, well, we don't want to do this. I said, well, you know, you can't stay here then, 'cause I think I'll be here. That was the most critical thing and it was the most controversial thing and it made me least popular and I still suffer from some unpopularity in some circles because of my stand on the quality of education that children ought to have and what teachers ought to do. I'm not so concerned about how teachers feel about children. I'm very concerned about what they do on behalf of children. Because you can love children and still mis-educate them. So you tell me you love them.  Oh, I pinch them on the cheek and pat them on the head and give away free grades. That's the saddest part, teachers who inflate grades out of kindness. It's not kindness, it's patronizing. It's keeping them enslaved. Kids wind up with a 3.8 grade point average in a high school and go to the local Cal [California] State [University] and end up in remedial math and English in their freshman year 'cause they can't pass the entrance exam at a level to get them out of what's called "bone-head" freshman math and English. How'd you get a 3.8? You can't even write a complete sentence. You can't even diagram a sentence, we stopped doing that. You can't write a complete paragraph. You know what I mean? That kind of stuff is painful. That is criminal when we do that to children.
Story_ID: 10729
Speaker 1: You focused on the teachers that--you know, you were critical of the teachers. Were there any other things that weren't performing right and you tried to support the ones who were. Were there other things that you think you did correctly that--.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, we started a parent center on campus [of George Washington Preparatory High School, Los Angeles, California] which we brought the parents onto the campus. The teachers when I came were asking for more security. They already had people walking around with handcuffs and sticks in their back pocket and guns. There were two plainclothes police officers on campus. My premise is that if you want clean up a campus, put mamas in the hallway. Daddies if you can find them, but I couldn't find too many daddies.  To bring the parents onto the campus changes the entire atmosphere of a campus. You don't need the police state anymore. You don't have to depend on them because once you bring police, you begin to depend upon them and you think that you need them when they're actually superfluous, they aren't part of the educational process. If they are, then they're educating us to know something else, that we need police to tame ourselves just like that bullhorn baseball bat thing.  You're in a jungle, you need a lion tamer. You must be animals. So, the parent center was another thing. And we came up with a student-parent contract where they had to agree to certain things and the parent signed and the student signed as a condition of enrollment and on, and on, and on. We had a dress code which avoided wearing certain things, especially gang attire which had become acceptable. People thought they were free to wear what they want, but that's a powerless appearance so I began to talk about it. And one of more powerful techniques I use and encourage principals to do this--regularly have assemblies with your students. I would have all male and all female assemblies. I'd lock everybody else but me and the students so it'd be me with the girls on one day and the boys were in class, and the next day I would just reverse it. So nobody missed any education.  The teachers wouldn't come and I would have these hour and a half sessions with the kids and we'd talk about everything. And I would begin with the thesis for the day and then we would spend--I think I'd ask any question that they wanted to. Nobody ever left and went back to class and the conversations would get pretty brutal but they knew that I was their principal. So whenever things would break out--now all kinds of things would break out.  I mean kids would were killed in the neighborhood, you know, and I didn't let that go. I  mean I didn't just say "Well, somebody died over the weekend. Let's go straight to class."  We'd talk about them. I wanted them to value life so that they didn't become indifferent to death and become accustomed to it and just say, "Oh, Mookie's dead" well, he had a name and you need to celebrate his real name, you know.  So those kinds of things kind of humanize the environment, is what I call it, and I used what I call the love agenda. I give the example that if you look in the education code of any state in the nation, you will not find love as a condition. You will find punishment, codified, you know how to suspend, when to expel, when to incarcerate, exterminate, eliminate, all that's by code section.  In the corporal punishment days, we knew how to paddle, what size a paddle could be, how many units, all those kinds of things codified. No place in it does it require that you love children in behavioral ways. And so I have always tried to figure out ways to make the campus a place where children want to come and feel respected with a structure so there's not a free-for-all. And I'm very demanding and I tell them why they must look a certain way, why you can't wear this, why you must study this.  And I have grown people come back to me today say "I still remember those lectures, those assemblies when we'd talk" so they still remember. And then they would quote some stuff I would say, when you said this, that, and another. I'd say, "Did I say that?"  I make it up as I go along. I still make it up. But it's a great free-for-all to have and that kind of bonding, I think, made a great deal of difference.  Part of the problem with that is that personality-driven so when you step back from it, you wonder who can continue that and I been accused of that. They say, "Well, you know, George, without your personality and your, you know, whatever it is you need to do, what can the next principal be expected to do because they can't command a thousand kids at one time to pay attention for an hour and a half?" which is what I can do. So I understand that, but you put some systems in place.  You shouldn't let the systems fall in place (unclear) and if you as a principal can't do it, then find somebody in the faculty who can. Maybe let a coach do it. Who's the best speaker on your campus? Let him preach the gospel of freedom and justice and equality and educational emancipation, you know? Maybe you're not the best speaker, but find somebody who can.  I don't expect you to be a powerful speaker just because you're the principal. I don't think I'm the best speaker in the world but I can handle myself in front of a group and I know I can talk to kids. So I use what I could the best that I could.
Story_ID: 10730
Speaker 1: And you start getting publicity pretty quickly on, early on.  You started--
Speaker 2: I started getting the wrong publicity first. I started getting attacked by the teacher unions because I was demanding and they were leaving and calling me names, so I was the cause celebre for--stop him! He's a dictator, he's--but the, but the community loved it. So it became the struggle, the parents supporting me, the public perception down at the board and all those about, the you know, he's too dictatorial.  We take him to grievance every time. We keep taking him grievance, well take me to grievance, it's all right. I mean, earn your money. So I was having a love affair with the community and this love-hate affair with some of these other folks. But I got--they started leaving on their own. I never drove anybody out of the school [George Washington Preparatory High School, Los Angeles, California]. I never fired anybody, but they voluntarily left. They said, well, you know, if he's going to be here, the community supports him, and I got to hire new teachers and the school started growing and growing and people started getting off the busses and coming back. I'd go out there in the morning and encourage them to get off the busses. A curious thing happened. I got a break, I got a lucky break. I came to the school around '78 [1978], '79 [1979]. Around 1980 we had a gas crunch in the country and the gasoline prices shot up and people had to go odd and even numbers to get gasoline at the gas station, you know, it depends on the license plate number and the L.A. Unified School District had this massive bussing program. I had, when I came to Washington High, there were 1700 kids in the school, students enrolled; 1300 per day who should have been at the school were on a bus, more than were attending neighborhood schools, so I had a whole school full of kids on a bus that I never saw, they were just computer printouts.  They voluntarily put themselves on a bus rather than come to Washington High School 'cause Washington High had this negative reputation. The Crips gang was born there; the Crips were still there, you know, all these colors and all this kind of stuff. And people had gotten shot and killed and people had been afraid, terrorized by the neighborhood. The decision was made by the board of education that the busses that were taking the kids from the inner-city to the valley would not make multiple trips and multiple stops to get a fifty-load of kids on the bus. They would make one stop to save gasoline. So in the past, the busses would stop, pick up ten at the church, five over here, see? The bus might go and make eight or nine different stops to get a full busload in the neighborhood. Now they would make only one stop.  They would come to the school of origin which was Washington High School. So on a Monday morning, 1300 kids showed up to catch busses lined up down three blocks around my school and they kept coming every morning. I said, "Oh, my Lord. You have put the canary in front of the cat."  I now get to see this whole population of kids that don't know a thing about Washington High School. They don't know a thing about Washington--other than what they heard.  But they're right in front of me every morning. I looked at that for about three or four days. I said, "Shoot, I'm not going to go to sleep on this one." I got my bullhorn and my cookies and my cheerleaders and I went out there and started passing out fliers and serving cookies and say "Look, tell your parents to come to the meeting on Thursday night. I'm going to talk to them about you coming back."  Oh, they were terrified, throwing them on the ground. We just thought, you know, this battle started up. "Please come back to Washington High. It's a wonderful place."  We'd jump on the bus and give them information before they'd leave. Most of the kids were terrified. But I started wearing them down. Every thirty kids I got to come back was another teacher position.  And I kept working at it. One summer I personally must have made over 2,000 phone calls. Just myself and my counselor, she did the same thing. And by the time September came, we had picked up about maybe 300 kids from that which meant ten more teachers. And the word got out, it's okay to come to Washington. And these were children of the affluent, the influential, the ones who had come from private schools who didn't want their kids to go to a public school, and certainly not Washington, but I made them a promise. I said, "You spend six weeks here. If you still want to leave after six weeks, I'll help you get on the bus."  Nobody ever took me up on that 'cause they built in this brother-sister program, peer counseling program where the kids would go in and embrace it.  So here they know you're new and you're scared, I put two kids on you. They won't let you get away. They make you feel good all day long. Kids felt great about coming--we even had gay students. In those days, you know, they didn't want to be called that, them black males gay? They'd be driven out of other schools, they could come to Washington 'cause nobody would hassle them. I made sure of that. I made sure of that.  No matter what condition they might be in, you know, oppressed in any other way, you could be at Washington High School and not be oppressed, but you had to play by the rules; these are my rules and if you broke the rules, there was a consequence. I didn't kick you out of school, but there was a consequence. We had them picking up paper, picking up trash, staying after school, you know, painting walls. And the mamas would say, "Well, I'd rather him do that than you kick him out."  And so that's what we'd do. Girls too, they don't want to help me clean up. It was called campus beautification and just little stuff, you know, just to make sure everybody still acts the same way. If you're retarded, that's what you had to do.  At lunchtime. Meet me at the flagpole, we're going to clean up the campus. And so kids got used to saying, "Okay, you got busted today, maybe you'll get busted tomorrow," but that was just a symbolic thing.  I didn't want them picking up trash, but I wanted them to know there was a consequence for breaking my rules. And they were my rules, I have to admit that. I mean, I made them up. I thought they were good for kids, though.
Story_ID: 10731
Speaker 1: When did the whole concept of doing a movie come about and how did you find out about it?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I used to have--I had a Peace March every Christmas. I took the band and the cheerleaders and the student body and we had--we'd go around to it, we'd have them march around the neighborhood and we'd have a march for peace and justice 'cause my old marching days with SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and the media picked up on the Peace March and so a couple of the teachers repeated to them the other things we were doing, so it became--and I would do it every Christmas.  I'd do it the Sunday before they went home for the Christmas holidays, or the winter break, whatever you want to call it. And it was either Sunday or Saturday. I can't remember what day of the week it was. And that got a little attention. I wasn't trying to get it. I mean people would ask me, how'd you get a movie made, like I went and I called somebody to make a movie. I had nothing to do with it.  But the Landsburg Production Company simultaneously was looking for a storyline. Alan Landsburg is a big producer in Hollywood. He had a lot of TV shows on at the time and he and his wife, Linda Otto, they came out and filmed one of my marches and they kept watching what I was doing. They said, this makes a good story.  Also, right around the same time Sidney Poitier had some people looking for a storyline 'cause he wanted to come back and do a sequel to from 'To Sir With Love' but it would be coming back maybe as a principal this time, you see. So all of that was meshing around, mushing around and they landed on me. And then they called it 'The George McKenna Story', and we dickered in front of--I didn't even think they were going to make the movie. You know, after you do all of the filming, there's no guarantee that the, what is it, that the networks are going go buy it because it was made for TV movies. And CBS [Columbia Broadcasting System] bought it for 'Tuesday Night Movie of the Week' and I got to meet Denzel Washington. They selected him to play the part. And I was honored, I mean, I liked him and curiously enough, the director of the movie was Eric Laneuville. Now Eric Laneuville's mother worked at [George] Washington [Preparatory] High School with me as a counselor and Eric and Denzel had been on a series together called 'St. Elsewhere' where Denzel played like a doctor and Eric played a little orderly who rolled around little stuff and said little funny stuff. But Eric wanted to be a director and this was his first big directorial job and he's done well since then. So it was like a--like kismet or something. I don't know what came out, you know, and they did it on location in Houston because L.A. [Los Angeles, California] Unified [School District] couldn't get it together with union regs and all of that how can you do it on a campus and all of that, so we went to Houston [Texas] and did it on location at Austin High School in Houston. And the rest was a piece of history, you know, the movie went out and then it got a lot of notoriety and it tried to show, you know, what happened at the school but it couldn't show it all. It focused too much on gangs as being the biggest problem.  That really wasn't the problem. The problem was the educational delivery system that was so flawed because we, the adults, had let it get like that. I found that children will do anything that you asked them to do. Depends on who asks them and how you ask. They'll go through walls for you. If you don't believe that, ask any football coach.  He can make you do suicidal things if you love your coach, 'cause football is a brutal game. I played football, I'm the smallest thing out there, they're trying to kill me, I'm a running back. I was motivated by fear and whatever coach told me to do, I'd try to do it. So--because I had affection and respect for my coach--so if they have respect and affection for their teacher, they'll learn anything, anything. But you have to bond with them. I mean, you know, inner-city children have this need to be respected because sometimes they get disrespected by the world around them and they don't know where they're going in life.
Story_ID: 10732
Speaker 1: As I said, they don't have this affluence promised to them, just get through, you know? Just skate through and daddy will take care of you. Most of them don't have daddies. I did a survey on my own, not to embarrass the kids, but I asked them in an assembly, "How many of you in this assembly", 'cause we were talking about manhood and responsibility and it was with the boys. I said, "I'm not going to try to disrespect anybody, but I want you to be honest in here. How many of you in this auditorium", and there was a thousand of them in the auditorium, "have the same mother and father in your home today that give birth to you?"  And 80 percent of them didn't, 80 percent. Now a couple of kids said "what if you have a stepfather?" I said, "That counts, but I asked about the biological father.  Now how many of you even have a daddy?" 50 percent of them didn't even have a man in the house, but they had stepfathers. I said, "Does he love you?" "Yeah" "Okay, then that counts" but this notion of a male disappearing, especially African American, Latino--well, the Latino males had a tendency to stay home more. They stay with their families. Our men had a tendency to disappear.  And the boys, and the girls no longer expected a daddy, so it's become cyclical now and today in the 21st century, young ladies today, honestly--it's a sad situation. They're having babies and they're not even looking for a husband anymore. They're not looking for it--it's okay because they never had a father, so they don't know what they're missing and their mother never had a daddy in the house. So daddy is almost becoming an obsolete word in the black community.  But the girls still get pregnant and they have babies and that's their rite of passage and they go into that same cycle that their mamas had and that's one of the great tragedies. Now who do I blame for that? I don't know who to blame, but I think public education can be responsible for interceding and educating and making us aware. One of the other things I thought was very powerful that we did at the school--I didn't know how powerful it was.  I developed something called the Speaker's Bureau. It's kind of like career day, but it's not a day, it goes on all year long. I would look for people in the newspaper, in the neighborhood and have them sign up all year long to come in when they could so if you worked at the bank and you were a teller or you had a hardware store or you worked as an engineer and you looked like the kids--black or white, I didn't care what blend you were, maybe young people, whatever, whoever wanted to come talk to kids. And we had somebody coordinate it so people would come in and talk to kids. I didn't realize how powerful it was until 1985, twenty years after the Watts [Los Angeles, California] riots a reporter came from the 'L.A. [Los Angeles] Times' came to [George] Washington [Preparatory High School]. They wanted to do a story; what do kids who weren't even born then think about the world today, they wanted to talk to black kids who lived around Washington High.  It was during the summertime, so I was able to find ten kids, just randomly picked them. I knew they hadn't gone away, but they were all going somewhere and when the reporter talked to them, he asked them what made you decide what it is you want to do with your life?  You know that seven of them said, "Those speakers that George McKenna brought in here". And those speakers, when they left, they didn't even know that they had that influence on the kids.  'Cause you know, when you talk to a bunch of teenagers sometimes you don't even know if the light is on, you know, they just kind of look at you. You know, they ask you dumb questions, how much money you make?  Are you married? What kind of car you drive? You know, teenage silly stuff, but they're listening and you don't know they're listening and you don't know you have an impression on them because when you talk to teenagers, sometimes you say, "Hello, anybody home in there?" you know, you want to hit them on the head and they are listening, but the impact is later. And seven of them, seven out of ten, now you know, that's 70 percent. I don't know if that would be realistic across all of them. But they actually said that they heard these people come in and say, "I'm doing this with my life. I remember being a teenager like you and here's what I'm doing" and they got inspired by that. Now, they probably got inspired by a lot of stuff I said but after they hear me enough, you know, same old George McKenna.  "Oh, that's just him again, you know, saying the same old thing," but when another person comes and says something to them--same thing their mother's been telling them for fifteen years--all of a sudden the light goes on. So that helped as well. I had a great time as a principal because I was there in the trench with the kids. I've been out of the schools for the last thirteen years as superintendent of Inglewood [California] and Compton [California] and now L.A. Unified [School District] where I just resigned my position after one year.  Being at central office is very different in dealing with adults and politics. You don't have any children there, but often you're--you confront adults who exhibit childish behavior and so you have a sense of deja vu. And the politics of public education is really the overriding cause of much of the dilemma in public education. 'Cause those are political decisions, you know, how much money is spent on what and on whom; on what vendors and what contractors; on what curriculum; on whether we bus, or we don't bus; whether we build or don't build a school; whether we put them on a year-round calendar or not; what's the norm; how many kids in a class; those are political decisions and the other two pieces are economics and pedagogy. The economics, you have to keep it balanced, operate in the black, and pedagogy is just what do we teach? What do we learn how to teach?  We can teach no matter what the budget is if we want to teach.  Now this notion of we can't teach unless there's air conditioning.  That's ridiculous. I mean I grew up when air-conditioners didn't exist and in New Orleans [Louisiana]?  What are you talking about?  How did I learn? We sweated and we fanned and we learned. So those are, I think, speechless arguments.
Story_ID: 10733
Speaker 1: What is next for you?
Speaker 2: I don't know. I'm now on what's called administrative leave from my position with the [Los Angeles Unified School] District. I'm looking to expand my work maybe at a national level. Maybe do some writing, some research, consulting work perhaps. I'm not really looking for employment. I think I've gone as far as I can go inside of the system. I've done what I can do to set models for those who wish, like I said, for those who believe no further explanation is necessary. For those who do not that may be possible, so--I'm an educator, I've always been an educator. I think I got a good twenty years left in me of fight. If my grandfather [George McKenna, Sr.] can live to be 102, I'm sixty now, that's forty-two more years. I figure I can catch up with him but I got a good twenty more years of good hard work in me. By the time I'm eighty, maybe I'll start slowing down and stop running every day and fighting the way I do, but I love this stuff, I love it. So, education is what I know.
Speaker 1: And what do you think you want to do on a national level? Do you have, I mean, what are you--
Speaker 2: Probably focus on where African American children are getting a good education and almost exclusively on that because here's what I believe. What works for African American children always works for the rest of the community. The reverse is not necessarily true. So I think the greatest barometer of American culture and its civilization, whether or not we really are civilized, to what extent to we treat and educate our African Americans because they, in this country, are the primary barometer of whether this country is still civilized and humanized. Now there's been arguments about wherein lies the immigrant population in California, and they get exploited too, you know, but it's from--they're not slaves. They're not slaves and we do educate them and even try to give them bilingual education and all that.  But what do we have for African Americans across this country? I have, you know I'm connected to some organizations that are at a national level and I have no employment opportunities, I'm not looking for that. I'm just looking to be involved in raising the consciousness of America, which is what you're doing with this series. You're trying to say there are successful African American people out there.  Think of the power of this, not just a black history month, not just in the month of February. When I can plug into some kids who are saying, what do I do with my life?  I say, oh, you don't know what to do with your life? You don't know any successful African Americans in your neighborhood? You never been out of Watts [Los Angeles, California]? You don't know where the Pacific Ocean is? Here, let's plug you into the website of HistoryMakers and you can spend your life reading about all these wonderful people and you can see them on screen and they can tell you what they've done and what they haven't done 'cause I'm assuming these are candid conversations you're having with us and many more people much more celebrated than I have ever been and much more accomplished. I think this is a wonderful thing you're doing. That's a form of education, so all of our libraries ought to be able to plug in to this on your network, your digital whatever you have that's going to allow us to do this.  That's the kind of stuff that will keep inspiring our kids. So I think that the educational system has to be held accountable for helping America become as great as it could possibly be. I don't think anybody would refuse treatment from a physician who's African American who can save their life because they don't like black people which is what people used to do years ago and put them on a list like Charles Drew was on a list. Benjamin Carson is a magnificent doctor, so I've heard.  I don't think anybody would be afraid to go under the anesthetic with him with a mask on his face, no matter what he looked like behind that mask 'cause he's got skills. So we need to stop wasting this magnificent human resource that we have in America through our public schools. Too many people have fallen through the cracks and we don't need to let that happen.  And for whatever reason, I mean, whether we do it because we're losing our power in the world. America's no longer the dominant power so we need to re-educate our kids, whatever reason we think is the right reason or we're, you know, we're falling behind the Japanese or here come the Russians are coming, the Russians are coming. Whatever selfish reasons, it all has to for me, with how African American people are treated. And I'm not ashamed of saying that and in my other mission would have to be a subset with that of the African American male to try to rescue that population 'cause that--the demise of the African American male is going to cost us more than anything in the black community. Now how we rally them beyond a rally, beyond the Million Man March, and beyond the come to Jesus meetings--and I don't knock anybody for what they did, I mean, I think that [Louis] Farrakhan what he did was a magnificent thing.  I don't know anybody could have pulled that off and I believe a million brothers were out there, you know. I know a hundred thousand of them myself that were there that told me they saw a whole bunch of people there, no matter what the media says. And I watch T. D. Jakes on the--giving his ministries to men and all the brothers that are trying to do this. The men have to be rescued, I don't mean any disrespect to the women, but I'll tell you one thing, if we rescue men, I know of no women that will be disadvantaged by that activity.  'Cause when men decide to be predators, women and children make excellent available prey. I've been to the prisons when I was in law school, I went to the women's prison to do (unclear) work and I guess second or third year you can go--I can't remember what year--I went to the prison. Most of those women in that prison when you ask them why they're in there, it goes back to some man, 90 percent of them will tell you some man made me crazy.  You know that little story about that little girl, Kimba's nightmare that was in 'Emerge' magazine that they just let out of jail? Gave her twenty-four years to life. They finally let her out--[President Bill] Clinton commuted her sentence for carrying dope and doing things--all about a man. All about a man. So I think that my mission, and I've chosen to accept it, I think it's a mission possible and if I'm captured--they don't have to come and get me, I'll just stay captured--is to redeem the public schools so that they can redeem the population of people that I identify with, which then affects the rest of the world, in America, particularly. I think everybody will be advantaged if the African American population is given a superior education. That's what my theses on, reparations. Even without reparations, just give it to us now.  We demand it, we're entitled to it, we should have had it a long time ago and you're worse off for having mis-educated us. You'd have done me more favors by having educated us than by what you've done to us and what we're still having done to us.
Story_ID: 10734
Speaker 1: Now, I usually ask a legacy question. Do you think you just answered that? You know, what you would like to--.
Speaker 2: I'm not done yet. God ain't through with me. So whatever it is now, I want to polish it a little bit. I hope I get a little more time 'cause I'm not done yet. I've seen some things happen but not enough. My only mission in life--I don't think I can fix everything, but I can leave it better than I found it. So far, I've done that. I haven't failed yet in that, but one time I'd like to fix something so I say, "Now it's fixed."  But I haven't gotten there yet.
Speaker 1: And what about Fannie C. Williams? What do you think she would think of you if she--
Speaker 2: She'd probably burst her buttons being proud of me 'cause I was always getting sent to the principal's office for being mannish. My teachers would send me to the office. I always tried hard to be mannish. I had a little dip in my walk, a little glide in my stride. I wasn't trying to be girlish, I was trying my best to be a little man, you know, and all my teachers were women, you know, I didn't see a man teacher 'til I was in the seventh grade and I loved my teachers, you know, and Fannie C. would sit me down and give me these lectures, you know, and pull my ears, and stand me in the line in the corner, you know, turn my face to the wall. But I think she loved me a lot 'cause she knew I could do work if I could just shut up my mouth and stop running my mouth and aggravating people.  'Cause I'd get bored, you know, I didn't have a lot to do, I'd start aggravating everybody else in the classroom. I think she'd be very proud of me. And more importantly, I think my mother [Leah Metoyer McKenna] would be too. But she always was proud of me, my mother never told me she wasn't proud of me. 'Til the day she died, she was proud of me and I loved her more than any creature God ever created.
Story_ID: 10735
Speaker 1: Oh, you had said one thing impressed you about Denzel Washington, what was that?
Speaker 2: He's a committed man. Denzel Washington is a committed man. He's true to his beliefs, he's not a shyster. He said he wouldn't take any "coon" jobs. He wouldn't let them make him into a pimp or a fool, a buffoon, and he's kept to that. He said he'd turned down lots of jobs because of that.
