Story_ID: 372445
Speaker 1: Good morning.  Thank you for participating.
Speaker 2: Good morning.
Speaker 1: I am Shawn Wilson.  I will be the interviewer today.  And this is Neculai Burghelea, the videographer.
Speaker 2: Hi.
Speaker 1: And I'll have you state your full name and spell it out for me.
Speaker 2: Rose Eileen Niles McCrary [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Rose Niles McCrary], R-O-S-E, E-I-L-E-E-N, N-I-L-E-S, M-C-C-R-A-R-Y.
Speaker 1: Your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Ten, twenty-six, sixty-one [October 26, 1961].
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Columbia Presbyterian Hospital [New York-Presbyterian/Columbia University Medical Center], in Manhattan, New York.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: January 26th, 2007.
Speaker 1: And, and the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: The library at the First Presbyterian Church in Mount Vernon, New York.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am the senior pastor of this congregation.
Speaker 1: Okay, is there a junior pastor?
Speaker 2: We have an interesting approach to developing a church staff here.  They, for many years, had associate pastors, but then the budget sort of shrank down.  But since I've been here, women in ministry who are doing other validated calls, validated, like teaching at the seminaries and things of that nature, have come an affiliated with us as parish associates.  They seem to think there's something interesting about what we're doing here, and so they want to be part of the ministry.  So, and we also recently developed a position for Christian education consultant, so we have that.  There's a number of staff-type people, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --in addition to me.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I, I really believe that, in terms of lay leadership, ministry is everybody's business, so we've done a lot to try to promote lay participation, and preaching, and leadership in the congregation.  So, one monkey don't stop the show, so you know, whether I'm here or not, there's leadership, and--
Speaker 1: Things go on.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's empowerment.
Story_ID: 372446
Speaker 1: I have five basic questions for you.  These answers appear on the website with your biography.  Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Pink.
Speaker 1: Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Sugar, anything with sugar.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall, autumn.
Speaker 1: A vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Jamaica.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I can do all things through Jesus Christ, who is my strength and my life.
Speaker 1: And that is, is that a--
Speaker 2: It's a scripture.
Speaker 1: A scripture.
Speaker 2: It's a, it's a variation of the scripture (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: A scripture, okay.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The scripture is "I can do all things through Christ, who strengthens me," [Philippians 4:13]
Story_ID: 372447
Speaker 1: So we're gonna start.  And I want to get some sense of your history, your family's history.  So we'll start with your mother and that side of the family first.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And your mother's full name?
Speaker 2: Jean Pauline Davis, is her maiden name, Niles [Jean Davis Niles].
Speaker 1: And her date of birth?
Speaker 2: Twelve, twenty-seven, nineteen ninety-three [December 27, 1933].
Speaker 1: And her place of birth?
Speaker 2: Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
Speaker 1: So your mother's Australian?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What do you know about--did she grow up in Australia?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What do you know about her background, her growing up in Australia?
Speaker 2: For many years--I was, I was the first child born here.  My sister [Debra Niles] was born in Australia.  My father [David Niles, Sr.] was--you didn't get to my father yet, but he was a merchant sailor.  It's important that I sort of back into the story about my mother because for many years in growing up in the Bronx [New York], I knew very little about my mother.  But back in 1989 she decided to move back to Australia.  And so she moved back there, and I've had the opportunity now to take three trips over to Brisbane, once with my daughter [Eupha McCrary], twice by myself, and spend some time with her.  And it's amazing how the emotional cutoff that I experienced, you know, where it was just too painful for her to talk about all that she had left behind, 'cause back in the '60s [1960s], leaving Australia felt like literally the original pioneers, even coming here then.  It's like people would only call us if there was a death in the family, or we'd get a telegram.  We'd get these little aerograms, these little blue aerograms in the mail.  And it would always invoke pain and suffering and sorrow over the loss of the connection.  But here we are in the 21st century, and now, you know, it's a, it's still a day's travel to get there, but there is a very different attitude with the Internet and all the ways that we can stay connected.  So, it's been bring out a lot of the history.  So, my mother has a very interesting background from Australia.  Her mother was Irish Catholic and probably, since there's no real immigration story on that side of the family, my grandmother's family were the Kenneallys, and they were, their, the next level were the Kellys.  And so it was this big Irish Catholic family.  My, my grandmother was one of fourteen Irish Catholic children.  And, and what I've learned about Australia is, is if there's no real immigration story in this, you know, folks who are Irish, there may, it may have gone back to the transportation period, when there were political transportations, you know, in the rebellions in Ireland.  So, and my mother used to sing us a lullaby call--about Ned Kelly, who was sort of the Jesse James of Australia, Australian history (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you sing that lullaby?
Speaker 2: A little bit of it (singing), "Ned Kelly was born in a ramshackle shack.  He battled since he was a kid; grew up with robbers, bad men, and thieves, and learned all the things that they did."  That's about all I can, you know.  It had a terrible moral to the story at the end.  You know, you know, it was sort of like--I have to get her to sing that, you know, so I can record it.  Now her father [Harold Davis] was British.  Her father immigrated--her mother was born in Australia, but her father--her mother was Eileen Kenneally [Eileen Kenneally Davis], and her father was Harold Davis.  And her father was born in Manchester, England, and he immigrated as a small boy, like about five years old, with his parents to Australia.  And he was an only child, so my, my mother's, mother's side there was this fourteen cousins, you know, that all had families.  And on her father's side it was just these sort of strict, Anglican, very rigid, you know, folks, you know, and he was an only child.  So there was some real tension.  I often reflected that my mother made a mixed marriage because she married a African diaspora sailor, my father.  But then when I sort of learned more about her life, I realized that her parents also had a mixed marriage.  Because the mixed marriage of Irish Catholic and British Protestant is a serious mixture in terms of the ways in which there were issues that came up.  So my mother was the only girl, with five brothers.  And her mother got very sick when she was in the seventh grade, and she had to leave school to take care of the family.  And she worked in a department store and went through--you know, I mean, leading up to that, went through World War II [WWII] as a child.  And then, of course, Australia got very aligned with America, so there became a real interest in anything American, and along came my dad.  So that's sort of part of the story as to how--what her history was.
Story_ID: 372448
Speaker 1: Your father's full name?
Speaker 2: David Allen Niles [David Niles, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Date of birth?
Speaker 2: November 13th, 1905.  So there was a real age gap between my parents, ages--he was born in St. Vincent, British West Indies, which is in the Grenadine Islands [St. Vincent and the Grenadines].  And he was also one of fourteen, originally fourteen children.  And a number of them didn't survive childhood; couple of them were supposedly poisoned by women as they got older (laughter).  But the ones that I wound up knowing were seven; I had seven aunts and uncles, you know, who basically, except for one, wound up immigrating here to America.  And, but most of them had raised their families by the time that my father decided to get married.  So I have first cousins who are old enough to be aunts and uncles, and so big, very big, very generous, exciting, and loving family.
Speaker 1: And now, you say that your father was a, was a merchant--
Speaker 2: Right, right, originally in the West Indies.  He, his family, his father was an evangelist and for some--a sect of Protestantism called the Plymouth Brethren.  It's very strict.  They call their churches Gospel Hall, no smoking, no drinking, no parties, no-it's an enclosed brethren. They don't believe in music even being played in the church services.  They're very, you know, there's, there's so much love in their midst.  There's, but there's also a kind of--friend of mine was in Africa, and she saw a brethren van.  And on the side of the van it said, "The wages of sin are still death."  You know, (laughter) that's, that's their, their, their, you know, they're very, you know, kind of fundamental, literalistic interpretation of the Bible but passionate about Jesus Christ.  And so my grandfather, my father's father, James Nathanial Niles [James Niles], was originally born in Barbados, and he immigrated to St. Vincent and lost touch with his family.  We all just wish we knew what happened to the rest of that family.  But he was preacher by avocation.  By vocation he was a kind of a craftsman.  He painted the wheels on coaches, 'cause at that time, that was before automobiles.  And he had a curio shop that he would sell things to the--you know, it wasn't a big cruise industry, but sometimes boats would come in, and he would make things and sell them.  And my grandmother, who was Scottish supposedly, although she always looked sort of Mestizo to me, but I only knew her through pictures--was Rose [Rose Medford Niles].  I'm Rose [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Rose Niles McCrary]; she was Rose.  Rose, her maiden name was Medford Niles.  And so they had an interracial marriage, 'cause my grandfather was African descended.  But we don't know anything about that history.  That's, that's lost history in our family, up to the point that he came over to St. Vincent.  So I, someday I want to go to Barbados and do some research and try to track down something about all of that.  But others in my family have tried and not found much success.
Story_ID: 372449
Speaker 1: My dad [David Niles, Sr.] grew up in the school system in St. Vincent.  He originally trained as a shoemaker.  His father [James Niles] wanted him to be a teacher, but he wanted to be a shoemaker.  So his father was like, "You have the opportunity to be a teacher, and you want to be a shoemaker?"  But he was fascinated with pretty, pretty shoes.  You know, I mean, he, he made three-tone shoes and won some exhibition, and you know, so that was gonna be his career.  But he also really, really wanted to get from the islands.  So he took the opportunity, as so many people still do today, to migrate to work on some form of agriculture.  So he was cutting cane [sugarcane] actually in Cuba.  And he worked his way around the islands together with several of his brothers.  Like, one would get a job in Aruba and send for the other one to try to help them along.  Cue- he lived in Aruba; he lived in Curacao.  He got a visa to come to New York [New York], came to New York.  It was one of these kind of days, dead cold winter, and he refused to get off the boat.  (Laughter) He just, he just said, "Forget about it; I'm not staying here."  So he went back to Aruba, and so his family castigated him, you know, 'cause the whole idea was one brother, a family, a, a family friend had helped the first brother get to New York, and that was my Uncle Joe [Joseph Niles].  Uncle Joe was a photographer early--you know, he was just very talented, but then he got married, and so that meant he had to stop sending money home.  So then they sent my Aunt Rhoda [Rhoda Niles], and then she got married.  And so whenever they would not be able to work any longer and send money back home, the next one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We're coming.
Speaker 1: --it was their turn.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, so, it was my father's turn.  So, he finally came.  He spent some time working as an, as a porter, then as an elevator operator.
Speaker 2: Here in New York?
Speaker 1: Here in New York--
Speaker 2: Where did he--
Speaker 1: --in Harlem [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: --work as a porter.
Speaker 1: Buildings around Manhattan [New York]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --you know.  He would talk about going to the employment agencies and how would put on the board outside of the different employment agencies the size of the suit, you know.  You would get hired if you could fit the, the uniform, basically, you know.  So, and then he would talk about walking, you know, like the length of Manhattan island, you know, kind of for a job or you know, that sort of thing--I mean probably health--much healthier lifestyle than what we actually live today.  I mean, he lived to be ninety-two and very good health, you know.
Story_ID: 372450
Speaker 1: Now how did he [McCrary's father, David Niles, Sr.] meet your mother [Jean Davis Niles]?
Speaker 2: Yes, well, story, the story about that is that my dad worked as a carpenter.  He was good with his hands, and he was always interested in building things and crafting things.  He worked as a carpenter during World War II [WWII].  But he was always curious as to why he didn't get drafted.  You know, he sort of thought it was unusual, you know, 'cause they never even checked him out.  He, he had sort of bow legs, and maybe he would have been (laughter), you know, rejected.  But they--he went down to some office after the war and inquired.  And they looked him up, and they said that they had him in the dead file.  For some reason he had been misfiled.  So, he just kind of was curious about, you know, all that had happened in the world, war-torn Europe.  He, he had a conversation--he had a brother, his younger brother Isaac [Isaac Niles]--well, the, all my, all of my father's family were named names out of the Bible.  So I have an Uncle Moses [Moses Niles], and Uncle Isaac, and Uncle Joseph [Joseph Niles], Uncle John [John Niles], you know, Uncle Daniel [Daniel Niles], you know, and then the two girls were Sarah [Sarah Niles] and Rhoda [Rhoda Niles], so--(unclear)--you know, and then the ones who passed away, Joshua [Joshua Niles], Rachel [Rachel Niles], Leah [Leah Niles].  You know, they're all named out of the Bible.  But, so Isaac was the brother just younger than him, and he was having this conversation with my Uncle Isaac and said that he wanted to buy a ticket to go explore war-torn Europe.  He didn't just want to see it in the news reels.  He wanted to see it in real life.  And my Uncle Isaac said, "Why would you pay for that?"  (Laughter) "You know, just join the [U.S.] Merchant Marine, you know, and, and come see the world for free; you know, work your way through it."  You know, so, he did.  He, in sometime in the about 1946 or '7 [1947] he joined the Merchant Marines.  And in the beginning he took trips, you know, working for the SS [steam ship], you know, shipping company.  He took trips to Europe, all over Europe.  And then he switched to Asia, and he took trips around Vietnam, those kind of areas.  And then one day, a guy was like really upset down at the union hall.  And he was like, "I, you know, I made a deal that I'd go to Australia.  And you know, I'll get in such trouble if I back out at this point, but you know, I really can't go."  So my father agreed to go in his place.  And so he took the trip to Australia.  And at a party, I think, you know, sailors, you know, come ashore, you know, go to parties, so at some party he met my mother.  'Cause as I said, there was a fascination in Australia, as I understand it, after World War II--
Speaker 1: About anything American (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) with anything America, yeah, exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: And he was American.
Speaker 2: He was American.  And he was very dashing and very cat- you know, he was much older than my mother, but you know, very--
Speaker 1: She was born in--
Speaker 2: --handsome.
Speaker 1: --nineteen--
Speaker 2: Thirty-three [1933].
Speaker 1: Thirty-three [1933].
Speaker 2: And he's 1905.
Speaker 1: So he was--
Speaker 2: Twenty-eight years older than her.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so he was in his fifties.  The story is that he had already purchased his retirement home in St. Vincent.  He had his plans for his retirement and then you know, met my mother and yeah.
Speaker 1: And scratched all of those plans?
Speaker 2: Scratched the plans.
Story_ID: 372451
Speaker 1: And then they married and came back to New York [New York]?  How did they get--
Speaker 2: They got married kind of abruptly.  You know, just, there were, there were issues.  You know, there was not--apparently my [maternal] grandmother [Eileen Kenneally Davis] was fine with it.  My grandfather [Harold Davis] wasn't fine with it.
Speaker 1: Because of his--
Speaker 2: Because, yeah, 'cause probably have a lot of reasons--his only daughter, you know.  And she was running off to Sydney [Australia] to see him, and you know, kind of--so, and then some tragedies struck.  My, my father [David Niles, Sr.] was with my mother [Jean Davis Niles] when he learned that his father [James Niles] had passed away back in St. Vincent.  So he left and I think went immediately to St. Vincent to sort of comfort his mother [Rose Medford Niles] and deal with that issue.  And then on a--so their courtship was a long courtship.  You know, I mean it involved his leaving and going back to St. Vincent, back to New York, you know, and these journeys took a long time, you know, five, six months.  So over a period, a few years of correspondence, you know, he didn't forget her.  You know, 'cause I mean he, my father used to have like a, a billfold of photographs of the girls in every port, you know.  So it was kind of like, you know, there's something special about my mom.  And he--they--her, her father also died when they were together at one point.  He had a massive heart attack and died within a few days.  So at some point the story goes, my father turned to my mother and said you know, "You were with me when my, I heard my father died; I was with you when you heard your father died.  What do you think?  Let's get married."  And so she said, "Well, I'm a sport, you know.  I'll try anything," so (laughter), you know.  But they, but they got married by the captain of the ship, and he sailed, like, the same day or something like that.  So they got married, and he sailed to--'cause he couldn't change the schedule of the ship.  So she's continued living with her family, and she, you know, was pregnant.  And there's sort of a lot of dra- dra- drama happened as it became disclosed that my father got married.  And, but my sister [Debra Niles] was born there.  I have an older sister who was born there.  And then, just over time it became clear that my father's schedule didn't carry him back to Australia that often, you know, and that he was more likely to be in port here maybe every three months instead of in Australia every six months.  So, and with a small child, you know, they decided that my mother should relocate here.  And my father decided to buy a house in the Bronx [New York], you know, so.
Speaker 1: Had he lived in the Bronx before--
Speaker 2: No, he always--
Speaker 1: --during this time?
Speaker 2: --lived in Harlem [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: He had always lived in Harlem.  Did he talk about--
Speaker 2: St. Nicholas Avenue.
Speaker 1: St. Nicholas.
Story_ID: 372452
Speaker 1: Did he [McCrary's father, David Niles, Sr.] ever talk about his time in Harlem [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yep.  He just had a lot of fun from what I gather.  He worked in different, as I said, he worked in different jobs.  One of his favorite jobs is he was a waiter at the dining room at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], and he met a lot of the Columbia students.  He, he, and tried to date them (laughter), you know.  He did all kind of, did all kind of stuff.  But he also participated in an active social life.  Apparently they had different clubs, like the different states.  Georgia and different states had different social clubs, and he went to these dances.  And he went to Atlantic City [New Jersey] on his vacations.  And there--actually I have another photograph album with some wonderful picture of that whole era of his life, and that's the--you know, he just really pretty much enjoyed himself and you know, but did a lot to take care also of children.  Since he didn't have a family of his own, he really helped to raise his nieces and nephews, you know.  So he made a lot of investments in the lives of his, his, you know, extended family, you know, as they were growing up.
Story_ID: 372453
Speaker 1: You were the first born?
Speaker 2: No, I have an older sister [Debra Niles] who--
Speaker 1: You have an older one that--
Speaker 2: --was born in Australia.  I was the first child born here.
Speaker 1: Here, okay.
Speaker 2: I have two younger brothers [David Niles, Jr. and Joseph Niles].
Speaker 1: So then when they actually--back when you were born in 1961, you were born here in the Bron- or in the Bronx [New York]?
Speaker 2: I was born in Columbia Presbyterian Hospital [New York-Presbyterian/Columbia University Medical Center], which is in Manhattan [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then they brought me back home to the Bronx.
Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories of growing up in the Bronx?
Speaker 2: You know, it's interesting.  I think that my earliest memories are, you know, the kinds of things that were traumatic moments.  I mean the ordinary moments I don't remember very much of except you know, one or two glimpses of things.  But I, I remember, partly, I think I remember things that my parents [Jean Davis Niles and David Niles, Sr.] told me about over and over again, you know.  But--
Speaker 1: And some of those things are?
Speaker 2: My dad had at some point brought my mom a big, huge bottle of Chanel No. 5 perfume.  And I was a little girl, maybe two or three, you know, just toddling and walking around.  And I, I decided to wash my doll in the whole bottle of Chanel No. 5.  And you know, I actually do sort of remember that.  And you know, there were other times when, you know, I sort of remember vaguely my mother being upset about things, 'cause a lot of times she was on her own, you know.  And so--
Speaker 1: Because he was away.
Speaker 2: 'Cause he was away.  And I, I remember being upset because my mother was going to leave.  I think that there was this general fear of loss and abandonment, you know, so.  I mean kids feel that way anyway, you know, but I think that in our family it was a, it was a powerful theme.
Speaker 1: Well, when did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And so--
Speaker 1: --she go back [to Australia]?
Speaker 2: --it got fed into it.  She didn't go back until I was an adult, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, but then--
Speaker 2: But there was always this sense that, you know, you never knew (laughter), you know.
Speaker 1: That if she may go--
Speaker 2: You know, I mean that, you know, you had this feeling that every time she left, you know, it could--you know, there, there was, there was an odd issue about that in, in my childhood, so.  I can remember, you know, just typically when my mom would--you know, 'cause she had to go away to the hospital to have my two brothers.  So two years later she had my, my next brother; then two years after that she had my next brother.  So some of my earliest memories are really centered around, you know, the sort of activities of bringing a new baby into the house, when she left to have the baby, who took care of us, you know, because--
Speaker 1: Who did take care of you?
Speaker 2: She would have to find, you know, reliable people to keep us.  In the one case, we stayed with my father's sister [Rhoda Niles].  But they all really worked hard, you know.  I mean I've, I've recognized this myself, you know, that in some ways, you know, soon in my childhood, because, because they were older, they retired, and so then they were around all the time.  But in that early phase, I think when we were just really infants, everybody was just working very hard.  So my mom didn't have a big support network with her--with, with my dad's family.  They were here, and they did what they could.  But she found neighborhood people, so to speak, so we had a babysitter from the neighborhood, and there were some other people in the neighborhood.  But they were un- sort of unfamiliar.  So you know, I used to whine and scream and holler, and "I don't want to stay;" and you know, I had a very good set of lungs even then.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 372454
Speaker 1: At what point did she [McCrary's mother, Jean Davis Niles] start to take you to church often?  I read that you attended the University Heights Presbyterian Church [Bronx, New York].
Speaker 2: Right, right.  Well, my sister [Debra Niles]--it's very interesting.  I saw the church on a recent trip to Australia, where my sister was baptized and near where my mother currently lives again and where she was living at that time when my sister was born.  And because her mother [Eileen Kenneally Davis] was Irish Catholic and her father [Harold Davis] was Anglican Protestant, they did not want to--she didn't want to go either way.  She didn't want to favor either one.  So she looked for a different type of church, and so she found a Presbyterian church.  So then when she came to the Bronx [New York], she found that there was a Presbyterian church within walking distance, and so that, that made since.  And my father [David Niles, Sr.], even though he was this--he had grown up this very strict Brethren sect [Plymouth Brethren], he just wanted his kids to go to church and know God.  But he didn't really have a lot of respect for American religious traditions.  You know, he--or--I mean, people who grow up in Plymouth Brethren I think have an odd conditioning in the sense that they have such a great respect for the saints and that tradition, that even though they may not want to live that strict of a lifestyle, they really feel that, from what I've observed at least, they feel that they can never be that good.  My father used to say--you know, I would say well, "Daddy, why don't you go to the Plymouth Brethren, you know, Gospel Hall, if you love them so much (laughter)?"  'Cause he would always tell us, you know, "Oh, these Presbyterians, they smoke in church, and they drink in church, and they do everything in church (laughter)," you know, and you know, that's, you know, that's not right.  And I'd say well, "Daddy, you know, why don't you go to the Plymouth Brethren?"  He said, "I can't live that life, you know, I can't live that life," you know, so.  There'd be this sense that you're, you know, a sort of person without a country, you know, 'cause you can be neither fish nor fowl.  But they--in other words--and, and I think, as my father sort of started this new life for himself--he bought a house, he furnished the house--when we were baptized, when I was baptized and then when my brothers [David Niles, Jr. and Joseph Niles] were baptized, it became an opportunity to sort of show off his house, and open the house, and invite people, and have a big party.  And you know, so we all had very formal baptism events, you know.  But then the good, the good news was they--you know, I always say to people here in my ministry in the church [First Presbyterian Church, Mount Vernon, New York], that if it's just a party and you never take the kid back to church, it's like--what do they call it?  "Hatch, match, dispatch," you know, the, you know, the, that, you know, people come to church for baptism, for marriage, and for funeral, you know, but never otherwise, you know.  And that doesn't give enough of a mooring and an anchoring in life.  So, you know, the church, actually it was the '60s [1960s], and there was a lot of, a lot of activities for young people.  You know, there was--you know, the, the minister was a young, you know cou- he was married.  They were young, had a young family.  And he was very sort of radical, you know, and you know, you know, wanted just youth in the church.  So, you know, we used to sing in--actually, I never got to really be in the group that I wanted to be, in the, the, the, the youth group, because they were the teenagers.  But they used to sing in dungarees, you know, jeans, sneakers, and red shirts.  It was so cool.  You know, it was like, we have to wear, you know, robes, but if you could just be a teenager, you can sing in--you know, we did 'Jesus Christ Superstar'; we did 'Godspell.'  You know, all that stuff that was going in that period, you know, just really kept so much activity going for young people, so.
Story_ID: 372455
Speaker 1: So we ended with you talking about the choir, but I want to step back to the neighborhood and ask about being the product of an interracial couple in the Bronx [New York] in, in the late '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: It was something that you just had a feeling that you were unusual, you know, especially because the neighborhood was going through a lot of changes.
Speaker 1: What changes?  I mean--
Speaker 2: It, it was a period of white flight.  It was a period of redlining, you know, banks redlining that area.  We--you know, I lived through the kind of the Bronx's burning, you know, period where huge developments around our neighborhood, which was the University Heights section of the Bronx, were burn, literally burning down overnight, you know, big developments where people had lived.  You know, but there were sort of like the, that sense that there--that we did have the policies of redlining, as I say, and people kind of giving up on that, that, that area.  So, I mean, what had started out to be a kind of suburban bucolic, you know, in, in the shadow of the NYU Rose Hill campus [sic. Fordham University, New York, New York], which is now Bronx Community College [Bronx, New York]--we used to go there and walk around and play on the campus, walk our dogs and all that kind of stuff.  But, you know, but you had a feeling in the local schools, you know, the relationship between the principal and the teachers and our family, that, you know, they, that they noticed, you know, the people in the neighborhood, the storekeepers and so forth, that they noticed.
Speaker 1: Were there other interracial couples, families that you could recognize as, say, eight, nine-year-old?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: I don't remember anybody else from an interracial standpoint, neither in the church [University Heights Presbyterian Church, Bronx, New York] nor, nor the community.
Story_ID: 372456
Speaker 1: How do you consider yourself to have been raised?  Did they say to you, "Okay, you're African American?"  Did they say, "You are West Indies and Australian?"
Speaker 2: Right.  It was very interesting.  I remember one time going in a store and, and having my mother [Jean Davis Niles] get offended.  And what I remember--I don't remember what the person had said in the beginning.  But I remember my mother saying, "My children have perfectly beautiful olive complexions."  And she sort of marched us out of the store, you know.  And you just--again, it was kind of--my father's [David Niles] effort was to just sort of segregate from the community as much as possible 'cause he just wanted to create a controlled environment.  And with my mother I think, too, you know, she just kind of took it for granted that we were white 'cause we were light-skinned, you know.  But my father was very clear about kind of race issues (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How so?
Speaker 2: He, he was, he, he was also ambivalent, but in certain respects he was very clear.  I remember he was telling me a story once about my Uncle Joe's [Joseph Niles] first wife.  My Uncle Joe was married like six times.  But, in my Uncle Joe's first wife, Jennie [Jennie Niles], and he was talking about Jennie.  He was clearly talking about an African American woman and all the issues of how he first met her in Harlem [New York, New York], and he's telling the whole story.  And he said, "Yeah, Jennie was Jewishy-looking like you," you know.  And so it made it clear that I was African diaspora, you know, and that, you know, he understood that, at least that day, you know (laughter), very clearly.  But, you know, he also understood how difficult from his standpoint being an African person in the world was.  You know, and so when I got into Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] on a scholarship, he told me at one point that I should, you know, live in Europe and forget that I ever knew him and just pass.  And you know, I mean these are the despairing moments I think that people face, you know, because of their--you know, it was hard for him to leave a society that's more of a meritocracy in the West Indies, you know, and come into a place of Jim Crow, you know, segregation and racism, and then to watch over the years that even in the face of all the efforts, you know, he still by the end of his life didn't think that we had gotten very far I don't think as a society, you know, towards real justice, so.  But that, you know, I think--
Speaker 1: But, but did--
Speaker 2: --I think, I think--
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: --also because I never knew any of my mother's family.  You know, my mother's family--
Speaker 1: But speak to--go, you go ahead--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no--
Speaker 1: --and your mother's family.
Speaker 2: --please go ahead.
Speaker 1: No, your mother's family.
Speaker 2: My mother's family just was a blank slate until I had a chance to go to Australia as an adult.  So we knew their names, but we never saw them or interacted with them apart from very seldom on the phone, and that would usually be, as I said, a tragic, you know, like somebody died.  And then it would just be--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --giving the news.
Story_ID: 372457
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So if your father [David Niles] spoke to you in that way about where he thought you had come from or how to help you identify yourself, how did your mother [Jean Davis Niles] speak to you on the same subject?
Speaker 2: She didn't, she didn't.  She just dealt with everybody as if everybody's just the same.  And you know, so she didn't understand when we all grew up and went through our racial identity crises and you know.  It was tough on her 'cause, you know, she, she had--at some point my parents separated when we were teenagers, and she was raising us a single parent, as a single parent.  And it was just really hard 'cause, you know, everybody was sort of going their own way, and, and she just was scratching her head and saying, you know, "How did this happen?" You know.  And she just, she, she just had a hard time kind of understanding.  Because I think, I, I personally think that it is very difficult for the people who experience white skin privilege, and, and nothing else, to fathom, to fathom, you know, the joys and the intricacies and, and to embrace your cultural heritage, you know, the, the, the pressure of a sim- the press towards assimilation is something, or the assumption of assimilation, that that's the best thing to do.  You know, that, that, you know, it's in your best interest to assimilate.  You have the opportunity to assimilate; why don't you just assimilate, you know, is the predominant, you know, kind of attitude.  And I think that the effort to maintain a sense of your cultural heritage and you know, just--I think the fact that my father did it, he was an example of it, even though, you know, on, on his worst days he probably would have rather not had to do it, you know.  But I think he was somebody who was a natural born griot; he told the stories, you know, and so he couldn't help himself, you know.  Probably, maybe if he had refused to do that, there would have been a whole different story, you know, in terms of my understanding of self, you know.  But--
Speaker 1: Did those stories help you?  I'm assuming the stories he told helped you later on when you went through your own (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --identity cri-
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.
Story_ID: 372458
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your friends before you're in first grade, elementary school [P.S. 26, Burnside Avenue School, Bronx, New York].  In the neighborhood, who were the other children that were around?
Speaker 2: Before first grade (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then describe, like, what look, that were they Jewish?  Were they Italians?  Were, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --who were the other people?
Speaker 2: Before first grade I remember there were some, some, some white children; there were also some black children; there were--it was a mixed, it was a really mixed community.  There were Hispanic kids.  It was a real, real mixed community, at that point.  It was balanced.  It was what you sort of wished the world would always look like, you know, and I had some friends from every group.  My father [David Niles, Sr.] had a strict practice of not allowing us to have friends over at the house, though, so there were very separate worlds, you know.  You had school; you had church; and you had home.  And they really were very distinct and separate worlds.  You know, so I had friends in church [University Heights Presbyterian Church, Bronx, New York]; I had friends in school; I had friends--well, not friends but my siblings at home.
Story_ID: 372459
Speaker 1: Did you have cultural celebrations at home?  I mean were--mean, I'm talking about food, like, or holidays?  Or did you--were you an American culturally?
Speaker 2: My father [David Niles, Sr.] would cook West Indi- what he called West Indian food.  He'd say, "I made a big pot of West Indian food."  And it was lots of root vegetables, and you know, soups, and white sweet potato, and yellow sweet potato, and green banana and all this kind of stuff. And he would say, "Oh, you, you kids don't like--."  Well, of course, when he would tell us we couldn't have any, you know, we'd want it, you know.  So I would beg for some, and he'd give me a piece.  And you know, so the--but it was almost like a shy or a side thing that he did.  My father, the work that he did as a [U.S.] Merchant Marine was, he was first a cook and then a chief steward, a lieutenant, an officer, and which meant he stocked the ship.  He did the purchasing; he developed the menus; he did the, you know, he supervised the cooking, you know, at all levels on the ship; and he ran the commissary and things of that nature.  And so when he retired when I was seven, he took over the household.  He took over the cooking and the preparation.  And he was home, at which point my mother [Jean Davis Niles] went to work, 'cause she was saying I--(unclear): "Two people in this house all day is not gonna work."  So he was a good cook.  He was a really good cook, and he just kind of made every meal kind of like the cruise ship, you know, you know, have a perfectly set table and you know.  He sort of employed the same standards, you know, that he always had in his, his career.  And then at holiday time we had a big feast, which he would prepare.  And there was a branch of the family--actually, how it worked out was on the road that they lived in, in Kingstown in St. Vincent [St. Vincent and the Grenadines], there were these two large families, one on one side of the road and one on the other.  They were both in this particular religious sect, the Plymouth Brethren, and that made them very, very close, and they both had large families.  So, they were kind of like stair steps.  There was the Thompson family on one side of the road and the Niles family on the other side of the road, so the one, the, the boy who was ten and the boy on this side that was ten became best friends.  The boy who was eleven and the boy who was--(unclear)--so you know, every year each of the wives was having a baby, so they, they matched off the kids and became best friends.  And when my father came to this country, the, the older brother, not the one that he was best friends with but the older brother of his best friend from across the road, was living in Brooklyn [New York] and had two, three children.  And one of the children--he, he loved all the children, but one of them was very bright and got into Hunter High School [Hunter College High School, New York, New York] and Hunter College [Hunter College, New York, New York] and then went to Meharry medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].  And my father, as I said earlier, sort of--he didn't have children, so he made it his business to try to help children like my Aunt Edith [Edith Thompson Stevenson], who then later became our godparent.  And so, we actually spent the holidays not so much with my father's brothers and sisters but with this Thompson family.  And so we have pictures--I think some might be in the book--photographs of, you know, sort of progressive years growing up.  We spent Thanksgiving and Christmas with this close extended family.
Story_ID: 372460
Speaker 1: Now were there children that you matched up with here that you sort of had that relationship with that they had in Kingstown [St. Vincent and the Grenadines]?
Speaker 2: (Unclear) unfortunately, that family didn't really have their own children.  That's part of the reason that they were, you know, kind of connected to us.  And my sister [Debra Niles] was the flower girl in my Auntie's [Edith Thompson Stevenson] wedding.  She was an anesthesiologist at Brookdale Hospital [Brookdale University Hospital Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York].  And my godfather was the director of the civil service commission for the State of New York, work, working in the World Trade Center [New York, New York].  We used to go visit him in his office and that sort of thing.  So, they were a black professional couple who just, just made such an impression on us, you know, in terms of neither of my parents [Jean Davis Niles and David Niles, Sr.] went beyond seventh grade education.  My mother dropped out, as I said, to take care of her mother [Eileen Kenneally Davis] when her mother got very sick and to take care of her brother.  She had five brothers and her father [Harold Davis].  And my father left school because in that system you had to pay after the eighth grade.  I believe the way he explained it was, you could repeat the eighth grade, but after that, if you wanted to go into high school, you had to be able to afford to pay for education.  And so that was the point at which they had offered to train him as a teacher to younger children, and his father [James Niles] was appalled that he refused, you know, because that would have been a way for him to continue his education.  He wanted to be a shoemaker--
Speaker 1: He wanted to make shoes.
Speaker 2: --so.
Speaker 1: So who--where did they live, and where did black middle class families live that were like them?
Speaker 2: Originally, I think when they first got married--well, the fam- the, the--
Speaker 1: The Johnsons.
Speaker 2: The, the Thompsons--
Speaker 1: Thomp- was it Thompsons?
Speaker 2: --the Thompsons family lived in Brooklyn [New York], in a brownstone on Macon Street, and we used to visit them there.  But then when the, when this particular daughter--there were two daughters and a son--when this particular daughter, my Aunt Edith, who married Morton Stevenson, and they first had an apartment, Riv- Riverton, Rivington [sic. Riverton Houses, New York, New York]; it's a, it's, it was a luxury apartment building in Harlem [New York, New York].  They lived there for a while, and then they bought a house out in Mill Basin in Brooklyn, which was way out by the water, you know.  And that was kind of where--and then, my Aunt Vera [Vera Thompson Marsh], who was the older sister, she and her husband have a house here in the Bronx [New York].  And the, her brother, Leslie [Leslie Thompson], has--still in the brownstone in, in Brooklyn, so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So--
Story_ID: 372461
Speaker 1: Before we go on, list your siblings in the order--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --in which--and just tell me what each of them are doing now.
Speaker 2: My, my oldest sister is Debra [Debra Niles], and she's four years older than I am.  And she is involved in music.  She's a vocalist, so she's involved in that.  My brother, David [David Niles, Jr.], Jr., David, Jr.--
Speaker 1: So it was your sister and then you.
Speaker 2: Then me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then--
Speaker 1: Then David.
Speaker 2: --David.  Did you want to know--
Speaker 1: Just the order.
Speaker 2: Just the order.
Speaker 1: And then kind of--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --what he's doing now.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He has his own business, a cleaning business.  And he, he's a lot like my father [David Niles, Sr.], very good with his hands, knows, you know, his way around tools.  And he's just a good manager, good businessperson and runs a cleaning company.  And my youngest brother is in the construction trade, Joseph [Joseph Niles].
Story_ID: 372462
Speaker 1: So when you started first grade, where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: P.S 26 [Burnside Avenue School] in the Bronx [New York], on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were there any--go ahead.
Speaker 2: --Burnside Avenue.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers that impressed you, made impression (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My first--
Speaker 1: --upon you?
Speaker 2: --my first grade teacher I remember as being a screamer.  She didn't know how to talk, you know.  She--everything was--
Speaker 1: What nationality was she?
Speaker 2: She, Euro, Euro, Eurogenic, genic.  I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I hesitate to say her name 'cause (laughter) (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But she, she just screamed nonstop.  I, I, but I had such a joy of reading from a very early age that, you know, what I really remember from that period was the teacher was up above my head screaming, and I was just reading away, just--I went through every single level of the readers, you know, just like, it, it feels like in a week, you know, because I just was so--I think there are certain advantages in having an older sibling, you know, four years older, 'cause I had a chance to really observe my sister [Debra Niles] as a reader, and wanted to read at an early age, and just took to it.  And that's, you know, something that I've learned to count as a blessing all my life, you know, reading as a great joy.
Story_ID: 372463
Speaker 1: Did you have any idea what you wanted to be, I mean as a child, first grade, kindergarten?  What, what did you think you'd become?  What did you hope (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My earliest--
Speaker 1: --to become?
Speaker 2: --hope, I remember I wanted to be an astronaut, you know, 'cause I, I always was sort of interested in--that, that was that period I think.  Probably a lot of kids wanted to be astronauts.  I mean it's the first walk on the moon, and you know, you, you know, my--we never, ever had television in our bedroom.  I mean, it was just a, not even a concept.  But I remember my father [David Niles, Sr.] putting a TV in our room so that we could watch the first steps on the moon, you know.  I don't know even know why they wouldn't let us all watch it together, but I can't, I can't even understand it, in retrospect.  But any, anyway, it was like, "The kids need to see this," (laughter) you know, so.  We had a television in our room just for that minute, and then it was gone, you know, so.  So I, I think I wanted to be an astronaut.  And then I can remember feeling sad one day because the teachers were all just driving out of the parking lot at the school [P.S. 26, Burnside Avenue School, Bronx, New York], you know.  And it was--I, I remember standing there thinking, "They don't let none of the teachers live in my neighborhood," you know.  And you know, it was just--but then, so I started looking around and paying attention to who does live in the neighborhood and--
Speaker 1: And who did you see in the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Through, through the church [University Heights Presbyterian Church, Bronx, New York] you know, primarily.  You know, that's where I saw--connected with professional people, lawyers and doctors.  And the minister lived in the community, and that, that made an impression on me, at least during that period, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's awesome though--
Story_ID: 372464
Speaker 1: Let's talk about who else you saw in the community that made impressions on you.
Speaker 2: Other than--
Speaker 1: Other than the minister.  You said there--in the, in your Bronx [New York]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, in--
Speaker 1: --community.
Speaker 2: --in, in the, in the church [University Heights Presbyterian Church, Bronx, New York]--well, I should mention that, that there was this one teacher, very interesting teacher who became an assistant principal and then was principal of my school [P.S. 26, Burnside Avenue School, Bronx, New York] for a while, and she was an African American woman named Marian Claiborne [ph.].  And she was so impressive as an individual.  I mean she was just the most elegant and--I-I would say dignified and graceful person and turned out that she was a member of a Presbyterian church in Harlem [New York, New York].  And I, when I learned that, I, I sort of thought that was very interesting.  But there was a, there was a lawyer in, in the church who was, who was one of the officers of the church.  But he, his wife was a schoolteacher, and they lived in the neighborhood.  And you know, you, you just always got very, a sense of such professionalism and dignity, you know, in the midst of that.  So the, these were some of the people I was very impressed by.  There was a Chinese couple who were both doctors, you know, in the church.  It was a very--at that time, as I said, the community was very diverse, you know, and very rich, so.
Speaker 1: And the minister of that church you said lived in the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Right, right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What nationality--
Speaker 2: --with his family.
Speaker 1: --was he?
Speaker 2: He was Eurogenic, and he, but he had just gotten back with his wife from being missionary in Beirut, Lebanon.  And so they had to come back and had their first child.  And you know, so they were looking--they, they sort of saw our family as contemporaneous with their children.  And you know, they just had a lot of positive energy, you know, for--
Speaker 1: Well, the New York [New York] that you're describing of the '60s [1960s] sounds like the United Nations [UN]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --sounds much more mixed that it even is today.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  And I, I think that a lot of that, you know--yeah, I, I, I, I think it was.  You know, and it's, it's sort of tragic that we've gotten into such, you know, pockets of separation (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, segregated communities, yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm.
Story_ID: 372465
Speaker 1: You talked about the minister that had impressed you and that, did you have any personal relationship with God at this time, as a child?
Speaker 2: You know, I remember going through a kind of a crisis, you know, 'cause, you know, there were ups and downs of family life, ups and downs of school life.  All kids go through encountering bullies from time to time and getting picked on and, you know, having to deal with things of that nature.  I remember going through kind of a crisis and feeling like I couldn't discuss it with anybody.  I couldn't discuss it with my father [David Niles, Sr.], my mother [Jean Davis Niles], anybody, but feeling like I still experienced a kind of, a presence, a relationship.  That was, that's the closest that I think I came to understanding that--I used to ask a lot of questions in Sunday school as a child.  And I had a teacher in Sunday school, the organist of the church [University Heights Presbyterian Church, Bronx, New York] had also grown up in the neighborhood, and she was a white woman, very brilliant woman.  And she was the organist and choir director.  And she and her husband at that time, he was an artist, a calligrapher, and he taught my Sunday school class.  And I asked him, "If God was the first thing that ever was," you know, "who made God, or what made God?"  And so he said to me that, "I can tell you what I believe, and I can tell you what the church believes, but you have to decide what you're going to believe."  And I found, you know particularly because of growing up in this very rigid West Indian structured, my father thinking Plymouth Brethren and literal fundamental interpretation was the correct way to go on some level, I think that I found that really--I've never forgotten that.  That's, you know, and that's still, in many respects, the, the, the guiding principle.  Next week I start to--I, I teach for New York Theological Seminary [New York, New York], and I teach in the master's degree that they award in Sing Sing prison [Sing Sing Correctional Facility, Ossining, New York].  And when I go to the prison, one of the first things that I say to the class--when I go to any class, any of the classes that I teach, one of the first things that I say is, "I will transmit a body of knowledge.  Part of it will be my own thinking.  Part of it will be more generally rooted thinking, in terms of other authorities, external authorities.  But in the end of the day, you have to construct meaning out of all of this.  You have to decide what you're going to accept.  You know, so, just be, be, be strong" (laughter), you know, because I just got through teaching a class in exegesis at the certificate level, which is a preliminary degree in the seminary.  And teaching exegesis is a real challenge when people have not previously had an understanding that the Bible is not a monolithic document that got handed to us from a cloud, you know, but that it developed over a period of time.  And it's a lot of different kinds of literature, and it comes from a historical context.  And you know, there are two versions of the creation account; you know, there are two versions of the flood account that were mixed together.  And you know, I had a young lady say, "You're trying to tell me that Noah didn't really put everything that existed into the--."  Said--you know, this language of sacred myth, myth doesn't go down too well the first time.  You know, it's a very bitter pill.  So it's learning to be able to say to folks, you know, "Use your own hermeneutical suspicion, you know.  You have your own reality," as June Jordan would say, "your own ware," you know, so.  You come from that place, and you apply your own principles of exploration to the material.  And I mean I get all of that from that one moment with that Sunday school teacher, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's incredible, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 372466
Speaker 1: So I want to move to--I'm not much further, but you're still seven years old in April when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed.  Any recollection of that?  And if so, was it a race recollection?  Did you think, oh--yeah, what was your recollection?  What is your recollection?
Speaker 2: I just remember my parents [Jean Davis Niles and David Niles, Sr.] watching it coming on the news and they cried; my parents both cried.  So, that's, that's what I remember, you know, just, just that it was a time of a lot of grief.  I don't remember a lot of anger.  I just remember a lot of grief, you know.  So, it's what I remember from that period.  Also, it seems to me I remember something about John, JFK [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] being shot, too.  You know, the, that, that whole period I can sort of glimpse little vestigial-
Speaker 1: And then Bobby [Robert F. Kennedy]--
Speaker 2: --memories.
Speaker 1: --his brother, also.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, exactly.  So, that was, that was a quite extraordinary period in terms of, you know, the hopefulness, the hopefulness of people kind of learning to articulate, you know, justice and push for real transformation in our society.  And then I think, I often think of, you know, kind of the brutality with which that was cut off, you know, as being something that forced people into a kind of a stupor, a kind of some, some somnolence, you know, where--torpor, I think John Calvin called it.  And, and the, and, and then everybody just goes to sleep, you know, and you know, starts going into debt (laughter), you know, spending money to have things that can just kind of keep us asleep, you know.  Same thing I think happened after 9/11 [September 11, 2001], you know.
Story_ID: 372467
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We're gonna start with 1975 [sic.], Watergate--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --was the next time.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Right.  So the other time that I can recall my parents [Jean Davis Niles and David Niles] sitting glued to the television screen was in the whole Watergate era.  And then at some point my mother wanted to see Watergate I guess, and she took us on a trip to the actual Watergate building [Watergate Complex; Watergate Hotel, Washington, D.C], and we stayed in it.  And then on the way back, we stopped.  She had a friend that she had taught with, 'cause she was a paraprofessional in the same school that I went to, the elementary school [P.S. 26, Burnside Avenue School, Bronx, New York].  She was a teacher's assistant, Title, Title I reading was what she specialized in.  And she, she had a friend who was Irish.  And now I never understood the connection with her mother [Eileen Kenneally Davis] and Ireland, you know.  But she, her best friend, was a young woman, younger, much younger than her, who was from a real Bronx [New York] Irish family, and this, this friend had relocated to Baltimore [Maryland].  And so as we were leaving Washington, D.C., area, we went to Baltimore.  We went to this working-class neighborhood with row houses.  It was very white neighborhood, white working-class neighborhood.  And my brother was playing with some children, and I was just kind of--it was hot.  It was summer.  I was about fourteen.  I was sitting on the front stoop, and the neighbors were sitting around talking, you know, beer bellies and whatever, whatever.  My mother was in the house with her friend and a normal time.  And then the guy who was sitting there, one of them, just started going off about the N problem and just on and on and on, and this--you know, what I mean by N, (laughter) you know--the N problem, the N problem, the N problem.  And so he turns to me.  He says, "Oh yeah, you kids, you're from New York [New York].  You have the worst N problem (laughter) there," you know.  And he says, he says well, "How, how do you deal with it?  How does your family deal with it?  How does your, how do your parents deal with this N problem?"  So the whole time he'd been going on, I'm sitting there trying to think, "How am I gonna deal with this?"  I couldn't even fathom it.  I couldn't imagine, you know, this.  It was sort of like a worst nightmare, you know, scenario.  Then I, I just said--you know, sort of like gather yourself up and sort of reach inside and pull up some courage, and I just well, you know, "I don't, you know, I don't have those issues because my father's black, and so we have a different approach to that," you know.  And he just kind of got--I mean watching the red color just, you know, infuse him.  And he, then he said well, "I should have known, you with your high cheekbones and your brother with his nappy hair," so.  I mean it was, it was one of these classic moments of ignorance and racism.  And there was this young couple--it's interesting 'cause there's always sort of balance.  There was a young couple, a younger working couple, that came up to me, 'cause the guy just sort of huffed off.  And then they came up to me, and they said you know, "That was terrible, and he should--," you know, that's, you know.  And then they, they asked my mother if they could take me out for some ice cream.  And so (laughter) they, they took me to some place and got me a nice ice cream cone or whatever.  But it's like, you just never forget that moment when you just for the first time have to sort of take a stand.  And you know, very often in my life people have said you know, "What are you?  Why do--?"  Or, and, and especially white people or European pe- ancestry people have said, "Why do--you know, you don't have to be black," you know.  "Why do you want to be black?"  You now, and--
Speaker 1: And what is your answer to that?
Speaker 2: I just said you know, that's just who I am.  It's how I was raised.  You know, I mean that's my--
Speaker 1: Right, but, but that's half of how you were raised.  The other half, you said your mother was very general.  In your eyes--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you were--she said you had the most beautiful olive skin--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --which meant you're white.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.  But she also never told us the stories of her childhood.  She never told us about her family background.  You know, she had experienced a kind of personal, emotional cutoff.  And she wasn't orienting us towards what it meant to be, you know, white--
Speaker 1: Right because--
Speaker 2: --for her.
Speaker 1: --it's, it's very--I mean it, it, it is interesting, the you know, with who you are, how you look, that you, that you--the, the only choice is to be light-skinned black, as opposed to dark-skinned white.
Story_ID: 372468
Speaker 1: Well, I remember, too, that there was a church--there was a person who worked in our church [University Heights Presbyterian Church, Bronx, New York], a very loving person.  She was really wonderful to me in so many respects.  But one day she said to me, "You know something?  You can never marry a white person."  So I said to her, "Why?"  And she said, "Well, because if you were not to say that you're black and marry a white person, your baby could come out black."  So, I mean, you get--and of course that, it, it hurts, you know, to hear that, but then you start to understand, you know, the, the pecul- who wrote the book, 'The Peculiar Institution' ['The Peculiar Institution: Slavery in the Ante-Bellum South,' Kenneth M. Stampp], the peculiar fabric of life in America, perhaps not so much globally.  You know, perhaps that's part of the reason my father [David Niles, Sr.] was encouraging me to go live in Europe of some place like that.  The peculiar paradigm of racism that has been established here in America will perhaps fade away, you know--
Speaker 2: And long do you think?
Speaker 1: --you know.
Speaker 2: Another hundred years?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, I'm not even sure, I, I'm not even sure.  I heard something so disturbing just yesterday about this incident where these football players at a school, a Quaker school, beat up a group of Palestinian boys.  And they were black and white football players that beat up these Palestinian boys.  And I remember saying--I said to a colleague of mine, "This is so tragic.  How could black young people do this to other people?"  No, you know, something has gone wrong that they have not been taught their history, you know.  I mean, it's, it's offensive for, for whites to do it, but it's tragic for black young people.  You know and you, you know, and on the surface you say, "Well, whites and blacks are coming together; what and blacks are coming together in hatred of another group," you know.  But then you look at it you say what can, what, what can actually transform our bitter heritage?  And what has to happen is we've got to take the best from all of it, you know, and love it, you know, to the best of our opportunity and possibility, which is why, even though it's not an easy thing for me to do, recently I've tried to go to Australia at least every other year to try to understand better my white heritage.  But it's a, it--you know, that's bitter too, 'cause I asked my father once why he didn't just stay in Australia.  Australia historically had something called white Australia policies.  Up through the '70s [1970s], they actually had law that would not allow a person of color to become a citizen.  And they would implement the laws.  There's museums, you know, you can go to and im- immigration museums in Adelaide [Australia] and, and places I've been, where they explain all of this, that they would have, let's say, a dark-skinned person came from some region.  They would, according to the law, they could give them the citizenship test in Mandarin, you know, in any language that they wanted to give it to them, you know, that they have no chance of passing, so that they could reject them and tell them you can't be a citizen, you know.  And my father had talked about the boxer--can't remember his name--that was a famous black boxer who lived in Australia and would have to leave the country every year or so to reapply for, for just per- residency, that he could, he could live in the country.  Forget citizenship, but he would have to leave and then reapply to come back in the country.  And so my father said you know, "I just, you know, I couldn't see living in a place, you know, where you could not have any, any stability," you know.  Now they changed those laws in the '70s [1970s], but they're history, and where my mother [Jean Davis Niles] lives in Australia, sort of like the redneck Texas are, you know, Queensland [Australia], they recently had a woman there who ran for their parliament on the basis of racism, you know, kind of like, "Stop the hordes," you know, "from pouring into--let's restore white Australia," you know, kind of a thing.  So they have this, this undercurrent, you know, which, you know, the ordinary Australian doesn't necessarily see, you know.  But, you know, when you're very hypersensitive to it, you pick it up a little bit.  You know, they have, they have their own--I'm still trying to understand the issues that go along with that, because as I say, my mom didn't really talk about it a lot, but I got a sense of how difficult the transitions were for her in, in the ways in which she, she really struggled, so.  I love Australia.  Don't get me wrong (laughter), love my family.
Story_ID: 372469
Speaker 1: What high school did you attend?
Speaker 2: Bronx High School of Science [The Bronx High School of Science, Bronx, New York].
Speaker 1: Ah, did you take the test?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: I've interviewed several piece--people recently that talked about how difficult it was for African Americans to get into that school, and the test was biased.  How did you find the test?
Speaker 2: You know, I just don't know.  I was the kind of kid who went to the, went to the library and got fourteen books, and came home and read them in three days, and then took them back, you know.  So I think that, I think, and, and I did it because I had nothing else to do, you know, and I loved reading.  There was the severest restrictions on television, and we weren't allowed to have any friends come over, so I, I used to play with the ants in the black--backyard.  They were my buddies, you know, so when they brought out those ant movies, I was like, "Yes, my people, you know," so.  You know, I mean, books, science, I just read voraciously science fiction, Isaac Asimov, all these, you know, Robert Heinlein [Robert A. Heinlein], all these, you know.  I loved to read, and I read, and I read, and I read.  History, I always loved history.  And I just think that that's what gave me, you know.  And when you came right down to it, I think the test didn't seem difficult to me at all, you know.  And I just took it and got in without--I mean never had a coaching session or anything, so.
Speaker 1: Well, if you're parents [Jean Davis Niles and David Niles, Sr.] had on, only gone up to seventh grade, who was it then that was pushing you to excel and to go to, like, Bronx High of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --Science?
Speaker 2: Alice Walker had that, has this poem that she wrote where she says, you know, those, those, "Those women," she said, specifies women, but I would say women and men, who, who, who, who worked as domestics, you know, who never got a chance to go to school, you know, but they knew exactly what we had to do and what we had to read.  You know, and I think the education ethic both my parents had.  Actually, my mother, when I was about eleven, went back to get her GED [General Educational Development].  She went to Bronx Community College [Bronx, New York].  And because the paraprofessionals were allowed to go to school for a certain number of credits for free, working towards becoming teachers, so she sort of got her GED.  I, I remember watching her study at night.  And my father was always unequivocal that we were supposed to go to college.  But, you know, they just, they--there were a lot of books around. There was a lot of discussion of what was in the newspaper.
Speaker 1: So it was them that pushed you towards Bronx High School of Science?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't recall them ever having to do what I do with my daughter [Eupha McCrary] and strategize and say, you know, is--you know, let's get her--let's put her in Princeton Review; let's, you know, get her ready; let's do this.  I just, it just happened.  I mean the school just tested everybody.  I don't remember there being, like, I want you to take the test.  It was just, "Okay, bring your number two pencils, and everybody's gonna take the test (laughter)," you know, and you know, some of us got in.  You know, my sister [Debra Niles] went to Music and Art [High School of Music and Art; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music and Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York].
Story_ID: 372470
Speaker 1: Who was it at Bronx High School of Science [The Bronx High School of Science, Bronx, New York] that influenced you that made it--that helped to push you actually into Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Right.  I had two influences of that nature--well, three really.  My best friend was a very interesting person--parents were--her father was the head librarian, eventually became the head librarian of Bermuda, but they were both schoolteachers.  And she used to travel every summer, Spain, France.  You know, she was being sort of sent around the world.  She was a very interesting person.  And her older--her boyfriend was a year ahead of us, and he had gotten into Harvard, so she was determined we were both gonna go to Harvard.  So she was the one who sort of pushed me.  They had some kind of preliminary application.  And I really didn't--at that time, as I said, my parents [Jean Davis Niles and David Niles, Sr.] had separated.  We were sort of living a fragmented life.  My mother was a single parent in the Bronx [New York].  And I really didn't know what I wanted to do.  I, I wanted to be [HistoryMaker] Ntozake Shange and go to Barnard [Barnard College, New York, New York], but, you know, so I really, just kind of, to placate my friend, did the preliminary application and sent it in.  But I was, I, once I got to Bronx Science, I was not a science-type person.  I mean I didn't really enjoy the science and math aspect of things there, but I really enjoyed the history and, and English, you know, the liberal arts.  And the head of the English department was a very brilliant man, Rifkin [Ted Rifkin] I think his name was, and he was very encouraging.  He sort of let me live in the English office, you know, and I did that.  And I also like languages, and I had, I, I took French.  And there was a Jewish teacher we used to call the dragon lady, you know.  But she just, oh, she was just so stylish and vive la difference.  And you know, she just would--so, you know she was an excellent French teacher.  I think I had her for three years in a row.  And she just also adopted a little group of us.  And during the period when final applications were supposed to go into college, there was just so much fragmentation going on, I was not getting to school very regularly.  And we didn't have a phone.  And this teacher, the French teacher, sent mailgrams to our apartment, you know, demanding that I call her and come to school, because apparently after seeing the preliminary application, Harvard was interested in me.  So they, they wanted to see the rest of the application, and they were like, you know, "Where is she?"  So, they tracked me down, and sat me down in the chairperson's office, and had me write out the essay on a yellow pad--took care of business, you know, got it in, and you know, I got offered a, a scholarship, and wound up going there.
Story_ID: 372471
Speaker 1: So what year did you graduate Bronx High School [The Bronx High School of Science, Bronx, New York]?
Speaker 2: Seventy-nine [1979].
Speaker 1: Seventy-nine [1979].  You went into Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] that--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, that fall (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) fall, that fall.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You enter Harvard.  What is that experience like?  And, and you go, and you decide you're going to be a history major, or?
Speaker 2: I wasn't sure what I was gonna do.  I really wanted to be an English major I think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, and you get--
Speaker 2: --'cause I--
Speaker 1: --a scholarship--
Speaker 2: --love literature.
Speaker 1: --to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --an academic scholarship.
Speaker 2: In needs based, you know, because of my mother's [Jean Davis Niles]--my father's [David Niles, Sr.] pension was like $250 a month, and that he didn't--as a elderly retired guy, you know, they weren't even that concerned about his situation.  And my mother, 'cause we were living separate and apart from him, my mother was, you know, this paraprofessional making about $8000, so, I mean based on financial need.  But I had, based on my scores on the SAT, I qualified for a scholarship through my dad's union, this--they call, called the Joseph Curran Merit Scholarship [ph.] or something.  So that was a big help, you know, towards things.  But, you know, everything, everything was pretty well covered.
Speaker 1: And you said you wanted to be an English major.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I really wanted to be an English major, but, you know, I found that the adjustment culturally to the Harvard environment was difficult, because in my own way, I had been so rooted and connected in the Bronx [New York].  And you know, you talk about diversity; it was like, it used to hurt my eyes to leave New York [New York] and go to a place where you didn't see diversity.  You didn't see people--you didn't see old people, and little people, and young people, and babies, and baby carriages, and you didn't see people of diverse cultures.  At the time I was, I had gotten very involved with the church, the Presbyterian church, and I was serving as the vice moderator of our regional senate when I was seventeen.  And so I would leave campus and come back to New York to go to meetings, to, to do various things.  And you know, I would just cry.  Actually what would happen was I, I'd land at the airport, and I'd get in a, like a car service.  And they would be carrying me up to this conference center in upstate Stony Point, New York.  And you know, I'd be like, "New York!" You know, "Oh, people, color, diversity, ah!"  'Cause, you know, Boston [Massachusetts]--I now go to Boston to unwind and relax, you know, because it's now become a part--a place that I feel, you know, is part of my history, heritage, and I know great friends there and so forth.  But at the time it was like, this isn't even really a city.  You know, they lied about this place; it's not a city.  The subways close down at night.  Did you know that about Boston?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: The, the, the buses and the subways close at like eleven o'clock.  So wherever you are, you can't get home from there (laughter), you know.
Story_ID: 372472
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, at this time were you thinking about being--what did you think you'd do after Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?  I mean well, what did you want to do?  You thought I'm gonna be an English major, were you gonna write, were you gonna teach?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I had this, as I said, my hero--during this fragmented period of my teenage years when my parents [Jean Davis Niles and David Niles, Sr.] separated, I remember, again, books were so important to me.  I, I sort of switched, you know, which hasn't been good for my bank account.  But I sort of switched from the library to wanting to have my own books.  So I had these jobs, these little jobs, and I, I would go to the bookstore up on the grand concourse and you know, buy poetry by black women.
Speaker 1: Name some of them.
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou--
Speaker 1: Maya Angelou--
Speaker 2: --[HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni.  My favorite book during this period was probably Nikki Giovanni's 'Cotton Candy on a Rainy Day.'  This is the image of that worked for me.  And, but then I discovered 'For Colored Girls' ['For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow is Enuf,' Ntozake Shange].  And actually my friend, Cheryl [ph.], was the one who introduced me, the same one that wanted me to go to Harvard.  She wound up going to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], early decision, so I sort of got abandoned, you know, in that way.  But she--we were, we were trying to get into a drama class our senior year at Bronx Science [The Bronx High School of Science, Bronx, New York], and she--I was like, "I don't even know what I'm gonna do."  She was like, "Here, take this, use this."  So she gave me a monologue from 'For Colored Girls.'  And I was like, "Okay, this is good stuff."  So I, I really got into drama and poetry, choreopoem.  I love the idea of choreopoetry.  So, but then, to be an English major at Harvard, you sit in these little tutorial seminars and discuss Edmund Spenser--wasn't really where I was at, you know what I'm saying, Chaucer [Geoffrey Chaucer], that kind of stuff, you know.  And I was like, um-hm.  So I mean, I--it just was so boring.  I, I probably ran into the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What at--
Speaker 2: --I ran into the wrong tutorial leader or something.  So I just found the whole thing--and it was very elitist.  The English department was competitive; it was elitist; it was boring.  It was all three.  So I wound up deciding to--I, I, I had walked into a large core introductory lecture seminar called Religion 10, and the subtitle was Pilgrimages.  And this very well-known, famous Harvard professor, at that time was not very well-known, not very famous, she was a tutor-level lecturer, Diana Eck [Diana L. Eck].  I mean I was just bowled over because her lecture was brilliant.  And it dealt with the Hajj to Mecca [Saudi Arabia].  It dealt with, you know, the--there's a certain group of Indians [Native Americans] in Mexico who, who chew peyote and go on a kind of spirit pilgrimage.  It just dealt with such fascinating, you know, subjects in terms of how one is transformed by going out on this spiritual journey and coming back, what all this entailed with all of that.  And I just, I stayed in the course, learning, being exposed to Buddhism, Hinduism, Islam, and Christianity, you know, concepts.  And then I just said you know--and, and I found out more about this small department that she was chair of called, comparative world religion.  And I just said you know, this, you know, this is what I want to do.  So, I wound up staying in that Wil- Wilfred Cantwell Smith actually was the chair, but she was the senior tutor for this religion department.  And it was a good decision, you know, 'cause I think if I had, if I had tried to be in one of these larger, you know, departments where you can easily get lost like English, government, you know, economics, I would have gotten lost.
Story_ID: 372473
Speaker 1: And there were other--at some point there was a, a guy who was affiliated with the social service group on the campus of Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] who was from a working class Boston [Massachusetts] neighborhood.  And he started a working class students association at Harvard.  And that was kind of like what struck a bell for me because somebody had said to me--one day I was sort of agonizing about my experience on campus--
Speaker 2: Which had been what?
Speaker 1: Which was a sense of alienation, even from amongst, in the black community.
Speaker 2: Because?
Speaker 1: You know, I made a lot of friends, but I always had this feeling that I didn't quite fit, you know.  And somebody said to me, you know, what you're not understanding is that the average income of black students at Harvard ex- families, exceeds the average income of white families at Harvard.  And so, you know, you're really talking about a different world (laughter), you know, and from where I had come from.  And I mean I still made a lot of friends, but it was very difficult to sort of absorb all the cultural differences.  So, eventually this organization called Phillips Brooks House [Phillips Brooks House Association, Cambridge, Massachusetts] was, which was being run by this Harvard graduate who had come from a white working-class background in South Boston [Boston, Massachusetts] and had a consciousness about that, he recruited me to work with the model that he had developed of working in housing projects around the city, tutoring young people over the summers as, as work study students, living in the apartments, you know, living in apartments in the development.  And that, that was really what sort of anchored me, 'cause I knew other working-class students who just left, just walked away from Harvard because they just couldn't deal with--you know, they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was it at--
Speaker 1: --they didn't find a way to deal with those problems.
Speaker 2: Was it at Harvard that you went through the identity crisis that you talked about?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  I mean, because everybody more or less in my life knew my background, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Before you--
Speaker 1: --to some degree before--
Speaker 2: --got to Harvard.
Speaker 1: --before I got to Harvard.  You know, I mean, I don't remember it being much of an issue at Bronx Science [The Bronx High School of Science, Bronx, New York], you know, just kind of probably 'cause of the environment it was.  It really--Bronx Science at that period tried to be very much of a meritocracy, you know.  And every--and there was so much diversity there, you know, that it just, it just was a nonissue.  I mean, I don't remember feeling that I had to really struggle with that very much until I left home.
Story_ID: 372474
Speaker 1: But then in leaving home, I did feel, as I say, a keen sense of where do I fit; where do I belong; you know, how do I go from here; you know, how do I progress from here?  And you know, eventually I wound up being the sort of revolutionary black female on campus [of Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] (laughter), you know.  But in the process--you know, poe- poetry-wise, you know.  But in the process of--
Speaker 2: Can you recite something of yours?
Speaker 1: Actually not recite, but there's one in here I think.  'Diaspora Dreaming' [ph.]: "I have been dreaming in diaspora a long time.  Spirit walking, slipping night after night to the graves, wherever they lay down.  I am asked to bury them, but I cannot.  I stare out to see and pray for walking papers.  Send me home, where vicious intentions won't reveal themselves in dreamtime to the one who looks white but is not.  Truth worn like designer garments, casually privileged, afraid of no gods.  Forgiveness stretched me out in diaspora dreaming.  Forgiveness of this people, for such a long time spent foolishly staring across wild visions of oceans, waves, hot waves, rising from cement and asphalt carpets, separating this from home, ancestral rock, distant shore.  I have been dreaming in diaspora a long time, so long and so many scattered pieces of my family, cutoffs floating up across my vision.  And I cry it seems like the ocean in waves to take me back.  And all these lost children, take we back, without the shackles and the orange jumpsuits of captivity, take we back to some underground railroad beneath the subway, beneath the sewers, beneath the fire in the belly of the earth.  I burn to be swept up with all the lifelike children born again with collective memories intact, born again with the drumbeat knowledge of Middle Passage, told to the rocking hold of every child.  Some came in convict transport; some came in cargo hold; some came in indentured servitude and still are coming on visitor's visa, on student visa.  We come by God's water, fall into this place to be taught to dream the dream of captivity by Babylon's waters, shouting straight from the gaping hydrant's mouth over green bottles smashed, animal dropping, filth, and pain swept aside.  Dance sweet freedom children, baptize yourselves and dance."
Story_ID: 372475
Speaker 1: In 1983 you graduate from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] with a degree in comparative world religion, but you're going to speak on the role, or race and religion, I'll say.
Speaker 2: You know--
Speaker 1: But you started by saying now and now people locally (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.  And more and more we talk about local theology and not so much systematic theology.  Systematic theology I think is a form of oppression and colonial dom- dominance, you know, because the idea is, "Whose system?" You know (laughter), from what, from what standpoint, what point of view?  When the missionaries--I used--a brother here in the church [First Presbyterian Church, Mount Vernon, New York] from Ghana, a very dynamic brother, you know, talked, talks about the experience of being taught.  He said, "We never used to pray with our eyes closed, and the missionaries came and taught us to play with--pray with our eyes closed.  And when, when we opened our eyes, they had our land, and we had the Bible."  So, you know, there's something to be said--and there was another great story that I, I, I picked up where these missionaries came to this village to teach them about Jesus and Christianity and to be the vanguard of stealing their property, you know.  I mean in that sense, there was a collusion between religion and colonialism, you know, historically.  I mean, so religion in history is one bitter swill to--bitter pill to swallow.  But the irony of, of, of the, the experiences that was described to me was that the missionaries came to the village to the, went to the king and said, "You know, we want to tell you about our Jesus, and about our god, about the Holy Spirit."  And in the African pantheon of religious, you know, life, you know, they would have many demigods, you know.  So the king said to the missionaries, you know, "Your god's pretty puny.  Your god only has one son?  My god has, you know, fifty sons.  I mean we have a huge, you know, pantheon."  But what people miss is that in African belief, there's, there's a sky god.  You know, there's the pantheon, you know, where the, the ones that interact with us on a daily basis, on a, on an interaction.  But there's also a god that can't be a, you know, that's so far distant, you know.  And you know, so, in that sense, and if you look historically, you know, the idea of having a god get a woman pregnant, you know, you know, have a child, you know, the, the whole point of view of that comes from a different historic era, a different historic conscious, different mythological consciousness.  And the power of it all for me is how we take that legacy, that heritage of beliefs, and apply a certain amount of intellectual knowledge to knowing where it all came from and then recognize it into something that makes sense for our relationship to a living god.  And the reason I stay Presbyterian more than anything else, has to do with the, my background, my upbringing, my heritage.  But the, the one idea that was fundamental to the Protestant Reformation, and Presbyterians still claim, which is that we're reformed and always being reformed.  So this idea that the truth of relationship with God needs to be re-experienced over and over and over again, depending on the context, depending on the historical moment that you find yourself in, the realities that you find yourself facing.  So, given that as a framework, I don't have a problem with black Jesus.  In fact, I think he was black.  I don't have a problem--you know, I think that the, the historical record has distorted who Jesus really was, what the context really was happening, you know, what was all about.  These were not Europeans (laughter).  You know, this was a very different setting, very different culture, despite Mel Gibson's interpretation (laughter), you know, despite, you know, Michelangelo's cousin be- becoming the model for so many paintings and so forth and so on.
Story_ID: 372476
Speaker 1: So, but on the other hand, there is no one exclusiveness about this reality because it's not driven solely by the historical.  Jesus was a mystic, so that there's a connection between him as a mystic and every other mystic, you know, on the planet, from every other cultural tradition.  The, the stream of mystical spirit people who channel power to such an extent that they can actually transform human reality, that bigness of who we understand Jesus to be and to have been constructed to have been, to connect him after his death to all the other promises of a spiritual tradition, in terms of, this is the Messiah, in terms of, this is the son of God, in terms of this is--you know, we understand, you know, the kinds of continuities and discontinuities that that entails.  But I certainly don't believe that one can fully love one's self if one has no permission to construct God in one's own image and likeness.  You know, I think--it reminds me of the picture of the little boy standing in the mirror in a Superman costume, the little black boy, seeing a picture of Christopher Reeves in the reflection, you know.  I mean if you are not free to construct God in your own image and likeness, knowing that we are constructed in the image and likeness of God, you know, God--I had a little boy come to me in my first call, which was on the Lower East Side, Alphabet City in Manhattan [New York].  And this little boy came to me and said, "Pastor, I just don't understand why God doesn't stop all this bad stuff," you know.  If it--, "What kind of god wouldn't stop it?" (Laughter) You know, I mean all this bad stuff that's happening in, in, in the world?  Why doesn't God just stop it?  If God is all-powerful--you, you know, I was teaching the children, you know, omniscient God, omnipotent God, you know, all this stuff.  "If God is all-powerful, why doesn't God just stop the--and why, how, what kind of God would sit back and see all this, you know, mess?"  You know, kind of thing--very smart little boy.  And so, I wind up giving a lesson in free will, you know, this concept that, you know, if, if, you know--said okay, you know, I like science fiction.  "Do you know the difference between an android and a cyborg?"  (Laughter) You know, you know--said, you know, and he says, "Yeah, I think so."  I said, "That's good 'cause I don't," (laughter), you know.  Just imagine, would you want God to make us all cyborgs or androids like Data, you know, in, you know, 'Star Trek,' you know.  Would you, you know--Data's struggling with against being a robot.  He wants to be a full person.  You know, he's really searching for the way to become a full person--said you know, our concept of the creation of God is, comes from this story, Adam and Eve and the, you know, you know, the garden [Garden of Eden].  And you know, Eve refuses to sort of remain naive.  You know, there's something about us where God says okay, you know, what?  I'm letting you go; I'm setting you loose, you know, which means there's not gonna be any do-over, you know, which means you take the consequence of your choices, you know.  And you have free will, you know, which means: I've given you this good earth; I've given you all the possibilities that are here; I've given you the capacity to love; I've given you the capacity to reason; I've given you the capacity to imagine beauty.  You, you can have so much goodness, but we choose, you know, vengeance, and revenge, and fratricide, and homicide, and jealousy, and rage, and anger, and murmuring against God.  I mean that's sort of the whole, you know, story as it unfolds in the scripture, but it unfolds in our lives, you know.  And if we don't have the option to truly claim that we are fundamentally created in the image and likeness of God, with all of God's hopes resting on us, but God is not a reward and punishment god who metes out the rewards and punishes and you know.  God sort of, you know, is a hands-off, you know, present with love, and energy, and support but equally present for all parts of God in creation.  God could have--you know, obviously we could all not have evolved differently, and the world could be very bland and very the same.  But we are, in fact, connected.
Story_ID: 372477
Speaker 1: Just one more philosophical question, and then we'll move back to the timeline.  Is then--there must be a--you have to do that process double, being black and a woman to be where you are today.  You've had to construct out of religion not only black theology but a female--we, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Well, you, you, you know, there's this passage in the Book of Acts which talks about a, a woman who was a slave, and she was possessed by a spirit of divination.  And I always talk about the fact that she had, poor sister had three strikes against her 'cause she was a slave; she was a woman; and she wasn't in her right mind, you know.  And the apostles really didn't want to be bothered healing her.  They resisted healing her for a long time.  She chased them around the city yelling at them, you know.  And they finally--'cause they knew that because she was making money for her masters through this possession that she had, that once they healed her, they would get in trouble.  And you know, it's, to me it's a metaphor for the, what can be so misguided about anything that gets institutionalized, you know.  As a mystical spirit leader, Jesus wasn't about institutionalization.  But what had became of his message turned into a vehicle of institutionalization, very quickly.  You know, and as they're carrying this message around and trying to build a movement, they really would rather not have to go to jail.  I mean, Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] didn't really want to go jail, but he knew he had to go to jail, you know.  But the disciples, you know, in this case, you know, really didn't necessarily think that this woman's life was worth, you know, the, the brutality that they would face in prison.  And you know, but I think they learned a lot from that process, and you know, we too can learn a lot from that process.  And you know, the contrast with the tradition my father [David Niles, Sr.] comes out of, when they say, Brethren, they mean, Brethren, the Plymouth Brethren.  So I sometimes go to family funerals where woman are not allowed to speak.  In fact, recently there was a family funeral, and somebody came up to me and said, "Aren't you a Presbyterian pastor?"  And I'm wearing my little hat 'cause women have to cover their heads and you--(unclear).  And one time I went to a family funeral I was the only woman there who had forgotten my hat.  It was really embarrassing (laughter).  It's like, "I forgot where I came from.  I needed my hat."  But, so I have a few little church lady hats, you know, that I pull out for Brethren occasions.  So I, I, I was, I felt good about myself.  I had my hat.  I was prepared to deal with the fact that I knew I wasn't gonna be invited to participate in the funeral.  But somebody came up to me and said, "Aren't you, aren't you the minister of the church [First Presbyterian Church] at Mount Vernon [New York]?"  I said, "Yeah."  Said, "Why didn't you participate--?"  I said, "Don't you know where we are?  We're with the Brethren (laughter)," you know.  And I had a relative that after I got ordained approached me and said, "You know, you, you were such a bright child."  And he had tears in his eyes, you know, and he said, "You know, you could have been anything.  You could have been a doctor or could be president of the United States, you know.  Why do you want to go to hell?"  You know, because their interpretation is so literal that women, you know, do not, you know, speak in church, you know, so.  And you know, I, I find that on some level just knowing that I may sometimes represent, in those circles, the only opportunity young girls have to see something like that, you know, is liberating.  It was liberating in my own life to believe that, to understand, to learn that--and, and really, it doesn't take much, you know, because if you, if you read the Bible without preconceived notions you can see how active the role of women and salvation history is.
Story_ID: 372478
Speaker 1: Once you graduated Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you went to the divinity school [Harvard Divinity School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: I did a year.  I had, I had gotten married my senior year in, in undergraduate.  And, and being in a new marriage, stress and you know, negotiations around future careers and all the rest of that, so I--
Speaker 1: What did you think your future career would be?
Speaker 2: I really wanted to--I felt called to the ministry, but there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When did you feel the--
Speaker 2: --there was some negotiation around that (laughter), that was going on.
Speaker 1: With your husband?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: When did you feel the call to the ministry?
Speaker 2: I think it was a growing sense that I had all through college.  And you know, towards the middle I really started thinking--I went on a trip to Africa with a group of young people with the Presbyterian church to Kenya.  And I really felt a sense of call during that period in the Motherland.  So, I, I had some advice from a pastor who told me that, you know, an old pastor had told him when he first expressed the sense of call that, "If you can do anything else and be happy, do that (laughter)," you know, because it is just too hard.  You know, this work is too hard if you have any doubt if it's the right thing for you or if you have any belief that you can really be happy doing something else.  "You should really go do that then," you know.  So I took him fairly seriously.  And when there was this sort of friction and negotiation going on--it was some family issues, you know.  I'm now divorced, so I don't really want to go into that, that whole area.  But there were some things in our extended family at that time.  We're newly married, and you know, I just decided to, after the first year, try something else.  So I went and trained in family systems therapy.  And they were doing the same kind of work I had done as an undergraduate in the housing projects, doing, instead of the sixty minute hour of family counseling, trying to strengthen families but doing it in a more organic approach in the community.  So the--
Speaker 1: That was at Kantor Family--
Speaker 2: That was the Kantor Fam- Kantor Family Institute [The Kantor Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and The Family Center, Incorporated [Somerville, Massachusetts].  So The Kantor Institute was the teaching arm of the sort of guidance center model, which was The Family Center, you know, which, where--but instead of so much having families have to leave the projects, which a lot of them won't do, and come to the center and sit in a room with a therapist, we went out, ran youth groups and kind of activity groups for children, and then tried to build relationships with their parents as well and their siblings, and dealt with a more organic approach, you know, kind of made ourselves available when there was a crisis, you know, so that we were on the scene (laughter), you know so that we could offer our services at that juncture.
Story_ID: 372479
Speaker 1: So you had actually taken the advice you were given.  You were going to step away from the ministry (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly.
Speaker 1: --and do--
Speaker 2: Exactly, yeah--
Speaker 1: --something else that you--
Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah.  'Cause it was like, well, if I can be a social worker, you know, if I could be happy doing social work, let's do social work.  And family therapy intrigued me just because with this global diaspora-type family, you know, and all the emotional cutoffs that I had experienced on both sides of the family, in some respects, it, you know--I wanted to study the theory of what makes families healthy, you know.
Speaker 1: Now when you were doing that work at Kantor [Kantor Family Institute; The Kantor Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and you were going to these projects, did they see you as a black woman or a white woman, or did that even matter?
Speaker 2: Well, the, some of the work I did was a continue, con- continuation of the work I was doing as an undergraduate at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] with Phillips Brooks House [Phillips Brooks House Association, Cambridge, Massachusetts], which is the social service student-run center.  They have like over a thousand different committees that deal with social issues and send Harvard students into communities to do legal aid and immigration intervention and these different committees that the guy was telling you about who was sort of like the working-class, you know, graduate who was facilitating a model, you know, out of Phillips Brooks House, he was the administrator of Phillips Brooks House, and he took that attitude.  So, I was working in the same projects and housing developments in Cambridge [Massachusetts], where I had worked as an undergraduate, so they already knew.
Speaker 1: So you had a relationship (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I already had a----
Speaker 1: --with them already.
Speaker 2: --relationship.  So it, it--
Speaker 1: So you were--
Speaker 2: --just was I found--
Speaker 1: --it was an ongoing--
Speaker 2: --through--and I sort of was functioning in some ways as a co-creator of the model.
Speaker 1: And what was considered your title at Kantor--
Speaker 2: I, I kind of began as a group worker I think they called it.  And then, by the end when I left, I was--we had developed a separate program called the FUN model, Family Union Network [ph.].  And I was the program administrator when I actually left the program.  So, I mean, (laughter) it was, The Family Center [Somerville, Massachusetts] was a dynamic and creative organization that was fairly young, and they just kind of got excited about people.  And you know, it was like, "What do you want to do?"  And it's like, "Well, I want to continue this work I started doing the--."  "Oh, great, let's do it," you know.  And you know, we--they found ways to fund the work and develop the model, and you know, we, we explored, you know.  And it's now really evolved; it's very sophisticated.  They have something called the parenting journey, and the work with the department of social services.  I'm, I'm on the advisory board still.  This is a very, very important program.  They do trainings all over the country.  And we were just, during that period, it was sort of like I began thinking about it, it seems like the in the Re- Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] era, you know, when it was kind of like, "Well, we gotta do something, you know," 'cause obviously things were still getting worse and worse.  But, some, some, at some point, I remember I had a history professor who talked about the fact that, "The pendulum can swing as far as it can go in one direction, and it's really got to start swinging back (laughter) in the other direction.  So we just try to be patient with the swings."
Story_ID: 372480
Speaker 1: What pulled you back to the calling, to say, "Okay, I can't--I've gotta go back to divinity school."
Speaker 2: My supervisor at The Family Center [Somerville, Massachusetts] said to me one day--you know, 'cause I would, you know, be real excited, come barreling into her office and--as I said, we were co-creating the model [Family Union Network (ph.)]--and I'd be like, "We just gotta get these kids singing," (laughter) you know, and: "We just need some, some, some lectures about good ideas for the parents."  And she was, she said--(unclear)--you, "You're, you're kind of trying to start a church; you know, I can see that."  It was, it was like all the pieces you're trying to bring in here, you know.  I said you know, oh, wow.  And eventually, my husband just kind of said, "Look, you know, everything you do is ministry, so you might as well go to seminary."  You know, so he came to the point of, of accepting and supporting, and we--you know, it just, it just felt the right thing to--'cause I had struggled, should I get a psychology degree?  Should I get social--?  I knew I had to get some degree, you know, in order to continue, you know, working.  That (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because you wanted at this point your own church, was the idea.  To go, going back to divinity school would mean--
Speaker 2: Right, right.  At that point, when I'd made the decision to go back to divinity school, it was pretty clear in my mind that I was, really what--I didn't feel call to social work or psychology, you know, that there were limits to all of these feels, whereas I think the key, the key moment came, I worked with a young woman who had a small child.  She had a lot of mental problems, a lot of psychological issues.  But she also had just a huge story of loss and pain.  She, she just had had a terrible life story, and she was afflicted physically, you know, with a lot of ailments, skin diseases, just, just problems that would make people shun her.  She had a very beautiful soul. And there was a model that was working in this housing project as well, which was a, a kind of a writing project that had been funded.  And so they were working with the women around writing poetry and doing things.  And she, this woman, was very involved with that program.  And just some of the things that happened, some of the things that we went through in, in working together helped me to understand that the significant issue would not be solved except through spiritually, you know, that the, the, the depth of the healing that was needed and restoration in her life was a--you know, social services could give, get her all sorts of things, you know, could--it, you know, and--but then, none of that seemed to avail, you know.  And I started feeling a strong sense that that was, that was my calling, to deal with things that I couldn't talk about with people from the standpoint of a social work contract (laughter), you know.  You, you know, I mean it wasn't like I could say, "Okay, so let's now talk about, you know, kind of your faith journey."  You know, so I figured that was, and I, I still think it's all necessary, that you can't--I think, I think [HistoryMaker] Marian Wright Edelman talked once that I heard her, about it's, it's kind of like a pyramid.  And if you leave out any of the foundational stones, the whole structure is gonna crumble.  So it's not enough just to do faith, you know, as they say, "You can be so heavenly you're of no earthly good."  You know, so, you know, you've gotta try to cover all the bases in order to really transform some of the stuck places in people's lives.
Story_ID: 372481
Speaker 1: Just talking a little bit more about philosophy again, so did, do, do, then do you find that that is a, that that is a huge part of sort of helping the black community today?  Is there spiritual aspect to some of the problems?  Like, I mean, I'm talking about like with the teenage pregnancy or this dropping out of school, like.  Will that also address some of those social--
Speaker 2: Well, I, I think that in every community there are some churches that are liberation churches that are not only talking about, you know, "Believe and you'll be saved," you know, kind of model.  I think that the spiritual component is critical.  I think it's important for people to know that they are, as they would choose to interpret it, connected to a higher power and a source.  I believe that, and I believe that because of the nature of the black church, we have always been institutions that have been also involved with justice and liberation movement.  So, you know, I connect myself to the United Black Clergy [United Black Clergy of Westchester] here in Westchester [Westchester County, New York], where W. Franklyn Richardson [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. W. Franklyn Richardson] is the president.  I think I recommend that you talk to him at some point.  You know, he's somebody that I found so admirable as a leader, and he has the capacity to help us to refine that vision.  Right now he's going on a national tour to try to call the black church back to its investment in social justice ministries.  And you know, that's how I wound up on the school board, through his agency in leading the movement to, you know, say that you can't just get to--his perspective, which I totally agreed with when he came to the community, is you have some clergy groups that get together and they eat, and they get to know each other, and they talk about, you know, their lives or whatever, or maybe read a bible passage.  But if you have a community in which 80 percent of the children are failing their reading tests, then that should be an issue of justice for the clergy, you know, and it's unacceptable, you know.  So we got involved with the schools and tried to make some transformations occur and wound up not being able to find people who really want to serve for free, on a volunteer situation on school boards, you know, unfortunately.  So it became, you know, kind of, "Who will go for me (laughter)," you know.  It's like, "Your turn."  "No, it's your turn (laughter)," so.  You get out there and do it.  So, I find myself on the school board.
Story_ID: 372482
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety [1990] you graduated [from Harvard Divinity School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], had a daughter [Eupha McCrary] that same year.
Speaker 2: Yep, yep.
Speaker 1: And a year later you were ordained.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Talk to me about your ordin- your ordination.  Is that--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, right.  Well, in the Presbyterian church we have two groups of--well, three groups of ordained leadership.  The deacons are the sort of benevolence, you know, loving people that help people.  That's deacons.  The elders, there are two types: the ruling elder, teaching elder.  You know, the ruling elder is the lay trustee board.  And the teaching elders are the pastors or clergy, now primarily called ministers of word and sacrament.  And so, I had actually been ordained as an elder in my church when I was fourteen, and that's what, what allowed me to serve in the church as vice moderator regionally when I was seventeen and get very involved in the church as a young person.  And so this was sort of my second ordination as a presbyter, 'cause we have these two types of presbyters.  But, you know, I, I--and in our denomination you can't be ordained until you have a call from a church.  So I went through the whole five ordination exams, app- applications to different, you know, churches, and wound up accepting a call on the Lower East Side, in Manhattan [New York], which brought me back to New York [New York] from, from Massachusetts at that point.
Story_ID: 372483
Speaker 1: Okay, 1991 you served--the, the Lower East Side [New York, New York] is where you were explaining the ordination process, and you have--there's a church involved.  And this church was called?
Speaker 2: Emmanuel Presbyterian Church [New York, New York], and it was on 6th [Street] between C [Avenue C] and D [Avenue D].  And it was a small church, mostly folk from one particular community in north--in South Carolina that immigrated up here and gotten involved in the large housing developments there by the East River as, as mostly as veterans.  Their, their husbands have been veterans.  They raised their families there.  They were mostly elderly.  And, but it had originally been a church that was funded through a mission grant from one of the larger Presbyterian churches, First Presbyterian Church [New York, New York] in, in Manhattan over by NYU [New York University, New York, New York], Greenwich Village [New York, New York] area.  And so they had some real funding, to the ability to support a full-time ministry and a vision for that community.  They had a day care center and a lot of positive, positive experiences.  And, and they were willing to take me green and you know, wet behind the ears and you know, give me some, some opportunity to make a whole bunch of mistakes, you know.
Speaker 1: But it was there that the little boy was--that taught you--
Speaker 2: Definitely.
Speaker 1: --and then that led us into the con- you know, the image of, of Jesus with--
Speaker 2: With children and God with--
Speaker 1: --with children, yeah.
Speaker 2: --children.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and you said--
Speaker 2: You know, here recently when we went through the Christmas holidays, I noticed that some of the leadership selected bulletin covers with a black--beautiful black Madonna and black Jesus on the cover.  And I was very impressed with that because it's been a journey for us to accept--you know, there, there's always people who kind of: "Why do you have to do that?  It doesn't matter," you know, "Just leave Jesus alone," (laughter) you know, as looking like the cousin of Michelangelo.  That's what we've always seen.  We're comfortable with that.  You know, change is resistant.  And I just feel strongly whenever we have pageants and things of that nature, the baby is black.  You know, we try to utilize, you know, who we are, you know, and, and just challenge the idea that everyone, if it's a Hispanic child, if it's an Asian child, they have this image, this--it was like the commercial where the people kept morphing, you know.  And you know, that's more like the image that I see of God.  You know, there's God is--we're created in God's image and likeness, and we, as, as somebody once wrote, return the favor.  I mean but in a sense, we have to, because otherwise this notion of self-love and self-worth is really meaningless, you know, so.  You know, the, the recent movie, this 'Children of Men' is an interesting movie where the women have become unfertile.  And this black girl is the first one to get pregnant in thirty years in the whole world.  And so, it's a, it's a recapitulation of this image, you know, which I'm very comfortable with.  Someone else from another culture could say, "Well, I'm not comfortable with that at all."  But, you know, I just really think that what we try to do through not only Black History Month but throughout the year is to encourage--they're supposed to be taking a trip to the--the Sunday school is supposed to be taking a trip to the New-York Historical Society [New York, New York] to look at the--they did one last year to look at the first part of the exhibit there.  And now they are going to look at this slavery in New York, Civil War period and you know.  So, it's, it's really trying to be affirming, because there's so much that mitigates against that in the life of our children, you know.  And they find themselves not emerging as the focal point, you know.  So we try to dispel all of that with imageries wherever we can--
Story_ID: 372484
Speaker 1: I want to talk about you coming here [First Presbyterian Church, Mount Vernon, New York], and that was ninety--1996.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But be--I mean I guess we'll talk about a lot of it, but I wanted you to talk about the community that you exist in or that you also existed in New York as far as other black theologians.  Is there a community?  Were there groups you were involved with in New York City [New York, New York] before you came here?
Speaker 2: Before I came here, I was involved with primarily the Presbyterian network, Presbyterian African American clergy and very embedded in kind of the denominational structures.  I had, had served as the synodmoderator in 1995, '96 [1996].  And I was just very active in that period of my life in the denominational structures and probably decided when I got here that since I was the only--you know, New York City and Mount Vernon [New York] are very different (laughter), you know.  So, this community, I was the only African American clergyperson in this whole Hudson River Presbyterian [Hudson River Presbytery], which is ninety-two churches that sort of stems from the Bronx [New York] border all the north into Sullivan County [New York], you know, and includes Orange County [New York], Dutchess County [New York], Putnam County [New York].  So it, it really, it was gonna be a lonely place if I didn't reach out and build ecumenical ties; you know, in the sense, you know that I could have colleagues in the Presbyterian denomination but not those that would fully understand the urban context of ministry and the challenges that I was working with then.  So I did that.  I sort of invested in the United Black Clergy [United Black Clergy of Westchester], you know, in terms of my support system, and received tremendous benefits from that relationship.  And the, also, in 19--in, in 2000--in 19, I guess '98 [1998], I decided to go back and--actually before that I had been thinking about where to go to get a doctorate and decided to go to New York Theological Seminary [New York, New York], because for many, many years, back to when I was a teenager, before I went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I had known about New York Theological Seminary as a radical seminary in the city, you know, as a seminary that took seriously--I think a third of the students are Asian, a third are Hispanic, a third are black and mixture of white.  I mean, so this is, this is a balance there.  But it's a very diverse community in terms of culture, language, but also, they do things like award a master's degree program in Sing Sing prison [Sing Sing Correctional Facility, Ossining, New York], which is the only program like it in the State of New York, maybe in the country, you know, where guys can get a master's degree in professional studies, focusing on theology.
Story_ID: 372485
Speaker 1: You work within that program where you teach--
Speaker 2: I, I currently teach in that program.
Speaker 1: --in that program.  Who were some of the other teachers in that program?
Speaker 2: Mark Chapman, who's a professor at Fordham University [New York, New York], Ed Hunt [Edward L. Hunt] is the--who is on the faculty at NYTS [New York Theological Seminary, New York, New York] and pastors a church in West, Northern Westchester [New York].  And Eleanor Moody-Shepherd, who's the, currently the associate dean for many years.  And she's worked with me as one of the parish associates here.  And, but the, the whole community at New York Theological Seminary is serious and focused on providing to practitioners of liberating ministry a, a educational foundation, you know, towards that.  And you know, so that is--I, I would say that that's in many respects the core reflective community that I currently belong to as a member of the faculty there, the adjunct faculty and the doctor of ministry [D.Min.] faculty.  And then currently, I teach in every one of the programs in some respect.
Speaker 1: And in that, within that program, do you--they allowed--well, you--they've come up with this reaching out to prisoners and others--
Speaker 2: That goes back to one of--
Speaker 1: --or is that something you constructed?
Speaker 2: No, no, that goes back to one of the previous presidents of the seminary, who is named Bill Webber [George W. Webber].  And he had a vision to do--to go into the prisons and to provide theological education in prisons.  You know, this is, you know, over twenty years I think they've been doing this on some level, you know, but it's, this is my--after I received my doctor of ministry in 2001, I guess in 2002 I was asked to teach in the D.Min. program.  Then about a year later, maybe 2003, I started teaching one course in the spring semester in Sing Sing [Sing Sing Correctional Facility, Ossining, New York].  And yeah, I do other things with the seminary, 'cause I, I just--it is important in my view not to--and in fact, we have a onsite program here because the certificate program, which is a preliminary program, just giving a like a year's worth of a taste of theological study, is, is, in my view, for people in my congregation or other congregations that are really hungry for bible study that really want to go beyond what's being offered in local church, this certificate program is a great program.  And it's very affordable, very reasonable, and it's just a great program, even if people decide never to go on any further.  But sometimes people do decide, then, "Well, let me go on and get the Master of Divinity."  But, so, these, these take place at satellite campuses, and right here in our church we have an ongoing certificate program in ministry.  I don't teach in that one, but some of the other parish associates and our Christian education consultant are, you know, also graduates of the seminary.  They teach in that program.  So, that's the main community, and I believe that everybody needs several communities of these types, you know, a clergy affiliation with other clergy as well as intellectual stimulation (laughter), so.  You know 'cause a lot of times people don't realize that as, you know, educated scholars of the Bible and theology and so forth, you know, you come out and you have no--it's not that you have nobody to talk to you, so of course talk in bible study classes that you do and so forth and so on, but it's very critical I think that you reconnect to an environment that will stimulate.  You know, because a lot of times people just stop using the tools that they've learned in seminary and kind of just do a social service ministry as opposed to continuing to investigate ideas and press the limit on, on, press the limits on how we apply those ideas, you know, and so that we're transformed, so.
Story_ID: 372486
Speaker 1: In Mount Vernon [New York], you said that you are one of ninety-two, out of the ninety-two churches you're the only African American--
Speaker 2: And when I first came.
Speaker 1: --when you first came.  And--
Speaker 2: But there are a couple of others, you know, or have been over the years, you know sort of coming and going.  But I've--it's still, you know, still pretty much not much diversity in the Presbyterian church, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the Presbyterian church is--so when you spoke about having to reach other to other denominations as to build a base, did you do, reach out to other, I mean, just beyond Christians, to Buddhists and Muslims?
Speaker 2: We have tried.  I mean the primary base that I've sort of reach out to was just the United Black Clergy of Westchester 'cause I felt that they were an organization that wasn't just talking the talk, but they were walking the walk; they're, they're involved in the community and taking risks and making investments to promote liberation and change in the community.  So that was the kind of group that I wanted to hang out with.  But over at some point, we realized that de facto we were the only strong clergy association, you know, locally, and that we became concerned that we would try to reach out to Catholic leadership, and Buddhist leadership, and Hindu, and Muslim leadership and try to create an interfaith connection.  So we've had a number of initiatives.  We've attempted to do so.  It isn't really taking hold, you know.  So it's, it's one of those interesting things that you kind of keep pushing for a while and then say well, you know, "Got to pay attention to other things and then keep going back to it," 'cause it is, it is crucial I think.  And I think that our president, Franklyn Richardson [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. W. Franklyn Richardson], is a global figure, and he understands the need to be interfaith and ecumenical.
Story_ID: 372487
Speaker 1: Now is it through the United Black Clergy [United Black Clergy of Westchester] that you became involved with the local--with the Mount Vernon [New York] school board?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  There's actually a book the Urban League [National Urban League] has published about process, you know, about the model of clergy leadership making a difference in the lives of, you know, a local school district and transforming it.  There, there was a lot of neglect of the schools.  There was, basically, there was a feeling--when I first came into the community, some members of the church had approached me and said you know, "You can get your daughter [Eupha McCrary] into the good school."  And the good school was the one school that had a large, still had a large proportion of whites in the school and supposed to be the place, you know--and you know: "You can get special permission, because you're the clergy, to put your daughter in the good school," and you know, the perfectly nice school.  I mean, for me this looks like a bucolic little suburban community, and there's a perfectly little nice school down the street.  So I said, "No, you know; you know, we'll just send her to whichever school she's zoned for and work with that school."  And I'm glad that I took that position because a lot of times I think that's how they, sophisticated structures of disempowerment, will do you a favor and then silence you, you know, 'cause, see, then you're not in a position to challenge, you know, what's happening.  So, basically, that's also part of the reason why it's been--even though it seemed counterintuitive because my daughter has a learning disability and is brilliant, but needs some special supports.  And when she got to middle school age, we had just lost a good superintendent, and powerful, strong superintendent that we had managed to get up 'til that point.  And things sort of seemed very chaotic, and I just felt that she needed to be in a smaller, more supportive--you know, so I had made the decision at that juncture.  Even though I had been struggling, I believe very much in public education, that it should be fair and accessible to everybody at a good quality, based on my own experience.  But, you know, you always have to say, you know, "Can I sacrifice my child to my own political ambitions or liberation ambitions, you know, so to speak?"  And so she goes to a small private school, and she's thrive, she's been thriving there.  But at the same time, I felt that in some ways that liberated me to put myself out to make the changes in the community even more so, because in my experience, some of my colleagues whose children were in the school districts came under attack as part of that struggle.  You know, so, for me, you know, "Okay, the child is safe."  Now we can go out there and really say, you know, this Swahili word, bolekaja, come on out and fight.  You know, so, that's kind of the way that it played out.  And I was asked several times to run, and then I finally--because things started to go off track, and I realized that someone--you know, it's not enough to have good intentions.  You really need to train a body of people in strong leadership ability, so, and trying to be a mod- role model.  Though, the one thing the Presbyterian church has helped me to understand, is how to run a good meeting (laughter), so, you know.
Speaker 1: Now are you running for a second term (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I just--
Speaker 1: --or are you--
Speaker 2: --I just--
Speaker 1: You have already (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) just ran last year for a second term.
Speaker 1: And you were elected for a second--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --term?
Story_ID: 372488
Speaker 1: You've been at this church [First Presbyterian Church, Mount Vernon, New York] for how long?
Speaker 2: This is the twelfth year.
Speaker 1: The twelfth year.  So when you look back over that twelve-year span, what do you consider to be the highlights of, of the work you've done here?
Speaker 2: I think the church had been through a lot of transitions, short pastorates, a number of short pastorates.  And they just really had gotten I think very discouraged by some of the experiences of, of negativity in those short--some of those short pastorates.  They were great things as well, but I think that I came in as a stabilizing force, you know, and was able to make some strong connections, and be able to stay.  You know, I think it was a, a great thing that I've been here for over a decade.  So in some ways--somebody said the, the trick is to keep showing up (laughter), you know.  So I've, I've just been able to reverse that trend of two or three years, very short pastorates, and do a piece of work.  And a lot of the work has been community connection and involvement, you know, that as the first black pastor that this church had, even though there were people who kind of saw Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and saw light-skinned and didn't understand fully what (laughter) my perspective was gonna be, but I think that it, it also brought about some peace in the valley between different sections of the African diaspora, 'cause there's a large part of this congregation that's Caribbean diaspora, which I share the Caribbean background.  But there's a large part of the diaspora that's American, from the American South.  There's a large part of the diaspora that's also, you know, European diaspora that just stayed, that never left.  And so, given my background, I was able to be a bridge builder, you know, just to kind of create some levels of understanding where you do not have disempowered groups, you know, that everybody's got equal access to the process of the work in the life of the church.
Story_ID: 372489
Speaker 1: I have two questions left before we wrap it up.  One, do--have you found that it was a greater challenge in your work being woman or black?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's kind of hard for me to separate the two, but I think--let me put it this way: Nancy Pelosi (laughter)--Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton], you know, these women--I think that women--the issues that, that kind of disempower women, particularly white women, are still there but that they are on the, on a decline.  You know, I, I see the empowerment of women.  In our denomination, most of the church executives now are white females, you know, and that's good to see; you know, it's good to know.  But I don't think it crosses over into addressing the hard core.  I mean when I hear that 50 percent of the African American men in New York City [New York, New York] are unemployed, it breaks my heart.  And I just see us needing to be radical in the ways in which we address that we really haven't made much progress.  You know, a few of us have progressed radically, you know, well; we're quite, quite well-situated.  But somehow that has not crossed over to really addressing--which is why the clergy saw the need to, and, and Franklyn Richardson [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. W. Franklyn Richardson] is traveling around the country, to promote this idea that the one institution that we really have always had is the black church.  And the black church forgets its social justice in, in, in favor of prosperity gospel and megachurch concepts and you know, all this kind of stuff.  If the black church abandons its social justice imperative, then you know, we, you know, we, we, we have less hope.  You know, we always have hope.  Cornel West talks about the fact that he's not optimistic, but he has hope, (laughter) you know, so.  You know, I think that's, that's really what I--I'm, I think I'm most anchored in that which is most of a challenge, you know, and I think that the challenge that faces us as to, to actually see--I mean when I go the prison, and I see, you know--Richard Pryor had this joke, you know, "I go down to the jailhouse, and I look for justice, and I see just us."
Story_ID: 372490
Speaker 1: You know, and the unfortunate thing is that, you know, in the same timeframe that we've all benefited from the civil rights struggle, the new form of slavery is the industrial prison complex [prison industrial complex] and seeing our children caught up in those toils for lack of education and lack of investment, you know.  Kids need the same things that I needed when I was growing up.  They need somebody to take an interest in them; they need somebody to provide a place for them; they need somebody to push them to use their mental capacity; and they need, when they're old enough to be bored and in trouble, they need to be channeled into their first experiences of work and professional life, you know, so.  People came up to me when I would turn fourteen and said, "Do you have a summer job?" In my home church [University Heights Presbyterian Church, Bronx, New York], you know, and got me jobs, you know.  And you know, I just really think that that's where we as a community, you know, are not making the sacrifices that our ancestors would have hoped that we would have made, you know, rather than pointing the finger and saying, "They should do it (laughter)," you know.  There's a group of us, you know, that need to be involved with challenging each other to do what has to be done, so.
Speaker 2: So what is it you would like to be remembered for?
Speaker 1: Telling the story in a way that reflects the living power of the energy of the divine presence of God.
Speaker 2: Well, thank you very much.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 372491
Speaker 1: That picture is when I was about nine years old, so around 1970.  And my dad [David Niles, Sr.] had it in his wallet and carried it all the time.
Speaker 2: So that picture is a very precious picture that was taken in St. Vincent before my grandfather, James Nathaniel Niles [James Niles], died.  And that's my Aunt Rhoda [Rhoda Niles], my father's oldest sister.  And that's a, a very important family picture, 'cause she's not in front of the camera; she's behind.
Speaker 1: That is a picture of my dad, just around the time that he bought his home in the Bronx [New York] and near to the current Bronx Community College [Bronx, New York] campus, what used to be NYU's Rose Hill campus [sic. Fordham University, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: That is my mom, and they're bringing me home from the hospital [Columbia Presbyterian Hospital; New York-Presbyterian/Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Just give us your mother's name again.
Speaker 2: Jean Niles, Jean Pauline Niles [Jean Davis Niles], and they're bringing me home from the hospital in 1961.
Speaker 1: That's outside of University Heights Presbyterian Church [Bronx, New York].  That was, I believe, may have been the day of my brother's baptism [Joseph Niles].  And those are his godparents, our godparents, Morton Stevenson, Dr. Edith Thompson Stevenson.  And in the right hand corner is my father's brother who lived in St. Vincent, my uncle Daniel [Daniel Niles], with my mother.  I'm in the middle on the top step, and my youngest--my, my next youngest brother, David [David Niles, Jr.], is in the forefront.
Speaker 2: Nuclear family, father, mother, sister [Debra Niles], myself, my two younger brothers.  And that would have been--I look about four--maybe about 1965.
Speaker 1: I was in college [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and this was a dear friend, dear family friend, that I met through church circles, a famous artist in Roxbury in Boston [Massachusetts], Margarita Winthrop [Margarita Lewis Winthrop].  That was at her home.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, what, 1983?
Speaker 1: That would have been 1983.
Speaker 2: That was actually the celebration after my ordination to minister of word and sacrament in the Presbyterian church in 1991, October of 1991.  And that's my father, who was present, and my cousins.
Speaker 1: That is one occasion of preaching at the Emmanuel Presbyterian Church, which was my first parish, on the Lower East Side in Manhattan [New York].
Speaker 2: And that is me here as the senior pastor of the First Presbyterian Church of Mount Vernon, New York, probably taken in 1996, when I first--soon after I first came.
