Story_ID: 571015
Speaker 1: My name is Adrienne Jones and I am the interviewer. Neculai Burghelea is the videographer, and if you could please state your name and spell it, please?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] James McQuay, J-A-M-E-S, M-C, capital Q-U-A-Y.
Speaker 1: What is your date of birth and where were you born?
Speaker 2: My birth is November the 15th, 1924, Baltimore, Maryland.
Speaker 1: What is today's date?  It's September 21st [2007], it's a Friday and where is the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: This interview is at 344 South 3rd Avenue, Mount Vernon, New York, 10550.
Speaker 1: I also need to tell you that the tape only runs for thirty minutes, so when the tape is about to run out I'll go like this, and then you can just finish your thought and we'll let Neculai change the tape.  What is your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation is a furrier.  I've been a furrier for many, many years.
Story_ID: 571016
Speaker 1: So I'm going to start out by asking you five People magazine-ish type questions, and I'll just ask the question and just whatever comes to mind you can respond.  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I think my favorite food is some sort of chicken, and chicken salad.  Something like that, something mixed with chicken.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is--well, I have two favorite times of year.  When I was a little younger, my favorite time of the year was the winter months, but now that I'm older, I want the warm months, so I've changed my time of the year.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Anyplace that I can go fishing I like.  It doesn't make any difference where it's at.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase, and if you do will you share it with us?
Speaker 2: If you change the way you look at things, things change the way they look.
Story_ID: 571017
Speaker 1: So we want to start out by talking about your family.  So I wanted to start with your mother, and I was hoping you would start by telling me her name and where she was born.
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Sarah McQuay and she was born in New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: And did she grow up in New York City?
Speaker 2: She grew up in Yonkers, New York.  They came to Yonkers, New York and they grew up--she lived the rest of her life in Yonkers, New York.
Speaker 1: And did you--did your mother ever tell you any stories about when she was growing up?  Do you have any sense of what it was like for her as a young person?
Speaker 2: Not really, she didn't talk much about her time growing up because my mother was always busy with something.  She had three children.  There was myself, my brother [Buel McQuay] and my sister [Marion McQuay], and she did domestic work and the domestic work kept her going all the time.  As a matter of fact we even had to assist her with her, her work.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  And what about your father, what's your father's name?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Thomas [ph.], but I don't know as much about him.  I don't remember much about him.  He wasn't part of the family when I grew up.
Speaker 1: If you had to describe your mother to someone, how would you describe her?
Speaker 2: I would say she was a hard working woman.  Even though she didn't have a fancy education, she went to work all the time.  As a matter of fact I think she was what got me into the method of understanding what work was all about, because I saw her work so hard and I followed right in her footsteps.  I had many, many jobs and I've had a job from delivering newspapers when I was ten years old until I retired, so I've always worked after that.
Speaker 1: Did you know your mother's mother?
Speaker 2: Yes, I knew my mother's mother.  Now she--her name was Mittie Dickson and Mittie Dickson was also a hard working woman and believe it or not did the same type of job, domestic work.
Speaker 1: And where was Mittie from?
Speaker 2: She was from Augusta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And did she grow up in Augusta?
Speaker 2: No, she came north and spent most of her time in Yonkers.
Speaker 1: And you said she was a domestic and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --was she, and did she work for people in the Yonkers area?
Speaker 2: Well, both of them lived and worked in Yonkers because I, when I look at it they didn't drive in those years so they had to get back and forth to work and I imagine they picked a place close to home.
Speaker 1: So at that time were they walking to work, your grand, your grandmother and your mother?
Speaker 2: Took the trolley.
Speaker 1: The trolley?
Speaker 2: At that time they had a No. 8 trolley that went up Riverdale Avenue from I would say Saint Vincent [College of Mount Saint Vincent, Riverdale, New York] to Getty Square [Yonkers, New York] and they boarded that trolley every day going up towards about Saint Vincent and then they would walk four or five blocks to the house where they were working at.
Speaker 1: Did you know your grandfather?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your grandmother if you had to describe her?
Speaker 2: Oh I, I don't remember her working, so she was always home.  She was the person that was the day to day mother.  She was everybody's mother, but because she didn't work she prepared the food, she did the dishes.  She would wash the clothes.  She was the one that stayed home, but also a hard working person.
Story_ID: 571018
Speaker 1: Can you tell me, what's your earliest memory from your childhood?
Speaker 2: I can, I can remember when I was in grammar school because it was Number 3 School [School 3] in Yonkers, New York and I remember it well, because we used to walk to school every day and my mother [Sarah McQuay] would walk with me to school when I can remember us walking back and forth to Number 3 School on Hamilton Avenue in Yonkers.
Story_ID: 571019
Speaker 1: Can you tell me, which were the most important holidays at your house [in Yonkers, New York]?
Speaker 2: Christmas I think was our--we didn't have many holidays, because holidays cost money and money was something that we weren't a part of.  So everybody seemed to have something at Christmastime.  So I would definitely say Christmas.
Speaker 1: And how did you celebrate at Christmas?
Speaker 2: Well, they'd make us go to bed early because we wanted to stay up all night and watch Santa Claus come but they'd make us go to bed early so that Santa could come and we'd--he'd be there by the time we woke up; so they were busy putting us to bed and we were busy trying to get up before daybreak to catch Santa Claus in the house.  We never caught him, but we, we always got some gifts.
Speaker 1: Did other people visit when you had Christmas?  Did you have--did you make a day of it and--
Speaker 2: No we didn't make a, a big day of it except going through the gifts because even at Christmastime my mother [Sarah McQuay] or my aunt [Bessie Dickson] at some point or another sometimes had to work even on holidays, because the type of job that they had required them to, to go in.
Story_ID: 571020
Speaker 1: So did you and your siblings have responsibilities around the house?
Speaker 2: Well, I would say that I had more responsibilities than them, because it seemed like I was growing up forever, because I was busy taking care of them while my mother [Sarah McQuay] was working.  And I had a brother and a sister and that was my job to watch them while she wasn't there.
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: You were the oldest?
Speaker 1: I was the oldest, yes.
Speaker 2: And will you name your brother and your sister for us?
Speaker 1: My brother was Buel George McQuay [Buel McQuay] and my sister was Marion McQuay.
Speaker 2: And where did you and your mother and [maternal] grandmother [Mittie Dickson] and brother and sisters live?
Speaker 1: At that time we grew up on, in Yonkers, New York, 24 Culver Street.  And that was an interesting story because in south Yonkers it was only one street that black people lived on and that was the one street.
Speaker 2: Can you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So if you came from Yonkers you lived in south Yonkers, everybody know, knew exactly where you lived.
Speaker 2: How long was the street?
Speaker 1: One block.
Speaker 2: Wow, and about how many houses on that block?
Speaker 1: I said it was ten on one side and maybe nine on the other side of the street.
Speaker 2: And were they single family homes?
Speaker 1: No, most of them were like three family homes.
Speaker 2: And how about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There were two one family homes, but most of them were three family homes.
Speaker 2: --and how about your house?
Speaker 1: Was it, it was a three family home.  We lived on the second floor.
Speaker 2: Did it have, did you have yard space in the, on this block?
Speaker 1: There was yard space between the houses that we both used and that's where the people hung their clothes out on the clothesline.  So as far as that was concerned that space was for, was for you know, the people who needed to hang things out there.
Speaker 2: Did--so you knew all your neighbors?
Speaker 1: Oh everybody knew their neighbors.  The neighbors was out of the neighbor- everybody in that one block became like a family because since you were relegated to that one block, everything that you did was based around that block because you didn't, you didn't really go to too many other blocks around you. They were neighborhoods where people didn't treat you too nice, so the safety was staying on Culver Street.
Speaker 2: Were there any businesses on Culver Street?
Speaker 1: No businesses were on Culver Street, just those few houses that the black people lived in.  And I think most of them worked in domestic work like my mother did, and somehow or another I guess maybe the people in that area allowed them to have that one street as their own, because they were utilizing their services.
Speaker 2: And you said there were no businesses, so if you needed to do some shopping what would--where would you go?
Speaker 1: Well I remember Riverdale Avenue which was only one block away.  They had some little mom and pop stores.  There was no major store like A&P [The Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company], but they had the little stores that you could go in and you'd buy one can of beans or potatoes or something like that.  We didn't, we didn't do a lot of shopping anyway.  My mother brought a lot of things home.
Story_ID: 571021
Speaker 1: Today what sights and sounds and smells remind you of when you grew up on Culver Street [Yonkers, New York]?
Speaker 2: Anybody cooking cakes, I remember their house, if they're cooking cakes that the aroma from the cakes is what I remember most and then they use to make gingerbread.
Speaker 1: Your [maternal] grandmother [Mittie Dickson] or your mother [Sarah McQuay] and grandmother (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: What kind of things did your mother and grandmother make to eat, I mean you said gingerbread, any other, any other signature things that your remember?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess that most of us ate like collard greens, rice, corn, those types of basic things like that, but I, I would, I would say, and oh, they made all kinds of muffins, like corn muffins and things like that.  So they made the desserts as well as the regular food.
Story_ID: 571022
Speaker 1: Where did you go to elementary school?
Speaker 2: I went to Number 3 School [School 3] in Yonkers, New York, and that was about six blocks away from Culver Street.
Speaker 1: How did you get to school?
Speaker 2: We walked.  We walked to school.  Nobody went any other way, except there was one or two white families that also lived on Culver Street, they both had cars, but nobody else had a car.
Speaker 1: And how did you all interact with the two white families that were on Culver Street?
Speaker 2: Well it, it was rather how they interacted with us, because they were only two white families in there, and both Italian families and we really had a good relationship.  As a matter of fact we had a relationship all through my [U.S.] Army service days and when I came out.  We were, it, we were very close.
Speaker 1: And how old were you when you started school at Number Three?
Speaker 2: I guess about five years old, was it, how it (unclear) I think so.
Speaker 1: Five or six?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of your teachers there?  Did any of them make a--influence you or are any of them memorable to you?
Speaker 2: I had one teacher I remember, and right at this moment I can't think of her name, but I only had one that, that remains with me and I have to say that after I left school, other students that I knew that were black students and had her said the same thing about her.  And I think that what it was that she really took an interest in us as black students and nobody else did.  Most classes, we were just invisible.  We came to class with everybody else, but since in Number 3 and Hawthorne [Nathaniel Hawthorne Junior High School; PEARLS Hawthorne School, Yonkers, New York] there were never more than ten or twelve black students, we really didn't matter to them.
Speaker 1: Well, what was that elementary school teacher who made an impact on you?  What subject did she teach you?  Was she a general teacher?  Did she--
Speaker 2: She was a general teacher, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had her for the entire (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --year or more while you were in elementary?
Speaker 2: Right, I had her right, right through the, right through the--as a matter of fact, I think I had her for a half a year afterwards because after she taught us--she was my home room teacher, that's what they called her.
Speaker 1: So, I should probably ask you how the school, how your schooling was setup. Was there an elementary school, a junior high and a high school, or did you just go to one school for all your years (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, there were--it was three different schools, Number 3 School that was on Hamilton Avenue in Yonkers; and Hawthorne Junior High School that was about five blocks from Culver Street and then I went to Yonkers High School that was up on Broadway in Yonkers.
Speaker 1: So in elementary school how many years, or how much of that time did you have the teacher who really took an interest in you?
Speaker 2: For homeroom class, I had her one, one full year.
Speaker 1: And what were the other teachers like, or what was the atmosphere at Number 3 like for you as a black student?
Speaker 2: Well, as I said, we were ignored.  People didn't, we didn't count.  They didn't go out of their way to make us feel anything special.  We were just there and if, if you were like I was, I was sort of athletic and I ran track.  That kind of opened the door for you, because other kids always liked to know somebody who was doing something in sports.  So I think I had a good time with the students because at all three schools I ran track and I was, I wasn't bad and they, they were glad to speak with me, as well as I was glad to speak to them.
Speaker 1: When you were in elementary school did you have any particular interests?  Any subject that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I didn't--
Speaker 1: --you really liked?
Speaker 2: --I didn't, except art.  Art was something that I started at a very young age and I continued to draw all through school and then when I got into the Army believe it or not, I was able to use my ability to draw to make certain maps and things in the Army, so it started at a young age and it went right through life.  And even now I still draw some.
Speaker 1: What kind of a student were you when you were in elementary school?  Were you well behaved?
Speaker 2: I was well behaved, I'd say.  I can say that very easily, because I didn't, I didn't liked to get into trouble.  I never was in trouble in my life I think.  And I think most of it was because I realized that that's something that I wouldn't want to be.  I respected myself.  I had a little saying that I went with all through school; it went like this: "I have to live with myself and so I want to be fit for myself to know," and I used to always repeat that.
Speaker 1: (Pause) I'm just writing that down.
Story_ID: 571023
Speaker 1: Where did you go to junior high school?
Speaker 2: Junior high school was two blocks from Culver Street, that was Hawthorne Junior High School [Nathaniel Hawthorne Junior High School; PEARLS Hawthorne School] near the Hudson River in Yonkers [New York], and that was only two blocks, so that was easy to go to school.
Speaker 1: Only two blocks from Culver Street (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Culver Street, right.
Speaker 1: Now, how much younger are your brother [Buel McQuay] and sister [Marion McQuay]?  So how soon after you started elementary school did you start taking your siblings (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was two years between both of them, between my brother and then another two years between my sister.
Speaker 1: So were you in junior high school when, when your brother and sister--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --when your sister started going, I guess your brother might have started--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he started--
Speaker 1: --as you left elementary [School 3, Yonkers, New York]?
Speaker 2: --yeah, yeah, like, they were two years apart, both of them.  My brother was--see it was me, then my sister then my brother.
Speaker 1: And were you responsible for getting them to school perhaps before you went to your junior high school classes?
Speaker 2: Well, that's why I tell most people I think I always felt like I was an adult because since I was a person that they could rely on, they relied on me.  And I try pass that on to other people too, young people and if you rely--and then they make, you make them more responsible too, many times.  And I found out that--I learned a lesson because a lot of things that I did as a youngster I don't think I could have done without them saying, "James [HistoryMaker James McQuay], you can do it."  And James went ahead and did it.  And it, it served me well even in the [U.S.] Army, I had, realized I could do a lot of things that I didn't realize otherwise that I could do.  And there were some young people just like me that did nothing and that's why I think, why they did nothing because nobody really pushed them along.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers in, in the junior high school that had an impact on you?
Speaker 2: No, I had no teachers in junior high and no teachers in high school that--by that time the teachers I guess, were tied up in other things.
Speaker 1: And then that was Yonkers High School [Yonkers, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yonkers High School.
Speaker 1: And how close was that to your home?
Speaker 2: Now that was about two miles, so when we went--I would, had to go two miles to get to Yonkers High.
Speaker 1: And you also walked there?
Speaker 2: We walked (laughter).
Speaker 1: How early in the morning would you have to leave?
Speaker 2: Well, that's another interesting story, story.  I was up anyway, because when I was in junior high school I started with a job and what was the job?  The job was delivering papers to some customers to their house.  So when they woke up in the morning they would have a paper sitting in front of their door and I worked for a man named Mr. Schiller [ph.].  And Mr. Schiller would come and pick four of us up in the morning at Culver Street, put us in the truck and we would ride away.  It would be like five o'clock in the morning.  And we'd go into the big apartment buildings and go to the top floor and go down from the top floor to the bottom delivering the paper in front of the door there.  The name of the paper was Herald Statesman.  I think it's still in Yonkers, the Herald Statesman.
Speaker 1: And what was your second job?
Speaker 2: My second job was when I went with Mr. Ginsberg [Nathan Ginsberg], I told you in junior high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 571024
Speaker 1: So let's first talk about some of the help that you would provide your mother on her job.  How did you help your mother complete her duties when you were about twelve or thirteen?
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, what, what happened was that my mother didn't, couldn't walk well.  She had a problem walking and she needed somebody to come to her house where she worked at to help her with her job, because the lady she worked for told her that, "Before you go home, Sarah [Sarah McQuay], you have to clean the kitchen floor and you have to clean the bathroom floor every day.  I don't care what, you can't leave before the kitchen floor and the bathroom is clean."  So my mother asked me if I would come there after school and do those two things for her so she could get out and that was my job to go there.
Speaker 1: And so could you tell me a little bit about the schedule of your day?  You would go to, you might even wake up in the morning and do the papers?
Speaker 2: Do the papers.
Speaker 1: Then you'd go to school?
Speaker 2: Then I'd go to school.
Speaker 1: Then you'd go meet your mom?
Speaker 2: Then I'd go and meet my mom.
Speaker 1: And how far was it to meet your mother?
Speaker 2: Well she didn't--she wasn't too far.  It was about five blocks.  She was on Valentine Lane, so that was five blocks from Culver Street.
Speaker 1: And then after you finished at your mother's would you come on back on your own, or would you bring her back?
Speaker 2: No, I, I would be late enough to walk back with her.  She would leave when I left.
Speaker 1: And how often did you do that with your mother?
Speaker 2: I did it nearly every day.
Speaker 1: And, so how did that result in your meeting Mr. Ginsberg?
Speaker 2: Well, there came a time where I was walking home with my mother from that job where she was working at where I was helping her to get her things together, and it was a furrier and he used to stand in front of the shop.  His name was Nathan Ginsberg and the shop was Exclusive Fur Shop in Yonkers [New York].  It was there for many, many years.  I had never noticed the store, but we use to see him standing in the front of the store, and one day he said to my mother, "I see you going by with this young fellow every day, and I can see he is an ambitious little fellow, and I'd like him to work for me."  And my mother said to him, "When did you want him work?"  He said, "He can start anytime on Saturday, when he's not going to school."  And I started to work for him while I was in junior high school [Nathaniel Hawthorne Junior High School; PEARLS Hawthorne School, Yonkers, New York] and that's how I--it led to a, a trade.  It led to a business and it led to my life work.
Speaker 1: So start off by telling us what your Saturday schedule was like?  What were you doing at Ginsberg's shop?
Speaker 2: Well, when I went to, to work for Mr. Ginsberg on Saturdays a lot of times--I initially started--I would accompany him.  When I say I would accompany him, he had deliveries to make for people that had storage coats, so he, he could run in and deliver the coat and let me sit in the car while he went in and delivered to the customer.  Eventually, that became a job that I did when I got older and got a license.  As a matter of fact, I got a license when I was sixteen because in Yonkers that had something they called a junior license and you get it before you're eighteen and he helped me to get the license so I could be of assistance to him to drive the car.
Speaker 1: And when you say license, you mean a driver's license (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A driver's license.
Speaker 1: Did he teach you to drive?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I learned how to drive with him and in his car.  I learned how to drive and had a license at sixteen.
Story_ID: 571025
Speaker 1: You said when you started out you would do deliveries with him initially, and then what else would you do on a Saturday?
Speaker 2: Well, on Saturday, I worked for him all day long, because you see he, he worked, himself, he was a mechanic.  And then what would happen a lot, the other four men that worked in his shop [Exclusive Fur Shop, Yonkers, New York] would go home, but since he liked me to be around the shop, I would stay until like seven o'clock at night while he was working.  But believe it or not that's how I learned the trade because he would let me sit at the machine, let me nail a coat, let me square a coat.  He taught me how to become a mechanic.
Speaker 1: And you said mechanic, by that what do you mean?
Speaker 2: You actually make the garment.  The mechanic is a person that actually cuts the skin, matches the skin, and makes the garment.  So he would, he taught me how to do all of that and then the other part was when it came to the, the ones that worked the daytime, they didn't like the idea of me sitting at the machine, so I had to do most of that after they left for home, he would let me do that at night when they were gone.
Speaker 1: And what is it to nail or to square a coat?
Speaker 2: Well you see a fur coat has to be sewn together first.  All the skins have to be sewn together on a pattern.  It's a pattern, because a woman may be a size 10, 12, 14, 16, so there's a pattern that you use to make the coat.  And since fur is leather, leather has to be stretched.  So you put the pattern on the board and mark it around and then you nail the coat up on to that pattern.  You let it sit there overnight to dry out, and the next day when you come in you put the pattern on the coat and you square around the pattern to make the, make the pattern fit the coat that's nailed up and then you close it up together where you have the seams for the bust line and the back and the collars and the cuffs and that's how you put it together and eventually you have a coat.
Speaker 1: How, how many years did you work for Mr. Ginsberg [Nathan Ginsberg]?
Speaker 2: Well, I worked for him for almost, almost, almost, I know fifteen years.
Speaker 1: So that's--wow.  And so that--did you work for him before and after you went away to war [World War II, WWII]?
Speaker 2: No, I went to work for him after I came out.  See, I, I got out, I came--I got out of the [U.S.] Army in 1946.  Well, I was working for him before I went (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Before then--
Speaker 2: --in, before I--see, I was working for him when I was in high school [Yonkers High School, Yonkers, New York]--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --but that, that was--I didn't do, I didn't do the work, like I couldn't make nothing; I wasn't doing that.  I went into the Army and came back when he taught me the trade.
Speaker 1: I see, when you, when you stayed late and did the nailing and the squaring?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That was after you came out of the service?
Speaker 2: Out of the Army, I--
Speaker 1: So beforehand you would (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I was a gofer.  I did anything that they needed.  I even used to go get them things to eat.  I, whatever they needed I did.
Speaker 1: And what other, what other kinds of things does a furrier shop need?  I mean, I understand that they probably needed some personal errands, like you're getting their food and so forth, but were you doing anything special, (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I used to--
Speaker 1: --running any errands that were directly related to making the coats?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I, I couldn't drive at first, so what they would do they'd put me on the train at 242nd Street and Broadway and that was, I would go down to 30th Street which was the wholesale fur market and I always had something to pick up for him, maybe nails, tape or tags for the coat, linings and, so that was my job to go back and forth like that to bring things back to the store.
Story_ID: 571026
Speaker 1: And how many years were you there [Exclusive Fur Shop, Yonkers, New York] before you--I assume you got drafted, is that true, or did you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, no, I was drafted.  I got, I, I got out of Yonkers High School [Yonkers, New York] in 1943 in June, and in September Uncle Sam was waiting for me and I was in Camp Upton, New York and Long Island ready to do my service.
Speaker 1: How long were you in the [U.S. military] service?
Speaker 2: I was in the service from 1943 to 1946.
Speaker 1: And where were you, where were you stationed?
Speaker 2: I was in the South Pacific, and I made two ongoing invasions with, with the Saipan in the South Pacific and Tinian in the South Pacific, they were two islands and if we went ashore--we went ashore D-Day, so we saw plenty of everything.
Speaker 1: Saw act- plenty of action?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they, we went ashore where they had these--they would call them LSD landing craft [landing ship, dock] and the front goes down and we were--we had to go ashore in the water and we, once they landed we went right ashore.
Speaker 1: And what was your job?
Speaker 2: Well at--the first job was we would, would try to secure a landing strip so that they could put, put an air base there.  So we were trying to get to a place where we would have a clearing and where there was going to be an air base.  And then after that they had a chance to bring in troop ships and we became the ones that started to unload the troop ships.
Story_ID: 571027
Speaker 1: What was your rank in the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: When I was in the Army, I was a sergeant.
Speaker 1: And were you a member of a segregated unit?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was a member of a segregated unit because in World War II [WWII], all the Army was segregated.  As a matter of fact, during the time when you were inducted into the Army after you left the induction station, the blacks went one way and the whites went another.  So it--you got it--that right at, from the very beginning.
Speaker 1: And within your unit did you feel that you did, that you got the support that you needed from the greater army, or did you feel that your unit was treated worse than perhaps a white unit?  Or did you even have a sense of that?
Speaker 2: Well, we, we didn't have a sense of that, but we, we had a sense of the fact that we would--we were a black unit, unit, because everything that we experienced was in that fashion no matter where it came from.  And so you knew what you were, there was no--even when you went to a new base, you went from one segregated base to another segregated base. I went from Camp Upton [New York] and then I went all the way across country to Fort Lewis in, in Seattle, Washington and then I left there and I went to Hawaii.  So all these places were segregated units, and then I went to the South Pacific.
Speaker 1: Now, particularly on the U.S. bases being in the segregated unit, what did that mean?  Did that mean that you didn't have access to particular things that were on the unit, or opportunities there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it--what it meant was--
Speaker 1: --on the base--
Speaker 2: --what, what, what it meant was that since your, your, your company with your--together with other soldiers and everybody in your company and also in your battalion was all like you, black, except the officers.  There were white officers, but other than that, all the units were black.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us--do you have any stories that you want to share with us about when you were in the Army, anything interesting or exciting that you might have talked about when you came home?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I, I didn't, I didn't, I didn't enjoy my stay in the Army.
Speaker 1: No, why not?
Speaker 2: Well, as I said before, the Army made you feel that you were a second class person and I, I didn't like that idea at all, especially when you know that what you're doing is for the benefit of the whole country, not just for you as a person.  So I think that that's why after World War II [WWII], the Army was very quick to get rid of that type of discrimination, because there are a lot of people like me who probably stood up and they saw exactly what was happening, but they changed it today, I think.
Speaker 1: And how did you find Japan?  Was that an interesting contrast to the United States?
Speaker 2: No, I, I wasn't in, in Japan itself.  I was in the islands outside of Japan, and believe it or not there were--it was very primitive.  There was no real sturdy buildings.  It was always--it was farm islands where they raised food and things like that, so it was, it was not a, a city at all.
Story_ID: 571028
Speaker 1: When you came back, what did you do?  Did you start back with Mr. Ginsberg [Nathan Ginsberg]?
Speaker 2: I was, I was home [Yonkers, New York] exactly two weeks, and I went back to Mr. Ginsberg, went right back to work.
Speaker 1: What did you do for those two weeks (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I--
Speaker 1: --just recuperate?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What did you do for those first two weeks?
Speaker 2: The first two weeks I went around trying to visit everybody that I could, could see that didn't see--hadn't seen in such a long time.  And he wanted me to come back because he was busy and I enjoyed working there anyway and I, and I certainly needed that little bit of money.  It wasn't like it was big money, but at that time in life it was real money and I didn't tell you how much the [U.S.] Army paid, did I?
Speaker 1: How much did the Army pay?
Speaker 2: Twenty-one dollars a month if you were a private and as a sergeant I made seventy-eight dollars a month.
Speaker 1: And did you need to spend any of that money while you were in the Army?
Speaker 2: Well you were in, you were in the kind of places where you couldn't spend nothing anyway so they, they knew what they were doing sending you to the South Pacific.
Speaker 1: So did that enable you to save any money or (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I sent mine home because I couldn't spend it.  There was no--there was, it wasn't like you could go to a nightclub or a town or something, so even with my seventy-eight dollars I think, I, I sent forty dollars a month home to my mother [Sarah McQuay] and that forty dollars, believe it or not, that forty dollars a month almost paid my mother's rent.
Speaker 1: How much was the rent on Culver?
Speaker 2: On Culver Street, right.
Speaker 1: The rent was, was, it was--
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: So we were talking about how much money you were able to send home and we started to talk about how much was the rent on Culver Street?
Speaker 2: The, the, the rent was--I, I really can't remember, but I'm sure I took care of my mother's rent by sending her that money home for those three years that I was in the Army and I enjoyed doing it because whenever you--my personal life, I was so young when I went in at eighteen.  I didn't know anything about money or things or, I didn't have a wife at home so, it was easy for me to send the money home.  I, I knew they needed it with my brother [Buel McQuay] and sister [Marion McQuay] and my mother really--when I came home she told me how much it meant to her and I was happy I was able to do it.
Story_ID: 571029
Speaker 1: So eventually you go back for, to work for Mr. Ginsberg [Nathan Ginsberg]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and it's at this point that you're able to essentially apprentice with him?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's--when I went back then they--when the regular workers went home at four o'clock I would stay every night with him until seven and then he would either drive me to Culver Street or I would just run home to Culver Street.
Speaker 1: What time did you arrive there in the morning?
Speaker 2: Well I, I didn't--I was, you know, I was going to school, so I had to go to Ginsberg after school when I came--only Saturdays--and I worked for him on Sunday by the way.  Many Sundays we went to work, he and I by ourselves.
Speaker 1: I see, so you had a nice period of time on Sundays when you could--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, that's how I learned (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) continue your opportunity?
Speaker 2: --that's how I learned by being around him and him feeding me the work and teaching me as I went.  It was good for him, it was good for me because he paid me a lot less than he would have had to pay the, those polished mechanics, so he was teaching me, but I was benefitting from it too and look what it did, it took me on in life to allow me to have a business.
Speaker 1: How many other mechanics did Mr. Ginsberg employ?
Speaker 2: He had three beside himself.
Speaker 1: Now, when you were growing up and after you returned from the [U.S.] Army do you and your mother [Sarah McQuay] and your family attend church?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, we went to Messiah Baptist Church in Yonkers [New York].
Speaker 1: Did you go regularly?
Speaker 2: Only on Sunday, yeah.
Speaker 1: And did you participate in, in the church besides?
Speaker 2: No, I, I didn't sing or nothing like that (laughter).
Speaker 1: So on Sundays when you would go to Mr. Ginsberg, would that be after church?
Speaker 2: It would be after, after church when I went to him, right.  Now some Sundays if he needed me for something special, I didn't go to church.  He, his job took over if, if it was something to do.
Speaker 1: How, well first of all, would you say that Mr. Ginsberg was your greatest influence?
Speaker 2: I would say he was.  He was a mentor and a true mentor, that's why when I see young people today I say, "Try to find a mentor."  A mentor is better than money because he taught me things that--and, and in such a manner, in a loving and caring manner because he cared about me as a person.  He wanted me to learn, but I--it was good for both of us.  He was teaching me something, but I was helping him to complete the garment and the better I got, the better the garment was going to be.
Story_ID: 571030
Speaker 1: So let's talk a little bit about his business [Exclusive Fur Shop, Yonkers, New York].  Mr. Ginsberg [Nathan Ginsberg] was both selling and repairing?
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, he's building coats--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and he's also selling them and repairing--
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: --coats that are brought in.
Speaker 2: He was doing both.  He was doing both.  I would run down to the fur market on 30th Street, buy the skins, bring the skins back to Yonkers [New York] and then we had to match the skins first because skins are, have certain colors to them, so you had to get thousands to match them out so that would--they actually would get into one garment.  So you had to go to a place like the fur market where they had many, many skins to match them out just enough for forty skins so you could make the coat.
Speaker 1: Forty skins for a coat?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: What kind of a coat are we talking about?
Speaker 2: Persian coat.
Speaker 1: And a Persian coat is made out of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Back in those years black Persian, grey Persian, brown Persian was, that was the big, big thing for a Jewish family to have a black Persian coat and every Jewish woman aspired to have a black Persian coat to wear to wear to what they called the shul.  It was--they--that was the church to them.
Speaker 1: And so, was there a large Jewish community in Yonkers?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: So did Mr. Ginsberg have a large clientele?
Speaker 2: A large Jewish clientele.  Just like when I went I had a large black clientele.
Speaker 1: And, so I would imagine that getting some familiarity with the fashion district [Garment District, New York, New York] and with purchasing firms was also helpful to you as you built your own business (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, it did, it did several things that--
Speaker 1: --'cause you have a sense of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it put me right in touch with the wholesale skin dealers.  I got to know them personally, on a personal basis, they got to know me because we, we talked every day.  And they, they were the ones that opened the door for me to allowed me to even start with no money.
Speaker 1: So how long did you work for Mr. Ginsberg?
Speaker 2: I left him in, in 1950.  I went to work--I worked for myself in 1950.
Story_ID: 571031
Speaker 1: Okay, I realize that I have another question about Mr. Ginsberg [Nathan Ginsberg].  You said that he really cared about making sure that your pos- that, you know, that your job was worthwhile and that he taught you quite a bit?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you also said that Yonkers [New York] was a very segregated community (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --where you only lived on the one street [Culver Street]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so how do you account for the love that Mr. Ginsberg had for you and how he was respectful and caring in his teaching?
Speaker 2: Well, I have to say it was because we got to know each other.  He saw me walking there every day, and he'd already formed his opinion about me.  So that's what got me in the door because if he hadn't voluntarily on his own come to my mother [Sarah McQuay] and asked her could I work, I never 'til today would never have had the job.  So he had already formulated his opinion about what it was that's why I tell young people today, you've got to be held, held responsible to make yourself available in such a manner that somebody wants to help you.  Somebody--you can, you can be sullen and unruly and, and miss the goal, or you can be a person that's considerate and understanding and somebody else that you might not even know will give you a helping hand that will propel you to the next step.
Speaker 1: And so these are traits that you think Mr. Ginsberg saw in you?  He, did he think you--what did he think about you when he saw you going back and forth every day?
Speaker 2: Well, he told me what he thought.  That's why he wanted to know if I would--wanted to work for him and what's even more, it's funnier than that is that he had three children, two sons and a daughter, Diane [ph.], Philip [Philip Ginsberg] and Ronald [Ronald Ginsberg], that was his children.  Right 'til today--it's two, one died, but Diane is still alive and Philip is still alive and he's a big stockbroker today on Wall Street, and they act like they're my children right 'til today.  We, we have a conversation every, at least once a month right now, after all those many years.
Speaker 1: That's how families are formed.  Did you ever talk about race relations with Mr. Ginsberg?
Speaker 2: No, not, not really, he didn't--I think I was kind of young and I didn't know much about race relations if he had asked me.  I wouldn't have known how to explain it to him.  I just knew it was there, but I don't think I could have explained it to him.  He used to sometimes say that he would, he would see somebody, a black person that looked trodden, downtrodden and he might speak something about them wishing that somebody could have helped them, that they didn't appear to be so downtrodden.  So he was sympathetic.
Speaker 1: I see. So how did you decide to leave Mr. Ginsberg in 1950, or--
Speaker 2: That's the interesting part of the whole story.  After working for him for so long, I knew everything about his family, because as I told you before, not only would I at, at the store [Exclusive Fur Shop, Yonkers, New York], but he took me to the house even to eat.  I would, I would go with him home to eat and things like that.  And I saw how he lived and I said, "If that's--if a furrier lets you live like this I want to be a furrier."
Speaker 1: How was Mr. Ginsberg living?
Speaker 2: He lived very good.  I mean, he had everything he wanted.  He took--the main thing I saw, every summer he took his family and there's a place called Ellenville, New York, still there.  He took his family up to Ellenville every summer the minute school closed.  They stayed the whole summer, his children and his wife [Frances Ginsberg].  They, they rented a cottage up there and then he would come back and I would work with him at the store.  I said that if, if you can be a furrier and that's how furriers live, I want to be a furrier.  It was very easy.  I didn't know any black people that was going away any place for the summer.  So that was truly what made me a furrier.
Speaker 1: And did--was Mr.--did Mr. Ginsberg encourage you in establishing your own business?
Speaker 2: No, he never said anything about establishing my own business, he said everything about learning, but he never told me, "James [HistoryMaker James McQuay], go into business for yourself."
Speaker 1: So did you--
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact that was an interesting story too because when I left him he was a, a little disappointed.  He thought that he had been a part of me for so long, but even though he was disappointed, he didn't, he didn't think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: --he, yeah, even though he was disappointed--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: --he understood what I wanted to do and we, we became, and we, we were, we, we didn't--weren't friends right away, but over a period of time we became the same close friends and closer because he realized that I was, I was really making it and I was sticking to what I wanted to do.  And he really became my very good close friend, and his family, like I said, even 'til today we're close friends.
Story_ID: 571032
Speaker 1: So what was your fe- first step in trying to establish your own business, where, how did you find a location to put your business and how did you get that location (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I--right.  I had made up my mind that for me to exist I had to be in a black neighborhood and the only black neighborhood in New York where there would be a lot of black people would be Harlem [New York, New York].  So I went to Harlem because I use to go there to go to some of the nightclubs and I was a little familiar with Harlem and I had a couple of friends that lived there and, and so I went around with them different places and from time to time and one day I saw a sign in a window that said Eleanor Bush [ph.] and it was at 150th Street and Broadway.  It said, "Store for Rent," but the store had had a fire and then it had water damage to it, and it was just sitting there.  So I went by, by a few times and saw, saw it sitting there, but I decided that would be an excellent location.  I'm right there in Harlem but not at 110th Street or down 115th Street where I thought was not good.  This was Broadway and Harlem and, and I, I could only see me growing in a place like that.  So that's--I made up my mind I wanted to be there and I, I copied the number off the sign and I went to Eleanor Bush because he was down at 72nd Street someplace and I, I, I talked to the person that was there at the desk and they, they asked me what I wanted and I told them I wanted to be in the fur business.  I wanted to be, I wanted to rent the store and then they asked me what I wanted to do with it and I said a fur business, he kind of laughed and he said, "A fur business in Harlem?"  I remember him saying that and then he told me how much the rent was and I told him that I couldn't pay the rent so he didn't understand what I meant.  And I said I, "I'm going to offer you a proposition," and I said, "If you let me have three months free rent, I will get that store in order, clean up all that stuff that you have in the store there and, and paint it and get it up."  I said, "What you benefit from is that if I can't make it you got a store that's all cleaned up.  What I got is a store, that I--a business that I can start out without paying money."  So he laughed at me, he said that "I've never heard such a thing," he said.  He said, "I don't know, you better, you better talk to my father."  His father wasn't there so I left, and believe it or not about a week or so later, maybe two weeks later, I got a call and they said it was Mr. Bush and he wanted to talk to me, so I went down to talk to Bush, to the father, and I explained to him that if he gave me the three months rent free, what I was going to do.  He said, "You know son, if you're really anxious to have a store like that I'm going to give you four months.  You got four months to get it together."  And believe it or not, that's how I went into business without any money at all.
Story_ID: 571033
Speaker 1: Now why did you choose to go into your own fur business as opposed to working for some other furrier like Mr. Ginsberg [Nathan Ginsberg] or perhaps as a mechanic someplace else?
Speaker 2: As I told you, Mr. Ginsberg's family went to the country every year and they, they had, they went, they went away to the mountains, they, they had bought a new car every other year.  I, I, I could--I didn't see myself doing that on a salary.  I had to have a business if I wanted to live like, like the Ginsbergs were living.
Speaker 1: I see, so once you got the store and did you fix it up within four months?
Speaker 2: Well I, I fixed up before, quicker than four months.  That was an interesting time.  There was a fellow named Winston Burnett [Winston A. Burnett].  He's not alive today, but it--Winston Burnett worked for a building concern.  As a matter of fact he was renovating buildings in Harlem [New York, New York] and he was out of Amsterdam Avenue at the time working in a building and I asked him to come around and look at my store because we grew up together and he came around to the store and he said he could fix it up for me.  And the first thing he did was, we started to clear out the, the debris that was in there, but what people didn't know we used the truck that he was using to, to--in renovating this building to put the, the trash in and then we took that same trash and dumped it in a lot in the building where he was renovating up on Amsterdam Avenue and then, then they took it away, somewhere where they took the trash away up there, but that's how we got rid of the trash.  But Winston Burnett cleaned it all out for me and painted it for me; he was the one that painted for me and I was in business.  But the point was, after I got the store finished, I realized I don't have any merchandise, and you need merchandise to be in business.  So I asked my wife [Doris McQuay], she had a couple of fur garments that I had given her over the years and then I got two of my other friends to give, let me use their garments and I put them in the window, and I took them home with me every night, because I was afraid that somebody would break in and take--somebody would break in and take them.  So the people saw the window, that's all they saw and in the back of the shop where we had some fur machines.  I, I had two old fur machines in the back of the store.  We closed off the back so that nobody could see back there, but it was, it was nothing back there, but--so when I first started in I had just a make believe front and even the sign of James, James, I had it--I used James Furs or, or something like that.  I, I painted the sign myself that was in the front, because I told you that I was an artist and, and I made my own sign.
Speaker 1: Where did you get the--obtain the fur machines that you had in the back?
Speaker 2: Oh I, I--Mr. Ginsberg had a, a lot of them in, in the basement, and he let me have a couple.  I don't remember whether he sold them to me or gave them to me, but I got the fur machines from him.  I think he gave them to me.
Speaker 1: So did you eventually, were you eventually able to get some merchandise into your store?
Speaker 2: Well, I went to the, to the market and some of the people allowed me to take the merchandise out, but they wouldn't let me keep it overnight.  You see, if you're in business you need merchandise, somebody come in and look at something today, they may come back tomorrow and want to see it again, but they didn't trust me so I had to run down every morning, put it in the window, make it stay in the window.  Then at night before I went home I had to have it back to them, so I did that.
Speaker 1: And were you working by yourself so that you were physically actually doing all of that yourself?
Speaker 2: Well mostly I was doing it all by myself, but I had a, a part-time worker, and he wasn't working.  It was an old man that could sit in the store and allow me to go wherever I needed to go.  So he, he was glad to do it.  He was retired and I gave him a few dollars now and then.  It wasn't a salary, but he, he did it more to have something to do than, than the salary.
Story_ID: 571034
Speaker 1: So, since you didn't have merchandise, or you would have to return the merchandise (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --how did you get yourself going in the beginning?  What kind of services did you offer?
Speaker 2: Well that was, that was the only service that I offered besides repairs, and I told you that I could make repairs.  So that the, the first year that I was there I did more repairing than selling anyway.  You--either they didn't trust me, or they didn't know me.  I didn't have a name and, and so I ran back--I sold, I sold some stoles because in those years the mink stoles were very, very popular, so I did sell a few stoles along the way, but most of my business was really, was repairing something.  Some things they brought into me were beyond repair, but since they had a fur shop in the neighborhood they figured you could do wonders.
Speaker 1: How is a, how--what kind of damage has occurred to a fur that makes it beyond repair?
Speaker 2: Most of the damage was done because they were old.  Now these might have been women--their, their, their mothers worked for people like my mother [Sarah McQuay] worked for and they, they gave them the old fur coat that was old and dried out and split and whatnot.  There weren't too many nice coats.  A lot of them were beyond repair.
Speaker 1: And what did you do about advertising your shop, like how did you let people know that you were there besides your sign obviously?
Speaker 2: I, I went and had some folders, I mean some flyers printed up and then after that, I left there in the evenings, I would go around to the apartment buildings and go up on the elevator to the top floor and put, put flyers under the door like on Riverside Drive because Riverside Drive was close to me and there were some black people at Riverside Drive that could afford what I was doing and they really were my, my first customers.
Speaker 1: Were you ever--did you ever get the opportunity to have merchandise in the Harlem store [New York, New York]?  My information said that a man named Jason--Joseph Corn (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he--
Speaker 1: --he provided you with some garments that you (unclear).
Speaker 2: --yeah, he was the first person that allowed me to, to keep some, keep them overnight at my place, was Joseph Corn.
Speaker 1: And was he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He's still in business by the way.
Speaker 1: --the--Joseph Corn?
Speaker 2: The grandsons are down there.
Speaker 1: And so you met Joseph Corn in the fashion district [Garment District] around 30th [30th Street, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Right, I met him really through Ginsberg [Nathan Ginsberg] because he was what they called the matcher.  What was a matcher?  If you had old coats to make over you had to go downtown to a place like Corn's which was a matcher because a, an old coat--new skins wouldn't match into an old coat but if you bought new skins and put it in the front it would look--it would stand out.  You had to buy actually old fur for a coat that was--and he had hundreds of them, so he--I, he was the matcher, Joseph Corn, still is a matcher.
Story_ID: 571035
Speaker 1: Did you do fashion shows or any kinds of exposes?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did, I did fashion shows at some of the churches.  In other words, I found out that, you know, the women that go to church always wanted to dress a little better.  So I went, I went to churches and, and, and talked to some of the ministers and when they had some affair of their own they would allow me to be the fashion show at their luncheons, in other words, because back then they had a lot of luncheons.  And so the fur at the luncheons was the, was fur that I supplied at the luncheons.  That's what a lot of those pictures were, by the way.
Speaker 1: We're going to take a look at those pictures so we'll get an opportunity to--for you to show us.  And how would you organize those fashion shows?  How did you get your models and--?
Speaker 2: Well, models was easy to get.  Any black woman you asked to be a model, she wanted to model the furs so that was the easiest part.  And I knew a lot of women when I was coming along.  I, I, I had more models than I needed. Somehow or another people enjoyed doing that.  That wasn't something that they felt that they didn't want to do.  They'd walk out on stage, turn around and walk back and get somebody to clap hands for them, so I had it very easy with, with models.  Of course, afterwards I didn't have any fashion shows, because I didn't have any fashion shows for years.
Speaker 1: From, from about when to when did you do Ebony fashion shows [Ebony Fashion Fair]?
Speaker 2: I have to look at my papers.  I can't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, because I know you have that one photograph that has Audrey Smaltz [HistoryMaker Audrey Lavinia Smaltz].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And where did you get the merchandise that you showed in the fashion shows (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, some of it I got, I remember over--
Speaker 1: --that you did in churches?
Speaker 2: --they called them memorandum.  A memorandum was like, they'd give you the merchandise to show, but it's not yours.  You have a receipt for it, because you are responsible for it and maybe they let you have it for two or three days, but you'd have to bring it back.  And then eventually, I bought a couple of trade in pieces that I had from some women that was either, got older and they didn't want them anymore, they were moving down south and I bought them from them; and then I sold those used pieces to some of my customers because they could afford them.
Story_ID: 571036
Speaker 1: And is Harlem [New York, New York], the Harlem that you're--you are on 150th [Street] and Broadway--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Is gentrification happening in Harlem at that time?
Speaker 2: No, but there, there was still a lot of white families living up in that particular area because they lived, like I told you, along Riverside Drive.  That's only a block or so down the hill.
Speaker 1: So there are a number, there are lots of white families on Riverside and then between Riverside and Broadway and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Amsterdam [Avenue].
Speaker 1: --Amsterdam.  Most--it's, it's a black--
Speaker 2: All of them are black--
Speaker 1: --it's a black area?
Speaker 2: --right, that's black.
Speaker 1: And are there other businesses in that area?
Speaker 2: Well on Broadway, all of Broadway.
Speaker 1: I mean I live in that area, so I know that, but I--
Speaker 2: Yeah, all, all of--
Speaker 1: --we just wanted you to describe what Harlem is like.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, well see, along the street level there were all businesses, apartment buildings are over the stores, so on the street level there's all kinds of--every kind of store you can think of.
Speaker 1: And were any of those dress shops or fashion stores--
Speaker 2: Yes, some of them were dress shops--
Speaker 1: --or stores that?
Speaker 2: Some of them were cleaning stores, a lot of cleaning stores.  They had some shoe stores and, and when we get down by 137th [Street] and 8th Street [sic. 8th Avenue; Frederick Douglass Boulevard] there were a couple of butcher shops, so they were there, anything that people in the neighborhood used every day--all neighborhood stores, types of neighborhood stores.
Speaker 1: So unlike Yonkers [New York], as a black resident I could access black businesses on Broadway or--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --were there not black?
Speaker 2: They, they--but they, it wasn't because they couldn't be there, it's just that there weren't, weren't many black businesses.  They had--the biggest one was Carl's Corner [New York, New York] which was a bar and grill, was also at 151st Street.  He, he had a big store there.  And what, what--I'm back to--one of my good customers who started me off a lot was Ed Smalls.  He had Small's Paradise [New York, New York], so he, he was a guy that really gave me a helping hand.  He said, "James [HistoryMaker James McQuay], I know you're going to need it, so I'm going to help you buy a couple of the things for you."  But I knew--he, he, he was the one that told me, said, "Just stick with it, but you're going to need a lot of help."  And he, he truly was a, a steering point for me because that was--when I get to his name, he, see he saw me doing what I was doing and he liked me as a person, and so therefore a lot of times what he did, he would talk to some of the musicians that came to his--that performed in his place, and that's, that's where I really got a real head up on better merchandise, because these people, not only did they, could they afford it, but they wanted it.  They were in show business.  They, they, they, they really put my business on the map for me.
Story_ID: 571037
Speaker 1: So we were talking a little bit about Mr. Smalls [Ed Smalls] and you were explaining that he bought a couple of articles.
Speaker 2: Items for--from me to help me out, but then he introduced me to--you saw, like Billie Holiday, people like that and, and I was able to sell them a few things.  And then he would go to a place in Atlantic City [New Jersey], it may still, I know it's not there anymore, but it was called Club Harlem.  Club Harlem was the biggest black club in Atlantic City.  So every summer I would go down to Club Harlem and he would recommend me to somebody that was traveling from, even from a different state, I'd meet them at Club Harlem and sell them something.  I would--I'd go down with a, a carload of stuff and they would pick out something that they wanted, so he was very instrumental in helping me to get to the next step.
Story_ID: 571038
Speaker 1: How long were you at the 150th Street and Broadway location?
Speaker 2: About three years.
Speaker 1: And what caused you to move from there?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I told you that I had to go to, to the fur market and bring everything uptown anyway.  And, and, so I decided that since I, I could, I had to do that, I could probably do better if I was in the market itself.  When a woman comes I could run right around to the market and get what I needed, if I needed, and I didn't have to waste time getting on the train to go downtown and come back uptown, so that was a story in itself.  I went--when I went to the market and I went to a man named Alex Macquist [ph.] and Alex Macquist was an old time furrier almost ready to retire.  So I told Alex, Alex Macquist, I wanted to be downtown and how, how could we work out a deal?  Because he didn't even come in every day, but he was, he was so many years in business he kept the place open.  He, he was then like I am now, where he didn't come in often, so he gave me a deal.  He said, "You're a mechanic, I'm not."  And so I said okay, so I'd do his repair work, like his remodels and repair work and that way I didn't have to pay him much rent.  So I would work it off.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about something that happened in Harlem [New York, New York].  You, I asked you earlier why you chose to go into business for yourself and you were saying that you saw that Mr. Ginsberg [Nathan Ginsberg] had a lifestyle (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A lifestyle that--
Speaker 1: --that you would like to have?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I was kind of wondering about your relationship with the union, because one of the things that you told me was that you couldn't really work for anyone else because you couldn't become a member of the union.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Could you talk about that a little bit?
Speaker 2: Well, the union, the union after I went down there myself, I thought I was going to have a problem with the union, with, with, with me.  But I really didn't have a--they didn't try to put me out of business.  See, I thought they would try to put me out of business.  I can't remember why they didn't, but they, they didn't.
Speaker 1: And you're talking about the union once you're down in the fashion district [Garment District, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you had not--
Speaker 2: I think, I think, oh now I think about it, I, like I said, when I went down with Alex Macquist, I didn't--he was in the union.
Speaker 1: But was there ever a time when you attempted to join the union and they wouldn't--
Speaker 2: No, I never tried it.  After I found out that, that I couldn't get in it when I was a worker, I, I wouldn't get in, I didn't want to get in it when I was, when I was in business.
Speaker 1: No, no, before you were in business (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --when you tried to get into the union--
Speaker 2: They said they wouldn't give me--
Speaker 1: --can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, see, all that, you know what they did--before I, when I was trying to get into--they would only give me a floor boy's book, that's what I was saying.  A floor boy's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, but we didn't talk about it together on camera yet.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: So let's talk a little bit about--
Speaker 2: Oh, about that.
Speaker 1: --because you said that was one of the other reasons why you went into business--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and that it was good because it--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --sort of forced you into business?
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.  Otherwise I wouldn't have done it.  I would have--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: --I would have been happy to get a union job, making union wage.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: I would have--forget about a business, that was and first of all, I never could've dreamed that I could do a business.
Speaker 1: So let's just back up and slow down a little bit--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and talk about--so you're, you were working--I've already lost Mr. Ginsberg.  When you were working for Mr. Ginsberg you are now a mechanic?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Do you attempt to join the union--
Speaker 2: Union, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --as a worker?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, as a worker.
Speaker 1: And what happens?
Speaker 2: They, they told me the only thing--they, they wouldn't give me a, a book as a mechanic.  They'd gave me a book as a floor boy which is the lowest job that--and the lowest thing, and I didn't want to be a floor boy.  I wanted to be a mechanic.  I--the whole idea of joining the union is that you make a legitimate living.  I didn't want to be--I was--I wanted to be a businessperson, or, or if I wasn't, if I wasn't a businessperson I didn't really care, but if I made a salary that I could make a living at, I was comfortable.  And they knew that, that's why they didn't let, didn't let, let black people join the union.
Speaker 1: So in addition to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) If I was white, I could have joined.
Speaker 1: --so in addition to seeing Mr. Ginsberg's lifestyle--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you were really unable to get a job as a mechanic--
Speaker 2: Right, as a mechanic.
Speaker 1: --at any place else--
Speaker 2: With a union wage.
Speaker 1: --with a union wage?
Speaker 2: I could have worked out in New--which I did.  I worked for Leif's [ph.] in New Rochelle [New York] on some Sundays, not with, not with a union book, but he was just hiring.  He was hiring a person that could do the job, you know.  He got to know me through some other people.  So I used to go up there and work in that manner.  But no, the, the union didn't, the union would just, wouldn't give us a job.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Wouldn't give us a book.  See, without a book you couldn't work.
Story_ID: 571039
Speaker 1: So then you get your own business, and you do a fantastic job of getting it with no down payment and you're in Harlem [New York, New York] for three years, and you're generating this business with Mr. Smalls [Ed Smalls] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: Now let's talk about how you made a deal to get yourself downtown with Mr. Mac, Macquist [Alex Macquist (ph.)]?
Speaker 2: Macquist--I--when I went to Mr. Macquist I explained to him that I saw he was older, you know, and I had known him a long time in the market as a worker.  And then I told him that I--me as a mechanic, I could do his work because he was hiring workers to come in anyway.  If he gives me a space in his showroom where I could be in business for myself, while I'm not selling to my own customers, I could do his repair work and his remodeling.  Because he was giving it out to other people, and he thought that was a good idea, too.  But he didn't want me in his showroom, he--with his white customers.  So I said, "Well, how we going to work it if I can't be in the showroom with your customers?"  He said, "You got to take your customers to the factory part."  You know, he had like a little, little small space off the factory where the workers were at.  He said, "You got--you're going to have to use that space there."  I didn't want to do it, but once again, the mind says if you can't do, that you're not going to be able to get in, in that--that building was at 330 7th Avenue--you wouldn't be able to get into the building because you can't pay all that rent and you need a space and you want to be in the market downtown.  So I took it.  And that, that's what kept me in the market because after I started paying him I got to know other people in the market.  People got to know me in the market, other than "Hi."  People get to know you on a first name basis.  And I made a lot more friends and then I found some, some people along the way like Mr. Levin [ph.] and, and a couple of other Jewish people that I met that said, "James [HistoryMaker James McQuay], I'm, I'm going to help you, you know, I mean, you're struggling, but I'm going to help you."  So that's--and I think that's what it's about today.  I want to help everybody I know, because I know that I really had--I couldn't have done it alone.  It was not something that you could do alone.  Somebody, someplace, has to say, "I'm going to give that person a helping hand," and that's my life today.  I want to give everybody--well, I'll just say--but anyway, they, they, they use to tell me, say--they used to tell me that, "You should, you--it's a good thing you're not a woman, because you'd be giving it to everybody," (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, when you were in your Harlem shop and later when you moved to 30th [Street], were you making coats of your own?
Speaker 2: I've always made coats.
Speaker 1: Okay, even when you were in Harlem?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I always could make some coats.  I've made, I've, I've bought some skins and would make--I was that was what I did when I had--because I had a lot of free time.  In the summertime we weren't busy, so I used everybody's money.  I borrowed from everybody in my family; one hundred dollars here, two hundred dollars there, three hundred dollars--every, every human being that I knew almost, had to help me because I really, I really truly didn't have money and then I only got money even in what I did, I only got money when the summertime came--I mean when the wintertime came, because nobody gave me money in the summer.  That was another hard part about it.  You, you, you're up to your ears in rent, the rents go on in June, July and August.  The landlord doesn't want to know nothing about the fact that your business doesn't give you any money in the summer.  So that was, that was another reason why I, I had to do side work, to, to--because without it I couldn't have paid the bills.
Speaker 1: So once you get into Mr. Macquist's building--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --do you fix up that factory room?  How do you make that?
Speaker 2: He, he had a little small space off the, off the main show room and I would--my customers--I would come and they would sit in there.  It wasn't big enough, just for three people, maybe.  It was a little alcove, but I didn't care and my customers didn't care either.  They knew me.  They were coming to see me, "James, you got a place."  They were happy I had a place, and I didn't feel uncomfortable at all because they didn't make me feel uncomfortable.  And so I, I, that was how I was able to progress to the point to when, when I left him I got my own place.
Speaker 1: And who did--who were some of your customers that came when you were still in that very small alcove space and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well they were just, they--at that time I still didn't have any main customers, I just had just people that I knew and, you know.
Speaker 1: And is at a fur shop like where you were on 30th is?  Did you make an appointment to come and see you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or did people just drop by?
Speaker 2: No, people generally called you up and they, they still probably call you up.  Very few people just, on their own, come down because they wanted to make sure you're there.  So even today if they want to--like she's there.  So they, they call her up, if she needs me then she will call me and then I go down, but that's how they make appointments.
Story_ID: 571040
Speaker 1: Tell us about how you came to have your own space.  Where was it and how did you come by it?
Speaker 2: Well, there--a space become, became available at, at Macquist's [Alex Macquist (ph.)] place.  He retired and then I took over his spot.
Speaker 1: So you were able to get into his showroom?
Speaker 2: I--but I was already there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now it's your showroom?
Speaker 2: Right, but you see, do you understand me?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: The good Lord placed me in a place that when Mac- he was like I am now.  He was sick, tired, older--he'd had it.  And so I didn't have to go out and the landlord didn't kick me out.  He said, "Well, you've been here a couple of years with Macquist; you must be all right."  And that's, that was really the way that I got in there.
Speaker 1: So once you had the showroom and the, the entire space to yourself, how did that--how was your business?
Speaker 2: Well I was struggling all the time.  I was hardly making it, but I could pay the bills.  I found ways to pay the bills.
Speaker 1: And about--
Speaker 2: But you, but you see, that's another thing about most businesses, what I realize now that I'm older is that very few small businesses make a big living.  The--my business was a business where we sold stuff, but you sold only during those winter months.  But you had four months out of the year that you didn't sell nothing, so you've been--you still got the lights to pay, the insurance to pay, the rent to pay, so by the time you, you've made that money, you gave it all back.  So it was just a question of every year making some money, give it back, making some money, give it back.  But I wasn't a, a big spender myself, so I could afford to do it.  But if I was a guy that had luxuries and wanted diamond rings and earrings and chains and all that stuff, I couldn't have made it, because there's never really enough left over to say that you, you're making a lot of money.  It just, it just doesn't happen.
Speaker 1: How did you publicize your business once you were down on 30th Street [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Well by, by that time I was--I got joined up with Ebony fashion show and, and everybody when they walked out of Ebony fashion show had heard my name because my name--that's really what built (unclear).
Speaker 1: And how did you get hooked up with the Ebony fashion show and about what year is that?
Speaker 2: I can't remember the year.
Speaker 1: Okay, how did you, did you meet Eunice Johnson and--
Speaker 2: No, somebody, somebody introduced me to them but I can't remember who introduced me.  Oh wait, I, I know how I did it.  Somebody, oh, I guess--was it--might--was it Powell, Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.]?  I think it was somebody that Adam Clayton Powell knew, and, and, introduced me to somebody else and I--but they knew somebody or something like that.  I think that that's how I, how, how did I get there?  It's really, I can't, can't get my mind around how, how I got there.
Speaker 1: The fashion shows that you did with Ebony Fashion Fair, were they in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: Well, some of them were in New York, but some of them were in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], because they use to be--we use to do a big one at the hotel in D.C., I can't remember the name, Hilton [Washington Hilton, Washington, D.C.], I think was the hotel.
Speaker 1: And you use to have big shows?  How many (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, that was a big show.
Speaker 1: --how many coats do you show in a big show?
Speaker 2: Thirty pieces.
Speaker 1: Oh wow.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And would you essentially sell all those pieces right there while you were in D.C.?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't sell nothing.
Speaker 1: Oh wow.
Speaker 2: Because what happens with a fashion show is that you, you're there with your merchandise and the people are lining up to come into the fashion show when you show your merchandise, but you're gone.  I, I--my biggest thing was to get out of there before the crowd came because I got very expensive stuff.  I didn't, I didn't want to hang around in the hotel.  I was probably the first one out, that's why we--when, when we had the show we would look at the space so that, that I would be in the first half and that allowed me to get together, to gather up all my stuff and all the people that worked with me, to get out of the fashion show so that if somebody had some ideas to rob or something, we'd be gone.  We, we, we weren't--you always had to be aware of that, you had--
Speaker 1: Yeah, you said that, you said you had to be very careful about the coats and you had to be very careful about who you hired--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right.
Speaker 1: --to work with you and the coats?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So was it not rare for a furrier to wake up in the morning and find all of his coats gone?
Speaker 2: Has it, has it happened?  Sure it has, but, but I been--I was in it all my life, so I knew the things to look for.  Sure, and, and a lot of people took chances.  I was a person who didn't take chances.  I don't even take chances today because see, see you can only take chances if you can afford it.  I never was there, at a point in my life where I could afford to lose anything, so I didn't take chances.  I would rather even lose a sale than get myself in a predicament where I might lose something else.  But some people took chances on anything they wanted to do.  And somewhere along the line, they, they, they had trouble too.
Story_ID: 571041
Speaker 1: So did you eventually hire some additional people to work with you?  You said you had one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, people--
Speaker 1: --person working with you in Harlem [New York, New York].  And what about when you got down to 30th Street?
Speaker 2: Well, I had, I had people that--the people that I had on 30th Street.  I had only two full time people.  It was her and another, another fellow, but the others I wouldn't call--they were called fill ins.  In other words if I got an order, a big order or something, I would hire somebody for a month, two months and that was it.  But I only had three people that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the people that you would hire, would they generally be mechanics?
Speaker 2: They were mechanics; yeah, you needed--
Speaker 1: Now, would you hire mechanics who had union cards?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, but they, they, they weren't supposed to be working for me, but they know me.
Speaker 1: Because you were not a union shop?
Speaker 2: Right, because I was not a union shop.  So they, they would come in and we'd lock the door and they'd work and we would do it, because see, see as, as, as I told you all the years that I was part of the fur market I knew a lot of them really personally because it wasn't that some there--I, and some of those non-union workers was coming up through Ginsberg's [Exclusive Fur Shop, Yonkers, New York], so I met them at Ginsberg's, and, and so when they--when he [Nathan Ginsberg] wasn't using them, I, I, I would use them sometimes.  So, yeah, they wanted, they wanted to work for that extra--they called it off the book money.
Speaker 1: Now, what was your schedule like, I mean as a furrier?
Speaker 2: I didn't have a schedule.
Speaker 1: Are you--well, you said that sometimes you would work almost all the time.  Can you describe (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's why, that's why there was no schedule.  If something needed to be done you did it.  You didn't have, you didn't even have a lunch hour.  If you like--when you worked for somebody, it come one o'clock it's chow!  The bell rings, its lunchtime (laughter).  If it comes one o'clock and you were me and you needed something because a woman was coming to your shop after she gets off from work, you better work right through lunch hour, right up to 5:30 when she walks in because she is going to be furious if she can't have a fitting at 5:30.  She don't want to hear you went to lunch (laughter).  So actually--and this is true of any small business, a small business doesn't run on the same time schedule that big businesses do.  They, you, you got to make it when you can and so everything goes out the window.   Like I said--told you, I use to go--even her, I use to drag her down on Sundays sometimes when, when she didn't want to go.  I would go.  I'd say, "Hey look, we've got to go on Sunday.  We, we're not going to be ready if we don't go on Sunday."
Story_ID: 571042
Speaker 1: Did you marry when you came back from the [U.S. military] service?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I married a young lady named Doris [Doris McQuay].  We're still married (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And how, how did you meet Doris?
Speaker 2: Through a customer.
Speaker 1: Tell us about it.  It's a really good story.
Speaker 2: Yeah, through a customer.  I had a customer that owned, had a beauty parlor and her name was Cassie [ph.].  Cassie had a beauty parlor out at 145th Street before you get to the 8th Avenue train, you know, you go up there.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So, she was, she was a customer, she became a customer of mine and bought some stuff from me, right?  And I--Cassie became a customer (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Cassie, the beauty shop owner?
Speaker 2: --the beauty shop owner.  And one time when I came there to deliver something, I don't remember what it was, it was something--we were all talking, you know how a lot of people start talking and they wouldn't--when I came into the beauty shop it was always a lot of fun because I was always laughing and joking and people joined in and you could easily get a lot of conversation.  The minute Cassie said, "He's the fur man."  That, that--I mean that would open the door on everything; so everybody would start talking.  Well, Doris came to visit Cassie, I don't know if she got her hair done that day or not, but she was there and I met her while I was there.  And I, I kind of thought I wanted to know her better.  And I remember calling Cassie back and Cassie introduced us and (unclear), we're still together after all these many years.  It's over forty years.
Story_ID: 571043
Speaker 1: I know that you said that the years are not your strongest point.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But do you have any sense about just, a, a, an approximate time that you moved downtown from uptown?
Speaker 2: It was in the '40s [1940s], so what would it be?
Speaker 1: So, so you moved downtown in the '40s [1940s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And how long were you in that downtown, 30th Street shop [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: It's still there.
Speaker 1: Oh, you're still there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Drena's [ph.] there every day.
Speaker 1: Now see, somehow I thought that you had had a shop in Mount Vernon [New York] at some point.
Speaker 2: I, I did, but we only stayed in Mount Vernon about three years.
Speaker 1: When at--so you had a shop downtown on 30th and (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we had both of them.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: We were on Gramatan Avenue.  You know where Gramatan is?
Speaker 1: Well, this is actually my first time coming to Mount Vernon.
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: The main street is Gramatan Avenue.  We were on Gramatan Avenue.
Speaker 1: So after a few years on 30th Street did you also open the shop in Mount Vernon?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were both open.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about establishing that second shop?
Speaker 2: Well, the, the second shop--oh, I know how it was.  There was a man retiring, and he had a fur business and he was an older man.  So I, I got to know him through somebody recommending me to go talk to him.  So when I went to talk to him, he, he was really, really wasn't up to it.  He was--not only was he older, but he was, he was sick, he was sickly, too.  So he would like be open only a couple of days a week because he was always closing the shop; putting the sign up saying "I'll Be Back," you know, that kind of thing.  So I, I made a deal with him and bought the shop from him, but it wasn't much of a business because he, he had long ago stopped really working hard.
Story_ID: 571044
Speaker 1: So let's go back to talking about the store that you bought in Mount Vernon [New York].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: From an older gentleman (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He, he was sickly and he, he left and I, I moved into the store.  But his, his white customers didn't come to me, so that was the first thing I lost.  And I had to try to rebuild what, what it could be.  But it didn't work, so I had to--after a couple of years I left.
Speaker 1: I see, now when you were downtown, were all of your clients--was your whole clientele black?
Speaker 2: Basically, right, even 'til today.
Speaker 1: And at that time you were the only black furrier?
Speaker 2: Well, there, there was a couple of people but they were smaller and they didn't do much, yeah.
Speaker 1: I see, so you really had very little competition as to your clientele (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --because presumably--
Speaker 2: I didn't, yeah, I didn't have, I didn't have much competition.  And the other thing was, that the black people who--they worked for me.  In other words, if you did well for them they were quick to tell their neighbor or their friends or something.  It was--they--it was--and then if they liked you they were glad to bring them to you.  So when, when Drena [ph.] came to me, while I was there we, we had more fun with the customers, than, than--it was not even work.  I, I hate to tell you it was.  A lot of those people--we saw their kids grow up and, and so we were invited to their parties and their weddings and their--even their divorces (laughter).
Speaker 1: So what you're saying is that in the fur business it's really a lifelong business (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --where you're serving the person--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --over a period of time?
Speaker 2: Right, and they're, they're spending a considerable amount of money so they, they, they, they feel happy if they feel as though they, they, they bought something and they--you didn't broke them.  You, you gave them their money's worth.  But money never was, never my object.  That was another thing.  I had never--I was never in business just to, to get rich.  I wanted to be in business to be independent.  An independent business started me--to me being rich and so I, I always used to say, "If I can pay my bills and have something to spend over, that's enough for me."  I, I'm not, I'm not greedy and not hungry.  Even, even at this point, money means less even now because I bought all the clothes.  And like I told Drena, I don't want to buy no more suits.  I don't want to buy any more clothes because I don't go to places that I use to go anymore.  I needed them then.  I don't need them anymore now.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your store?
Speaker 2: Which one?
Speaker 1: And was it the same name (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The same name as--
Speaker 1: When you were in Harlem [New York, New York], what did you--when you made your own sign outside, what was the name of your shop?
Speaker 2: Furs by James [ph.].
Speaker 1: And then when you moved downtown?
Speaker 2: James McQuay Furs Incorporated [James McQuay Furs, Inc.].  It was James McQuay Furs and I used something else.
Speaker 1: Used something else in Mount Vernon?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. I think by then I might have had labels.
Speaker 1: We'll, we'll, we'll get a chance to look at your labels, so if you don't quite remember--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --we'll, we'll be able to talk about it in a little while.
Speaker 2: Fur, fur designs--
Speaker 1: Fur designs?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think what it was.  I better look at the label.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We can look at the label in just a little while.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's my understanding that in the 1970s you started to get quite a number of celebrity clients.
Speaker 2: It was somewhere back then.
Speaker 1: And that Bill Cosby was one of them?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had him.
Speaker 1: Was he--so men and women were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Customers--
Speaker 1: --customers for furs?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Who else would come to see you on 30th Street and purchase your furs or have something made?
Speaker 2: I had [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt.  Remember Eartha Kitt?
Speaker 1: Yes, I do.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had, I had a lot of people then, not necessarily the most famous people, but I had a lot of different people from many places because you, you know what would happen?  They moved me to their Ebony fashion show [Ebony Fashion Fair] in another city.  People always took home their programs and those same people, when they came to New York [New York] they looked you up, because when they went home they took that program with them.  And our name and address and everything was in there and we had--a lot of times we had a fur lady with a garment.  So I, I remember mostly that people would come in the store, they--holding something they--holding something out of a magazine where they tore it out (laughter).
Speaker 1: And what magazines covered you while you were--
Speaker 2: Mostly the black magazines--we did, we did--we were in--four or five times in Ebony and Essence.  We had a whole page in Essence.
Speaker 1: And earlier you showed me a magazine.  Oh, that was Upscale.  It looked like you had a whole spread in Upscale (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, that was a different magazine, yeah.
Speaker 1: That was a little bit later in 1997?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was another maga- other company.
Story_ID: 571045
Speaker 1: Now, is your, are your sales at all affected by politics and the Civil Rights Movement during the '60s [1960s]?  How does (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well the truth of the matter was, I, I really wasn't affected by it because the black people weren't, wasn't--they weren't--you're talking about animal rights you're talking about, right?
Speaker 1: I'm not talking about animal rights yet.  I actually was going to ask you about that next, but I just meant in terms of how they--
Speaker 2: Black people were just getting money back then.  You've got to realize they were--that was--those were the first years after the war [World War II, WWII] that, that black people really was stretching out, getting better jobs, making more money than they had ever made in their life.  And, and it's like the women use to say to me, say (unclear).  That's what they use to say when the animal rights came out after that.  They'd say, "Look, all these years I wanted me a good fur coat and now when I can afford to buy one, they're going to tell me something about some animal rights."  And they use to make a joke of it.  So those same women, they were my best customers.  They, they were defiant.  Nobody was going to stop them.  They said, "Why couldn't they have said this ten years before I came along?"  So they--I--that didn't affect me.
Speaker 1: So in the '50s [1950s] you had a lot of animal rights activists?
Speaker 2: Not--black people were not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, white activists and did they protest at all in the fashion district [Garment District, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: In the district, but not with, not in front of me because I was in the building.  But they, they were in the district sometimes, yeah.
Story_ID: 571046
Speaker 1: Let's change the subject for a moment and talk about Yonkers [New York] in the 1980s.  Was your brother a firefighter in Yonkers?
Speaker 2: My brother was a firefighter in Yonkers at the time, and that's an interesting story, because when he was a young fellow he was going to Saunders Trade School [Saunders Trades and Technical High School] in Yonkers.  And that was a school that, not only did they have academic subjects, but they had other subjects to, to do with steam and engines and things like that because he liked those types of things and that's where he was going, but one day he came to me and he told me that he was going to get married, so I asked him, "How are you going to get married?  You don't have any money, you can't get married.  Marriage means taking care of somebody else, maybe children and things like that."  I said, "You need to get a better job," because he was working at a cleaner called Rose Cleaners, a big cleaners in Yonkers on Broadway.  So he said, "Well I have to get married because the young lady is pregnant," so that ended that.  But what happened was, I said to him, "I don't know how you're going to take care of her with, with that job at a, at a cleaners, so I think you need to get a steady job.  And I saw in the paper last month where the Yonkers Fire Department was hiring firemen."  And so my brother was the kind of fellow that, he, he could do everything.  He was braggadocios and could do everything.  I said, "Well, there you are, you're bragging, you can do everything, go, go take the test.  Let me see you take the test and show me."  So he took the test and listen to this, when the test, when the list was there it went up to his name, like let's take for instance, say he was forty on the list, they, they appointed thirty-nine firemen and left him out because they didn't want to hire black firemen.  So we couldn't do nothing, the list went dead. Finally two years later there was a, the test again, I said, "Buel [Buel McQuay], you got to take that test."
Speaker 1: And so he had to retake the test?
Speaker 2: He took the test the second time.  Now they--this time he wasn't forty on the list, they--I'm just saying the number for like forty (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I understand.
Speaker 2: --but say like this time he was twenty, now they, they had no choice but to, to hire him because they, they needed firemen.  They hadn't been hiring for two years and some firemen would leave on retirement, some died, whatever it is.  So they got to his name, they might not have wanted to appoint him, but they appointed him anyway.  Now when he gets on the fire department, I say to Buel, "You don't want to be a fireman, you want to be something in the fire department."  You, you go to school, take something else, find out what they do.  I don't know how to do that stuff.  And he found out, found a way and he became a lieutenant in the, in the fire department.  I don't know if you saw his picture, did you see it?
Speaker 1: Yes, and we're going to take a look at it together--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --also.  So when your brother--when you encouraged your brother to revolutionize the fire department--
Speaker 2: They, they only had one other black fireman named Curtis Gettings [ph.].  There wasn't any black firemen there.
Speaker 1: And, and how long had Curtis Gettings been a fireman?
Speaker 2: Let's say about five years and he was the only black one on there.
Speaker 1: And so your brother was number two?
Speaker 2: Number two.
Speaker 1: And, and then you counseled your brother to do some administrative work within the department?  Is that how (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that--no, I told him--he, he got a--after he got on, on the fire department, I said, you don't want to just remain a fire--plain fireman, you, you've got to find a way to--he had to go up because you're young and they don't like you anyway because you can give somebody some orders, I, I'm just telling you this, but, I was telling him, you can give somebody some orders rather than taking all the orders.  So he, he was very, he, he really understood and he did it.  I mean, I was very proud of him, and everybody else was proud of him because when he wore the uniform everybody, you know, black people not just in general was proud to see him, like when they'd have the Memorial Day parade, we'll say, right, they'd put him right up front.  Now after he got--that is another thing.  After he got on the fire department they used him for all kinds of stuff, to showcase, to show that they had a black fireman.  They, they had things in White Plains [New York], they sent him over; he dressed up in the fire uniform and represented them.  Do you understand me, first they didn't want him, and then, but he got hired and they wanted to show what they were doing.
Speaker 1: And in Yonkers in general, was, were most of the public services similar to the fire department, where there were no black employees?
Speaker 2: Yeah, fire department (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The police--
Speaker 2: --the police department [Yonkers Police Department] too.
Speaker 1: Other civil service jobs?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they, they, they weren't, they weren't there, black people weren't there, weren't a part of it.
Speaker 1: And, in terms of your life, isn't it true that eventually the union, the furrier's union wanted to showcase you as a successful furrier?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was years later though.  That was many years later, and by that time I didn't even need them to do anything for me.  But that's interesting too because that's what happened in Yonkers, they people and other--sometimes I remember my brother, after he was on a couple of years, they might have had something in another city, they, they would even let him go, so black people over there could see Yonkers had a black fireman.  So it went from not wanting it to showcasing it.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Story_ID: 571047
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about how you managed to (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And my sister [Marion McQuay] became a nurse, I told you that?
Speaker 1: No, you hadn't told us and I hadn't asked, so let me slow down and ask you what about your sister?
Speaker 2: Oh my, my sister, my sister took a test to become a nurse at the Professional Hospital [Yonkers Professional Hospital] in, in Yonkers, New York.  There's a hospital on Ludlow Street called--it's still there [sic.] called the Professional Hospital and she went and passed the nurse's exam and she became a nurse, so she was a nurse for years at the Professional Hospital.
Speaker 1: And were there very few black nurses?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And what about doctors?
Speaker 2: I don't think there were any doctors, no.  So all three of us did pretty well.
Speaker 1: And has Yonkers changed, I mean clearly all of the black people in Yonkers are not living on the same street anymore, is that true?
Speaker 2: Well they--I, I, it's really funny you should ask me.  I just was talking to somebody about a month ago, and they were telling me that a lot of black people still living on Culver Street.  But, but now you can move around Yonkers.  I mean I've even got some cousins who live on Central Avenue and other places, so it's, they're not--if they're living there it's because they want to live there, it's not because they can't move around in Yonkers.  Today you can move around in Yonkers.  Warburton Avenue--see they're putting up these new big apartments and buildings so now it's the kind of thing where they, they don't want to be sued, so, so they'd rather have you in than be sued; and plus the fact that if you can pay that rent, they want you anyway because those people that are living on Warburton Avenue and those other places up north further away, those rents are substantial.
Speaker 1: So the place has changed quite a bit?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And does it feel different to you, maybe not now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but when you got older did Yonkers feel different than it did when you were limited to Culver Street and you were--?
Speaker 2: Yeah it felt better.  It felt better, it felt better to me only because I had a life experience that didn't make me feel closed in, like I knew people all around Yonkers white and black and I use to go to the white people that I knew there like they were--even now some still live there.  They still--we're friends and so I go with a different attitude and they, they treat me differently too.  But I'm sure, yeah there's been a big changes in Yonkers. Yonkers was really a wicked place.
Story_ID: 571048
Speaker 1: See most of the blacks came to Mount Vernon [New York].  A lot of blacks in Mount Vernon.
Speaker 2: And how far from where we are is Mount Vernon from Yonkers [New York] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Fifteen miles, even, not even fifteen miles, maybe ten.
Speaker 2: So you've got a lot of people just shifting to another area?
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, and that's why, that's why Mount Vernon grew because when I was a, a younger man people were buying houses in Mount Vernon, but they couldn't buy them in Yonkers.  So anybody who wanted to buy a house rather than go through that kind of shame (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Trauma.
Speaker 1: --and trauma they'd just come on, just leave Yonkers and come to Mount Vernon and that's--a lot of people like me that live in Mount Vernon, they came from places in Westchester County [New York], not necessarily Yonkers, some places in White Plains [New York], New Rochelle [New York], places--because all of those places were the same way, but they could go to Mount Vernon and find a nice place and so that, that's how Mount Vernon got built up.
Speaker 2: When did you move to Mount Vernon?
Speaker 1: Even, even the last two mayors in Mount Vernon were black.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: Yeah, one was in, in office about six years he just lost office this month to another black person.
Speaker 2: So is Mount Vernon something of a black town?
Speaker 1: It--now, it is.  It's, it's predominately--a lot of, nearly all, all the, all the office holders are nearly all black now.
Speaker 2: And why was Mount Vernon more welcoming to black people, perhaps than Yonkers?  Or how is it that people found that they were able to come here?
Speaker 1: Well I think that when, when back in those years you could buy a house in Mount Vernon for less money than you could buy one in White Plains or Yonkers or New Rochelle.  Those were really exclusive areas price wise, so they would, if, if they were civil servants that, they gave them a chance to buy a house.  They could buy it in Mount Vernon, 'cause the, the only thing they didn't have, they well, I have to tell you that where we are we're in what we call south side Mount Vernon.  Mount Vernon is divided into the south side and the north side.  It's been recently that black people have been moving to the north side and that's only going back ten years, so the, the north side is only ten years old that black people started to move and now it's--the whole south side is black so that's what, when they built on this south side.
Speaker 2: So how long has the south side been a black area?
Speaker 1: Well, it, I'm going back thirty years is when--thirty or forty years when black people started moving here, but they just kept moving, they just kept moving into the south side because they--the realtors wouldn't take you to the north side, wouldn't show you any property on the north side, that's how they kept it.
Speaker 2: But how would--why would the realtors, why was south Mount Vernon open to black ownership, I mean why, why were the realtors willing to show black people houses here (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The houses here were less money and, and after some got in they figured some--it started the building.  They really, really want--after black people found out that they could go, they would tell their friends and their neighbors and someplace else--and so rather than to go through the embarrassment of what it might take to picket it and stuff they wanted to go someplace, they wanted to go to a place where they could eat in the backyard and put them a table out there and call themselves at home because there still were nice places on the north--on the south side just not--all of the property on the north side is more expensive.  First of all because they got more space between the houses on the north side.  The south side the houses are closer together.
Speaker 2: I see.  And you said Yonkers is not fantastic but it's better than it was when you first ari- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --when you first lived here?
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 571049
Speaker 1: How did you come to have your coats featured in movies?
Speaker 2: They came to me.
Speaker 1: Who came to you?
Speaker 2: I had--who came to me, well, I had a couple of coats--
Speaker 1: Or for which movies were your coats shown in?
Speaker 2: It was a long time ago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I have 'Foxy Brown' and 'Cleopatra.'  Do you remember any other movies?
Speaker 2: No, no.  It was before that even I think.  I don't think 'Foxy Brown' was around.
Speaker 1: That was pretty late.
Speaker 2: That was recently.
Speaker 1: No, that's in the 1970s--
Speaker 2: Oh, really?
Speaker 1: --but, but you're saying you had movies before that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Did Cosby [Bill Cosby] ever wear any of your fashions in his movies?
Speaker 2: I can't remember really.  (Pause) I can't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  More recently did you participate in the Congressional Black Caucus?  Did you have a fashion show there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I told you that I had it; I had it for seven years in a row.
Speaker 1: Oh!  No, we haven't talked about the black caucus yet.
Speaker 2: Oh I, I had--
Speaker 1: I thought we had talked about fashion, Ebony Fashion Fair.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I did, I did the black caucus fashion show seven years in a, in a row at that time, when we did it, but it's been ten years ago I'm sure.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I have that it was in the 1980s.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm sure it was.  But we enjoyed it.  It was, that was a party in itself.
Speaker 1: And I also have that you, did some, or a fashion show or some for the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority]?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I did them.  I did them in New Rochelle [New York] at the, at Fontainebleau [ph.], you know, those country clubs, we did them in, up, up here in Westchester [Westchester County, New York].
Story_ID: 571050
Speaker 1: When I first arrived, we were talking about how you became successful and you were talking a little bit about how you need to create a way for yourself.  Can you talk a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: Well when I say you have to create a way for yourself, I say that because if, if you have the desire and the drive, you're going to make things happen.  And the other part about it is that you're not going to be so easily disappointed if it doesn't go right.  Because a lot--the people that really don't become successful are really people that just give up and they think that, that it's one straight arrow to the top, but there should be some detours along the way.  And if you know that there's going to be some detours along the way, if one happens, or comes about in your progress you'll accept it and recognize that well, maybe I have to just do something else and that's basically what I tell everybody that I never, I never felt that I couldn't make it, you know some people say--I had a lot of people tell me that, "You, you're not going anywhere."  I had a lot of people say that and I, when I, when I made it I realized why, because they didn't see anybody else doing in, so if you don't see anybody else doing it you take it for granted that you, you're just putting your head against a stone, but that's not true.  I, I believed that I could do it.  That's why I truly believe that the young people today, they think they can do it: a lot of them are going to do it.  Whatever it is that they want to do they're going to do it.  You see it happening every day with something that, somebody does something that never did it before.  That was somebody that truly believed in, in what they were doing.
Speaker 1: And you also said that your mom [Sarah McQuay] was very supportive?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: In what, in what way was she supportive?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother was a woman that--as I said before I didn't know my father and my, my mother was a, a person that took us--she was, I'll give you an example.  She took us to, to the museum.  I went downtown, 86th Street, someplace to the museum.  We went down in Central Park [New York, New York].  Now these were places where a lot of people on Culver Street [Yonkers, New York] weren't going because nobody took them, but my mother use to like to take us different places, so much so that when I got older after I came out the [U.S.] Army and I got older, I went these places myself without anybody taking me, but I was introduced to it through her efforts and her sister's, she had--I had an aunt named Bessie [Bessie Dickson].  And between the two of them I, my eyes were open, I guess it would say to something more than just Yonkers [New York] because all my years up to the time I went in the Army, Yonkers was all I knew.
Speaker 1: You also had mentioned that your mom believed that you could do things and would tell you that same, that you could do things and you were discussing the fact that you thought that other people needed to let their kids know.  Could you just speak about that in your words?
Speaker 2: Right.  My mother was a person to say that if, if you, if you think you want to do something or you think you want to accomplish something, you have to try it and just don't give up.  She was a person that really said that it may not come to you the first time, it may not come to you the second time, but she said that doesn't mean that you can't do it and I always remember her saying that although she didn't have a lot of, on her own, she, she made me believe that I could do certain things and, and I never felt guilty in any manner of trying to do anything that I wanted to do because I had that kind of backbone which she put there.  She was the one that was instrumental in making me see that it can--you can make it happen and I've been trying to make everybody else that's in back of me do the same thing and I know that's where I got it from.  And anybody that knows me will tell you, I'm always plugging them up, holding them up, pushing them forward because some of them do break through.
Story_ID: 571051
Speaker 1: Have you had some black, some people who are younger than you are come and train with you as a furrier--
Speaker 2: Oh yes, we've, we've (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and start their own businesses?
Speaker 2: --we've, we've had them, right now, we've had two or three on the job, right there at (unclear).  As a matter of fact, we have one young man that's with us now and we told him he could only work for us if he stayed in college, go to school, otherwise we didn't want to know you and he, he was a person that loved Drena [ph.] and I like we were his mother and father because he didn't have a mother and father with him, right.  So he kind of like accepted us as, to be instrumental in some of the things that he does.  And he's working for us now.  His name is David [ph.], and David this year is the first in his family to graduate from college.
Speaker 1: Wow.  Where did David attend school?
Speaker 2: I have to ask Drena that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But this, this, just this year is the first person in his family to graduate from college.
Speaker 1: That's fantastic.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I'm sure that much of his motivation was due to your job requirement that he stay in school (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we, we stayed right on him, you know, we, we stayed on him because--well he, I have to say one thing about David, as opposed to some of the other children, or young people that I know, David wanted to do it.  He saw what we, Drena and I had done and he worked with us; was a good worker and--what, what do you want to know about David, I forgot?
Speaker 1: We were just talking about the fact that he stayed in school.  We pretty much--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --covered it.
Speaker 2: I thought you wanted to know what school; I think she probably knows.
Speaker 1: Oh yes, we were asking what college he went to, but that's okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, because I can't remember.
Speaker 1: That's okay.  That's okay; you don't have to remember everything.
Story_ID: 571052
Speaker 1: The picture that you're looking at is in Camp Upton, Long Island [New York].  That's a group of men that were in my platoon while I was in the [U.S.] Army in 1943.  That's me standing in front.  That's my platoon.
Speaker 2: The picture that you're looking at now is right after the Super Bowl [Super Bowl XXII] when Doug Williams was the quarterback.  So he has the football in hand and the jacket that he has on is a mink jacket that I made for him, Doug Williams, Washington Redskins.
Speaker 1: The picture that you're looking at now is a collection of my furs that were shown in the Ebony fashion show as we traveled around the country, the Ebony fashion show.
Speaker 2: The picture that we're looking at now is of my brother, was a fireman in Yonkers [New York], captain of the fire department in Yonkers and Buel McQuay was his name.
Speaker 1: This picture is a group of young ladies in a fashion show that was being held in New Rochelle, New York.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Creations.
Speaker 1: Are these your creations (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --these furs?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yes, Mr. McQuay [HistoryMaker James McQuay] made these furs, made these furs.  I like that white one.  What kind of fur is that?
Speaker 2: It was a fox; it was a combination.  I remember when we made the bottom out of something else, I can't remember and we made that out of coyote and made the collar out of fox.
Speaker 1: You've got to tell us who's in this picture?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  If you know the names of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You pointed it out to me earlier.
Speaker 2: This picture is a picture that the Ebony Fashion Fair had and it's Audrey Smaltz [HistoryMaker Audrey Lavinia Smaltz] at the microphone.  This is a group of women who as we traveled around the county in that, with this show.
Speaker 1: And there you are in the center?
Speaker 2: That's me in the center.
Speaker 1: And are these furs that you made?
Speaker 2: All mine.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This picture is a picture of me along with two young ladies that were in the fashion show and she's wearing an elegant fisher coat, very rare coat, very expensive coat, very beautiful coat, a fisher coat.
Speaker 2: This picture was of the end of the fashion show that we had at one of, one of the colleges, but I can't remember what college it is.
Speaker 1: Fashion Institute in New York [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Fashion Institute.  This is a picture at the Fashion Institute.
Speaker 1: Going back so far, let me see how, where I was at; you know, I was in high school [Yonkers High School, Yonkers, New York].
Speaker 2: That's what you said, that was right before you went to the service.
Speaker 1: Right, that's was, that's when, they, that's when that was, at a party that they gave me before I went to the service.  The one that's bending over, see the one that's bending over?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: He was killed in Germany.
Speaker 2: Oh, wow.
Speaker 1: I, oh, it's an interesting story.  See the guy in the middle?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you see the tennis match last week, where James Blake played?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's his, that's James Blake's grandfather.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, wow.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The tennis player, you know, it's in the--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes, yes, (unclear).
Speaker 2: Right, that's--and his name is James Blake too and his son is named Thomas [Thomas Blake, Sr.] and Thomas had the one that plays tennis.  So that's, that's his grandson.
Speaker 1: Not bad at all.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And you are on which side?
Speaker 1: In the black suit.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  How did you get to know James Blake and the other (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Oh they, they, he, he was my best friend growing up.  The grandfather was my best friend growing up.  We did everything together and the other fellow was, was, was a good friend, but he got killed in World War II [WWII].
Speaker 2: Okay, (unclear).
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead, who's in this picture?
Speaker 1: This picture has Jackie Joyner-Kersee (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, so who, who are the people in the picture?
Speaker 2: He, he, the three people, the three people in this picture are, that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's George Jackson, that's Bill Cosby and that's James McQuay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Perfect.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: What we're looking at now is our label, that's our label that we put in each and every one of our coats, James McQuay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Who designed these labels?
Speaker 1: These labels were designed by James McQuay.  The coats were designed by James McQuay.
Speaker 2: What's the guy from the Ebony, I forgot his name already again?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's Doug Williams, James McQuay and who's that?  He was from the Urban League wasn't he?
Speaker 2: He was the head of the Urban League.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Wasn't he the president at one time?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I forgot his name.  He was president of the Urban League.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Can you start from left to right?
Speaker 2: From left to right is Doug Williams, James McQuay and the president of the Urban League.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What year was this?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Do you know who that is?
Speaker 2: Who is it?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's Billie Holiday.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Should I say it?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes, yeah, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Oh, the picture that we're looking at now was Billie Holiday and that's a stole we made for her for a Christmas gift.  It was bought by someone for her for Christmas.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: The picture we're looking at now is Muhammad Ali, James McQuay, Joe Frazier.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Smoking.
Speaker 2: Smoking Joe Frazier.
Speaker 1: Smoking Joe Frazier.  As a matter of fact this was made at the same time that they fought at Madison Square Garden [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: The picture that we're looking at now is James McQuay, the black furrier.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This picture is a picture of James McQuay going fishing.
Speaker 1: The pictures that we're looking at now were a part of a collection of furs that we had at the black caucus [Congressional Black Caucus] fashion show as we traveled around the country.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Which magazine is this?
Speaker 1: You're, you're asking the wrong one.  Can I turn it over?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Here's the cover and you don't have to say.
Speaker 1: This picture is Patti LaBelle in Upscale magazine.  She's on the cover.
