Story_ID: 174677
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: I said, this was just after I had left the service in 1968.  I had just joined Inmont Corporation as a special assistant to the president.  I was a very old man at that time.  I was all of thirty-six.
Speaker 1: The year?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you know what the year was?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1968.
Speaker 1: Sixty--I'm sorry, you did say that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that's a picture when I was at Fort Dix, New Jersey on a recruiting trip for the Special Warfare Center [U.S. Army John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School, Fort Bragg, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a picture of young Captain Miller.  This was taken in 1961 I believe at Fort Dix, New Jersey.  I was just up for a recruiting trip, recruiting people for Special Forces at that time.  I was stationed--I had been stationed at Fort Dix earlier and my colleague there, Captain Alan [ph.], on the left, was a company commander there whom I had known and I had been fortunate to get assigned to the Special Warfare Center at Fort Bragg.  And I was--as I said, it was just a recruiting trip.
Speaker 1: That was what--you said what year you said that was?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-one [1961].
Speaker 1: Okay, '61 [1961].
Speaker 2: Just a picture of some colleagues of my commander there Colonel Harrington [ph.] holding the basketball.  This was at Fort Dix, New Jersey our regiment had just won the regimental championships.  This is also 1960 I believe.
Speaker 1: Sixty [1960]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1960.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's a very, very young.  I think I was about maybe nine or ten years old.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: No, not to my recall, but just a little collar there if you can see it, the collar of the day.  I think my mother [Mamie Rufus Cooper] had taken me to Bloomingdale's I believe to have that picture shot.
Speaker 1: Yeah, picture of a young captain.  I can't even tell you where or when that was taken.  I can't make out what it was, but, nonetheless, there I am.
Speaker 2: But you're a captain at that point?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Also another picture, a different season of the year, of course, 'cause we're in our khakis and I was also a captain on this particular scene; I can't tell you just where it was.  I suspect that it might have been in Korea.  I'm fairly certain that it was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You did say Korea earlier.
Speaker 1: Yes.  I had been in Korea twice during the Korean War in '51 [1951], '52 [1952], or '52 [1952], '53 [1953] or other.  And then this was 1965.
Speaker 2: This was '65 [1965]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now how do you know that?
Speaker 1: I know where I was at the time.
Speaker 2: Oh, now you do know?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know.  No, this was in Korea, 1965.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Also in Korea, just in Mufti [ph.], getting a breather from the uniform with some colleagues.  Can't tell you the occasion, but I know where it was, Korea 1965, '64 [1964], '65 [1965], I'm not sure, but I suspect it was '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, young sergeant 19--circa, let's see this is circa 1955, early '56 [1956].  I was on recruiting duty in New York City, just next door to the famous Apollo Theatre [Harlem, New York, New York], and it was the same recruiting office from which I had joined the service in 1948.
Speaker 1: Running track at Fort Bliss, Texas.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Yeah, this was a young soldier 1949, let's see summer of '49 [1949].  Forty-eight [1948], '49 [1949], summer of 19--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you were in the circas then?
Speaker 1: Nineteen forty-nine [1949], 1950, yes I was at Fort Bliss, Texas.  I was a young corporal at the time.
Speaker 2: And this was 1961.  I was just receiving the Army Commendation Medal.  And this was farewell session at Fort Dix, New Jersey, and the Sergeant Major Kerner [ph.] is passing me on a pen and pencil set that they had gifted me with.  It was just before I went down to Fort Bragg to join Special Forces headquarters.
Speaker 1: This one is 1956, the summer of 1956.  Let me see if I can straighten this out.  Yeah, I know you didn't want to--this is the summer of 1956 at Fort Benning, Georgia.  I was in officers' candidate school and we were just about to graduate and a lot of my colleagues, many of whom I saw at a forty-fifth anniversary reunion a couple of years ago at Fort Benning, yeah, what they call Benning School for Boys, Fort Benning B-E-N-N-I-N-G.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: I'm that fellow right there.
Speaker 2: What year did you say that was (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) God, 1956.
Speaker 2: Gotcha.
Speaker 1: Summer of 1956.  God, was I ever that thin?
Story_ID: 174678
Speaker 1: We're gonna start out by slating it.  My name is Julieanna Richardson.  I'm the interviewer.  Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  And I'd like you to start out by stating your name and spelling it for us including your middle name.
Speaker 2: Sure, it's Donald LeSessne Miller and the middle name is L-E- capital S-E-S-S-N-E.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: January 10, 1932.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is September 17th, 2003.
Speaker 1: Okay, and our location?
Speaker 2: We are located in Secaucus, New Jersey at my home.
Speaker 1: And I'd like to have your occupation.
Speaker 2: I am retired.
Speaker 1: Businesses--how would you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm sorry, well there were several retirements.  I'm a retired [U.S.] Army officer, having retired from the United States Army in 1968.  I then went into the corporate world and in 1995, I retired as vice president of employer relations at Dow Jones, and then went on to form my own company, which was known as Our World News, and that closed in October--actually November of 1997.  And since that time, I've been essentially retired except I continue to serve as a director of the board at Schering-Plough, and I retired after twenty-five years of service as a director of the board at the Bank of New York [Mellon Corporation, BNY Mellon, New York, New York] last year.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Bank of America is now Bank of New York?
Speaker 2: No, Bank of New York.
Speaker 1: Oh, Bank of New York, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 174679
Speaker 1: Now, I ask five questions of everyone.  They're a little People magazine-ish, just very short answers (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's okay.
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: My favorite food--that's hard, Julieanna [Richardson].  There are so many favorite foods as you can tell, but I guess I would tell you fried chicken and potato salad.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of year for me is summer.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color, kind of another hard factor for me, but I guess my favorite color would be blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Again, it's kind of hard to say, but we spend a lot of time in the Caribbean and in Hawaii, but I would say Hawaii is probably my favorite place to vacation.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My friends would tell you yes because I have so many funny sayings that I developed or learned while I was in the service, but one is, you can't get there from here.
Story_ID: 174680
Speaker 1: I want you to give your father's name.  You don't know much about him, right?
Speaker 2: I really do not.
Speaker 1: Okay, but can you give his name?
Speaker 2: Actually, I don't.  I can't.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, no problem.  Let's talk about your mother and if you could give her name and what you know about her background and her growing up.
Speaker 2: Sure, my mom, Mamie Cooper, maiden name was Rufus.  She was born in Jacksonville, Florida we believe around 1898.  She graduated from Florida A & M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida] at a point in time when few women, certainly not black women, were going to college.  As I understand it, she worked as a teacher for a short while but then during the [Great] Depression, wound up working as a domestic and did a lot of domestic work for different families, very wealthy families, living primarily in Connecticut.  The last such person that she worked for as I recall it, having had an opportunity to meet him was J. C. Penney.  She later left domestic service and went to work for a company called Interchemical Corporation, later the name was Inmont, Inmont being where I met my wife [Gail Miller] and she worked there, servicing the executive staff and it was a result of her making me put on my uniform whenever I'd come to town and come down to see her on a job site that caused me to have introductions to the chairman of the board, and the president, and the executive vice president and several of the other senior officers who followed my career through her eyes for a number of years.  So in 1968, when I was about to retire, I was offered an opportunity at Inmont, thanks to her, good offices on my behalf and I joined them in 1968 as a special assistant to the president.
Speaker 1: Now, I wanna--how did she get to New York?  You didn't tell me that part.
Speaker 2: Yeah, her mother, my grandmother, Mamie Miller married, remarried actually a gentleman by the name of John Hill Miller, and one of the things that my grandmother insisted on was that her daughter be sent to school for a proper education, and John Miller did that and then moved the family to the New York area.  My sense is, and I'm trying to piece things together, is that he came to New York rather out of need more than desire because he was working as a railway postal clerk and got into an altercation with another postal employee who was white, and he had occasion to do a little violence, and it was necessary for him to leave in a hurry, and he did.
Speaker 1: Now, where were they living at that point?
Speaker 2: In Jacksonville, Florida.
Speaker 1: In Jacksonville, Florida.  Okay, he left Jacksonville and came to New York?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, the two names--both your mother are--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Both Mamies, yes.
Speaker 1: So Mamie?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Mamie Miller and Mamie Cooper, and there is a third Mamie Cooper and that lady was like a stepmother to me because when my mother and her husband [Wayman Cooper], who was not my biological father, when they divorced, he married another woman, whose name was Mamie Urgo [ph.], the second Mamie Cooper, so there were three Mamies in my life, a very important name to me.
Speaker 1: So you grew up around your grandparents I take it?
Speaker 2: I did actually.  My grandmother and grandfather raised me substantially while my mother was out making a living and providing the necessary monies to sustain the family.
Speaker 1: And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Incidentally, my mother, just as an aside, during World War II [WWII], while she was in domestic service, went with the family for whom she was working out to Tacoma, Washington--actually Seattle, Washington because the husband was a naval officer who had been called to active duty, and once he left for the Pacific, she joined Boeing and was a riveter, building B-17s, and B-29s during the World War II.  Mamie, the riveter (laughter).
Story_ID: 174681
Speaker 1: So what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 1: Childhood memory.
Speaker 2: The earliest childhood memory I have was not a very pleasant one.  It was my grandfather taking me up on a roof and giving me a spanking (laughter).  I was about three years old, yeah, but it's a fond memory, although it wasn't a particularly pleasant one, yeah.
Story_ID: 174682
Speaker 1: Where were you living at the time?  You know, with--where were your grandparents [maternal grandparents, Mamie Miller and John Miller] living (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: But I mean what street?
Speaker 2: In Harlem [New York, New York] at 142nd Street between 7th and 8th Avenues, yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you--if you take yourself back to that street.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: I'm wondering if you remember any of the neighbors and can describe them or what the block was like?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it was a very interesting neighborhood as I recall it.  Of course, I was quite young.  As I say, the earliest memories I have was three.  I think at either age three or four, I was in a little nursery school next to a Catholic school on our block and we were dismissed, and my grandmother would normally pick me up, but for some reason, I just went home.  And I can remember her being absolutely shocked that this three or four year-old is coming home from nursery school, and she was mortified.  I mean, she really was.  I do remember that very well.  I remember also that there was a school, a Catholic school, St. Charles, and just behind it, on the other block, on 141st Street was the church, St. Charles [Church of St. Charles Borromeo and Resurrection Chapel, Harlem, New York, New York].  Interesting recall of that time--I don't remember very much about people.  I do remember one family in the building.  They had a car and it was very, very rare for people in Harlem at that time, particularly apartment dwellers, to have automobiles.  And I can remember them taking me on Sunday trips once a while out to Corona, in Queens [New York, New York], where my wife [Gail Miller] is from, and it seemed to me to be such a long distance; and it was such an exciting thing.  The neighborhood was tough.  It was a tough neighborhood.  I remember once picking up a stick, a broom stick.  Kids used to play, what they call, "stick ball" in New York, and this older kid, and I think he must have been a teenager, I mean he was very angry that I picked up his stick and he wacked me soundly, I mean he almost knocked me out.  And I can remember my grandmother on him like white on rice, and right away.  It was one of those ugly things that sticks in your mind, but, basically, it was an interesting time.  I felt okay.  You know, I didn't have any particular feelings about it except I remember those few things.  Right around the corner, on 7th Avenue, between 142nd and 141st, was a hotel, called the Woodside, and if you listened to Count Basie's music sometimes, you will hear him playing a song called, 'Jumping at the Woodside.'  I didn't really appreciate the fact that this was the place that they were talking about.  It's no longer there, but just a fond memory of the Harlem that I knew, fruit stands, a guy walking through the backyards of the buildings, calling out, "the umbrella man, umbrella man" and he would fix umbrellas and sharpen knives, horse-drawn ice wagons.  You know, it's very interesting, very different time.
Story_ID: 174683
Speaker 1: Now, you've described some sights and sounds.  Are there any other sights, sounds or smells that, you know, remind you of your youth and growing up on 142nd Street [Harlem, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, we moved from 142nd Street.  The time that I described was probably around 1935 to about 1937.  My mom [Mamie Rufus Cooper] moved us up to Greenwich, Connecticut about 1937, as I recall it.  Maybe, it might have been '36 [1936].  I'm not sure of the dates, but I remember I had my sixth birthday in Greenwich, which would have made it what 1938.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And I stayed in Greenwich with my grandmother [Mamie Miller] for a while, and then we moved back to 142nd Street and I was the superintendent's grandson.  My grandfather [John Miller] was a superintendent of a building.  We lived in the basement.  It was not something that I was terribly happy about, as I recall it, but the love that I had received far outweighed the circumstances in which I found myself and I seem to have enjoyed it actually I guess to some extent.  I can remember helping my grandmother and grandfather pull the dumbwaiter where people would put their garbage on each day, and we'd empty that and send it back up.  I can remember helping them stoke coal in the furnaces, and just generally having a lot of fun, but we moved.  In 1939, my mother decided to shift us out of there up on to what they called, Sugar Hill [Harlem, New York, New York].  And that was a transitioning point in our lives I think because Sugar Hill was a different life experience.  It was a quantum leap economically for us and I can remember when my mother moved into this apartment on Convent Avenue at 310 Convent Avenue, which was 143rd Street.  It was just a couple of blocks up the hill and one block north, but it was a different world entirely, and I can remember her paying the rent on that apartment, seventy-five dollars a month, and that was a humongous number in those days, and she struggled, but it put me in an entirely different life experience.
Story_ID: 174684
Speaker 1: Can you talk about Sugar Hill [Harlem, New York, New York], you know what (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, sure.  Sugar Hill, the--I guess, in the minds of so many people, it was nirvana, it was heaven on earth, it was what the name connoted, Sugar Hill.  If you lived on Sugar Hill, you were thought to be well-to-do, I wouldn't say wealthy, but well-to-do, I mean you had escaped the bowels of the ghetto and there were some extraordinarily interesting people that lived on Sugar Hill.  The part that I lived on 143rd [Street] and Convent Avenue, within two blocks of us, were people that were growing up at the time that I was growing up, [Clifford] Cliff Alexander, who later went on to become secretary of the [U.S.] Army, and now is a very distinguished business man in Washington [D.C.], Philippa Duke Schuyler who was a child protegee musician.  She later died unfortunately in a helicopter incident in Vietnam, and the first black state senator, Mr. Julius Archibald.  There were just a host of people that I could think of, probably one of the first black West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] cadets who grew up right across the street from me.  I can't recall his name, but I could see him so well.  There were physicians; there were lawyers, there were business people; there were entertainers. Right across the street from me lived Jimmy Rushing, who one of the great blues singers of the era.  And I can remember getting on the elevator in my building once and seeing this, to me, huge black man with a beret and a bald head.  Later found out that it was Jack Jackson, the former heavyweight champion of the world.  So we had some very interesting people, and there were a lot of role models.  It was an interesting neighborhood.  There were whites who grew up in that area.  I was--my family, we were the first black family to move into the building at 310 [Convent Avenue], but there was an exodus as fate would have it, but it was just an interesting time, Julieanna [Richardson], but there was a lot of culture.  There were teachers; there were educators; there were just all manner of people, whom you could look at and see and appreciate for who and what they were.  Unfortunately, as time went on, and it's a function of economics, people began to transition out of the neighborhood and into the suburbs, particularly after World War II [WWII], but Sugar Hill was a great place.  Farther up on Sugar Hill in the '50s [1950] were two apartment buildings 409 Edgecombe Avenue and 555 Edgecombe Avenue, numbers which are familiar to a lot of people who know very much about Harlem [New York, New York] and Sugar Hill, where the elite of the black community lived and everyone aspired, you know, to those addresses.  They have diminished in consequence in later years.
Story_ID: 174685
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember the day that your family moved in to Convent Avenue [Harlem, New York, New York], I mean--?
Speaker 2: I don't remember the day, but I remember--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you remember the feeling?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Oh absolutely, I certainly do.  It was an entirely different experience.  I mean to go from living in a basement to living in a large apartment, a large front facing apartment on Sugar Hill [Harlem, New York, New York] was, as I say, it was a transitional experience for me.  We lived--where I lived on Convent Avenue, was just two blocks north of CCNY, City College of New York [New York, New York], and it was a few blocks north of a place called, Lewisohn Stadium, where every summer they used to give wonderful concerts.  It's where I first saw Marion Anderson, and it was just a fabulous, fabulous experience--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: --light years away, yet only two blocks away.
Speaker 1: Now your--so it's you, your mother [Mamie Rufus Cooper] and your grandparents [Mamie Miller and John Miller]?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay and did your mother ever talk about that sort of--that decision process that made her do that?
Speaker 2: Not a lot but we had a clear understanding.  She was very much thinking about me.  I think that her willingness to sacrifice at that time had an awful lot to do with me and, of course, with her mother, but it was one of the things in retrospect that you think about.  You do not fully appreciate it at the time, and you don't fully appreciate it even in subsequent years, but at this juncture in my life, in my seventies, I'm looking back at it and recognizing and understanding the enormous consequences and sacrifices that she had to make.
Story_ID: 174686
Speaker 1: You're in school at this point.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What school are you in because--?
Speaker 2: I went to--the first school I remember was in Greenwich, Connecticut.  I was--I went to kindergarten I guess and first grade, and then I came back to New York [New York] and I can remember being in the second and third grade.  When we moved up onto Convent Avenue [Harlem, New York, New York], I went into another school.  I had been at P.S. 5 in Harlem [New York, New York] on 141st Street and Edgecombe Avenue.
Speaker 1: Do you remember where you went in Greenwich?
Speaker 2: Directly across the street from my home there on Hamilton Avenue.  As a matter of fact a couple of years ago, Gail [Miller] and I and some friends from Hawaii drove up there and took some pictures of the house and the school.  It still looks great, you know, after all those years, but I went to P.S. 5 on 141st Street.  Then when I went to Sugar Hill [Harlem, New York, New York], moved up to P.S. 186, which, now, so sadly has been completely abandoned and it's just--it's heartbreaking to see it, but anyway I went there through the sixth grade.
Story_ID: 174687
Speaker 1: Talking about Connecti- you know, the school in Greenwich [Connecticut].
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was going to go back and say when I went to the first grade in Greenwich, it was, obviously--oh, I shouldn't say obviously, but it was in fact a very, very integrated class.  There were perhaps two or three, maybe three or four black kids, but the bulk of my classmates were white.  I can remember a couple of them, Dick [ph.] and Salvador [ph.]; and those are the only two I remember.  Then when I came back to New York [New York], to 142nd Street, I was in an all-black elementary school [P.S. 5].  I can remember that, and then when we moved up onto Convent Avenue, I went back full circle into a fully integrated class.  I was talking to my daughter about it just the other day.  And I think there is a significant relevance to that because in that class we're at 1938, 1939, a number of kids whose families were refugees from Europe, from Germany, from France.  I can remember Ursula Hess [ph.], Serge Berlow [ph.] and then there were a number of Jewish kids in the class, Doris Myerson [ph.], Judith Kramer [ph.], and a Chinese kid that I can remember Raymond Suhoo [ph.], and people of that sort.  It was a very, very integrated, diversified environment; and then when I went to junior high school in 1944, I guess it was, the school there was a very diversified school, a number of Hispanic and Latino students, a number of whites, blacks, Asians.  And it makes a difference, and I left there, and went to the High School of Music and Art [later, Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York], which is a very, very difficult school to get into, but I went as a voice student and it was there that I ran into my first difficulties in an academic environment.  I began to feel--well, let me put it this way.  When I was in junior high school, I had a great voice, and I was recognized as a talent.  When I got to the High School of Music and Art, I found out for the very first time that I was a little fish in a big pond instead of a big fish in a little pond.  And I think that plus my adolescence led me into a situation in which I was not at all academically interested.  And so as a result of that, I used to play hooky every day.  And one term, I guess I played hooky, I wanted to say, about eighty-nine days in a row.  My grandmother [Mamie Miller], God rest her soul, would walk me to the front door of the high school; and I'd walk right out the side door and go down to the Paramount Theatre and see people like Billy Eckstein and Louis Prima and other people of the day; and just had a wonderful time doing nothing, but it catches up with you and eventually I had to leave that school and went to George Washington High School [later, George Washington Educational Campus, New York, New York]; and I was equally diligent about not going to school.  And finally I just decided that this was not my thing and I needed to get away, and I joined the [U.S.] Army at age sixteen.
Story_ID: 174688
Speaker 1: I wanna just go back just a little bit to--is it P.S. 130?
Speaker 2: [P.S.] 186 [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: One eighty-six [P.S. 186], were there any teachers that influenced you there or sort of?
Speaker 2: Well, there were teachers and it's ironic that you should ask that question because my daughter [Lynn Miller], just last week, started teaching third grade at an elementary school in the Bronx [New York, New York].  She is a teaching fellow and will be receiving her master's from one of the institutions and I was discussing with her the impact of third, fourth, fifth and sixth grade teachers.  The only one that I can really think of that had a true impact was a lady by the name of Mrs. Dulski [ph.].  I can't tell you why, but I think she was either fourth or fifth grade with me, but she was someone whom I very much admired and respected.  And then when I got onto to junior high school, there were a couple of music teachers, Ms. O'Brien [ph.] and Ms. Perry [ph.], who were very instrumental in helping me along.
Speaker 1: Now, is it junior high school that you found your voice?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Actually--no, I shouldn't say that because I had been singing in my church choir for a number of years before that.
Speaker 1: What church?
Speaker 2: This was Bethel A.M.E. [First African Methodist Episcopal Church - Bethel, New York, New York]  It was located on 132nd Street between Lenox and 5th Avenues, but when I got to junior high school, it's a different environment.  You have music periods or courses, and it was there that I began to excel to some degree, but junior high school was an interesting time.  Ms. Perry and Ms. O'Brien were very influential.  I can remember our librarian who was a very disciplined, but obviously caring woman, Ms. Martin [ph.], but those--I don't remember very many other teachers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 174689
Speaker 1: Were you a baritone?
Speaker 2: I was a tenor.
Speaker 1: Tenor, okay.
Speaker 2: Tenor and later became a baritone, but, yes, I was.  When I got to the High School of Music and Art [later, Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York], I guess because of my indifference and also because of the fact that I had a grandmother [Mamie Miller] who was, herself, not a particularly educated woman, loving woman, caring woman but a woman who did not understand what the needs of a young kid growing up were; and I did not have that guidance of mother and father who might have otherwise influenced me differently.  And as a result of that, I can recall being essentially told, "You have to leave because we need this spot for someone who is going to do the work that needs to be done."  One of the teachers made a famous remark, which is all too familiar to too many black kids, "You need to get a vocation, something that will allow you to find a job."  It was not the wisdom of a guidance counselor who had any kind of empathetic sensitivity to what I was all about.  He, in his wisdom, had decided that the best thing that could happen for me was that I should go to some other school, school of commerce or whatever, and learn what I could learn so that I could get on with having, what he would perceive to be, a productive life.  Little could he understand.  Why should he understand it?  I didn't understand it for sure what my potential really was until some other people later in life touched me in a different way.
Speaker 1: Now, what is going through your mind at this time, and what is sort of forming you except you're exploring--you're a teenager and you're exploring the world, you know and?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, it is interesting.  You know, kids do silly things and kids do things on whims and not with an awful lot of thought from time to time.  I followed some of my colleagues and joined, what was then, the New York State Guard and this was because the National Guard [of the United States] had not yet been re-formed after World War II [WWII].  I joined an organization called, the 15th Infantry Regiment, which was at an armory on 142nd Street and 5th Avenue.  It's where the 15th Infantry Regiment had its home.  Why did I do that?  I did it because the guys, you know, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen, seventeen years old, you get an excitement about guns, and soldiers, so I just decided that this would be a fun thing to do, so I joined the state guard at fourteen.  Ill-disciplined, but at least I had an interest and an excitement about things [U.S.] military, and my grandmother would later tell me that from the time I was three or four years old, I loved soldiers and trucks and guns, so I just decided that I would join this state guard unit.  It later was activated as a National Guard unit and became the 369th Coast Artillery.
Story_ID: 174690
Speaker 1: Now, the [New York] State Guard unit [15th Infantry Regiment], they would accept young--men that young?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: No, and people say to me all the time, "Well, you lied about your age."  I said, "No, I never lied about my age.  I did make certain factual readjustments," (laughter) but one does not admit to lying and I won't admit to it even now, but the fact of the matter is I did join when I was fourteen; and then at the time, I was about sixteen or fifteen actually, it became the New York National Guard.  And in March of 1948, I made a decision that I needed to be away from what I was doing; and I wanted to go into the [U.S.] Army because all I could see was a different world.  I didn't know what that world was, I didn't have any clue.  This was not about getting an education.  It was not about even being a soldier.  It was just about a different experience and a removal into something else, and I knew that I was not focused in the right direction because some of the guys that I was hanging around with were off doing different things and I wasn't comfortable with it, so I joined the Army.
Speaker 1: So did any of your buddies join with you at the time?
Speaker 2: One guy, Jimmy Giberk [ph.] tried to join with me.  I didn't realize this, but for reasons that--health reasons.  He had a metal plate in his chest.  I didn't know that, and he couldn't enlist because he couldn't pass the physical.  I passed the physical, and there were several other guys in my neighborhood who joined at about the same time, and we all went to Fort Dix, New Jersey and that's where we started our career.
Speaker 1: And that's where you did your basic training?
Speaker 2: I did my basic training at Fort Dix, New Jersey, and I was then all of sixteen.  I had just turned sixteen in January of that year, so I was a young sixteen.  I was not a very mature sixteen and it took a while for things to catch hold for me, but I later left later that year and went to Germany and I spent my seventeenth birthday in Germany, and I was in a company.  And this all has an interesting tie-in.  I was in B Company of the 371st Infantry, stationed in Kitzingen, Germany.  And while I was there, I became a company clerk, and I was company clerk for an officer, whose name was Henry Minton Francis.  Henry Minton Francis [Sr.] was one of I think the probably fifth or sixth graduate, black graduate of West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York], and he made such an impact on my life.  He couldn't know it at the time, and I couldn't know it at that time, but I was scared to death of him and at the same time so admiring of someone who could be such a striking soldier figure.  As time went on, and I'll jump up ahead a little bit here, I had later gone off to officers' candidate school and came out as a young 2nd lieutenant and in 1968, I was about to retire.  I was a major and I had heard through the grapevine that Minton Francis had retired as a lieutenant colonel and was in Washington, D.C. in a very senior position at the U.S. Post Office [USPS].  I contacted him and asked if we could meet and he agreed, and we talked.  I reminded him that I had been a company clerk of his.  I don't think he really remembered me.  There is no reason he should, but he was very instrumental in helping me think through my decision with respect to retirement.  Later on, back in December of 1971, I was named deputy assistant secretary of defense.  I stayed in that job until 1973.  And, at the time that I left that position, I was asked if I knew anyone who could take my place and I recommended Minton Francis and he got the job.  Sort of a fascinating thing, and Minton and I remain friends today.
Speaker 1: Did you know, at the time that you were his clerk, did you know much about his background and the West Point, or did he ever?
Speaker 2: No, I knew he'd gone to West Point because people in the [U.S.] military are very quick to point out West Pointers at least they were at that time, and he was a phenomenon.  I mean he was an extraordinary soldier and had been to West Point and just those two factors alone were very important, and people knew he was a West Pointer, yeah.  And I was just enamored of the guy.
Story_ID: 174691
Speaker 1: Now, how long were you stationed in [Kitzingen] Germany?
Speaker 2: Just a year.
Speaker 1: Just a year, okay.
Speaker 2: Perhaps not even quite.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Perhaps not quite a year.
Speaker 1: Okay and that was what year are we in?
Speaker 2: This was 1948, '49 [1949].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then--so, you go there at that time and then--but you're now, a new world is sort of opening up of things that you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, exactly.
Speaker 1: You know, you had talked about wanting to--so, and what are learning about discipline and structure?
Speaker 2: Well, you're learning a lot of things.  You know that you're in an environment in which you are expected to perform at a certain level and that your behavior has to be acceptable in ways that perhaps have heretofore not been known to you.  And I was not a very adept student.  I was very difficult and was always finding some little trouble to get into, not being at the right place at the right time or doing something I wasn't supposed to do, but there were tolerances that people had for reasons, again, that I don't understand, but I can recall in one instance while I was in Minton's [Henry Francis Minton] company.  I was sent back to the United States on an early rotation, as they call it; and I think that they had sort of given up on me, and they had decided that maybe it would be better if I were not in the service, but when I was at Bremerhaven, Germany, waiting to board a ship to come back to the United States, I had to go through an interview process, and there was a young, white soldier who was doing the interview and he asked me a question, he said, "You know, how would you like to go back to school and become a classification and assignment specialist?"  And I said, "What's that?"  And he said, "It's what I'm doing now."  And I said, "Yeah, that sounds like a great idea.  I'd like that."  And this young man, name I do not know, had such an incredibly enormous impact on my life because when I came back, instead of coming back and being discharged, I was sent off to a school, where I learned a lot about administration, and it was from there that my enlisted career began to take off.  It was an epiphany without a doubt, and I mention this to you because it is so important for people to understand that turning points in one's life are not necessarily defined or determined by you but often by others who see things that you do not see or cannot see.  And they are very impactful.  This gentleman, whoever he is, God knows I'd love to be able to find him and say, thank you, but I can't and the only way that I can say thank you is by trying to do something like that for others that I have run across from time to time.  It was a very, very interesting time.  It really was.
Speaker 1: Now, where did you do your training then as a classif- you went to--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was at, then Camp Lee, Virginia, now Fort Lee.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This was, again, in 1949.  As a matter of fact, my dear and good friend, [HM] General Harry Brooks, whom I think you can interview one of these days, was there at that time as a young lieutenant.  We did not know each other at that time.
Story_ID: 174692
Speaker 1: --Let's put a little--some things in historical context.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: President--the president is President [Harry] Truman.
Speaker 2: Yes, Harry Truman.
Speaker 1: Harry Truman and he desegregated the forces?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: So you're coming into a newly desegregated?
Speaker 2: Actually, no because while the order was given in 1947, when I joined the [U.S.] Army, it was a totally segregated Army.  We had not yet implemented the integration.  And what's interesting about your question is that when I was deputy assistant secretary of defense, my responsibilities were for equal opportunity and affirmative action and contract compliance within the armed forces, but it was a totally segregated Army up until the first--we always had white officers except in the rare instance of a [Henry] Minton Francis, but the units, the men, the enlisted men, were all black.  That stayed that way, for me, until the first instance in 1952.  I was, by that time, first sergeant of a company if you can imagine going from 1948 to 1952, coming from being a private to being first sergeant of a company.  I was a young eighteen-year-old for a sergeant, and I had a young white soldier assigned to my unit, and it was a very difficult thing for him and for me because my need was to protect him, and his need was to try to find a way to get along.  And it wasn't easy.  Conversely, in 1949 when I was at Camp Lee [later Fort Lee] Virginia, I was the only black in my class and I had some very ugly experiences the first night I got there.
Speaker 1: Well, that's your first experience in the South?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Well, my first--yeah my [U.S.] military experience in the South--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --in the South, okay.
Speaker 2: That's right, exactly.  So, yes, integration was to come, but the first time that I really was assigned to an integrated unit, and, again when this happened, it was 1952 in Korea, I was to become, then, a twenty-year-old battalion sergeant major and the only black in the battalion, and it was sort of an ironic experience.  From there, things began to ease and by the time that I got back to the United States in 1953, there was substantial integration.
Story_ID: 174693
Speaker 1: I just wanna put--ask another question.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: I had read that right after Pearl Harbor--up until Pearl Harbor, that there weren't that many generals and you know lieutenant generals.  That there were you know very few of them and then--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You mean blacks?
Speaker 1: Period.  No, period.
Speaker 2: Oh period?  Oh, absolutely yes.  I think that's correct.
Speaker 1: I think there were like six.  I mean I can't remember the numbers.
Speaker 2: There weren't many.
Speaker 1: There weren't many.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: And then after that, it grew, like they were--I think they said they were making a lieutenant general every month or something, you know so--
Speaker 2: Well, during the war years [World War II, WWII], that was very necessary because you had [U.S.] Armies and [U.S.] Air Force and [U.S.] Navy units throughout the world, both in the European theater and the Pacific theater, and these divisions and corps and armies required very substantial numbers of senior general officers, yeah, very definitely.
Speaker 1: So that tendency is happening, so it's opening up you know positions.  But at the same time, you know, you're saying it took four years from the time that--or six years--how long from the time from [President Harry] Truman's order [to desegregate the U.S. military]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --from the time of Truman's order, it was at least--it was at least four years before I saw any tangible evidence of it and longer than that for the Navy and the [U.S.] Marine Corps.  I mean they didn't really begin to get the message until the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s].  It was just that real.
Speaker 1: Do you know anything about what the process was after the order?  I mean just--I know you were young.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was very young (unclear).
Speaker 1: Right, but do you know, historically, what the process was really to make the troops integrated?  You know what--were there lawsuits?  Were there orders you know on top of orders (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: I don't know that there were lawsuits, but certainly I knew that there were a number of directives that came down from senior headquarters.  There was a great resistance, a great resistance to it.  Harry Truman will always be respected in my mind for that particular action that he took because had it not been for that order, I cannot imagine that we would have ever had the likes of a [HM] Colin Powell to become not only a four star general but chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, which is the single-most senior position in the United States Armed Forces, and now, of course, we've had a number of black four star generals, certainly a number of three stars and two stars and an uncountable number of brigadiers.  So it has opened up a lot.  The services--the Navy has had four star admirals.  The Air Force has had four star generals.  The Army has had several and even the Marine Corps has had black three-star, [HM Lieutenant General] Frank Peterson, who incidentally was the senior most aviator of all services at the time that he retired, just an interesting guy and one of the history makers that you ought to be talking to.
Story_ID: 174694
Speaker 1: When did you start getting on the career track 'cause a lot of people go on for two years and that's it.  And a lot of people had that southern experience and that was it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Well, of course recognize that in 1953 when I came back from Korea, I was all of twenty-one years old and I was thinking seriously at that point in time about whether or not I ought to have a career in the [U.S.] military or not.  I decided to reenlist, and when I reenlisted, I had asked for and received an assignment as a recruiting sergeant on recruiting duty for the United States Army, and I was inducted into and went back to recruiting duty at the same location that I had joined the service in 1948.  As a matter of fact the sergeant that recruited me, Sergeant William Fowler, was now, by that time, junior to me, but still there at that recruiting location.  It was there and the interesting thing about this--again how circumstances and situations impact your life.  While I was there, we recruited a young, Chinese kid, and he came in and went to basic training.  About nine months later, he showed back up and he was a 2nd lieutenant and I said to myself, "Hey, there's something wrong with this picture.  There's something really wrong with this picture."  This guy had just came through here nine months ago and now he's a 2nd lieutenant, and I'm still a non-commissioned officer so I began thinking, at that time about going to officers' candidate school [OCS]; and I wasn't sure whether or not I was ready for it.  I didn't know what it would entail, but I knew that I wasn't the--not the sharpest knife in the drawer but not the dullest one either.  So I applied for officers' candidate school, and I had been a good recruiter.  So my commander, who at that time was a young captain--he wasn't so young I don't suppose, southern white gentleman, he said to me, he said, "Sergeant, you have done an excellent job and I would be proud to endorse you for officers' candidate school," and so I went to OCS.  And it was, without a doubt, the defining moment or moments of my life from that moment on.  Officers' candidate school is one of the most intense, one of the most demanding experiences that anyone can possibly go through, physically, mentally, emotionally, intellectually.  It is overwhelming.  We started with a class of 125 people.  When we graduated, we had a class of fifty-eight and I was at the top of that class.  I was a distinguished graduate from my OCS class.  It was an experience, but it set the tone for everything else.  Here you really got your arms around duty, honor and country.  Here is where you really got your arms around the fact that this is not a joke.  This is for real because you're being trained to lead men and, if necessary, into combat to do whatever has to be done.  For me, at that point in time, I was a young man, I had just completed my high school GED [degree] and was just inundated with demands.  They create a situation for you in OCS which is very compelling.  They give you assignments that they know you can't complete.  The issue is for you to prioritize what has to be done and to do it in such a way that will allow you to get the essential job done, and so on September the 14th, 1956, I completed OCS and became a commissioned officer.  That's where it started.
Story_ID: 178693
Speaker 1: (Cough) But there's a little historical tracing about the role of blacks in the armed forces and Franklin Watts [part of Hachette Children's Group] published it ['An Album of Black Americans in the Armed Forces,' HM Donald Miller] in 1969.  The [U.S.] Army bought five thousand copies of it in paperback for their book kits.  But it was for kids.  You know it was for kids probably fourth through the eighth grade or something like that, but as I began to research, I began to realize some things that I had never known, you know, blacks have had a prominent position in the armed forces for years.  They hadn't been adequately recognized and they were certainly suppressed, and I mean seriously suppressed--guys in the [U.S.] Navy, Jesus, I mean we didn't have an officer in the Navy until World War II [WWII], and you know, that's damn difficult to overcome, but it has happened, and now it is--it's unbelievable.  No one could have ever told me about [HM] Colin [Powell].  No one could have ever told me about the gentleman who is now the head of forces command, the black four star who was also the deputy chief of staff for operations of the entire United States Army.  Shelacash Veley [ph.], [Eric] Shinseki, this Japanese guy who was the chief of staff for the United States Army, c'mon.  [John] Abizaid, the guy who is now the four star commanding all of the forces in Iraq, [Ricardo] Sanchez, three star, who is his subordinate.  I mean it's c'mon--I mean it's a different world.  I don't know that you know this, but it's an interesting thing.  There was the chief of maintenance for the entire United States Air Force, black female two star.
Speaker 2: I heard that recently, right, right.
Speaker 1: I mean it's--this stuff is off--Sherian Cadoria, who is a female, she was a major when I was deputy assistant secretary of defense, was the head of the Military Police Corps.  You know, it's a different world.
Story_ID: 178694
Speaker 1: --So you go to officers' candidate school [OCS]--
Speaker 2: Fifty-six [1956].
Speaker 1: Fifty-six [1956].  How do you end up--you know because you had been an under achiever for a period of years, so what ends up making you the head of your class?
Speaker 2: Drive, determination, desire.  Desire particularly.  The door had been opened for me and I could see the opportunity.  I think until you have been found worthy of at least the opportunity, it is difficult, but, of course, a number of things happened to me in very rapid succession.  In 1951 we moved from--no 1950, we moved from Fort Bliss, Texas, I was in a [U.S. Army] Signal Corps unit, we moved from Fort Bliss, Texas, where I had been a young corporal to, then, Camp Gordon, Georgia, now Fort Gordon, head of the--home of the Signal Corps, and when I got there, they named me first sergeant of a company, eighteen years old.  I didn't have any more right to be first sergeant of a company than a man in the moon, but I had demonstrated some leadership skill, some level of intelligence.  I could read, write, speak and it was a turning point for me, and then, later, I became first sergeant of another company just before I went off to Korea, and then when I got to Korea, I was named battalion sergeant major of the 4th Ordnance Battalion in combat from 1952 to 1953.  And then when I came back, I eventually became a recruiting sergeant, so I was beginning to build, if you follow what I'm saying, beginning to build some skills and some experiences, but it was not until my asking and I'm reminded of the wonderful Biblical phrase, "Ask and it shall be given" [Matthew 7:7].  I asked for the opportunity and because of my experiences, I was given the opportunity and when I saw it, I wasn't going to let it go.  Julieanna [Richardson], I used to go to bed at night probably around ten or eleven o'clock after we had studied, did everything we had to do, and I can remember virtually every night that I was there, I would say my prayers and I would say, "Thank God for today.  God, please give me the strength to get through tomorrow."  I did that every day and I was determined to get through that class.  I told my friends, I said, "If any one man goes across that stage, it's gonna be me."  And I had--I had things to overcome that some of the other guys did not have to overcome because I had never been in the role that some of those guys had been in as real soldiers.  I had been sort of an administrative soldier, so I had to learn all over again--well, not all over again, but for the first time, how to read a map, how to navigate through field navigation using a compass, how to shoot, how to move, how to lead.  I had to learn those things.  And I am here to tell you and I'm not kidding a bit, it is the most challenging thing I have ever done up to that point or since, no doubt about it because it takes everything that you have, everything, to succeed at officers' candidate school.  They separate the wheat from the chaff.  I told you we started off with 125 guys and I think there were fifty-eight or fifty-nine that graduated.
Story_ID: 178695
Speaker 1: So, you're at that point at Fort Benning [Georgia]? Do you--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then is that when you later go off to Korea? You go back to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I went back to Korea but some time later.  When I graduated from OCS [officers' candidate school], my next assignment was back to Europe.
Speaker 1: Okay, in Germany?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Augsburg [Germany], was that?
Speaker 2: Aschaffenburg [Germany] first and then Augsburg.
Speaker 1: Augsburg was where your daughter [Lynn Miller] was born?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: So you're married at this point.
Speaker 2: Exactly, I was married to my first wife.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And got to Germany in December of 1956, having graduated from OCS in September and between September and December, I had gone out to Fort Ord, California to bring some troops back for movement to Germany.
Speaker 1: Now, what is happening in Germany at that point?
Speaker 2: Nothing much, there's a stalemate.  There's a standoff.  The [Berlin] Wall had not yet been built but when I was there in 1948, 1949, it was during the time of the Berlin Airlift and that, of course, abated later, but it was sort of a standoff time.  We were--NATO [North American Treaty Organization] was very much confronting the Warsaw Pact countries.  Our biggest concern was if the Russians would come across that border and into the Fulda Gap, what was gonna happen with us.  It was--those were our concerns there, and it was there--I went to jump school to airborne school, in Germany.  I should have gone right out of OCS but I didn't, so I wound up going to airborne school in Germany and then joined first the 10th Mountain Division which is now over in, I guess, they're in Afghanistan right now or have been and then later the 11th Airborne Division, which was later deactivated, and then onto the 24th Infantry Division.
Speaker 1: And what's your rank at this point when you--?
Speaker 2: At this point in time--initially when I get there, I'm a 2nd lieutenant.  When I come back, I'm a 1st lieutenant.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in between assignments from the 11th Airborne Division to the 24th Infantry Division, I was head of the leadership department at the NCO Academy.
Speaker 1: Now, how many bases are in Germany too at that point--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, God.
Speaker 1: --because we have bases all over.
Speaker 2: All over the place, I mean I can't even tell you how many.  There are just scads and scads of troops.  There must have been, I would imagine, at least two or three hundred thousand troops over there at that time.  I'm not sure of that, but that's my best guess particularly given [U.S.] Army and [U.S.] Air Force troops.
Speaker 1: So what was life like in many ways there?  You know, are you engaging--'cause there's so many--I mean are you engaging in German culture are you--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, as a matter of fact, well--I was an infantry officer and as a result of that, I spent enormous amounts of time in the field training.  I mean like some people put on a suit and shirt and tie and go to a corporate office.  I'd put on my fatigues, combat boots and go out in the field and my job was to train troops and to be trained and that's what we did, and we did it around the clock for months at a time.  So there was not a lot of relaxed time at home, but when we were, I started going back to school.  Again, one of these little vignettes, people in your life who make a difference.  I remember reporting into the 11th Airborne Division for airborne training and for an airborne assignment and the colonel who is commanding the regiment at the time said to me, two things, he said, "Lieutenant, I see you're not airborne qualified."  I said, "No sir, I'm not."  He said, "Well by God, you will be because you're going to jump school Saturday morning."  I said, "Yes, sir, no problem."  Then he said, "I also noticed you don't have a college degree."  He said, "Why is that?"  I said, "Well sir, I just never attended college."  He said, "Are you enrolled in the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] now?"  I said, "No, sir, I'm not."  He said, "Well by God, you will be because no officer in my command, who does not have a degree will not be pursuing a degree.  You must have one, otherwise you will not be competitive."
Story_ID: 178696
Speaker 1: And it's then that I began to go back to school at night and for nine and half years at night, I went to school all over the world, in Germany and then back in the United States, different locations, and in Korea, and finally got my degree in 1967 from the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland].
Speaker 2: So what is your work up the ranks during this time period, you know, in this nine and half years? So you're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm a second lieutenant when it starts--well, actually a 1st lieutenant when it started I guess, and then I'm a captain from about 1961 up until to about 1966 and then I become a major and I'm still going to school at night and when I retired in 1968, I was a major and I just not quite a year before that, had gotten my degree.  I had started graduate school but then dropped out and then decided that I would get out of the service, which was one of those difficult, gut-wrenching decisions.
Speaker 2: Why did you decide to get out?
Speaker 1: Interesting point--two points I guess, again.  I had just come back from Korea in 1965 on, what you call an unaccompanied tour, meaning I was there for just one year without my family.  When I came back to the United States, I was stationed at the Pentagon in Washington [D.C.] and in 1968, I guess it was early in 1968, I was told that I'd be going back to Vietnam, which I didn't mind because I wanted the Vietnam experience.  Soldiers like to go where the guns are--I mean that's the name of the game, but I was told that I'd be going to Vietnam and then I said, "Well, what about [United States Army] Command and General Staff College [Fort Leavenworth, Kansas]?"  They said, "Well, we will consider you for Command and General Staff College when you return from Korea"--I mean from Vietnam and I said to my assignment officer, I said, "You know, that's not acceptable.  I just came back from a short tour and I should be going on a long tour," and then what I said to him was, "when I graduated from the career course in 1964, I was the number one man in that course, and there's a guy who is now dragging up the last of the class"--I mean he was almost fifty-eight out of fifty-seven graduates, "and you're sending him to Command and General Staff College and not me."  I said, "That's not fair and that's not right and I want to see my branch chief, talk to him about it."  I went in to see this Colonel Myers [ph.] and he said to me among other things.  First he asked me, "Why do you want to see me," which was a silly question.  He knew why I wanted to see him, but he said to me, "What do you want to talk to me about?"  I said, "I want to talk to you about my career and going to Command and General Staff College," which is a very significant experience for young [U.S.] military officers because if you've been to Command and General Staff College, your assignment in Vietnam is going to be different than had you not been, so I wanted to get that assignment in so I could have my choice of a better assignment for my career growth.  He said to me two things that caused me to make the decision to leave the service.  First thing he said to me was, "Well, you know you're a very ambitious young man."  And I said, "Well, sir, I hope that it is ambitious in the interest of not only myself but the service."  He said, "Well, I'll tell you I'd like to send a Negro officer to every course, but I just can't."  I said, "Sir, I did not come here as a Negro officer.  I came here as a regular [U.S.] Army major and that's how I want to be treated."  He didn't like that a lot and so I had to go back and make a tough decision.  It took me many weeks, a couple of months actually I guess--two or three months to make the decision.  It was the most difficult decision I ever made in my life as to whether or not to get out of the service at that time or whether to stay the course, go to Vietnam, come back and then continue my career.  I was thirty-six.  (Cough) As I have said to my friends and family, I was too young to stay in the service.
Story_ID: 178697
Speaker 1: It was an awkward situation to be in.  If I had a stayed in the service for thirty years, I would have been forty-six (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: You mean for ten years?
Speaker 1: For ten years, I mean meaning thirty years meaning--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --right, right.  I gotcha.
Speaker 1: Had I stayed for the remaining ten years, I would have been forty-six years old.  Forty-six is not a good transitional age to move into industry, so I made the decision to retire, tough decision because I think I was tracking for some good stuff.
Speaker 2: Now, how do you think your assignment [in Vietnam] would have been different?  I mean the major--it's called major--what is the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No, it's called, Command and General Staff College [Fort Leavenworth, Kansas].
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: Command and General Staff College is the next step after your career course.  You have--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Officers'--
Speaker 1: Officers' candidate school or basic course, career course, which I had already taken--a company officers' course, and then career course, and then Command and General Staff College.  This is where you step up to begin to learn more about command and staff assignments, and it's a thing where the guys who are there are majors and lieutenant colonels, getting ready to become full colonels and then you go to the [United States] Army War College [Carlisle, Pennsylvania] as lieutenant colonels and full colonels to get ready for promotion to brigadier general.  So, it was in that context that I felt I was being short-changed, ironic story. 1971 comes, three and half years later, I become deputy assistant secretary of defense while I am on a tour in Germany--an inspection tour, had my family with me.  We have dinner one evening with, then, four star general [Michael] Mike Davison, who is the USAREUR commander, United States Army Europe commander, all forces come under him.  As a courtesy, he sends my family down to Garmisch [Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany] while I'm inspecting some other places, and the commander at Garmisch Recreational Center has a cocktail party in honor of my wife, her being the wife of the deputy assistant secretary of defense.  He tells her that he knew me and that I was such an outstanding officer and how proud he was of me.  Who was he?  Colonel Myers [ph.] (laughter).  It's a funny and small world.  It really is.  His decision not to send me really led to my becoming the deputy assistant secretary of defense.
Speaker 2: Which is pretty amazing.
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Story_ID: 178698
Speaker 1: You know, I want to just ask a couple other contextual questions about the service--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: --because you came in under President [Harry] Truman and during the time you were there, went through [President] Dwight Eisenhower, [President] John [F.] Kennedy--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --right.
Speaker 1: --and then [President] Lyndon [Baines] Johnson.
Speaker 2: Lyndon Johnson, right.
Speaker 1: And I'm just wondering did any of those presidencies affect the service at all or I mean, did you--?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, actually all of them did in different ways.  Certainly Harry Truman was the initial guy.  The fact that Dwight Eisenhower, himself, being a five star general was in the presidency had a meaningful impact on the services I think that there was a real appreciation by both Eisenhower and the [U.S.] military establishment that he was a very influential president, but you have to be reminded--people have to be reminded of the fact that it was Eisenhower who spoke about our need to beware of the military industrial complex, which I think a lot of people have not paid much attention to.  I'm not even sure that this president--this present administration [President George W. Bush] understands that and I particularly refer to the Halliburton situation and the fact that they have been given these mega billion dollar--or million dollar contracts over in Iraq without even any competitive considerations.  Mr. [Richard "Dick"] Cheney being in the White House, formally having been the head of Halliburton.  It's an issue.  Following him, of course, John [F.] Kennedy and it was John Kennedy who really created [U.S. Army] Special Forces as we know it today for special operations and that had a major impact on the services, and I was fortunate enough to be with General [William] Yarborough, who was the first commanding general of Special Forces at his Special Warfare Center headquarters [U.S. Army John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School, Fort Bragg, North Carolina] in 1961, '62 [1962].  Lyndon Johnson, I'm not quite sure what his impact on the military was except in a negative way unfortunately because of the fact that he was drawn into the Vietnam War in a way that I think he would not have wanted to be, but this was really a function of John Kennedy, you know, putting in advisors into Vietnam back in the early '60s [1960s], but what a lot of people do not understand, Julieanna [Richardson], is the fact that the U.S. military had a presence in the far east since the end of World War II [WWII].  I mean that is not widely known, but we had operatives there from the late '40s [1940s], right at the end of World War II up until today in differing degrees, in different kinds of operations, many of them very clandestine, but it was--our introduction to Vietnam was not new.  When it was known as Indochina, we were there.
Speaker 1: And then there was also the Pacific--well the Pacific Rim was a little different.  No, no, China--the Burma (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Burma, Myanmar now--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: -- as it is called.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a different ballgame.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 178699
Speaker 1: So you make this decision, you know, this difficult decision to retire [from the U.S. Army]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay at thirty-six.  You just or you're close to getting your degree [B.A. degree from University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland] from--or you just got--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I've had my degree for not quite a year.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so, at that point, and this is 1968, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay so this is 1968.  Your mother [Mamie Rufus Cooper] is working at Interchemical.
Speaker 2: Interchemical Corporation [later, Inmont Corporation, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: And she--can you tell the story then?  Okay, so you are newly returned--you return to the New York area?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I return to the New York area.  I--it's very interesting on the day that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated, which was April 4, 1968, I had been asked by a friend of mine, Frank Steele, who is one of the original Buffalo Soldiers.  He is still alive in his eighties, living out in Fresno [California].  Frank asked--he was a major at Fort Dix [New Jersey] at the time and I was there, he asked me if I would be willing to go to speak to a group of educators for a program sponsored by the board of education in Stanford, Connecticut to talk to them about the role of "the negro in the armed forces" at that time. This was because Whitney Young's widow, Margaret Young, had been putting together some of these lectures and she had asked Frank to do it and Frank couldn't.  He said he'd ask me if I could and I did.  And I came up to New York that morning and I remember it very well because I got a ticket on the Jersey Turnpike for speeding, but I was in my dress blue uniform and I told my mother that I was gonna lecture and would she like to hear me 'cause she had never heard me speak at all.  So she said, yes, and would I come by and pick her up at the job 'cause she was gonna go in early and do what she had to do, and then we could go up to Stanford and she was going to go back with me to Washington [D.C.] that evening.  While I was waiting for her, a gentleman by the name of Al Lederer [ph.] who was one of the senior VPs [vice president], saw me in the hallway, and said, "Good morning, major, how are you?  Nice to see you.  Your mother tells me you're thinking about retiring, would you be interested in considering a job opportunity here at Interchemical?"  I said, "Well, it would be something I'd be happy to consider."  "Do you have a resume?"  "No, I don't but my mother is coming back with me to Washington and I will give her a copy of my resume when she gets back."  Little did we know later that day that Dr. King was gonna be assassinated, so it was a very traumatic weekend but one that is indelibly etched in my mind.  I can't forget it.  As a result of that, I had a couple of interviews with people at Interchemical and later was offered an assignment as special assistant to the president and I took that assignment and stayed with it for several months, and was called up to the chairman's office, and he asked me if I would like to go to the Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts].
Story_ID: 178700
Speaker 1: So they [Interchemical Corporation, later, Inmont Corporation, New York, New York] sent me up to the PMD, the program for management development [at Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], the next year and in 1969, I went there in September of '69 [1969], left there in December and had just been immersed.  You know, it seemd as if what they attempted to do was to take the first year of the M.B.A. [master's in business administration] program and condense it into four months.  I mean it was heavy work.  I mean it really was, but very interesting, challenging experience and then I came back to the company and was named manager for corporate recruiting but also still remained as special assistant to the president.  And the chairman, the one who had sent me up to Harvard [Business School], Herb Woodman [ph.], became sort of a mentor to me in many respects and Associated Black Charities is a function of Herb Woodman getting me involved with the United Way, very interesting thing.  I mean there is a story that goes behind it.
Speaker 2: I wanna just a little go back to understand what was sort of happening.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Definitely your mother [Mamie Rufus Cooper], you know, people liked her at Interchemical.
Speaker 1: Yeah, clearly.  Sure.
Speaker 2: Okay, but what--why was he interested in offering you a job?  Was it that, you know, that times were changing--they were wanting to--you know, corporate America, was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, of course.
Speaker 2: --wanting to integrate?  I want you to speak to that issue.
Speaker 1: I think times were changing.  And, of course, this was the time when [Clifford] Cliff Alexander, for example, was the newly appointed chairman of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, EEOC, as we know it; and I think Interchemical was interested in identifying talent and talent that I guess they would have considered to be tested, tried, safe, positive, and it was an opportunity for me to come in and be responsible for all of the equal opportunity affirmative action programs that they had, and I set up the first program at Interchemical.  As a matter of fact, I had gone down to Washington [D.C.] and spent some time with Cliff, asking advice and council about putting it together.  And so that was I think a lot of the rationale behind it, but Herb Woodman [ph.], the chairman, was a very wonderful guy, who saw in me something, again, that I hadn't seen in myself and offered me the opportunity, which I took.
Story_ID: 174703
Speaker 1: First of all, can you tell me about what Interchemical [Corporation, later, Inmont Corporation]--what kind of company it is?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: And what its revenues are.
Speaker 2: Interchemical Corporation later known as Inmont, was a manufacturer of inks, paint products and other surfactants.  It was headquartered here in New York but had plants in Detroit [Michigan], in Toledo [Ohio], all over the place, where they made paints for the automotive industry and inks for the printing industry.  They made other plastic products by extrusion.  I can't tell you what their revenues were because I just don't remember but, at its height, I guess they had somewhere between ten and eleven thousand employees throughout the country.  It later went on to attempt to become, if you remember the word conglomerate.   They did a lot of acquisitions, some which were totally unrelated to what they were doing.  They bought fish hatcheries and they bought all kind of other stuff that I don't even remember now.  And it led to a disagreement between the board and [James] Jim Hill, who later became chairman, after Herb [Woodman (ph.)] retired.  And ultimately Jim decided to leave the company and when he decided to leave the company, it was just about that time that I was being recruited away from them by a company to go out and become vice president of industrial relations at Seatrain Shipbuilding [subsidiary, Seatrain Lines].  That's another transition in my career and I made the tough decision to take that assignment.
Speaker 1: I want to go back though to Interchemical.
Speaker 2: Interchemical, sure.
Speaker 1: And I want to understand just the nature.  So you're special assistant [to the president] really to help diversify the workforce.  Is that?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My job really is to become the head of the equal opportunity affirmative action effort for that company and it was one of the first in the industry.
Speaker 1: Okay, and these--but things are sort of opening up, and their concern is because they have government contracts, right?
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely.
Speaker 1: That's the hook, okay.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: That they're being made to, you know, someone's putting teeth.  Now was [HM] Art Fletcher there?  He wasn't there at the time.
Speaker 2: No, Art was not, but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --they were acting on their own--
Speaker 2: --[Clifford] Cliff Alexander was the head of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission [EEOC] at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think they were sensitized I think to the reality that affirmative action and equal opportunity was here and it was here to stay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, Cliff Alexander--so you're based--they're based in--now, Interchemical was based in--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --headquartered here in New York [New York].
Speaker 1: In New York, okay.
Speaker 2: --right down the street from the Harvard Club.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [68] West 44th [Street, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: So you're back in your hometown?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Story_ID: 174704
Speaker 1: --How do you go about making your job [special assistant to the president, Interchemical Corporation, later, Inmont Corporation, New York, New York]--you know, have--first, it's newly created.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the whole issue of equal opportunity and affirmative action is new.  It's brand new and so I don't have much of a road map by which to go so I go to Washington [D.C.] and I meet with Cliff [Clifford Alexander], and I ask Cliff, you know, how can he be helpful to me.  And they give me some materials, which essentially outlined the concept of what equal opportunity and affirmative action is all about.  So I put together a plan, which is less a plan than it is a road map for equal opportunity and affirmative action if you will.  And I brought in a guy who became a good friend of mine, Al Brooks [ph.], not Harry, but Al, and they were both OCS [officers' candidate school] classmates, by the way, but Al was retired now as a lieutenant colonel, and I brought him in as my assistant, and then when I went off to the Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts], he sort of took over from me, but the idea was to begin to create opportunities for women and minorities, of which there were very, very few at the time that I got started.  And it was a very difficult thing.
Speaker 1: Do you have a budget?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did have a budget.  I can't tell you how big it was now.  I will tell you this.  When I did the budget and laid it out for the chairman, I remember him telling me that he wished that he got budget proposals like this from others of his staff members because it was clear, concise, and I had the experience of working down in the Pentagon [Arlington, Virginia] of how to write a paper and how to present an issue, you know, so that's what I did.
Speaker 1: You worked in the Pentagon, when?  We may have missed that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, from 1965 to 1968.
Speaker 1: Oh, your last step was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was my last assignment.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.  I just want--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, no problem.
Speaker 1: Okay because I'm like, Worked at the Pentagon.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, so you, but this is your whole new introduction to corporate America and it differs (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It is.  I know nothing about corporate America.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how are you transitioning into corporate America and also part of your ability to make things happen means you have to be civically involved in a community that you were born in but you hadn't been in some while, so I'm trying to understand.
Speaker 2: Well, initially, I don't know a thing about corporate America.  I mean that's the first thing I got to tell you.  I don't even know how to negotiate a salary.  I don't know anything.  As a matter of fact, I can remember on one of my first trips with a couple of other guys from the corporation.  We were out in Cincinnati, Ohio, I think at a hotel.  And I noticed this guy was calling home on the phone and talking to his wife and his kids and he was ordering these meals, and I'm saying, "Man, you know, how can you afford to do that?"  He said, "Well, you just put this on your expense account."  I said, "Expense account, (laughter) what are you talking about, expense account?"  We didn't have such things in the [U.S.] military.  I mean you had--they would pay for your transportation from post to post, but if you wanted to call home, it was on your dime, not the government's dime, and if you wanted meals, I mean, hey you got a meal allowance.  It was on you, so I had to even understand that it was a different paradigm, very different, and it was very enlightening, and it took me a while to begin to understand the politics of corporate America.  I was a soldier, and as a soldier when I received an order, I carried it out and when I gave an order, I expected it to be carried out without a lot of discussion.  It doesn't work that way.  And I had to come to understand that that people have different priorities.  They have different agendas; they have different motivations; they have different needs; they have different expectations; and have different attitudes.  All of that was difficult for me to understand and overcome in the process of trying to get a job done; however, as time went on, I began to understand a little bit about the corporate game, but I also understood that if you want to get something done, you have to assert yourself and you have to be assertive, and you have to be focused.
Story_ID: 174705
Speaker 1: So what were you able to accomplish in that two-year period you know, and how many minority and women were there and how many--?
Speaker 2: Julieanna [Richardson], I can't tell you that because I just do not have the recall.  I can tell you that there were very, very few women in management positions.  There were a number of women who were secretaries; there were a number of women who were administrative assistants.  One of the managers for employment or something might have been a female.  But women--there were no corporate directors, no corporate VPs [vice president]; there were no women on the boards at that time, nor were there any blacks or Hispanics.  I was probably I think, without fair contradiction, the senior black in the company as a special assistant to the president.  And what was my progress and my results?  I can't suggest to you that it was very profound because I wasn't there that long and I left--actually I joined that company in July of 1968 and I left it in June of 1970.  So it was a two-year period but a good part of that time, I was out at the business school [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I don't think we made the kind of progress that I know has ultimately been made.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But it was an early time and a transitional period--
Story_ID: 174706
Speaker 1: So you then go to Seatrain Shipbuilding [subsidiary, Seatrain Lines, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Right, go to Seatrain Shipbuilding (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that's--where is that?
Speaker 2: That was at the Brooklyn Navy Yard [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's still in the area.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I got recruited away [from Interchemical Corporation, later, Inmont Corporation, New York, New York] to go to Seatrain and it was a good thing and a bad thing, a good thing in that it was my first opportunity to become a corporate officer of a company.  I was vice president of industrial relations and I did not have much experience in industrial labor or employee relations, but again I think they were looking for quite frankly an African American or Hispanic as the case may have been to come in and lead their employee relations function.  I had the good fortune to work with a gentleman, Carmine Broco [ph.], he was of Italian extraction, but Carmine was a very seasoned labor relations guy, knew the game, knew it well and was the corporate interface with the seamen's union [Seafarers International Union] and the Marine Engineers' Beneficial Association and UIW, which was the United Industrial Workers, so the seafarers, the masters and the workers, all had their unions and they were a tough bunch of cookies.  I'm here to tell you, but Carmine really taught me a lot, and showed me a lot, and guided me along the way.  And I had this wonderful experience out there, but the bad part of it was I was working for a young twenty-five year-old high school dropout who was the son of Warren Pack--Howard Pack, I'm sorry, Howard Pack who was the president of Seatrain Lines, which was the parent company of Seatrain Shipbuilding, but at Seatrain Shipbuilding, we were building the first of the super tankers that had ever been built; and these tankers, the length of the tanker if you stood it on end, was as high as the Empire State Building [New York, New York], and we were building them right out there at the Brooklyn Navy Yard.  And there, we really got involved in some intense efforts with respect to hiring of minorities at the yard because of the provisions that were in place that if you came into the Brooklyn Navy Yard to build, you would have a certain number of African Americans and Hispanics in your workforce.
Speaker 1: So the unions really didn't want to have any of that?
Speaker 2: Well, oddly enough the unions were more supportive of it than the management in that instance, but it was a very interesting time, and we managed to get it done.  You know, it was tough.
Story_ID: 174707
Speaker 1: --Are you ready to leave [Seatrain Shipbuilding, subsidiary of Seatrain Lines, New York, New York] at the time?  What happens that this opportunity [deputy assistant secretary of defense] happens in Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: Yeah, what happens is that I am now in a situation where I am really not happy with this guy, Warren Pack, and I don't think he's terribly happy with me because I can remember at a staff meeting one day, he said to me something to the effect, "Well, I don't know all about this Harvard [Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] stuff and these compensation programs.  I don't know about all that stuff; you know, I just know what needs to be done."  I said, "Hey, Howard--Warren, I'm not gonna apologize to you for my good fortune;" and I don't think he liked that terribly much, and I didn't care for him an awful lot either.  He was immature and not particularly bright, but in any event, I was there and my good friend, Harold Sims, who was then the acting director of the National Urban League, Whitney Young having died, Harold took his place in a acting capacity until they made their search for whomever was going to ultimately become the head of the Urban League, which wound up to be [HM] Vernon Jordan.  Anyway, Harold had been asked to consider this assignment in Washington and he said no that he had already an assignment that he was happy with, but he knew someone that he would like to suggest.  Harold and I had been at Fort Bragg [North Carolina] together at the Special Warfare Center [U.S. Army John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School] and we had gotten to know each other pretty well, so he made the recommendation.  I went down to Washington to interview for the assignment and the guy that was interviewing me had been the vice president of industrial relations, Roger Kelley had been the vice president of industrial relations for Caterpillar Corporation, and I was vice president of industrial relations for Seatrain [Shipbuilding], so we had an interest.  We had--there was a synergy there and an interest and I was later offered the assignment; and it was good for them because they were looking for someone who had just exactly what I had.  I had the [U.S.] military experience; I'd had the Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] experience; I had had the industrial experience by that time; I had written this little book, so it was a good fit for them.
Speaker 1: And you--so can you talk about that--I had also down you joined them in '71 [1971], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so there are a lot--even though you're not Republican, you know, [Richard] Nixon was as president, he had gotten elected in 1969.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So who are the African Americans assembling in the government at this point, you know, some names and what positions?
Speaker 2: Well, Bob Brown is one, of course, who is a specialist assistant to the president, but in this instance, the president of the United States; there is [HM] Art Fletcher, who is assistant secretary of labor, there is--oh, God, the names are escaping me, but John Johnson [ph.], who is the assistant secretary of the [U.S.] Navy.  There were--oh, God--I wish--was it John Wilks?  Yes, John Wilks, was there.  The guy--[HM] George Hailey who is Alex Haley's brother was there, [HM] Gloria Toote was an assistant secretary of commerce [sic., assistant secretary for equal opportunity] at the time, I can't remember too many of the other names, but there was a group called "The Black Political Appointees," and we used to meet once a month in different places, and there were several of us, and Bob, of course, was the dean, but [HM] Jewel LaFontant [Mankarious] was there at the time.
Story_ID: 174708
Speaker 1: I can remember all of us [political group, "Black Political Appointees"] meeting once.  I think we had a call meeting at the White House to meet with Mr. [Richard] Nixon and we all showed up, and Nixon walked into the Cabinet Room and he walked around the table and shook hands with each one of us, and we sat and we talked about different issues.  He, of course, at this time was revving up for his political campaign and he was busy making sure that we were all on board, and I can remember [HM] Jewel LaFontant [Mankarious] asking him a very pointed question about whether or not he was going to appoint her to an ambassadorship.  I was kind of taken aback by it, but she did it (laughter).  That was one of those interesting experiences.
Speaker 2: She had moxie.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I don't know whether it was--who we had Malek, Fred Malek, and what was his other assistant's name?  The name escapes me for the moment.
Speaker 2: But, were there other Democrats in the group besides yourself?
Speaker 1: Not many that I know of.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, see I was in a very interesting situation, very interesting position.  They had, the fellow that preceded me--and I won't get into any particulars about it, but he left on less than happy terms with them.  They were less than happy with him and when they found me, I mean they found the credentials that they were looking for.  You know I had the [U.S.] military experience, had the corporate experience, I had written this book ['An Album of Black Americans in the Armed Forces'], you know so it was--it was good for them.
Story_ID: 174709
Speaker 1: So talk about what you do you know, and it's one thing working for, you know, the U.S. Army.  It's another thing working for the U.S. Department of Defense.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: So what are you--and it's probably you're learning things that you, you know--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I'm learning, I'm learning stuff like you can't believe.  I mean this is an experience on an entirely different level.  I mean I am now in a situation--deputy assistant secretaries carry a three star equivalent rank and I am in an entirely different world.  I am being exposed to things as deputy assistant secretary that I was never exposed to when I was on active duty as a young officer, but what I learned very quickly is the following: number one again now, I'm seeing from a different prospective that the [U.S.] military at the senior most levels and the Defense Department at the senior most levels is a very political place, no pun intended.  You have to understand the name of the game, the rules of the road, you got to understand the players.  It's all very, very different.  The politics are being played all day, every day by everyone.  You learn that.  You learn that what is written is not always what is practiced, and what is practiced is not always written; and this is a very interesting thing to understand.  Power points are not as readily discernible because while people have rank, it's the people with the reach that have the impact, not necessarily those with the rank.  We had an assignment that was very important.  At the time I was there, we had to rewrite the Uniform Code of Military Justice and while this is generally a function that would accrue to the legal people, it fell to my department because I had a young man by the name of [Curtis] Curt Smothers, who was my deputy for military who had been a young captain in the [U.S.] Army, who had really challenged one of the four star generals over in Germany on some issues having to do with race relations.  He was a judge in the Judge Advocate General's Corps and he challenged the general.  And there was a big brouhaha and he won.  He prevailed.  And so he prevailed, but he had to retire or resign and [Melvin] Mel Laird who was then the secretary of defense asked him to come in and to be my deputy and it was with Curt that we rewrote the Uniform Code of Military Justice as it pertained to non-judicial punishment.
Story_ID: 174710
Speaker 1: It was a very challenging time.  We [U.S. Department of Defense] were undergoing very serious race relations issues with respect to all branches of the service.  There were fights; there were mutinies, I mean there was all kind of stuff that was going on within the services, having to do with race relations. There were discussions about hairdos, the afros; there was a question about the daps that people were using, you know, the hand displays.  There were so many things that were going on.  There were big fights up at--not physical fights--but fights up at the [United States] Military Academy [West Point, New York] about complaints that some of the service cadets had.  It was a very, very contentious time.  Commanders were being told that they had to have affirmative action and equal opportunity programs in place.  Many of them were receptive.  More than a few were very resistant.  And it got to be a very serious thing.  I can recall being on an inspection trip in Europe and one of the [U.S.] Air Force colonels at a base told me one morning at a breakfast that he didn't have time for this nonsense, that he had combat missions to be prepared to perform, and he had to keep his troops trained, and this was sort of an interference for him as he saw it.  I did not communicate that fact back to, then, General [David] Davey Jones, who was the USAFE commander, the United States Air Force in Europe, but his--my escort officer was a young, black captain, Air Force captain, and he communicated that back to General Jones' office from the field that day.  We went onto another base and ran into another Air Force colonel, who was black, who happened to be [Henry] Minton Francis' brother-in-law.  By the time I got back to the headquarters in Europe for the Air Force, General Jones met me as I stepped off the plane.  I mean met--he was at the steps of the plane when I stepped off, and he said to me, "Mr. Secretary, there is likely to be a problem that you're going to have encounter and you need to be aware of it because I've taken an action."  I said, "What is that?"  He said, "I've just relieved that colonel this morning," and that colonel was on the list for promotion to brigadier general, and he was out on his ear.  Same thing happened on another trip to Europe--no, it was the same trip, I'm sorry.  Forgive me.  It was the same trip but a different circumstance.  We went into Naples [Italy] to interview some of the troops and to meet with the commanders there, the [U.S.] Navy now.  And oh they were incredibly arrogant.  They showed me every discourtesy that you could show.  For example, here I am a three star equivalent.  I come up to the headquarters and some young, junior officer meets me downstairs and I say, "Where is captain, so and so?"  "He's up in his office.  He's waiting for you."  I get there.  He's got his feet up on his desk with a newspaper spread out.  I go inside and meet the admiral, who midway of our conversation, gets up and says, "Well, I gotta get ready for a ceremony," and takes his pants off and begins to put on another pair of pants.  I came back and I reported this to John Johnson [ph.], who was, the then assistant secretary of the Navy.  [Elmo] Bud Zumwalt who was then the chief of naval operations found out about it; called me in, discussed it.  This guy was on the list for promotion to three star admiral, booted him.  People were very serious about it.  We established during that same time, I guess it was in December of 1971, the Defense Race Relations Institute at Patrick Air Force base in Florida and there we began to gather troops to talk about diversity, to talk about affirmative action; to talk about the differences; and the tolerances and the cultures.  And we began to get very serious about it.  Every organization had assigned an equal opportunity or affirmative action officer.  And so we began to man-handle the situation.  I can remember going out and talking to the Command and General Staff College [Fort Leavenworth, Kansas] where I could not go as a young major and I was able to go out there and lecture in a class, and many of my peers were there at that time to talk about the seriousness of what this business of equal opportunity and affirmative action was all about.  One of my proudest moments, Julieanna [Richardson], was the day that I was able to invite six black colonels in to meet with the secretaries of the Air Force, the [U.S.] Army; I don't think the Navy was involved in this instance, but the Air Force and the Army, the secretaries of those services, for lunch because these six gentlemen had just been selected for promotion to brigadier general.
Story_ID: 174711
Speaker 1: In this group of six that you take in, who are they?  You said Harry [ph.]--
Speaker 2: Oh, let's see, we had General Brooks [ph.]; we've got [Arthur] Art Gregg, who later becomes a three star and the chief logistician for the Joint Chiefs of Staff.  There is [William] Earl Brown, who is an [U.S.] Air Force colonel at the time, who later becomes a three star general, a very senior position.  There are two or three others, and I can't remember their names right now, but those three are very visible to me, but it was just an extraordinary, oh.
Speaker 1: Was George--George Price, was he--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: George was a junior to these guys, he came along a little bit after them. But we all knew each other and knew each other well, as a matter of fact George tried so hard to get me to stay in the service and I wouldn't do it.  As a matter of fact I talked to him very recently he's one of my chums, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so you bring, you--you make this happen and just--?
Speaker 2: I shouldn't say and I have to be fair about that, I shouldn't say that I make this happen.  I should say that the efforts that the services and Mel Laird were putting behind this equal opportunity and affirmative action made it happen. I happened to be a facilitator, more than anything else, you know. I have to be fair about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 174712
Speaker 1: What other things or sorts--so this is, you know 'cause [President Richard] Nixon gets a rap, you know and his presidency sort of gets bogged down.  You leave a year before his, you know, before his leaving, so.
Speaker 2: And I will tell you why. Mel Laird, who I admired so very much, was then secretary of defense, and Mel had made it clear that he would not stand for a second term appointment, and I think, and this is my conjecture now, not his, I think that he makes the decision not to stand for a second term appointment because of Watergate. Watergate has just opened up, and it is a very delicate and very ugly situation. I see the handwriting on the wall. Laird is leaving. I have an opportunity to stay but comes along another intervention by Harold Sims, who had been asked about identifying someone who might be interested in becoming vice president of personnel [management] at Columbia University [New York, New York].  Harold sics them on me and the timing is so fortuitous that they are seeking to recruit me at the same time that Mel is saying that he's not gonna stay, and so I have to make this difficult decision, of do I want to leave this assignment, which I know I would have been able to maintain into a second administration, but I did not want to be tainted with the administration and here was this wonderful opportunity to go up to Columbia University to become probably I suspect, and I don't think I'm wrong about this, the first black vice president of any Ivy League institution. So I say okay, you know, let me go do this so, and we went back and forth, back and forth and finally I made the decision.
Speaker 1: One thing before we just leave the service, you received the Distinguished Civilian Award, was that important--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) [Department of Defense] Distinguished Civilian Service Award.
Speaker 1: --award, okay, that was for the time that you were at the [U.S.] Department of Defense?
Speaker 2: That is a very high-ranking award, and I was graced with that and very happily so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 174713
Speaker 1: So you go up to Columbia [University, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is another change.  You've never been in academia before either.
Speaker 2: Entirely different, totally different world beyond anything I had ever imagined, beyond anything I had ever imagined.  And I have to tell you straight up, I had come from the eye of the storm, so to speak, as far as politics were concerned, you know, in a political arena in Washington, D.C., but nowhere in my life did I ever know how politics were really played, which is on an academic institution.  It is unbelievable and you know, unforgiving, but it was a wonderful experience.  And I spent five good years there at Columbia, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now who's the president when you're (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: President [William] Bill McGill, who is now deceased, unfortunately, but a fine gentleman and a supporter.
Speaker 1: So what were you--what was your mandate to happen and what was Columbia because we were just yesterday interviewing, you know Dr.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: [HM] Roscoe [C. Brown]?
Speaker 1: --yeah, Roscoe, and he was talking--he was saying that you know, NYU [New York University, New York, New York] was sort of light years, but this is even further, much before you come there.  I think he is at Bronx [Community College, City University of New York, New York, New York] at that point, right so.  (Laughter) But he said, historically, you know, NYU was much more an engaged university and Columbia wasn't.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: You know, but it's sort of on the edge of Harlem [New York, New York] too.
Speaker 2: Well, Columbia is a very interesting institution both, academically, obviously, a stellar institution.  It is an interesting, urban university centered really in what now has become the broader areas of Harlem, sitting right up on Morningside Heights [New York, New York], incidentally, a place where I used to run across the steps when I was a kid, never even remotely imagining that I would be involved there in any meaningful way, but when I was recruited, the university I think was having its problems with affirmative action and equal opportunity and contract compliance.  They were beginning to move in a way of trying to create a process for recruitment of women and minorities and they were seeking also to do a better job on their contract compliance.  Their contract compliance had to do more with the Lamont-Doherty Geological Observatory [Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, Columbia University, Palisades, New York], which is up along the Hudson River.  A lot of people don't know that it is a part of the Columbia University, but it is.  And one of the reasons I think they were anxious to recruit me was when I was there [U.S. Department of Defense] as deputy assistant secretary [of defense], I issued a show-cause notice to Columbia University to show why their multi-million dollar contract should not be terminated for their failure to comply with some things.  The state-cause notice was later lifted after they made certain concessions; and I think that is how they really began to hone in on me after a discussion with Harold Sims, but that was not my motivation for issuing the cause of notice.   I had no idea that I'd ever work at Columbia.
Speaker 1: Wait a minute, you issued the cause of notice where?
Speaker 2: When I was at the defense department.
Speaker 1: Oh, so that--okay, okay.  I see.
Speaker 2: But, of course, I mean one had nothing to do with the other, but circumstance, happenstance has it that I wind up at Columbia.
Story_ID: 174714
Speaker 1: You asked about my mandate [at Columbia University, New York, New York].  I really did not have any particular mandate per se except to come in and--I think they were looking for someone to give some leadership to their human resources function.  They had a very old, staid, structured environment.  We did not even have the most fundamental records automated at that time or computerized.  When I first got there, there were two little old ladies, God bless their souls, with very thick eyeglasses who sat there and they administered the entire staff of the university with cards, 5 x 8 cards.  I'm serious.  I couldn't believe my eyes.  I really--they were still in the 19th century, not the 20th century.  It was unbelievable.  I had just never seen anything like it.  There wasn't a computer in the office, nothing, and so I went back to a guy that had been with me at Seatrain Shipbuilding [subsidiary, Seatrain Lines, New York, New York], Dave Rosenberg, and I engaged Dave to come to work with me there at Columbia [University, New York, New York].  We revolutionized the place.  We put in a new computerized system for all of the records.  We fiched, microfiched all of the old cards, hard copy records and began to turn some things around.  We removed some people that shouldn't have been there, brought in some new people.  We got involved in labor contracts to a way that I couldn't believe.  District 1199[SEIU United Healthcare Workers East] was there and gave us grief.  The supporting staff association up at Columbia Presbyterian [later, NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, New York] gave us grief.  They had an affiliation with Harlem Hospital [Center, New York, New York], for which they were receiving sums of money to support, what they called, the affiliation between Harlem Hospital and the College of Physicians and Surgeons at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital, all of which was a part of Columbia University proper.  And I got into big battles there with the head of the health sciences department because he felt that that was his to run.  My position was, yes, it is yours to run, but it's not yours to run when it comes to affirmative action and equal opportunity and corporate or university personnel practices.  We had to go in and redefine the benefits programs for the people at Harlem Hospital because I was convinced that they were being discriminated against, and it was just--it was an interesting, challenging time, unlike anything that I had ever seen, and I saw politics there being played as I said earlier in ways that I never imagined.  Some of these professors were so politically astute until it wasn't even funny, but it was a good time, and it was a meaningful time.  I think this is where I really hit my stride.  The Defense Department [U.S. Department of Defense] was one thing; Seatrain was another thing; Inmont [Corporation, formerly, Interchemical Corporation, New York, New York] was another thing, but Columbia University is where I hit my stride professionally in terms of the work that I was seeking to do.
Speaker 2: So what do you mean by that and--?
Speaker 1: I mean by that that I know the impact that I made on the institution.
Story_ID: 174715
Speaker 1: So can you talk about some of the impact--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well--
Speaker 1: --like Harlem Hospital [Center, New York, New York], was there a Dr. Jenkins [ph.] there?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Well, do you know who at Harlem Hospital, you were, you know, sort of interacting with or advocating on behalf of?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was a gentleman by the name of Price [ph.]; I can't remember his first name now.  There were several people.  I just can't--
Speaker 1: Can you explain the relationship?
Speaker 2: Yeah, let me try to describe it again. Harlem Hospital is a part of the New York Hospital System, but it is a teaching hospital, which is affiliated with Columbia Presbyterian Hospital [later NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, New York] and they receive funding, at least at that time, they received funding from the health and human services area as part of the affiliation, but what was happening was that the university [Columbia, University, New York, New York] was receiving these funds, but they didn't--they hadn't installed a proper retirement plan for these folks because they were affiliation people.  They were not hospital people, they were affiliation people.  There was a hospital staff, the doctors, the nurses, the administrators and what have, and then there was the affiliation, the affiliation having to do more with the administrative side of the relationship between Harlem and the health sciences division.  So we had to go in and straighten out a lot of stuff that had not been done.  We implemented a proper retirement plan.  It was consistent with the retirement plan that we had for the rest of the university.  They were entitled to that.  I can remember going over and talking to some of the people at Harlem Hospital and they were very, very upset.  I told them that we were going to correct some of the problems.   I sent Dave Rosenberg over to talk to them.  The first thing they came back to me and said, "Why did you send this white guy over here?  You're not serious."  I said, "Please, stop making those kinds of judgments.  Let's take a look at the progress that's made, the results that's made and do not deal with these ad hominem kind-of things."  It turned out they loved Dave.  I mean they adopted Dave more so than me because he was the guy that really went in there and did all the digging, the hard work, but the fact of the matter is at Columbia University, they had labor relations problems.  I remember walking out one day for lunch and I was walking back up Broadway at about 114th Street and my secretary was running down the avenue, I mean literally running, looking for me to tell me that they had taken over my office.  When I got back, my office was--there had to be a hundred people in my office, which was not as big as these two rooms, by any stretch of the imagination bigger than this room, but not as big, maybe from the stairwell over.  I'm not quite sure.  Anyway and when I say a hundred people, I'm not kidding.  They were standing on the windows; they were standing on my desk; someone had taken a sharp object and carved into this most gorgeous desk that I had--they had carved in the name, "Miller is an ass."  There were student activists there, there were union activists demanding certain considerations for the contract that we were negotiating.  I can remember Gil Noble, the guy who does 'Like It Is,' and I grew up with Gil, coming in on a news assignment and saying, "What are you doing here?"  I said, "Well what are you doing here?"  The fact of the matter is that they stayed there in the office.  Some began to leave, but when I left that night, they were still there in the office.  And I locked up all the files and told them, "Hey, see you guys tomorrow.  I'm going home and having a steak and a martini, and I hope you're going to be okay."  And I left.  I walked out.  They needed that kind of confrontation, and they stayed in that office for two or three days, but I'd go home every night; take a shower; have a martini; and have a steak; and tell them that I was going to do so, but they had not been accustomed to that.  They had been accustomed to people just caving, but when it was all over, the president of the university was very proud of the way we handled it.
Speaker 1: Well what did they want?
Speaker 2: Just issues in the contract, probably pay more than anything else.
Speaker 1: This is teachers?
Speaker 2: No, these are not teachers (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: These are administrators?
Speaker 2: These are the administrators and the supporting staff, yeah.  And they were with District 1199[SEIU United Healthcare Workers East] of the drug and hospital workers.  So it was a tough group, tough group (laughter).
Speaker 1: They were unionized then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were unionized.  Jesse Olson, who was a long time, old, Jewish labor organizer was the guy that I had to negotiate with.
Speaker 1: So you didn't union bust, you union controlled?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, no, it's not a matter of union busting.  It is a matter of not allowing one element to just circumvent you know the proper application of the collective bargaining process--
Story_ID: 174716
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, who were your other contemporaries around the country, who, you know, were in similar positions?  Were there other blacks that you know of?
Speaker 2: The only one that I knew of at the time was--and I can't call his name now.  He was up at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: [HM] Walter Leonard.
Speaker 2: Walter Leonard (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Walter, and he--
Speaker 2: Walter was there, but Walter was a special assistant to Derek Bok.  I went up and interviewed for Walter's job when I was at Columbia [University, New York, New York], but Walter went on to become president of, what was it Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee]?
Speaker 1: Right, that's right, but Walter had instituted--or what he is proud of is he  that he came up with what is called, The Harvard Plan, that was more of a recruitment tool, which is different, you know, for recruiting students.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  No, I was there primarily to be an administrator of the human resources program, which included affirmative action and equal opportunity.  I will give you an example.  I had a guy who was the president--not the president, but the treasurer of the institution.  Now, I don't know whether you know this, but Columbia University owns properties that run probably from 106th Street north to 125th Street now to about 135th Street from Broadway over to the river [Hudson River].  I mean they own virtually everything in there.  Bill Bluer [ph.], who was then the treasurer of the institution, had his offices down in the Wall Street area.  Why?  Because of the nature of the treasurer's office.  I mean they had great endowments, and they had great properties and what have you; and I went down to see Mr. Bluer to tell him that we had a problem with EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] who were coming up asking for information, which we did not have available and which we needed.  I can recall Dave Rosenberg and myself going down to see him at his office, and he was, I don't want to say cordial, but he was not engaging.  And, finally, as we were leaving, I had asked him for these records, so we could simply consolidate the records of the university and he would not give them to me.  And, finally, I asked him, I said, "Well, Mr. Bluer, what do I have to do the next time I come down so we can have these records?"  His comment to me, "Bring a gun."  "Bring a gun," and so I had to go back up to the university and see [William] Bill McGill and tell Bill McGill that we had a situation here that was gonna require his assistance because I could not continue in this way; and unless I received his support and the necessary records, I was gonna hang it up and we got some support, begrudging.  He told the president of the university that he should fire me.  You know, he was a nasty, old, cantankerous individual and I'm not gonna suggest that he was biased, but he gave every indication of it.  He really did.
Speaker 1: Now, what were you able to accomplish in that five-year period?
Speaker 2: Oh God, you know I think, first of all, to put the issue of labor relations in perspective, and there were labor relations that had to do with every element of the university.  Now, I did not have to deal with the teachers or the professors so much, but I had to deal with them in terms of their benefit packages and retirement programs, which were very significant.  We made great strides in that regard; we made great strides in the labor relations area; we made great strides in bringing the university into the 20th century in terms of its administration and began to establish some credibility for the university in terms of its overall administration.
Speaker 1: Now, who was on your team that sort of helped play a role?  Did you have a large staff?
Speaker 2: Large staff, I wouldn't say it was large, but I would say that--I'm just trying to think--there must have been about thirty-five, forty people something like that, not huge, but Dave Rosenberg, who I mentioned just now, was my key guy.  Ralph Dawson, who was a law school student, at the time at Columbia, had graduated from Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], is now a partner at Fulbright & Jaworski [Houston, Texas] and was my lawyer when I was trying to operate my little newspaper.  He was there with me in an administrative capacity as a student, working on my staff, but it wasn't a large staff, but it was an effective staff, and, as I say, we did some things that were really very, very meaningful.  The greatest compliment that I think anyone can ever receive is for someone to say after a person is gone, "Gee, I wish he was back," I got that all the time from the top on down.
Speaker 1: But you had sort of had it with academia, but there is a idiosyncratic nature to academia.
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Some of it not very business-oriented.
Speaker 2: Exactly, and a lot of it rooted in culture, which is not necessarily--culture, which is not necessarily consistent with the current times and reality, you know.  It is an old, academic environment, and people--academic practices and cultures die very hard.  So it was really--it was a very different kind of thing.  I am reminded of the fact that when [President] Dwight Eisenhower was president of Columbia University before he became president of the United States, he was there one day and he was meeting with the faculty and he was talking about the fact that there were going to be problems with pay increases because of the budget and how things had to be done in the best interest of the university, and one of the old faculty members stood up and said, "Mr. President, I think you do not understand that the faculty is the university," and that's the way they feel.  You know, forget the other components, the constituencies.  You know, forget the students; forget the alumni; forget the parents; forget the supporting staff; forget the administrators.  "We, the faculty, are the university," and I disavowed a lot of people of that notion while I was there.
Story_ID: 174717
Speaker 1: So now how does International Paper come up?
Speaker 2: International Paper was a very brief interregnum.
Speaker 1: Right, it was very--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Very, very brief. It was just a year.
Speaker 1: --was it just a--was it a year?
Speaker 2: Just a year.  I had been, as you said, I was no longer excited about academia.  I'd had all I needed of academia and this was an opportunity to break out and get into the corporate world.  While I was at Columbia [University, New York, New York], a friend and mentor, and former commanding officer of mine, Aaron Sadov [ph.], came to see me and along with a friend of his, another compatriot, they were both now at Con Edison in New York [New York] and they came up for some advice and counsel on some things that they were dealing with and at the same time, Aaron kept trying to recruit me to come away to Con Edison, and I wouldn't go.  I was comfortable, and they were not offering me what I thought I would need in order to go, so I did not go to Con Edison, but the same guy that had recruited me for Columbia, came to me to recruit me away from Columbia for this assignment down at International Paper.  I misstated something.  It was not the same guy.  It was another guy, Larry [ph.], who did it, but they recruited me away because they were able to give me a much better package than I had at Columbia, both in terms of base salary and bonus, and stock options and what have you, which universities do not pay.  So I made the decision since I was not too pleased to move on.  I had thought that the university owed me better than I felt was being offered.  So I went to International Paper and immediately found after I got there that International Paper was quite nothing that I really wanted to deal with terribly much.  I did not like the structure, and it was not easy for me to see it from the outside.  I did not like the leadership, and I was just very unhappy there.
Speaker 1: So you were director of personnel and administration there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly, and I was working for a guy, Herb Elish, who had been somewhat of a politician in and around the city.  I think he had been director or head of department of sanitation at one point in time, but a guy who was--he was politically astute, but I did not regard him as being particularly smart.  And I was just uncomfortable with him and he with me.  So Aaron Sadov, came back to me again and made me, as they say "an offer I couldn't refuse," he offered me the vice presidency of personnel at Con Edison and an opportunity to work for him and to grow, and so I decided to take that, and that's when I went onto Con Ed.
Story_ID: 174718
Speaker 1: Now, I want to know, politically and civically, during your time at Columbia [University, New York, New York] and you know at this--you got active, right?  Or were you--?
Speaker 2: Civically, not politically.
Speaker 1: Civically.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I've never been politically active, but, civically.
Speaker 1: So you weren't involved in any of the campaigns like when Percy Sutton ran for borough president?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.  Not at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But Herb Woodman [ph.], I go back now to Inmont [Corporation, formerly, Interchemical Corporation, New York, New York], back in 19--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Sixty [1960]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy [1970]--'69 [1969], Herb came to me and said to me one day, "Don, how would like to go over and do some volunteer work for United Way?"
Speaker 1: United Way.
Speaker 2: And I said, "Yes, sir, of course."  What are you going to say to somebody who sends you to Harvard [Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], and who is your boss, and he asks you to do something?  You do it, so I did.  And I got involved there with an organization called the special allocations committee.  And we would sit and make determinations about what kind of money ought to go to what kind of neighborhood organization or what have you and that resulted in my first exposure to the Greater New York Fund, which was the precursor of United Way in New York.  When I came back from the defense department [U.S. Department of Defense], I was at Columbia, I was approached by the director at United Way and asked if I would join their board.  And so I joined the board of United Way, and that's when my--
Story_ID: 178701
Speaker 1: --You were talking about your involvement with United Way.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was with United Way for several years, with the Greater New York Fund and then it later became United Way.
Speaker 1: And you said in about 1975 that's when you got--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, this was about 1975 or so, so I remained on their board for quite a while and I was on their board in 1982 when we made the decision to form Associated Black Charities.
Speaker 1: Now, you got married to Gail [Miller] in 1981?
Speaker 2: Eighty-one [1981] right in Hawaii.
Speaker 1: Okay in Hawaii, right, your favorite place.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my favorite place and that's one of the reasons why.
Speaker 1: Now, when you--but you met Gail-- where did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I met her at Inmont [Corporation, formerly, Interchemical Corporation, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: At Inmont.  That's right.  That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: I had first met her in 1969.  I guess I had just come back from Harvard [Business School, Boston, Massachusetts].
Story_ID: 178702
Speaker 1: Tell me the beginning of Associated [Black] Charities, why is there the decision to create the group, and you know, and where does that impetus come from?
Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting.  I, of course, was as I say, I was on the board at United Way [of New York, formerly, Greater New York Fund and United Way] at the time.  We had an executive director, whose name was [Joseph] Joe Weber.  Joe died some years ago, but Joe was a very interesting and astute and politically, savvy guy.  Joe was from the old school and he knew the game, and he knew the business, and he knew it well.  Black United Fund, BUF, okay, had announced its intent to come into New York [New York], and they came in all wrong.  They came with their fists balled up, and with an attitude, and they were gonna rewrite everything that was wrong.  Joe and Livingston Francis--Joe was Jewish.  Livingston Francis is black.  He was also with the United Way at the time and a couple of other people, Arthur Barnes, whose wife, now, [Sandra] Sandy Feldman is the president of the American Federation of Teachers.  She had been the president of the United Federated Teachers here in New York, but she is now national, but Arthur and some other people and I, Cal Pressley [HM Reverend Calvin o. Pressley], who is another Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] member.  Cal, we all agreed that we didn't need BUF, we needed our own organization under the umbrella of United Way, so we created Associated Black Charities, and it became a member agency of United Way, and we were in some substantial conflict from time to time with the BUF people and I'm not sure that even now, that there has been any sort of a reconciliation, nor any particular attempt to have a reconciliation, but we wanted Associated Black Charities to remain at that time as part of United Way.
Speaker 1: Now, two things I have questions about--'cause well Reverend Pressley, he was doing what at that point in time? He was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was head of the--I can't give you the name of it, but they were headquartered right in the same building with Associated Black Charities, yeah, Protestant Welfare Agency [sic., New York City Mission Society] is that--?
Speaker 1: Methodist, was it--?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure, but Cal--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --okay.
Speaker 2: He was a member of our board for a while.
Speaker 1: So BUF was based out of where?  You said they were trying to come to New York.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were trying to come in here.  I don't know where they were.  I think they were over in New Jersey if I'm not mistaken, but I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: And can you talk about the concept between both?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I sure can.  BUF was an organization that provided direct support to individuals and activities as opposed to the concept of Associated Black Charities, which had memberships.  They had member agencies and our role was to go out and develop resource for distribution to the agencies wherein BUF would take in contributions and go to specific activities as opposed to an agency.
Speaker 1: But you're talking about basically a philanthropic organization that they would fund--didn't BUF fund a nonprofit org--?
Speaker 2: They might have, but they would also--they would do community-based stuff directly, I mean, not into member agencies.  They did not have member agencies per se.
Speaker 1: So Associated Black Charities, you were operating on the model of--was it sort of on the model of the United Way?
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely, yeah, very much so.
Speaker 1: Okay, so who were the--one, how did the name come about?
Speaker 2: What Associated Black Charities?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Just exactly what it sounds like.
Speaker 1: But who came up with the name?
Speaker 2: I think it was a function of probably three people, Joe Weber, Livingston Francis and myself, yeah. And the idea was this is an association of these various charitable organizations, so let's call it Associated Black Charities. And you know, BUF was I thought a little bit trite, Black United Fund, come on.
Story_ID: 178703
Speaker 1: Now, how did the United Way react to this? Were they feeling (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, United Way was supportive of it. They wanted it.  As a matter of fact we could not have done it without the imprimatur, if you will, or the sanction of United Way.
Speaker 1: But can you put it in sort of in context because United Way--the thing is everyone can't be a member of United Way.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so it funds--but organizations get their funding automatically from it.
Speaker 2: I wouldn't say automatically.  They had both formula and nonformula grants. And the formula grants says if you were out there by yourself raising money, this is how much you would get, and a nonformula grant says beyond that for certain things that you're interested in doing that makes sense to the interest of United Way, here is some additional monies.  The formula grant is intended to preclude fifty different organizations from going to a company and saying, "Hey, how about a fundraising campaign?"  So Associated Black Charities would never go directly to organizations, but we do now because we're no longer affiliated with United Way.
Speaker 1: So who were your member organizations?
Speaker 2: In Associated Black Charities?
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: Oh, we started off with--oh, God, I can't even remember.  I mean there were fifty-two of them initially.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I'm trying to remember if the Urban League was once a member.  I think it was.  I don't know whether the Jackie Robinson Foundation was, I'm not sure it was, it might have been, but there were just any number of community CBOs, community-based organizations that were members.
Speaker 1: These are--was the focus more on sort of social service agencies?
Speaker 2: Primarily--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --social and health services, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 178704
Speaker 1: --You formed that and at the same time you're working at Con Edison, Con Ed [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Right, I'm at Con Ed, yeah.
Speaker 1: And now, how is this environment compared to the others?  This is your most senior position, right--in corporate America (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Up to that point, yes.  And Con Edison is different in that it is a highly structured environment.  Columbia University [New York, New York] was anything but structured, but Con Ed is a highly structured environment and a number of the people who are there are retired [U.S.] military people.  One guy, Bill Lapsey [ph.], was a retired major general.  The guy that I worked for was a retired colonel.  Another guy, Morris Dansker [ph.] was a retired colonel, and there is a very structured environment at Con Ed necessarily so because it requires a very specific discipline and control, and it has its operating plants, the plant managers who report to the division vice presidents, and the division vice presidents basically--there is a vice president for Brooklyn [New York, New York], Manhattan [New York, New York], Queens [New York, New York], the Bronx [New York, New York], Staten Island [New York, New York], who all report in to an executive vice president of operations.  There is also the executive VP [vice president] now, I guess for plant operations and all of the plants, report in to him as opposed to the other people, so it's a very structured environment--very, very much SOP, standard operating procedures.  I mean this is not a happenstance kind of operation at all.  I mean it's just very structured, unlike so many of the other institutions.
Speaker 1: So what were the issues you were dealing with there?
Speaker 2: Well, again, when I first went, I was vice president of personnel.  I had personnel management.  I was responsible primarily for the personnel operation for the compensation, the benefits administration.  That was basically my function for about a year and a half I would say.  Then Aaron Sadov [ph.] went off to become responsible for a different operation, and I then had the entire employee relations function, which included the medical operation, the safety operation, the labor relations, the training, as well as the human resources or personnel functions.  So I had, what I think I can tell you, was probably the most demanding, and compelling, and consequential human resources function in the City of New York.  We were the second largest private employer.  When I first got there, they had over twenty some odd thousand employees, all condensed right here in the city.  It was a hell of a job, wonderful job.
Speaker 1: And what did you learn about--one, you're dealing in a utility.  Right and isn't the issues of the today around nuclear?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had nuclear plants up in Indian Point [Energy Center, Buchanan, New York] at one point, and that was a compelling political issue for us, but it really did not impact my operation per se, but it was a day-to-day issue on the nuclear plant, nuclear safety, and nuclear power, but you know you--to use the phrase that I guess Howard Cosell used to use, "You are up close and personal," with everybody in the City of New York because they're dealing with power plant issues, gas, electricity, steam all day every day, and it is--it's a very commanding, a very demanding job, very much so.
Speaker 1: Now, were you heavily involved in the recruitment of like engineers and was there--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had a corporate recruiting function.  I was responsible for all professional and nonprofessional recruiting.
Speaker 1: Wasn't that around the time that the National Association of Blacks in Science and Engineering?
Speaker 2: AABE--well, AABE was there.  Yes, that too, but there was the American Association of Blacks in Energy, AABE, as they called it.  And then there was the consortium that NACME, National Association of Colored Minority Engineers.
Speaker 1: Right
Speaker 2: NACME was the acronym for it, and NACME had been formed, as I recall it, in the late '60s [1960s], but it had really come into its own by the time that I was here.
Speaker 1: Now, in your dealings, did you come across someone named [HM] Rufus McKinney?
Speaker 2: I know the name.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay because I think he was at a utility, out in California I think.
Speaker 2: I know the name, but I'm not sure I knew him.
Story_ID: 178705
Speaker 1: Are there other things that are sort of impacting you or your growth or--?  At what point are you joining boards?  Is this--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well that's interesting.  I joined the board of the Bank of New York [Mellon Corporation, BNY Mellon, New York, New York] in July 1977.
Speaker 1: So while you were at Columbia [University, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was a very interesting exercise, again, how things mesh.  If you recall, I told you that Herb Woodman [ph.] was responsible for getting me involved in the volunteer process, and that later when I came back from the defense department [U.S. Department of Defense] I was asked by [Joseph] Joe Weber if I would join the board at the Greater New York Fund, which later became United Way of New York City.  While I was on the board, one afternoon at a board meeting, a gentleman who was on the board was named president of the board. His name was Elliot Avery [ph.].   When the meeting was over and we had been discussing all manner of things at the board meeting and at other board meetings about pensions and actuarial assumptions and what have you, and I had some understanding of these issues because I had been involved with them both at Columbia and at Seatrain Shipbuilding [subsidiary Seatrain Lines, New York, New York].  When the meeting was over, I went over to Mr. Avery and I shook his hand, and I said that I wanted to welcome him into the presidency and that I was delighted that he had been named, and I looked forward to working with him.  I did not know really very much about his background or who he was except that he was with the Bank of New York.  He said to me at that time, "You know, Don, thank you very much, I'd like to have lunch with you to talk to you about something."  I said, "Sure, I'd be glad to."  You know, my immediate assumption was that he wanted to talk to me about something with United Way, but I did not know very much about him, so I called Joe Weber and I said to Joe, I said, "Joe, Mr. Avery wants to have lunch with me.  Is it something about the United Way that he may want to talk about that I need to know about?"  He said, "No, it's funny you ask because he just asked me about you."  So I said, "That's intriguing."  So later, I talked to Bill McGill, the president of Columbia, and raised the same question with him because apparently I had gotten the word that Mr. Avery had been talking around.  McGill said the same thing, he said, "It's funny you should ask because he just asked me about you."  Long story short, I went down to meet with him, and the next president-to-be, Carter Bako [ph.] and his vice chairman, four of us sat upstairs in the executive dining room, and he just popped the question to me, "Would I be interested in becoming a member of his board?"  Again, here was an interesting situation.  I think I have to be very realistic about it.  I was not a banker per se, but, of course, I had had some interesting exposures.  I had been, by that time, a deputy assistant secretary of defense; I had been a vice president at Columbia University; I had been to the Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts] and they were looking for someone that they could feel comfortable with and could learn to be a member of their board.  On the day of the black-out--I don't know whether it was precisely that day or a couple of days after.  It was a few days after that, somewhere around the 11th or so, or 12th--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: In 1975?
Speaker 2: In 1977.
Speaker 1: Seventy-seven [1977].
Speaker 2: I'm in Israel, in Tel Aviv [Israel] and I get a telegram that I had been elected to the board of the bank.  I served on that board for twenty-five years, from July '77 [1977] until May of 1982--no, 2002.
Speaker 1: So when you were on the board, were there any other African Americans on the board?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Were not before, were none then, and are not now.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's not a good legacy.
Speaker 2: No, it's not but I know that Tom Renney [ph.] is working on it.  We've talked about it; yeah, we sure have.
Story_ID: 178706
Speaker 1: That opened up another world [joining board of BNY Mellon].  Now, NYU [New York University, New York, New York] did not--I mean they didn't object to that.  That was--
Speaker 2: Columbia [University, New York, New York], you mean.
Speaker 1: I mean Columbia, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: No, not all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not at all, they were, unlike one of my subsequent employers who objected very strenuously to some other things, but, no, they did not object.  They were very pleased about that.
Speaker 1: Who was that?  Was that International Paper?
Speaker 2: No, it was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Dow Jones [& Company, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Dow Jones.
Speaker 1: Because I was wondering some companies would find things maybe of conflict of interest.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, at Dow Jones, they had to get special dispensation from the board for me to join them because they asked me to resign my board membership with at the Bank of New York [Mellon Corporation, BNY Mellon, New York, New York].  I told them I wouldn't do it.  They said, "Well we'll pay you."  I said, "No, it's not about that. I will not resign my membership at the Bank of New York," but then subsequently I had been offered an opportunity to go on Atlantic Mutual's board and they denied me two different times, and at one point in time, I had accepted it and then I had to back off.  They would not allow me to do it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And talk about just the board experience a little bit and what that added because it's not an experience--it's an experience that still African Americans--that African Americans are new to but there's more of, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's very true.  Well, let me add though before I talk about the experience on the board.  I subsequently also joined the board at Schering-Plough [Kenilworth, New Jersey] and I went on that board in 1977, I think it was--what am I saying?  1997--I always like to get twenty years back whenever I can (laughter).  It was 1997 I joined the board at Schering-Plough.  Board memberships are really very interesting because first of all it takes some time to get up to speed on the industry and then the specific organization within the industry, and then there is the issue of learning by experience in trial and error.  What the boardsmanship process is really all about.  And it is different.  It requires a certain sensitivity to not only the institution and the chairman, but also your other board members.  And it is not something that comes easy.  It requires a lot of understanding, a lot of patience; a lot of diligence because you really got to, as I said, understand the industry, then understand the organization within the industry.  It is a tedious process.  You are dealing with, for the most part, less so now than before, but, for the most part, at the time that I joined the board at the Bank of New York, I was the only non CEO [chief executive officer] on the board or if the person was not a CEO right now, they had been a CEO or very senior person.  Now, one of the people that was on the board at the time that I was on the board at the Bank of New York had been a partner--a named partner in a major law firm, but it was only, again, because of his involvement with the bank that he was on that board.  That happened on a couple of different occasions, but all of the other people were CEOs.  Later, at the bank, a couple of people joined the board, Kathy Ryan [ph.], a female, who was a senior vice president at MetLife, came on board and we were diversified to that extent, but Kathy remains the only female on that board.  I was the only minority on that board, but you are dealing with people who are very, very practiced in the art of boardsmanship and it's a craft, I mean, that you develop a skill toward.  On the board now at the Schering-Plough there are two--there had been three females--one of which is African American.  And I'm very happy about that, so there are two African Americans on the board.
Speaker 1: Her name?
Speaker 2: Kathryn, Kathryn Turner with a "K."
Speaker 1: Now, but it's really part of an exclusive country club in some respects.
Speaker 2: Oh it is, it is.
Speaker 1: I'm not saying it's not work, but it's a different level of society.
Speaker 2: It's a different level of society.  It is work, and it is very tedious work; and it can be very difficult work.  We, for example, right now, and it's a matter of public knowledge, Schering-Plough has been undergoing some very difficult times, having to do with the product; having to do with the management; having to do with derivative lawsuits.  It is demanding.  I am very much reminded when I read in the paper about [HM] Carl McCall's travails right now over the New York Stock Exchange [NYSE] with Mr. [Richard] Grasso's compensation, Carl being the chairman of the compensation committee.  I chair the compensation and organization committee at Schering-Plough.  It's a tough position to be in, but that's what you're there for, to protect the interest of the shareholder; and a lot of times the shareholders do not understand things that you do because they're not seeing the total picture, but the whole idea of being on a board is not to socialize.  I don't socialize with other board members.  It is to protect the interest of the shareholder, and in order to do that, you got to do your homework--
Story_ID: 178707
Speaker 1: Well, I know--I remember, I don't know if it was [HM] Vernon Jordan who was talking about--I think in a--I think a presentation I heard about his first board, and how he was like totally clueless.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: You know, and he had no idea what was going on.
Speaker 2: How can you know?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: How can you know?  I tease the, now, chairman of the board of the Bank of New York [Mellon Corporation, BNY Mellon, New York, New York].  I tell him that I did great work for this board.  When I joined this board, it had footings of five billion dollars and now the footings are over eighty billion dollars.  You know, I've worked very hard.  (Laughter) But the truth of the matter is, no, you don't know.  I can remember walking into that first board meeting, I felt as awkward as it is possible for a human being to feel.  I just did.  I did not know, but you know, and you learn, and you grow.  And the longer you stay on the board, the more you understand the intricacies of the operation; the more vulnerable you feel; and, yet, at the same time, the more fulfilled you feel because you know you're making a contribution that not many people have an opportunity to get.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you prevent your ghettoization?  I've heard some of that occurring that, you know, there were blacks on boards but they served no purpose, they were never on the right committees?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, I think, again, this is a function of the individual.  When I was at the Bank of New York, I chaired the trust and investment committee.  I also served on the audit committee; I served on the executive committee; I served as chair of the community reinvestment act committee, so I had a very broad based involvement there and not ghettoized at all.  Now, at Schering-Plough [Kenilworth, New Jersey], I chair the compensation and organization committee, which is one of the major committees of the company; I also serve on the pension committee, and I served on a special committee of the board that was set up to review some issues on derivative law suits.
Speaker 1: Now, I don't think people really understand, you know, what Schering-Plough, you know, what it produces, you know, what its companies are.
Speaker 2: Sure.  Well, Schering-Plough is an extraordinarily interesting company.  It has a broad range of products, but it is primarily a pharmaceutical company and our job is to research and bring to market new medications, new pharmaceuticals that address specific needs.  We had our blockbuster pharmaceutical, which was Claritin, which recently went over the counter and was replaced by another product called Clarinex, which is not doing as well as Claritin had done, but we just came out with a new drug called, Zetia, which in combination with some of other drugs will serve very useful purpose in reducing cholesterol.  Zocor, for example, is a product from Merck [& Co., Kenilworth, New Jersey] and Merck and Schering-Plough have now combined forces to create this special product, which will include Zocor and Zetia, and will radically, radically reduce cholesterol in individuals.  Zocor is a statin.  Zetia is not, but it attacks the process in a different way, but in addition to that, you know, we have over-the-counter things such as all of the Coppertone products, all of the Dr. Scholl's products.  We have a product line for animal drugs.  It's a very big operation, located around the world.  We have affiliations with medical companies or pharmaceutical companies in Japan.  We have facilities in Ireland, in France, in Spain.  We have operations in Germany.  It's a big, big operation.  It's a ten billion dollar-company.  It's not a small company, but it is small in comparison to its other members within the pharmaceutical industry.
Story_ID: 174726
Speaker 1: Well, I was recruited to Dow Jones [& Company, New York, New York] interestingly enough at a time when I was negotiating a labor contract and a strike at Con Ed [Con Edison, New York, New York].  We were in the midst of contract negotiations and I had been approached by someone about this particular job, difficult time because it's hard to focus on a contract negotiation and at the same time be talking to someone about a job someplace else.  Nonetheless, that's what happened and that's how it came about.  As soon as I had completed the contract negotiations, on the day that I reported to the CEO [chief executive officer] at Con Edison that I had completed the negotiations, I shared with him that very morning, as he was getting ready--he was happy about the contract negotiation.  And I told him, I said, "All right, I got to discuss something else with you and I'd like you to take a moment and read this."  And I handed him my letter of resignation. Difficult, but nonetheless, something I had given him my all.  And I was dedicated till that last moment, and no one ever had a clue that I was in negotiations.  In any event, I went to Dow Jones as their vice president of employee relations.  I was their first vice president of employee relations.  There was a woman who preceded me, who was vice president of staff development.  I did not like the title because I didn't think staff development gave any indication of what the position was really all about, but, once again, I bought into something that turned out to be somewhat different than I had anticipated.  The structure at Con Edison was gone and here I am now after seven years at Con Ed in a very structured environment, I'm now back in an environment, which is more like Columbia University [New York, New York] than anything else that I had experienced.  It's very loose.  Very well run.  I'm not criticizing that, but their management style is very different and I had been very heavily engaged in the contract negotiations on the labor relations side and while I was led to believe that I would have full opportunity to continue to do that, it did not turn out to be so.  And I became kind of disenchanted sooner than later, but it was a good opportunity, and it was a good exposure and it was an interesting environment.  I learned a lot, and I think I was able to impact some things that might otherwise not have been impacted.  In 1992, for example, I was able to convince the company to put together a, for want of another terms, a business fair for the African American community.  It was sponsored by Dow Jones and in coordination and in conjunction with Atlanta University [later, Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia], and the idea was to bring issues of black entrepreneurship to the front.  I made the observation to them that black entrepreneurship was a major part of the American business scene and it was not being reported on; not being adequately considered, discussed and represented.  So we made a very substantial move in '93 [1993] and did this conference in Atlanta [Georgia] with the full support of Johnnetta Cole and Tom Cole [HM Thomas W. Cole, Jr.] at both Spelman and Atlanta U respectively.  We did it again the next year, and then in the following two years, we did it at Baltimore [Maryland].  So we made, I felt, a very significant impact on the introduction of black business to the Wall Street Journal.  They ran sections on this in the paper in each of those years, and it was a very, very interesting experience.
Speaker 2: Subsequently after I left them [Dow Jones & Company, New York, New York], I think it was '97 [1997] I believe--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Five [1995].
Speaker 2: Well, no, I left them in '95 [1995], but in '96 [1996] and '97 [1997], we ran fairs, but I think it was '98 [1998] they did a collaboration with Black Enterprise, and I was happy to see that, although I was kind of miffed at it, I was still happy to see it.
Speaker 1: See it continue?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I think the important part is not what you contribute but what the contribution is and to whom.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: And let me add, as a result of that, I was able to convince the company to make a one million dollar contribution to Spelman and to Clark University [later, Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].  I thought that was significant.
Speaker 1: That's significant.
Speaker 2: It is particularly significant since up until that time and possibly now, Dow Jones had never given a million dollars to anything, so I felt good about that--
Story_ID: 174727
Speaker 1: Dow Jones [& Company, New York, New York] opened up--you were talking about it's a dynamic media company--
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: --and that, we were off camera when you were saying that so.
Speaker 2: It is a dynamic media company.  I mean we publish--I shouldn't say we--they publish The Wall Street Journal, Barron's; they collaborate on Smart Money; they publish the Asian Wall Street Journal weekly, they have an incredible interactive database, which is just unbelievable.  I mean you can get The Wall Street Journal online, but you can access it for all manner of other things.  The Dow Jones industrial averages is what everybody knows, and everybody assumes that because of that, Dow Jones is a part of Wall Street financially, when, in fact, it is a financial publication company, but it's a super organization.
Speaker 1: So but this, once again, opens up a new world for you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it does (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --of media and finance on a different level, though you've been dealing in the corporate world.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  It certainly does and when I had finished thinking through the issues of these black entrepreneurship conferences, I, one day, went and talked to the then chairman--the now, chairman, and said to him that you know, I was not happy with certain things that were happening at the company and I thought it was time for me to move on and take a little bit of early retirement and perhaps do something different, and I described to him what I had hoped Dow Jones would engage in sponsoring.  I described to him the concept of putting together a national news publication targeted to the African American community, and as I indicated to him, in my opinion, there were no and there are no national news publications of any consequence that are targeted to our specific community, and I described to him what I meant.  We do not have a single news publication, news publication, targeted to the African American community that addresses news, international news, business, sports, entertainment, education, fashion, lifestyle, religion, obits [obituaries], none of this do we have on a national basis.  The only publications that we have nationally, and I do not regard them as news publications are Ebony, Essence, Black Enterprise, a few smaller publications of sort.  Jet, which [HM] John Johnson has informed me, in his opinion, is a news publication and I said, "Fine, John, if you see it that way, my apologies."  In any event, I wanted to create this publication, high-caliber publication, lacking in grammatical misconstructs [ph.], lacking in misprints, but substantial in terms of its content and its suasion and I saw this as a meaningful and important project.  I encouraged the company to think about it, and, at one point in time, they had made a commitment to me to put up as much as eight million dollars, and this would have taken me where I wanted to go because it was going to be a five million loan, a three million dollar grant and they were gonna participate but only to the extent of the financing of the publication initially.  As time went on, for various reasons that they conveyed to me, they backed away from that commitment, and I finally decided that I had to go, and I had to make this thing happen to whatever extent I could, and so they did agree at one point in time to put in a million dollars if I could get two other major publishers to agree to put up a million dollars apiece, therefore, the three million dollars.  I was not able to do that, so I just finally decided to hell with it, I'm gone; I'm out of here.
Story_ID: 174728
Speaker 1: I left [Dow Jones & Company, New York, New York] and in November of 1995 moved into facilities in Baltimore [Maryland] because I had been given certain assurances by people there, to include people in the governor's office and also people in the city and other operations, that there would be some funding that could be available.  It did not materialize.  In any event, we made a substantial effort.  We put out about four different prototypes and the first prototypes we put out got raves because the quality was very high; the people that I brought on board were people who had been senior executives with Fortune magazine even people from Dow Jones, my vice president for circulation had been the circulation manager for The [Wall Street] Journal throughout the United States; my vice president for advertising had been one of our senior-most marketing people at Dow Jones and had been the publisher of the Asian Wall Street Journal weekly.  I had talent, real talent; my editorial page editor had been a national paper editor for the New York Times.  I'm talking about high quality people.  We put together a really extraordinary staff of folks, both on the administrative side and the professional side, and we did two prototypes in black and white, and two prototypes in color, full color.  I wish I had copies of it with me because I think it would be just stunning for you to see.  And these were broad sheets--two section broad sheets, and the content was superb; the presentation was extraordinary.  As a matter of fact, the woman who designed my last prototype, who happens to be, and we didn't know it until we found out later, a cousin of Gail's [Gail Miller], but she put together something.  She has now been named as president of the newspaper design association for the United States.  It was spectacular.  We made a test, a distribution test, we went out with fifty thousand copies, with fifty thousand mailings, asking people to subscribe.  I have been in the business of, on the side, which I have not discussed with you--my colleague, Harry Brooks [ph.], and I used to own a company called, Gurney's Seed and Nursery Company.  I don't know that you've ever heard of it, but I guarantee you have seen their catalogue.  It's about that big and about like so, seeds, flowers, plants, trees, that kind of stuff.  It's located out in Yankton, South Dakota, which is Tom Brokaw's hometown, no longer in existence, but we owned it for a number of years and I learned there that if you get a return of one half of one per cent, you are considered to have had a successful mailing.  We got a return of two and half per cent and of the two and half percent that returned, 40 percent of them sent money, checks, credit cards just telling us, "Bring the paper, bring the paper, we're so excited."  It could have been a magnificent thing.  It turns out to be probably the ultimate disappointment of my life that we were not able to bring it forward for the American public.  It would have been an interesting crossover read for a lot of people, but it didn't happen.  And at some point in time, as you probably know as an astute, business woman, and one who understands the world, you can't do it without cash, and the burn rate was too high for us to sustain it, so we had to give it up.
Speaker 2: Now, the name, you didn't give the name of the publication?
Speaker 1: Our World News, and it was an interesting name that came about.  We started off calling it The Nation, and then we started calling it The Nation's News, and that got too close to the Nation of Islam, so we decided we'd back off of that, but we called it Our World News, and it was a euphemistic phrase, but I think one that was very, very reflective of the audience that we were trying to reach.
Speaker 2: And you worked on that how many years?
Speaker 1: Well, it took a couple of years, while I was at Dow Jones and then two-and-half years or so in process.
Speaker 2: Why did they pull away?
Speaker 1: Well, their comment was--and I think it was more fortuitous timing--on their part than anything else.  They had closed down a plant, and it was at the same time that I was looking for funding and I think their comment was, "Look, it would be difficult for us to close the plant, and at the same time lay off a lot of people, and at the same time come out with something new."  As I say, I think it was fortuitous timing on their part.  They didn't close the plant because they intended to do it, but having closed the plant, it was, I thought, an interesting opportunity for them to step away from it, and they took it.
Story_ID: 174729
Speaker 1: Do you think you'll go back into any media or publishing in the future?
Speaker 2: You know, Julieanna [Richardson], I think about it from time to time, I really do, but in late 1977 when I had to close the operation down, I just had to come home and lick my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ninety-seven [1997].
Speaker 2: --Ninety-seven [1997] I'm sorry.  I tell you I like to steal twenty years whenever I can. (Laughter) But in '97 [1997] when I closed it down, I had to make some tough choices and I did.  And I closed it down.  I let the people go.  I explained as best I could what we were doing and I had to come home and lick my wounds, so to speak, and I've been licking 'em ever since, but the fact is I've gotten over it, but from time to time, it's very difficult not to think about trying it again because of the need, not because of my ego, not because of any business purpose, but because of the need.  We simply do not have a mechanism to communicate with each other; and if the African American community cannot communicate with each other; if we cannot have a dialogue around a set of given issues, when you come to that table of national opinion, if you don't have a voice, you don't have anything to say.  And this is what I was concerned about.  I wanted to create something that would allow us to have a point of departure that would allow people to talk about what the issues of the moment were.  Right now, for example, I wish we had this publication in existence because we ought to be talking about the impact of Iraq [War] and its consequences, not only on the American people, but on our African American community.  I wish we had it so we could talk about the impact on jobs; I wish we had it so we could talk about the impact on the economy, and come together so that we can have some sort of a voice, a national voice to help inform our politicians on our interests and our concerns, and to hold those politicians accountable.  We don't have that and we don't seem to want it for some reason.  I wish we did.
Story_ID: 174730
Speaker 1: Now, you've had, you know, really a fabulous career when you look at where you began and support of family.  You said a grandmother [Mamie Miller] who you know was not sophisticated enough to value education (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But smart.
Speaker 1: But smart, a mother [Mamie Rufus Cooper] who was always in there with you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And the service did for you what, you know, in some cases, not for a lot of African Americans but for a lot of African Americans, both education and career opportunities.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: And when you look back through your life, I'm wondering what--what sort of--what things do you garner from that, you know, that you say would sort of be a testament for others?
Speaker 2: Well, it's kind of hard to say--I guess I think that one of the things I would say is that so few of us have any real appreciation of what our potential is until the opportunity is presented and then there is the question of whether or not you have the stuff that will allow you to take advantage of that opportunity in a proper way, also the importance of a supportive family, a family that is loving and caring.  I have not talked about my wife [Gail Miller]; I have not talked about my children, but I got to tell you, I have a wife who bent over backwards, I mean bent over backwards to be supportive of me, ever since I have been on this rise, if you will.  When we were running the paper [Our World News], she was, in addition to being my chief confidante and fellow traveler in terms of our economic travails, she was also the corporate secretary; she was accounts receivable; she was accounts payable; she was the accounts, I mean, the office manager.  She was there.  My children have been very supportive.  My son [Mark Miller] worked with me on that project.  He was our systems manager.
Speaker 1: Your children's names give them?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they're Mark and Lynn--Mark L. and Lynn Ann Miller, but the family, the church; I'm not a churchgoer per se, but I am a believing Christian.  I grew up in the church, and I know what those roots were; and I understand the foundation that the church and family creates.  Friends who care and friends that you can turn to when the crunch is down and you know they'll be there to support you, but I think that the most important--not the most important, but among those most important things, is the importance of getting out there and getting yourself educated and informed and involved. It's just critical.  And when you cease education; when you cease being informed; when you cease being involved, you sort of fade away.  I'm concerned right now about my own involvement in other issues of consequence, and we've been talking about I've got to find something meaningful to do that will allow me to transfer some of this knowledge, some of this experience, some of this exposure to others who may need it more so than I right now.
Story_ID: 174731
Speaker 1: And do you have any thoughts about blacks in corporate America and what will be--what is necessary for maintaining success in that arena?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, I do, and what I'd like to suggest is that we take a look at what's going on in corporate America right now.  You know, when [Kenneth] Ken Chenault was named chairman and CEO [chief executive officer] of American Express, it was very significant.  It really was.  When we see now a new CEO at Merrill Lynch that's something significant.  When we see someone like Ann Fudge, who now has become CEO of a major--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Right.  You know?  We are beginning now to see a lot of people in positions that we didn't even know about, and so I think what I'm seeing is the result of a hard push and press on individuals becoming educated and individuals having a: equal opportunity and the benefit of affirmative action.  [HM] Colin Powell will be the first one to tell you about the importance of affirmative action.  He didn't mince any words about it when he stood in front of the Republican [National] Convention.  He was very pointed about it.  I think less so we have Condoleezza Rice, who although she may not articulate it as forcefully as he does, is a clear beneficiary of affirmative action and equal opportunity.  We have so many examples, so many examples of young African American men and women and other minorities who are coming forward, and I hate the use of the word minority, and if my wife [Gail Miller] were here, she would chastise me for it.  We have to find a better word for that because we're not in a minority, but having said all of that, I think that the future is hard work; the future is education; the future is never letting up on the fact that diversity is a critical and important part of our lives as we go forward.
Story_ID: 174732
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I don't know that I have any particular thoughts on it, and I say that because you characterized my life as being, you know, a very full one, and it has been.  It's been a very rewarding life; it's been a very full life; and yet as I look back on it, to me, it's quite an ordinary life.  And I don't diminish at all the consequences of what I've done and the value of what I've done, and the rewards that I've experienced as a result of it, but it's--I mean I don't have myself on a pedestal, I mean I really do not.
Speaker 1: But what do you want people to say about [HM] Don Miller?
Speaker 2: I think about it sometimes and I guess the most important thing I want them to tell anybody--what I would want my children [Mark Miller and Lynn Miller] to say, what I would want my wife [Gail Miller] to say is that, "He did the best that he knew how, and he was willing to pay the price."  Everything else is moot.
Story_ID: 174733
Speaker 1: I have two questions if we have time.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: One is your middle name.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Where is that middle name from? I've (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It is from a--
Speaker 1: And how is it pronounced--it's pronounced--
Speaker 2: LeSessne.
Speaker 1: LeSessne.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's pronounced LeSessne.  It is the last name of a college classmate of my mother's [Mamie Rufus Cooper], Howard LeSessne.  And I met him many, many years ago.  He was a dentist.  I have not seen the name in other places.  I have seen other spellings of it, but it is the only spelling of that sort that I've seen.
Story_ID: 174734
Speaker 1: And what about blacks in the [U.S.] military, your sort of view about that history, you know, if you could make a comment about that.  You know you did the album of black Americans ['An Album of Black Americans in the Armed Forces'] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --in the armed forces and it was, you know, shortly after you had to come out.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was published in 1969.  Look, blacks in the armed forces, Crispus Attucks, first man to die in the Revolutionary War, was not a soldier per se but was a patriot in the first order.  As time went on, we had blacks who fought in any number of wars.  They fought in the War of 1812.  They fought certainly in the Civil War with the 54th and 55th Regiments and they were heroes.  If you saw the movie, 'Glory,' and I'm sure you did, you have some appreciation for what they were about, and then they were used and misused in the southwest and in the creation of the westward move within this country.  We have been there.  We have been oppressed; we have been suppressed, and we have been depressed, but we are still pressing on and the fact of the matter is when you see someone like a [HM] Colin Powell and we all hold him up as the ultimate hero, the fact of the matter is it doesn't get much better than that.  Where is it gonna go?  Onward and upward.  They talk about the long gray line at West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York].  I talk about the long black line; it's there.  It's gonna be there.
Speaker 1: Okay and Associated Black Charities, a group that you founded, what are your hopes and desires for that organization's future?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'd like to see Associated Black Charities continue to develop its endowment or its financial strength.  I'd like to see it sharpen its focus on the kind of organizations that it will support, and I'd like to see it continue its efforts to recognize the people who have made a difference in this world in which we live.
Speaker 1: And can you talk about the people that you've honored over the years?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Over the years, you know, we started off honoring people like Leontyne Price and Leon Sullivan, and [Clifton] Cliff Wharton [Jr.], and then we went on; we've honored Marian Anderson; we've honored Colin Powell; we've honored [HM] Vernon Jordan and Franklin Thomas; we've honored Spike Lee; we've honored [HM] Ruby Dee and [HM] Ossie Davis; we've honored Johnnetta Cole.  There are just so many names.  We've honored [HM] Earl Graves; we've honored [HM] Ed Lewis.  We sought to honor [HM] John Johnson but he was not able to receive it.  We've tried to identify people who have been truly movers and shakers in this world of ours in which we live from all walks of life, and I'd like to see us continue that process, I really would.  I'd like to see us find a way to work with you.
