Story_ID: 10949
Speaker 1: My name is Jodi Merriday, and I am the interviewer.  Scott Stearns is the videographer and there are no observers officially present for this interview.  Sir, could you please state and spell your name, including your middle name?
Speaker 2: It's Daniel Algernon Moore, Sr.  D-A-N-I-E-L, A-L-G-E-R-N-O-N, M-O-O-R-E.
Speaker 1: Could you please tell us your date and location of birth?
Speaker 2: Born November the 20th, 1935 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is September the 24th, 2004.
Speaker 1: The location of this interview?
Speaker 2: This is the APEX Museum, African American Panoramic Experience on Auburn Avenue, 135 Auburn Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am the president of the APEX Museum and the, the founder of the institution.
Story_ID: 10950
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is chicken and dumplings.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of year is the spring time.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, mine or my wife's.  My wife's [Estella Moore] is (laughs) Jacksonville, Florida so it has to be mine also.
Speaker 1: And what is your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "The Lord is the strength of my life."
Story_ID: 10951
Speaker 1: Please tell me about your mother.  What was her name?  Where was she born, and where did she grow up?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Lillian Eleanor Warring.  Of course she got married, became Moore.  She was one of sixteen children that my grandmother.  She was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and she and her sisters and brothers all lived in Philadelphia with my grandmother until she was married and then moved, of course, out of the house.  But my grandmother had sixteen children.  My mother had eleven children--ten, actually ten children.
Speaker 1: What do you know about your mother's growing up in Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: Not much about her growing up and her early years.  She got married at a young age.  Of course, having ten children, that almost speaks for itself in terms of being confined to the house because almost every other year, there was another child born.  So she was not working.  She suffered from Parkinson's disease in her later years, but was a very loving and compassionate woman who took very good care of all of her children.
Speaker 1: How would you describe her?
Speaker 2: I would describe my mother as the most beautiful black woman that God has ever made.  And because she was that, she was a nurturing, caring person.  She was a person who loved humor, just a very good person.
Speaker 1: Did she share any stories with you about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Not really.  We--at that time, during those aid--during those days, there was not much sharing of family history.  So we didn't, we're not privy to a lot of our, our younger years or young experiences.
Story_ID: 10952
Speaker 1: Please tell me about your father.  What was his name?  Where was he born, and where did he grow up?
Speaker 2: My father was Edwin Louis Moore.  He was born also in Pennsylvania, in Dutch country in Pennsylvania.  He was a World War I veteran, and he was always extremely bright and extremely knowledgeable about who he was.  In doing some research of the records of the World War I veterans, they had a card that you had to fill out.  And you--and they would tear the end of the card off if you were, as they say, "colored".  But he described himself, even in those days, as being of African descent.  So he was always extremely knowledgeable about who he was as a person; a very stern man, did not smile very much, did not joke at all, but an extremely loving father and gave us a good home.
Speaker 1: What do you know about his background and his growing up?
Speaker 2: The same applies basically.  He grew up in Dutch country in Pennsylvania.  He had one brother and two sisters.  They lived in New Jersey, so we went there some time during the summer months.  But again, during those days, they didn't talk much about their childhood.
Speaker 1: So there was no sharing of stories in this instance either?  Were there any stories that he imparted to you, any, anything related to him?
Speaker 2: Not in growing up.  He often talked about his work experience after he was an adult.  He talked about his service during World War I.  He served in France during World War I.  He was the kind of person who would write to a president or anyone else in a heartbeat if there was something ever going wrong.  He gave us a, a sense of pride, and though we were very, very--got, not wealthy at all, he made sure that we were extremely proud of whatever we had and to care whatever we had, and we were not ashamed of ourselves or what we did not have.  He was the kind of person who believed very firmly in, not only being stern and being strict, but also having good, a good moral background.  So we had good moral fiber in us from an early age.
Story_ID: 10953
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your ancestors?
Speaker 2: Not very far, unfortunately.  My grandmother who had sixteen children, we learned about her husband, who was Ruben [Warring].  They were born in Virginia and Maryland--can't go back much further than that at this point.  But we're trying now to do some research to find more about, about them.  As in most cases with African Americans, there's a lot of, lot of missing links in our history.  And in many instances, they were not recorded as it should have been.  So it's a little hard--more difficult to search records and do an adequate search of our, of our past.
Speaker 1: Do you know much about the origin or the lineage or if there are any other ethnic communities represented in your lineage?
Speaker 2: Well, we do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My sister took a swab test not too long ago, and discovered that from my mother's [Lillian Eleanor Warring Moore] side of our family came from the Cameroon, Bamileke people of the Cameroon.  I took my swab about two months ago and traces it back to Nigeria.  So Nigeria and the Cameroon is where our ancestors actually came from.
Speaker 1: Did you know your grandparents on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: I knew my grandmother.  And again, I used to walk to her home, which was about maybe ten blocks from our house.  And she was also a very loving and a warm person, always had food in the home, always opened her door to anyone who needed a place to stay.  And although she had a house of children herself, she also took in other people's children.  At the hospital when she was giving birth to one of her children, someone in a bed next to door didn't have a--anywhere to go.  So that person ended up being brought home by my grandmother and being raised by her, she and her son and became a part of her family.  So it was always a reaching out to people and a sharing with people that was, that was a part of her whole lifestyle.
Speaker 1: What about your grandparents on your father's [Edwin Louis Moore] side?
Speaker 2: Nothing is known about my grandparents on my father's side.  And my father's side, other than his brother and two sisters, nothing about his parents.
Speaker 1: Were there any stories that were shared with you by your grandmother on your mother's side that you recall?
Speaker 2: They didn't.  You have to realize this was the 1930s and parents and grandparents didn't do much sitting down and talking about their, their, their life and about their, their past.  And you had to really dig deep for you to understand what you're even looking for because they just did not share those stories.  And when you became an adult and looked back or tried to talk with them, it became somewhat different.  But they were many times very secretive about growing up and about their past.
Story_ID: 10954
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, my earliest memory of growing up was moving, actually, physically moving from one house to another, and then walking down the street to--going to a new home and wondering why, first of all, I was not allowed to take the paper off the wall in the old house since we were moving out of that house and not even understanding just the whole dynamics of the move.  But one of my earliest memories was moving to a new lo--new house and holding my mother's hand, walking down the street going to a brand new home.  And the whole experience of being, going from place to another was my earliest experience.
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2: I imagine I was maybe three or four years old, yeah.
Speaker 1: And the new neighborhood that you moved into, how long did you end up staying there?
Speaker 2: Well, we stayed there for quite a while.  In fact, when I, when I left high school, we were still living there.
Speaker 1: Okay, and there, where you're moving, do you recall the name of that street?
Speaker 2: It was 1522 South Bouvier Street in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: And what was the neighborhood and the community like?  When you recall being a young man and coming into this neighborhood, what was it like?
Speaker 2: It was a mixed neighborhood.  It was white and black, and we had a few people on the street who were better off than others, naturally.  It was a close-knit neighborhood.  Whatever happened in one person's home, it was known in other people's homes.  If you did something wrong between school and home, you heard about it before you even got home.  It was a lot of love.  There were no locked doors in our neighborhood--visited each other's homes.  It was just a very open and friendly neighborhood.
Speaker 1: And was that across racial lines?
Speaker 2: It was.  We lived near an Italian group--population in Philadelphia.  So it was mixed with African Americans and Italians primarily.
Speaker 1: And were the Italians that lived in the neighborhood first generation Italians or were they pretty much--?
Speaker 2: Some of them were second gen-, second generation.  Some of them were first gen-, first generation.  And, of course, many of the children spoke both Italian and English.  And, but there was no, no racial problems in that, in our immediate neighborhood growing up.
Speaker 1: Was that pretty much the way that it was in other neighborhoods as well or do you think that your neighborhood was unique in that regard?
Speaker 2: It was somewhat different because if you went down four or five block into an all-Italian neighborhood, it was very different.  I had a brother who went to a school--he was only one of three blacks in the school.  And everyday after school, he had to take a deep breath on the steps of the school and run all the way home.  So you had that kind of atmosphere and environment when you went even several blocks away from where we were actually born?
Speaker 1: Why do you think your neighborhood was like that so early in the, the 1930s and '40s [1940s]?
Speaker 2: Thirties [1930s] and '40s [1940s].  Well, it was a small neighborhood that was again, not, not with racial overtones, but again, if you went two or three blocks away, then you'd run into an Italian neighborhood, and you'd have all kinds of problems getting, getting back home.
Speaker 1: Could you share other memories with us related to your early family life, holidays, special events or just daily life?
Speaker 2: Well, we had a large family when I was growing up.  I had five brothers and three sisters.  We had a brother and sister who stayed with my grandmother, but in our home it was my brother, my sister, mother and my father and two older brothers who were in and out.  My father, who was very strict, ended up putting them out, one by one to make, make it on their own.  But there was always, always a lot of love in our home.  We had one brother who was a, a typical clown, who always was gonna make my father laugh.  And he would have to almost hide himself to laugh, but he was always doing something out of the ordinary.  I had a sister who was a very, very loving sister who took good care of us whenever she could, helped me find my first job, get my start in, in, in vocational school.  And we had to just make, make do.  And I know what it's like to put cardboard in my shoes to walk to school, to keep the water out, when you had holes in the bottom of your shoes or have not---three pair of pants to change from day to day.  But, in spite of all that, we had, we had, we had pride.  My father only finished the third grade.  My mother only finished the sixth grade, but instilled in us a sense of achievement, a sense of striving to achieve.  I went all the way through school, both elementary, junior high and high, without missing more than five days of school.  I mean he was so strict, you couldn't even get sick during the school days.  You had to get sick on the weekends.  You had to have the mumps on the weekends or measles on the weekends because we did not miss school.  And in high school, I did not miss one day of high school for three years.  I mean we walked eight, nine, ten blocks whether it was raining or snow or whatever it may be, but we never missed school.
Story_ID: 10955
Speaker 1: Could you give your siblings' names in birth order, including yourself?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My oldest sister was Frances.  The next was a brother named Darius (ph.).  We called him 'D'.  Then there was William, we called him 'Billy'.  Then there was Harry, and it was Charles--no, Kit, Katherine, then Charles, then Conrad, then Gloria, then myself.
Story_ID: 10956
Speaker 1: Tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: (Laughs) Now, that's a difficult, difficult question.  If I were to look at sights that remind me of growing up, I guess it would have to be the sights of old cars, old automobiles.  We had one person on the street who was a, a huckster, who had a horse and wagon.  I was definitely afraid of horses.  So whenever he turned the corner with is horse, coming home, I was in the house for the rest of the day.  But the other sights I would think of, that remind me of growing up, mostly the, the cars of the, of the days and that era.  Smells and sounds, it's a little hard to say.  Sounds, sounds of cars or automobiles are the only things I can think of that remind me of my youth.  I can't think of anything that I could relate to as a smell or an odor that would tie me into growing up.
Speaker 1: And do you have any other memories of growing up or what it was like, how you were?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember some of the incidents when I was growing up.  I always wanted to be a boy scout, and we could not afford uniforms so I was not able to become a boy scout which is one of the things that I was, at that time, very hurt about.  I recall my father buying a car, his first, his first--his car that we were, we were aware of, and it was, of course, a stick shift, an old Studebaker.  And we had a very narrow street, so you had to--it was almost like a two-lane street.  So once you parked on the street, if it was--no parking spaces were left, you had to park somewhere else.  You could not find a place to park necessarily.  I recall days of growing up and playing in the snow and having my hands so cold and burning from playing with ice and snow, I would swear I'd never do it again until the following day or the following snowfall.  But those were the memories that I had of, of growing up.
Story_ID: 10957
Speaker 1: What elementary school did you attend?
Speaker 2: It was [George W.] Childs Elementary School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: And were there any teachers there that influenced you?
Speaker 2: There was Mrs. Roosevelt when I was in kindergarten, with whom I was in love.  I was in kindergarten, and she was a very, very lovely teacher, and I recall very vividly, I would walk to the door every day and hold the door until she get--got there to unlock the door.  And I had chocolate milk one day in my hand, between my hands, I was holding the door.  And when she came, I went to let her in, and I dropped the milk, and it spilled.  And I was just devastated.  Because it was no big thing to her.  I recall being in kindergarten and seeing my "first girlfriend," when we were laying on mats, taking naps, looking up and--at Marian Branch and knowing this was my long--life-long love even at kindergarten.  So I started early.
Speaker 1: Was she your life-long love?
Speaker 2: No. (laughs)
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: She wasn't even aware of it.
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you in these primary years, formative times?
Speaker 2: Well, I was a good student.  I was an A student until I got to, got to junior high school [Norris S. Barratt Middle School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and became quite a, quite a clown.  I invented a person that I called Joe A. Price, an imaginary figure.  And I would sit in class--because the teacher had someone else--we couldn't turn around in class.  And it was a girl next to me who turned around, and he didn't say anything to her.  So I turned around.  And he said, "Dan Moore, turn back around."  I said, "I'm talking to Joe A. Price."  My seat was empty behind me.  So he didn't say anything.  And Mr. Dunn was his name, for a long time, this man allowed me to have this imaginary Joe A. Price.  I would get up and go outside to let, let him in the classroom.  And, he was, of course, imaginary.  And I even asked him for test papers.  During the time of taking a test, this teacher actually gave me a test paper and gave one to my friend, Joe A. Price.  I was pretty fast in school, so I filled out his test and mine, got his, got the papers back.  He got an A.  I got a B minus. (laughs)  So I--.
Speaker 1: How was that possible?
Speaker 2: I copied something, something wrong, apparently. (laughs)
Speaker 1: And where did Joe A. Price come from?
Speaker 2: I have not a, not a clue, not a clue.
Speaker 1: Do you many--remember of the characteristics in your imagination?
Speaker 2: Just Joe A. Price.  And this teacher indulged me for a whole year.  And I would even get up and walk to the door and say--he'd said, "Well, Dan Moore, where you going?"  I said, "I'm going to let Joe A. Price in."  And he wouldn't say a thing.  But I was a straight A student practically.
Speaker 1: And were you in an integrated or segregated school?
Speaker 2: Integrated school.
Speaker 1: And what was the traditional composition of your classes?
Speaker 2: I would imagine at that time, it was about maybe sixty, forty.
Speaker 1: Okay, sixty percent African American--?
Speaker 2: White.
Speaker 1: Oh, sixty percent white.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.  Some of my earliest memories of class was being embarrassed when he read the story of 'Little Black Sambo'.  When I was in school, the only two blacks in history was Booker T. Washington, George Washington Carver, the only two blacks in our history were those two figures.  So it was a, it was a integrated school.  Our teachers were all white, and we, but we did well.
Speaker 1: What type of child were you?
Speaker 2: I think I was a pretty decent child.  I was like most children, you know, I had my, my moments.  We played well together for the most part.  I had a brother and sister who grew up with me.  We had friends on the back on, on the block which we also played with.  But I had a cousin who was a lawyer, and he made, made me fight every single day.  I actually fought every day.  He would come to the school and pick out somebody in the school and say to me, "Danny, he called your mother [Lillian Eleanor Warring Moore] a whatever, whatever."  And we'd go, we'd go to battle.  And they afraid to hit me, hit me back because he was there.  And he was bigger than most of us.  So I just fought just about every single day for a long period of time in, in school until I was expelled for, for fighting.
Story_ID: 10958
Speaker 1: Did you and your family attend church?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the church and what--(simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: [Charles] Tinley Temple [United] Methodist Church on Broad Street in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  The traditional church, it was a Methodist church, and Dr. Tinley, I learned in much later years was a songwriter.  And many of the hymns that we sing today in, in churches were written by Dr. Charles Tinley.  I recall going to Sunday school at, at the church.  I recall also going to have my hair cut at a barbershop which was run by Father Divine.  It was "A Peace Barbershop."  Haircuts were then fifteen cents, but you would walk in and just say, "Peace," you'd get a haircut for ten cents and a nickel tip.  Well, I would oftentimes go in and say, "Peace," give him ten cent, took the other five cents and buy a box of Good and Plenty (candy) on my way home (chuckle).  But you could get a haircut at the time for fifteen cents.  And Father Divine's mission was not too far from the church.  So we, we would walk to, sometimes to the barbershop, and not, not too far from the church.
Speaker 1: What were some of your early experiences in the church?
Speaker 2: Not many, other than remembering some of the, the little cards that they used for Sunday School, which I could not quite understand, with the, with, with the Jesus cat with the sheep and this, and this white man with long hair, who I later--could have looked like a hippy in later years, but primarily looking at those kind of memories or those kind of images that were kind of stuck in my mind as a child.
Story_ID: 10959
Speaker 1: Did you have dreams and aspirations in these early years to become anything in particular?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, I did.  I had dreams at one point of becoming a, a tailor because my sister told me that when she was--she had gone to high school before I did, and all the guys in school were making at that time, these fancy vests.  And she said, "You've got to come to school and become a tailor so you can make these vests and dress well."  So I took up tailoring.  I was perhaps the fastest person in the class.  I used to actually make pants patterns in like ten minutes.  So I was able to make pants for students and teachers alike, 'cause I was pretty fast in, in drafting patterns.  But I also recall in my earlier years, sitting by the window looking at the moon and wishing that I could do something to help people who were starving in foreign countries.  And I was, I know I must have been no more than maybe seven years old at the time.  But I recall very, very vividly sitting sometimes just watching the moon and just saying to God, you know, "I would like to be able to some day be able to provide food for those I've heard about that are starving around the world."  And I was what, maybe seven years old or whatever.
Speaker 1: And so in transitioning between elementary school [George W. Childs School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and your later years, was there middle school years or did you go directly from elementary to high school?
Speaker 2: There were middle school years.
Speaker 1: Okay, and they began with which grade?
Speaker 2: Ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ninth grade, twelfth, let me see.  Nah, sixth and no, they begin with, I think seventh grade, seventh through ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, where was your middle school?
Speaker 2: I heard all these tales about junior high school, which was Bok Junior High School.  It was Bach--I'm sorry, it was Barratt Junior High School [Norris S. Barratt Middle School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And brothers had gone there before me.  It was about maybe five blocks from the house.  And I have these fights they had at, at Barrett Junior High School.  So my apprehension was already there about going to junior high school and encountering, God's know what between my house and junior high school.  But I had no, no problems when I'm in junior high school.
Speaker 1: And were you sustaining being a good student?
Speaker 2: Yes, I mean that was mandatory.  I mean you just, you just, you just weren't a D student, period, not in my house.  You were B, A or better.  I mean you just did not bring home Ds, Es and Fs.  That was just unheard of.
Speaker 1: Were you participating in any extra curricular activities?
Speaker 2: I did run track for a minute.  And I do mean a minute (snaps fingers).  That's about it, ran, ran track for a minute.
Speaker 1: And where did you go to high school?
Speaker 2: I went to [Edward W.] Bok High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], vocational school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And also, back in junior high school, I also did--I ran the audio visual department in junior high school.  So I'd always be the person who showed the film whenever had, whenever they had films to be shown in the auditorium.  And then that gave me my love for film and my, and my appreciation, if you will.
Story_ID: 10960
Speaker 1: Went to [Edward W.] Bok Vocational [High] School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  At that time was very popular, was getting into tailoring.  And so I entered into tailoring in Bok and had a very good experience at Bach over the years.
Speaker 2: Did you have any hobbies or any other extra curricular activities that you were participating in, any interests?
Speaker 1: Well, I, I like to save stamps.  Even at an early age, I kind of save, saved stamps and coins, but that and I ran track.  That was about it.
Speaker 2: Were you participating in any extra curricular activities related to church?
Speaker 1: At that time, no.
Speaker 2: What were you thinking you wanted to be at that point?  I mean you mentioned earlier that you were doing the tailoring, but did you have any other notions of something that you wanted to become or something that you wanted to pursue into college?
Speaker 1: Well, at that point I was gonna be a tailor, and I was gonna make all these fancy suits and have a great beautiful shop.  And that was about it, basically. That was my, that was my goal.
Speaker 2: And you didn't become tailor--.
Speaker 1: No, I didn't become a tailor.
Speaker 2: --so what happened within that--the, the graduation from high school forward?
Speaker 1: Well, I looked a tailoring and went to work for a couple of tailoring shops, was not satisfied at all with that whole setup.  So I just decided to go into a different direction--ended up with a thousand different careers, drove a truck for a minute, drove a cab, sold insurance, always did very well in selling; got all kinds of awards for being the top salesperson in Philadelphia in insurance sales and (unclear) in the country in insurance sales.  So I just went, had various jobs basically to make it through.
Story_ID: 10961
Speaker 1: And when do you estimate that you landed with feet on ground, knowing what you wanted to do?
Speaker 2: Yesterday--no. (laughs)  Well, with feet on the ground, I'd have to say that when I got into producing film, that was what I really looked at as being what I wanted to do for a long period of time.
Speaker 1: And what year did that begin for you?
Speaker 2: In 1967 someone came to me and said, "We're always about young people not doing, doing well.  Why don't we have something to attract them that would be beneficial?"  So I, with my grandiose scheme put together a, a Christian rally at the Civic Center in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  It was called 'CURE', C-U-R-E, which stood for "Christians United Reaching Everyone."  We got buses to bus people in without charge  I got four international speakers.  We had exhibits from various missionary societies and perhaps set up the first Bible-preaching computer in 1967.  We arranged with a person who had ran with--who went with GE [General Electric Company] in Valley Forge [Pennsylvania] about twenty miles away.  They had a computer there.  We ran a telephone line there.  So a person could walk up to this computer, ask a question that would go out to the computer, and come back with an answer.  Now this was in 1967.  Now, this was really on the cutting edge.  I also had filmed, that event filmed.  And when it was finished, the person who had filmed it for me, I wanted to do, to do a second film.  There was a minister in Philadelphia called Melvin Floyd who worked with juvenile gangs, and he's also a minister.  So I wanted to do a film on him which we entitled, 'On Patrol for God'.  We did the second film on Melvin Floyd with the gang because he had worked with gangs for quite a while.  And it was extremely revealing because many of these persons who were in gangs and who, who--one man who was in a wheelchair, many of whom had lost friends in, in gang warfare, in senseless gang warfare.  So the film was shown on street corners.  It was shown by--in, in various neighborhoods.  It was shown in public schools.  I wanted to do a third film--this fellow named Gene Bergman who was from, from Holland [sic, Denmark], said, "Why don't you learn how to shoot film yourself?  And so you won't have to hire me, you can do it yourself."  He took some time out to teach me how to shoot film.  This was at that time, on sixteen millimeter film, and we had to do the whole changing bags from--with the film.  And then there was an editor at [television] Channel 3 in Philadelphia, KYW [TV] in Philadelphia who allowed me to sit and watch him overnight for about two days.  That's where I learned how to edit film.
Story_ID: 10962
Speaker 1: So with that [filmmaking] knowledge in hand, after maybe three or four months, I grabbed a camera, bought a camera, said, I want to go to Africa and film in Africa to tell the story that I feel we need to share with African Americans here.  And at that time, missionaries would come back from Africa, mostly white missionaries, saying that African Americans were not welcome in Africa.  I decided to find out for myself what it was all about.  I took this camera and my brother, who was an engineer, he learned how to operate the, the Nagra [brand] tape recorder.  We packed up our stuff and went to Africa, went to Liberia.  When we arrived in Liberia, the minister of information said to me, "Is this your first time visiting Africa?"  I said, "Yes."  He said, "Well, welcome home."  And that became the name of the first film that I did in Africa.  It was called 'Welcome Home'.  We filmed there for about a week or so and came back, and during those times, we had to--when you did film, it was not like today when you're doing videotape, you had to actually sit down with film physically on two different rolls and roll it out by hand and make it dissolve, have to go to a lab for two or three days to come back just to make one special effect.  But when I came back from Liberia, I met the daughter of the president of Liberia [William R. Tolbert, Jr.] who was attending school in Philadelphia, Willie Mae Tolbert [later Wokie Tubman].  And she carried me to Washington [D.C.] to meet with her uncle [Stephen A. Tolbert] who was, at that time, the, the treasurer of Liberia.  My purpose of going there was just to ask him to endorse the film so I could probably try to get a sponsor for it to sell it.  After he saw the film, he said to me, "I will, I will buy the film from you under one condition."  I said, "What is that?"  "That you go back and do a second film for us."  I said, "Well, I, I can handle that."  So in two weeks, I was back on a plane again, going back to Africa to film the sesquicentennial celebration of Liberia.  We filmed Jesse Jackson's first visit to the West Coast of Africa.  We filmed [President of Guinea] Ahmed Sekou Ture's visit to Liberia.  He was coming from I believe Sierra Leone visit at the time.  And it was a tremendously moving experience.  Just to walk down the street in Liberia and see thousands of women in white singing and chanting as they greeted Ahmed Sekou Ture from Guinea, and as he greeted President Tolbert.  It was a very moving experience.  President Tolbert was a very, very warm man, very--a person who had a, a real handle on his country.  He spoke several dialects, and we traveled with President Tolbert to various villages throughout Liberia, some by car, some by plane.  And he would meet with the people and talk their language. We went to leper, a leper village, and he was just a very warm person.
Speaker 2: You went to a--could you--?
Speaker 1: A leper village where, where they have leprosy.  See, they were separated, if you had leprosy, you were separated in a village by yourself.  You would not, you would not, you would not be mingling with everyone else because leprosy is contagious.  So there were villages set aside just for those who had, who, who were lepers, many of whom had missing limbs, etc.  And he would go mingle with the people, talk their language, and he was very sensitive because the car I was riding in--we got four cars behind his.  So whenever his entourage stopped, I'd have to get out of my car, run up to where he was to show him getting out, getting out of his car and going to shake hands with all those who were in the, in the villages.  So he made them put my car right behind his to make it more convenient for me to be able to get out and film him as he got out to meet all these folks.  Liberia is a very great country, beautiful country, very, great experience there.  And I went from there over to, to Ghana before coming home.  I did a film in Ghana on sickle cell anemia before I returned to the states.  So I got into film, that was the real niche for me, the whole creative process and the whole process of being able to communicate and to help change things and lives and people by exposing them to things through that medium.
Story_ID: 10963
Speaker 1: What was your next film after that?
Speaker 2: Well, I did several films.  I did a film on consumer education in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and that was done to help mostly elderly people understand some of the things that they would be encountered when folks came to their home to do repairs, they dealt with automobiles, fraud.  It dealt with all kinds of consumer education issues.  And I did a film called 'The Golden Bush Comb' which is a fantasy film, and I used my son in that film.  It was about a young man who found--he, he went look for his bush comb which was a big, large--at that time, big comb you used to, to comb your bush.  It's called a bush comb.  And looked in his pocket and his comb had turned gold.  And this genie appeared to him and gave him three wishes.  So his first wish was for a home for his grandmother, which she, which she got.  The second wish was for money which he went to the bank and got all these bags and bags of money.  And then his third wish was for a thousand more wishes.  So he took a (unclear) to that, and he went all over, all over the, all over the country getting--just enjoying himself basically.  And that was called 'The Golden Bush Comb'.  I did a film on Melba Moore and traveled with her to California, to Chicago [Illinois] right after she had finished doing her stint with 'Pearlie' [stage play] in New York [New York].  I did a film for Bill Cosby when he was doing his doctorate degree.  He spoke of Graterford prison in [Graterford] Pennsylvania, and I filmed that talk to those inmates at Graterford prison in Pennsylvania; did a film on Gayle Sayers, the athlete, who was with the Chicago Bears [professional football team] and was one of the first persons in many years to even to be allowed to interview George Halas who was the owner of the Chicago Bears.  And Bill Cosby also did a, a part in that film because he had written a book called 'The Lord is First, My Friends Are Second and I Am Third' [sic, 'I Am Third: The Inspiration for "Brian's Song"'].  And Bill Cosby did the intro [introduction] to that book, so I asked Bill Cosby if he would do something in this film.  And Bill Cosby, being who he is, did some tremendous little tidbits in that film that made it a--that separated it from a hardcore documentary into a very, very, I think very moving piece.  We filmed Gayle Sayers in--he was teaching school at that time in--I forget, in Illinois somewhere.  And, just a great experience.  I got some great NFL [National Football League] footage on him and with Cosby's remarks, it was, it was a great experience.
Speaker 1: So you just mentioned several films.  What was the span of time in terms of years that you were covering?  That first film that was done in Liberia was shot in what year?
Speaker 2: That was around 1972.
Speaker 1: And the last film that you mentioned, when was that one shot?
Speaker 2: That was probably shot nineteen, maybe '74 [1974].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're--I mean that's a lot of production for a span of two years and a lot of different topics.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was also asked to be a executive producer at WXIA-TV in Philadelphia [sic, Atlanta, Georgia], an ABC [American Broadcasting Company] affiliate, where I produced twelve, half-hour shows and three, one-hour documentaries for an ABC affiliate in Philadelphia.
Story_ID: 10964
Speaker 1: Now, these years were also quite tumultuous in terms of transformations that were happening socially.  Were you participating as an activist in any of the civil rights-related causes or were there any other causes that you were involved in?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Of course, being Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], we had different, different--a different set of problems than they had here in the South.  So we did not get involved in demonstrations and marches and basically in Philadelphia and didn't even understand sometimes what happened in the South because as I have told many times to Dr. C. T. [Cordy Tindell] Vivian, it's good that it was him down here and not me because it would have been a very different set of circumstances.  They were able to--and I admire, endure in a non-violent way, to make changes.  And I am not sure, in fact, I am sure that I could not have, and would not have participated in a non-violent format to make those kind of changes.  Now, I understand it was necessary.  When you're dealing with a police force, local and county and state and national guard who have guns and knives and billy sticks and clubs and mace and dogs and water hoses, you could not win violently, but my very nature would not have allowed me to have someone punch me in the face if I was trying to vote and say, "Nigger, go home."  So I was in the North, doing, I guess, my part in making, and trying to do films that would help educate people and was never actively involved in a, in a first--in a first-hand basis with any march or demonstration.
Speaker 1: Had you participated, what, what would you have proposed to be the resolve necessary?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure that I would have participated in that manner.  I think confrontation like that, if you're unprepared, brings devastation.  You don't go out and confront an army, and you don't have a weapon.  So if you don't have weapons that equal or, or exceed what they have, it's utter foolishness in my opinion to confront an establishment where you have a no-win situation.  Now, I admire and, and I've said this to C. T. Vivian a many times, I admire what they did.  It took courage, because it was not cowardice.  It was not that they were afraid or it was not, it was not that they were unable to fight back, they understood that they had to do something different to disarm this ugly monster, basically, and make a change.  So I have great admiration for those who walked with Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], those who followed the non-violent philosophy and those who made changes that have benefited all of us through a very non-violent protest.  And on the other side of the coin, when you look at the Black Panthers or when you look at other, other, other organizations who were more confrontational, they did not, did not have the know-how, did not have the understanding of the depth of this monster and how far reaching he was to destroy a nation, to destroy a neighborhood or to destroy a people at will.  So because we were not, in my opinion, prepared to take on that kind of battle, it was, it was absurd to confront a, a gorilla and you have no weapon.
Story_ID: 10965
Speaker 1: Were there any books that you held in high regard from that era that perhaps you read that were inspiring or that struck a chord with you?
Speaker 2: I can't say there were any books that did that for me, in all honesty.  I, I can say, primarily, that more video and film and, and records and audio tapes did more for me than, than some of the books.  I recall vividly sometimes, some of the films that I saw that talked about the war in Vietnam, for example.  It was in the setting of a barbershop.  And the person sang, you know, "Why am I gonna go 8,000 miles to fight somebody I've never even seen before, who's never called me a nigger."  So why would I go 8,000 miles to fight someone who I've never, I haven't ever seen or who has never done anything to me personally.  I recall some of these speeches of, whether it was Dr., Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] or, or Malcolm X or Paul Robeson or just my own feelings about the, the whole slave narratives and what I know we went through as a people.  And I think shaped my life and shaped the way I, that I think.
Speaker 1: What were some of those songs?  What were some of the tapes or the, the movies?
Speaker 2: Well, we look at some of the songs, and you talk about slavery, for example, and you talk about what they went through and how they tried to, through underground railroads, send messages when it was safe to cross.  And if you had to, dogs on your trail, wade in the water so you could get the dog off your trail cause dogs could not follow the trail in the water, different things like that were more meaningful to me.  I have great respect and admiration for black women.  I believe that black women have been and are a sustaining force in our race.  We would have been annihilated had it not been for the understanding of black women who persevered through slavery, who allowed themselves to be raped, to be dehumanized and not allow the black man to retaliate, understanding it would be his death.  So who better could calm this black man from coming home out of a field and seeing his wife, laying across the bed crying or sobbing because she had been raped and, and being persuaded by the same person not to fight the master.  That kind of vision, that kind of strength, has given great respect for black women, which is why I am appalled at music today that denigrates and destroys the image of black women because black women are the true backbone of this race.
Story_ID: 10966
Speaker 1: Are there any particular artists that come to mind when you, when you think of people that you are appalled by in contemporary popular culture?
Speaker 2: I couldn't even name those authors.  I mean I'm a different generation.  And if someone asked me to name a, a, an artist, I, while someone else may say, Cool Jazz somebody, I say Nat King Cole or the Ink Spots. (laughs)  So it's different generation for me.  I don't, I don't--I don't follow it closely enough to know which artists are in that whole field that denigrate women.  I couldn't, I couldn't even begin to even name them.  I do know what I've heard, and I do know the first times that I heard this vulgarity, I was picking up my son from school who was about maybe twelve years old.  And I heard a radio playing next to me in a car.  I could not believe what I heard on the radio.  And so, I cannot believe today the lyrics, the narrations, the innuendoes that tear down black women.  Every black man has a black mother.  How, how do you destroy your black mother?  So if I denigrate you, I'm destroying my black mother.  And, and no black man has ever been born who hasn't had a black mother.  So how do you get to a point where you denigrate bla--the black woman and how do you get to a point where you say that she is a, a B [expletive] and a, and a W [expletive] and whatever else they want to call her, and not really understand that my mother's a black woman.  So I, I get offended when I hear people talking adversely about black women.  And that's a real serious passion with me.  I mean I have two sons and I would not allow them--and I mean this very, very firm--allow them to talk back to their mother at any point in time in life, wouldn't allow it to happen.
Story_ID: 10967
Speaker 1: How, how did you see transformation in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] as a result of the Civil Rights or even the Women's Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: I don't see that see much of a transformation--,
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: --in Philadelphia.  I think, Philadelphia, like most cities, is still run by an old network of people.  And even though there may be people of color in positions, I consider that like I consider Atlanta [Georgia].  In most cases influence, but not power.  And we have gained influenced, we have not gained power.
Speaker 1: How did you see the arts impacting social transformation?  You were clearly coming into being a filmmaker and an artist at a time where there was a lot going on.  Did you see the arts impacting or transforming society?
Speaker 2: Without  question.
Speaker 1: Okay, in what ways?
Speaker 2: I think the, the visual arts and primarily, the media has more impact than we can ever, ever, ever believe.  Visual images are put into our minds and they stay there.  When I think about Christ, when I think about where he was born.  When I think about Christ coming out of Africa, and I compare that in my mind with the first images that I saw as a child of Christ, they are opposed diametrically.  But in my mind eye, I can still go back and see that imagine presented to me as a child.  When I think about the images we see on television today, we--they, they penetrate our minds and our thought processes, and they become a part of our being.  They become a part of us.  So when we make reference to someone, whether it's Christ or whether it's a profit or whether it's an individual, whatever it may be.  It's that image that we see that makes us think that way.  You don't think about Africa.  You're not thinking about some young person with a swollen belly and fly on this lip.  It's the image, not the image that I saw in Africa.  When I got there and I saw stores that had shaving cream and, and toothpaste, I was, I was, I was amazed.  But the image that I had before I got there was little children--you can see their skins and bones, swollen bellies and almost always, a fly on their face or on their lip.  And that is the image that has been given to us of Africa--poverty.  Some African cities, some African countries are beautiful.  And when you think about Africa, you don't think about Egypt because the image of Egypt places it outside of Africa for most of us.  So image and art and, and the visual, visual image does more for us, I think, than almost anything else in influencing how we think.  Beauty is in the--as they say, is in the eyes of the beholder.  What makes a black woman beautiful?  What makes a black man beautiful--or a white person beautiful for that matter?  It's the image or what has been put into our minds as, "This is symbolic of beauty."  Not only years ago, but even today, you rarely see dark-skinned women in commercials--not just twenty, thirty years ago.  There's a commercial running right now in the store that has shocked me because a, a brother with a whole lot of hair and next to him is a picture of Einstein, with all this hair, which is totally unusual for a society that, that I know of, to give you this kind of, this kind of images.  Most of our images of our past--when you look at the Harlem [New York] Renaissance, when you look at all these Broadway [theater district in New York] shows, you look at all the, the Radio City Music [Hall] dancers, you don't see dark-skinned people.
Story_ID: 10968
Speaker 1: You were discussing your responses to the images [of African Americans] that were being presented.
Speaker 2: If we don't present different images, children will grow up with one set of images in their mind, given to them by somebody else.  And I refuse to sit by idly and watch our children grow up with images of beauty that don't include them.  I'm not saying just black--white is also beautiful, but I must be included in that number.  If you're, if you're presenting beauty, you must have some inclusion of someone of a darker hue.
Speaker 1: How do you think that your early films challenged stereotypes?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm not sure how much the--it challenged them, but my, my thing was that I had to make sure that the image that was being seen was the image being seen from a African American perspective.  And that was not the case until I did some film that I, I feel that I did, that made Africa look differently than it was being shown, as I saw it, as I saw it.  I recall the 'Tarzan' movies, and all you would see was this white man in loin cloth, swinging on these vines with some strange yell, and all these hundreds of, of natives running.  This was the image.  This was the Tarzan image.  And this is portrayed--why?  Why, why is this portrayed?  So when I come up, my image of Africa is that Africans are below Europeans or white Americans because the image I've seen has always been this white person named Tarzan, who was in charge.  He talked to the animals, talked to the chimpanzee and he ruled--when he came, if there was trouble between tribes, when he came, it was all settled.  So in my mind's eye, what am I seeing?  I'm seeing that there's a white male figure that comes on the scene and solves the problems.  I had problems with Santa Claus.  Here you are in a poor neighborhood.  You can't give your children anything all year long, and then once a year, once a year--not only what they need, but what they want, they get.  But who brings it to them?  A jolly white man in a red suit.  So the image is, what I need I can't get all year long from my single black, black mother or my black family, but once a year, here comes this white man down the chimney with his big, red suit and his jolly face.  And he brings me not only what I, what I need, but what I want.  So from childhood, we started getting images that this person is a savior.  And if you don't have a good image of yourself, you cannot control your destiny.
Story_ID: 10969
Speaker 1: So you came to Atlanta [Georgia] in nineteen seventy--?
Speaker 2: Seventy-four [1974].
Speaker 1: Four. [1974]  What was that like?
Speaker 2: I had a choice between Atlanta and L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  I had a film company in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  I was gonna expand it to either L.A. or to Atlanta--visited both places several times.  I got much better vibes and feeling here in Atlanta than I did in L.A.  So I decided to extend my company to Atlanta and for a while, ran two companies.  I had one in Philadelphia, called 'Omega Films', and one here in Atlanta called 'Image Seven'.  So I had two companies at the same time.
Speaker 1: And were you continuing the production of films?  What types of films were you doing?
Speaker 2: Doing a number of things--did some film at the time for, some commercial films.  Did a film for, for MARTA [Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority], the transit system; did a film for some of the government agencies.  I did a film for the National Park Service and did several films, mostly, mostly commercial; did a film, a commercial for the, for the King Center.  And just a variety of different things that I did when I, when I first came here.
Speaker 1: So you were primarily a entrepreneur of sorts?
Speaker 2: I would hope so.
Speaker 1: Owning your own film company.  How, how was that or was that even a profitable venture for you?
Speaker 2: It was profitable, but I chose in many instances to do films that were more socially conscious than just doing films for the money.  I did commercials.  I did things for Sta-Sof-Fro [personal care products for African Americans] years ago, early commercials.  I did TV things, but my main objective was to get enough money from these ventures to do what I wanted to, which was film that would help impact the lives of people.  During the '80s [1980s], there was a lot of problems here in city with missing and murdered children.  And I did a, a presentation to show to small children about strangers.  So that's my passion.  I've got to do something to help make a difference.  So rather than just doing a commercial film, I stopped what I was doing to do a film directed towards small children, with some music and some songs, some lyrics and animals, etc., about talking to strangers because that was a, a major concern at that time, children talking to strangers and being taken off somewhere and not being seen again.
Speaker 1: So what were some of the other films that you were producing?
Speaker 2: I--.
Speaker 1: You did the commercials, and you mentioned MARTA, Sta-Sof-Fro and this one definitely related to the missing and murdered children.  Were you do any other kind of production projects?
Speaker 2: Primarily commercials.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Some documentaries for the National Park Service--did a film for the Arkansas Post [National Memorial] for National Park Service.  Did a film for the U.S. Forest Service and did a film for BellSouth [Corporation], IBM [International Business Machines Corporation], AT&T [American Telephone and Telegraph Corporation].
Speaker 1: And so, if we were following that journey from nineteen--let's '75 [1975] to 1980, what are some of the things that stand out to you about that, that particular span of time?
Speaker 2: I guess basically the, the desire to keep doing things that really made an impact; not just producing films for its aesthetic view or for its commercial view, but a film that would really reach home and make someone think.
Story_ID: 10970
Speaker 1: At any point in this process, were you thinking about college?
Speaker 2: Didn't, didn't go to college.  I have no college background.  I, I never, never even desired to go to college.
Speaker 1: It wasn't even a thought.
Speaker 2: Didn't give it a thought.  I worked for other people for only a few years.  I carried mail for a minute, drove a cab for a minute, sold insurance for a minute, but I knew early on I couldn't work for anybody else.  It just, it just wasn't me.
Speaker 1: And so in terms of your professional development, clearly you were producing films.  What other types of things were you doing?  Would you just say for the duration of your career from 1970 to present, that that was the primary occupation?
Speaker 2: Primary, but I also did exhibitions.
Speaker 1: What types of exhibitions?
Speaker 2: I did one for the World's Fair in 1983 in Knoxville [Tennessee].  It was entitled, 'The African American: The Original Energy Source'.  When it was completed, I came back to Atlanta [Georgia] and got a telephone call saying, "We want you to come back to Knoxville to change the exhibition, because we have some folk who are being offended by the remarks about Dr. Charles Drew having been the person who pioneered blood plasma and how to store blood, who died outside of a hospital because he was black."  So I said, "Well, we can come back. Let me see what you're talking about."  Went back to Knoxville--would not change it.  And the thought at that time said to me, "We had better be responsible for interpreting our own history.  If we are not responsible--if we don't do, if we don't do that, we will run the risk of someone else saying what our history is and omitting or changing or embellishing or not embellishing information or facts that they don't agree with or feel we should not know."  And this is not something that ended in 1983.  It goes on even to today.  We had a, a situation where one of our staff members just two days ago, who had to confront a school system for doing a book about Georgia history that has one sentence in it about African Americans, which says, "They were brought here to pick cotton."  And this was being taught in third grade, to teach children, before going into fourth grade about Georgia history with one sentence in that whole time period before the Civil Rights Movement, said about African Americans: "They were brought here to pick cotton."  That is the reference they've given the black American in 2004.
Story_ID: 10971
Speaker 1: How were you [African American Panoramic Experience (APEX) Museum] received by the Atlanta [Georgia] community?
Speaker 2: I think it depends upon which one you're talking about.  I think some good; some not so good.  Some wished we would, we would just vanish and go away or have an art museum that did not teach history.  If we're an art museum, it perhaps would have been much better funded by now, just looking at art.  But talking about history and talking about slavery or slave castles or African empires and kingdoms or revealing the fact to young people that Africa is the origin of humankind, the origin of mathematics and science and literature and writing and architecture.  There are a lot of folks who don't want our young folks to understand, this is where it all began, because if be--if I believe that my history began in the hole of a slave ship, I begin thinking like a slave, with a slave mentality.  But if I believe and understand that I came from royalty.  I came from kings.  I came from queens, that my ancestors built pyramids, that can't even be duplicated today; that my ancestors had cities and universities.  They founded universities and, and big metropolitan cities years ago; that my ancestors and from, from my bloodstream, my, my ancestors created mathematics and science and understood astrology and astronomy and understood mathematics and science and medicine long before European cultures even thought of--then my thought about myself is different.  So our mission here is to make sure that we understand who we are, first of all.  Secondly, if other people of other cultures, whether they be Caucasian or Japanese or Indian or whatever, begin to see us in a different light, it will also change their perception of us.  If all they see is a gangster rap video, if all they see is some black woman on television shaking herself or some black man using profanity or degrading her, if all they see if news reports of a robbery or news reports of, of a murder and described as a young black, male wearing a white t-shirt and, and jeans, and that's all they see, that's their image.  If we don't show another image, they won't have another image from which to, to draw.  Our mission is to make sure they see the other side of us--they see that there is a genius in us.  We are inventors, and things that we use today, lights and, and traffic lights and, and, and clutches in automobiles and spark plugs and lawnmowers and lawn sprinklers, came from black genius.  They must see this, and we must tell them.
Story_ID: 10972
Speaker 1: What is the history of the APEX [African American Panoramic Experience] Museum [Atlanta, Georgia] ?
Speaker 2: The history of the APEX, in nineteen--I guess it was '84 [1984]--I'm sorry, 1978, I was invited by one of my employees to a banquet of Howard University [Atlanta, Georgia] alumni, and they were honoring Dr. Benjamin E. Mays.  When I sat at that table, and I heard the accolades about Dr. Mays, the first thing that came in my mind is, "Why isn't there an African American museum in this city that honors men and women like Dr. Mays who has accomplished so much?"  And so I called my employee afterwards and said, "You know, we need to have something here, just bottom line, that puts forth the positive side of African Americans."  I said, "Well, I'll just start a museum and just, you know, do it, no big deal.  I'll just start a museum."  And what I thought would take two years, has taken more than twenty years to establish it as I want, as I wanted to see it eventually.  But that was the inspiration behind starting the APEX.
Speaker 1: So you were in many ways, a visionary?
Speaker 2: I, I guess.
Speaker 1: And were you able to get many people to support you when you were founding the museum and getting it on its feet?
Speaker 2: We put together, I think, a good strong board.  The first person I talked with is--was Gates Webster, who is an attorney here, who has since passed, Mary Welcome was also an attorney here.  We formed the board, got incorporated, and off to a good start.  I think the vision I had was so large that many persons could not quite embrace it.  Had it been a smaller vision or a smaller institution or a smaller goal, it may have been embraced differently. But we're talking about a multi-million dollar project.  We're talking about a walk through history, in EPCOT [Experimental Prototype Community of Tomorrow] Center [at Walt Disney World, Orlando, Florida] fashion, from ancient African civilizations to contemporary America.  That vision becomes, in many people's minds, undoable.  And if you talk in some circles about it not having support from a, a right, established community, it becomes in their minds an impossible dream.  In my mind, it is a, not only a possible or probable, but a likeable dream.  I see it as a divine mission.  I don't see it as a, a job or a task, but as a divine mission.  And some folk ask me, "How do you stay here?  How do you manage to go for all these years of just toiling just to make the, pay the rent and keep the lights on?"  Just look into the eyes of a child walking through this door, just watching their hand raise as someone asks them a question.  That's the inspiration that keeps me, keeps me here.
Story_ID: 10973
Speaker 1: Let us pretend that I'm an African descended person living abroad, and you are explaining to me virtually what I would experience in the APEX  [African American Panoramic Experience] Museum [Atlanta, Georgia], what would you say?
Speaker 2: You will experience history.  You'll experience on, on a first-hand basis as though you were actually there when the events took place.  Our, our objective is to put you into an environment where you feel the very presence of being there and watching history unfold before your eyes, as though you were an observer right there in the heart of all that's going on.  That could be an African village.  That could be in an African institution.  That could be in Mali or, or Ghana or Songhay [kingdom].  That could be in Egypt with the pyramids being built.  It could be in a slave castle, where you actually stand next to life-sized mannequins that actually move and walk--and walk and talk in different languages.  So you feel, I was there.  I, I, I--it was, it was almost like in my bosom when I--I was there, and I stood in a slave castle or I walked into a hole of a slave ship and I saw people lying down in spoon-like fashion, moaning and groaning and talking different languages, never to even communicate.  I saw it, I felt it, I was there.  I saw an auction block.  I, I saw them examine this man and, and his buttock and in his mouth, I, I saw them buy him, and not his wife, and send his wife on to a different plantation.  I saw it, I felt it, I lived it.  I saw the Harlem Renaissance.  I saw Duke Ellington and Cab Calloway, and I experienced Ella Fitzgerald and I, I experienced it.  I was there.  That's the, that's the feeling I want you to have when you come out of the APEX.  I was in Harlem [New York, New York].  I saw Duke Ellington, and I saw him--I saw this genius with all these thousand of songs.  I saw Cab Calloway come on the stage and sing, "Hidey, hidey, hidey, ho," you know, I saw all of these greats in our history.  That's the feeling I you want to get.
Speaker 1: And what do you think the museum offers for contemporary artists?
Speaker 2: There is a segment there for the visual artists that we'll have rotating exhibits for, for visual artists.  Most of them has to do with sculpture, painting, performing arts as well, but my passion is journey, the part I call the journey.
Speaker 1: So right now, if one were going through the journey today with us, what would their experience be?
Speaker 2: They would be blown away.  They would come out of there saying, "I was in Egypt.  I was in Mali, I was in Ghana.  I was in Liberia, I was in South Africa.  I, I met Mandela (chuckle).  I, I, I experienced Dr. [Benjamin E.] Mays.  I, I talked and, and, and sat right close to Mary McLeod Bethune when she was talking about what she has done.  I saw an inventor sitting down by a desk with, with his, with his pen and, and pad, doing a, a diagram for a patent for a lawnmower that I, I--that my grandmother used or my grandfather used.  I was right there, right in the midst of it."  They'll say, "Wow!"  That's the word.
Story_ID: 10974
Speaker 1: So are you continuing to make films or has the APEX [African American Panoramic Experience Museum, Atlanta, Georgia] primarily become your, your primary, the, the place where you devote your primary energy?
Speaker 2: My primary energy is devoted--I'm still making film.  In fact, I'm making a film right now, by the way.  I'm making a film on MARTA [Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority] right now, to celebrate their anniversary, twenty-five years.  I'm also doing a film on [former Atlanta Mayor] Maynard Jackson.  I interviewed Maynard Jackson several years ago; a very, very poignant interview.  He said things in that interview that have really hit home with me.  He talked about the political power and the power of--and the process of being involved in, in politics.  And he talked about how many things are influenced by decisions made by politicians.  And I, I don't care what you do, what you, what you are about, when you think about it, most decisions are made by law.  How we drive; how fast we drive; where we stop, when we stop. Sometimes even down to, as he was saying, "We're in city hall, this mundane, it may be mundane, but this, this building, somebody decided why it would have to be a certain way."  So rules and regulations govern how we live.  So if we're going to effect how we live, we must affect those who make the rules.
Story_ID: 10975
Speaker 1: What is the vision for the future of the APEX [African American Panoramic Experience Museum, Atlanta, Georgia]?  Let's fast-forward twenty years.  Where would you envision the APEX being?  What would be things that you would include if you were able to have your druthers?
Speaker 2: Well, in twenty--well, how old would I be? (laughs)  I don't, I don't know that I've looked that far in terms of what the APEX would be in twenty years.  My feeling is when we get the APEX to the way it ought to be, hopefully, it will have such an influence, that those who come behind me will be able to make it what it ought to be for the next generation.  I don't look at myself as being the quote "mastermind" to have to do all the thinking and the planning.  From this experience ought to come some young people with some sharper minds and some brighter ideas and a greater and broader vision to make the APEX what it needs to be for the next gen--next generation.  I would be remiss if I felt I had to be at the helm of the institution until I die.  If I'm not about nurturing and bringing on other people, then I have, I have not even thought about sustaining a vision of importance.
Story_ID: 10976
Speaker 1: Throughout the course of this interview, have there been any other thoughts that have been stimulated, anything that you'd like to share, perhaps, that I haven't asked you about?
Speaker 2: You have dug so deeply (chuckle), there is not much left.
Speaker 1: Why did you want to tell your story?  Why do you think history is important?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure that my story is important necessarily.  And I really mean this very seriously.  I was asked.  I'm, I'm responding because I was asked.  I would never have, I would never have asked someone to tell my story.  My story will be told when the APEX [African American Panoramic Experience Museum, Atlanta, Georgia] is unveiled and not, not the Dan Moore story, but the story of my spirit and of my ancestors being fulfilled in walking through that institution and seeing our history unveiled.  That's my story.
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way that you've lived your life and what is important to you?
Speaker 2: What did Frank [Sinatra] say?  "Regrets, I have a few" (laughs), but not, not many.  I wouldn't make, I wouldn't make many changes.  I believe I've been led by God.  It has not been on my timetable, it has been on his.  And even though I thought two years would have this thing done, and I'd be able to go on to something else, it has taken this learning experience for me to learn things I wouldn't have, I wouldn't have known in two years.  Some of the people who have come through this institution, one of them now heads the African American Museum Association, who came through the APEX.  So what influence has, what has been--what have--has influenced the people, is also part of the whole process.  I don't see time as God sees time.  What I see is, you know, "I need to hurry and get it done so I can move on," or whatever.  This is God's plan.  This is a divine plan, and things that I go through on a daily basis, each one is a, is a test.  And my, and my test is, "How much do I trust him?"  That's my test.  "Do I really trust him?"  If he says, "I will provide," do I trust he will provide?  If the light bill is due (chuckle), if the gas is due and salaries due, do I trust he will provide?  And I say for, for our next generation, our generations to come, our ancestors, I stand on very firm ground that this will happen.
Story_ID: 10977
Speaker 1: For those who would be interested perhaps in going into either film or any kind of historical preservation, what, what recommendations or suggestions would you have for them?
Speaker 2: I would think first of all about film, it's a powerful, powerful medium, powerful medium.  And I would suggest strongly, if a person has real passion, real--wants to make some real changes that media is the way to go because the influence of media is so far reaching.  You can see children who can hardly walk, dancing or emulating somebody they've seen on the television.  You hear children using words and language.  You want to know, "Where'd they get this from?"  Somebody has shown them something that has made their mind and their vocabulary shift a certain way.  So if you really want to make some changes, I would really suggest a, a media career as being a strong possibility of making some real serious changes.  Preserving history is also important.  I'm not much of a, of a preservationist in terms of the APEX  [African American Panoramic Experience Museum, Atlanta, Georgia] got to--has got to interpret this person's desk or John Jones sat here.  My thing is, if you have to fabricate that stuff to make the presentation, we'll do that, but I also respect the--those who preserve history in its purest form so there are documents.  There are references we can go back to and say this is actually what someone said or what someone did.  This is a slave narrative or this is a, a document for sale of a slave.  Here are the papers, when auctioned, here are the papers from someone's inventory where they name the cow and then--where they--or they number, rather, the cattle and the sheep and the goats and the furniture and the Negroes.
Story_ID: 10978
Speaker 1: What made you shoot your first film in Africa?
Speaker 2: Well, this fellow named Gene Bergman had taught me how to shoot film.  About six hours is all--I had training about six hours.  And he showed me lighting techniques.
Speaker 1: When did this happen?
Speaker 2: This was back in the, in the, in the '70s [1970s], late '60s [1960s] because in the late, late, late '60s [1960s] or early '70s [1970s], and he took about, maybe eight hours at the most, of his time on two sessions.  And we sat down.  He showed me how to, how to light a subject, how to load the camera, how to load the magazine and how to shoot.  I went out and bought a small camera, and the first thing I shot was some airplanes taking off for the airport.  And the next thing I shot was in Africa.  I went and bought the--I rented the, the camera.  My brother was very, very inclined to do almost anything with electronics, he was the sound, sound man, and I took my son with me also on that, on that first trip.  And he was about twelve years old.  And we just packed up our gear and went to Liberia.  Landing on the shores of Liberia was a tremendous experience.  When my son asked about the name of the film, and I said I didn't know what the name of it was gonna, and the Minister of Information said to me, "You know, this is your first time being in Africa, then welcome home."  The film, again, was called 'Welcome Home'.  But just the feel of landing on the soil of that Motherland was an incredible, incredible feeling.  All I was gonna do was simply do a film on Africa as I saw Africa.  I knew how Tarzan saw Africa.  I wanted to see Africa as I saw Africa.  I heard about the missionary stories, and they would not accept blacks from America, etc.  I wanted to see Africa as--from my eyes.  When we finished in Liberia, I went to Ghana.  I had some challenges in Ni-in Ghana.  Even though I had gotten permission from the embassy here, when I arrived in Ghana, we spent about five days just trying to get a permit to film in Ghana.  We finally got a permit to film.  We filmed maybe no more than an hour at the very most, and here comes the police saying, "Well the President has just told us that you can no longer film here."  They had a coup several months ago, so they were just afraid of anything.  So we had to pack up and go and, and leave there.
Speaker 1: And who was president at that time?
Speaker 2: I don't recall who the president was at that time.  But it--we got word from the President [General Ignatius Kutu Acheampong] that we would not be able to film any more in Ghana.  And I was doing a film on sickle cell anemia 'cause Ghana has one of the largest hospitals in the world that deal with sickle cell anemia, but my objective was just to simply put some film together and make it happen.  Someone asked me, you know, "Why'd you feel you could, you could do this?"  Well, I can do anything I want to do, given the same circumstances as anybody else.  And nobody else in this world is any smarter than I am.  They may have more opportunities. They've had more chances, but given the same parameters, I can learn whatever they can learn.  If they can learn to fly a jet that weighs so many thousand pounds, I can do the same thing.  Given the same classes, the same exposure, I can learn whatever anybody else can learn.  I mean it's just that simple.  It doesn't matter what it is.  I may not have, I may not have an interest in that subject matter, but if I want to learn that, I can learn it.  In editing, I sat and watched an editor for two nights in a row--just overnight, just, just watched him, didn't say a word, I just watched him work, and from that point on, I edited my own films.  And that was a difficult task at that time when we were working with film, and you had to take film and physically cut it and hang it up on the wall and go back and pull a shot from the wall and put it in, into your show.  But whatever it is, whatever needs to be done, I can do it if I have the same exposure of anybody else.
Speaker 1: What was it like also, from a technical perspective, shooting in Africa, that first film?  Did you encounter more challenges in that environment than you encountered later in other environments like the U.S.?
Speaker 2: The only thing I was, I was concerned about--well, two things.  Primarily, going through x-ray with the film, and the second thing was the heat and humidity in Africa after we had shot the film, and it was very hot.  So what we had to do was, we were told we should send film back here every day to the states.  And we sent some back, but some I just kept with me.  And in spite of the heat there, and it was, it was hot, all the film came out intact.  But the only two challenges were, me going the x-ray with the film and--at the airport, and having the heat adversely affect--leave moisture on the film.
Story_ID: 10979
Speaker 1: How has your spirituality defined your work?
Speaker 2: My spirituality defines me.  So it defines all that I am and all that I do.  My connection with God defines everything I do.
Speaker 1: And in this spirituality, what was leading you to Africa for that first film.  Do, do you recall any of your primary thoughts or notions?
Speaker 2: It was, it was again, it was primarily that I needed to see for myself exactly what this continent, that I came from, is all about, how it looks, how it feels.  In terms of the, the, the motive for going there, I just could not accept the Tarzan image that I'd been seeing on television.  I could not accept what someone said, that I would not be accepted because my skin was dark, visiting the country from which I came, that the Africans there would not accept me because I was an African American.  I couldn't accept that.  So I had to go and see for myself.  And that was the reason I went.
Story_ID: 10980
Speaker 1: What do you still want to do that you have not done yet?
Speaker 2: In addition to building the APEX [African American Panoramic Experience Museum, Atlanta, Georgia] and making it complete, I still want to go to the Motherland and do more films in the Motherlands. But my next greatest challenge is doing something significant to help erase hunger in the world.  My next greatest challenge.
Speaker 1: Is there anything you've done already that you would have liked to have done differently?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What are some of those things or that thing?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, first of all, I would have kept the APEX plans more, in--more closer to my vest in earlier years than I have.  I wouldn't have exposed fully the whole essence of the APEX because for some folks, it's hard to digest.  It should have been kept closer to me until I was ready to reveal the journey and the plan.  So I think I prematurely announced and, and broadcasts and, and talked about the whole breadth and, and scope and depth of the project to the extent it made some people apprehensive, both white and black.
Speaker 1: What were some of their apprehensions?  What kind of resistance have you encountered?
Speaker 2: From African Americans or I should say from 'colored folks', you encounter the thing that, "We don't want to talk about slavery.  That, that's history, we, we want to go on."  So our children know nothing about it, and we try to avoid even talking about it or thinking about it.  From some Caucasian people, it's like asking the Germans to produce a holocaust museum.  We don't want to--the world to see what role we actually played in this whole drama.  So in some instances, there's still guilt.  And I don't intend to play on guilt and say, "You're, you're guilty.  Do this for us."  It's our responsibility.  We certainly welcome help from anybody, but it's my responsibility to tell my children about my history.  And even though we welcome support from other entities and other nationalities and other races, it belongs to us to make sure that our children are informed as pure as possible about our history.  And it's not all, all good.  We played a role in slavery.  We, we captured slaves and sold for the Europeans.  I don't believe we, we have thought of the depth of the slavery that we encountered in this country.  And there's been slavery in Africa for years.  But I don't think the depth was understood of the horrific slavery that we encountered, which to me was second to none in world history, where you actually take and destroy a person's mind, destroy a person's character, destroy a person's culture, destroy a person's whole being.  Most slavery was for a period of time and the servitude would end.  You were not stripped of your culture.  You were not, you were not devoid of, of learning about who you were.  You were not taken out of your, out of your, out of your culture and, and made to feel less than your master.  This was the first slavery I know of in world history that was so dehumanizing, this whole Middle Passage, this whole notion of you being put up with, with cattle and sold as, as merchandise.  This whole notion of taking the very essence of your soul and making sure it's destroyed and debased, making sure that from generation to generation, you don't carry anything with you as positive.  A total calculated, destruction of one's being has not been the experience in world history, that I know of, of any form of slavery.
Story_ID: 10981
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: Concerns, there are many.  Some of those concerns are really right now to the young, African American male who has a serious disconnect from our culture and our ancestors.  There is a very serious disconnect from a lot of young African American males in our society today, to what has gone on in the past, and their role and their responsibility going on into the future.  When you talk about stereotypes and talk about racial profiling, it's not something that just happened in the '60s [1960s] or '70s [1970s] or '50s [1950s] or '40s [1940s].  It happens every single day.  Racial profiling happens all the time, and not necessarily white against black, but because our society has so permeated us in such--and, and indoctrinated us, in many instances, it's blacks against blacks.  But it's still a stereotypical image, especially of the young, black male.  I've had the experience recently of visiting the Atlanta [Georgia] City Jail and Fulton County [Georgia] Jail.  Ninety-nine percent of those people coming out of there are my color.  I can't believe that Atlanta is all black, but here are some white folk somewhere in the city, whether it's Midtown or Buckhead [Atlanta neighborhoods] or somewhere.  Ninety-nine percent of the folk coming out of that jail are my color.  I have first-hand knowledge of young, black men who are sitting in jail as we speak for running a traffic light (pauses) for running a traffic light, while I know, and you know, that other people get a ticket and keep going on and go to court.  I know of young, black men who are stopped just because they're riding in a certain kind of car or playing certain kind of music or looking a certain way, not only by white police officers, black, black police officers as well.  So our society has put this label, if you will, on young black men.  What better way to destroy a race of people than to destroy the black male?  We had better turn this philosophy, this thought process around, and not just get angry when somebody gets killed, not just, not just have a knee-jerk response, knee-jerk response when somebody gets, gets beaten, but understand that philosophically, we've got to stop the whole mindset that we're now seeing in our, in our cities.  Other hopes for our community is a hope that we will rise above and beyond all these things we have been through and make our ancestors proud and make our children proud of who we are.  Susan Taylor [Editorial director of 'Essense' magazine] once said that, "If we're not careful, we'll be the first generation since slavery that's left so little to our children."
Story_ID: 10982
Speaker 1: When you look back at your life, what stands out the most?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure anything stands out the most.  I'm, I just--I guess I'm in--I'm a work pro--I'm a work in process.  So it's not like I'm (chuckle), I'm finishing writing my--writing an epithet, you know.  It's just this--I'm a work in process.
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?  Where do you--what do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: "He did it God's way."
Story_ID: 10983
Speaker 1: And what message or lesson do you have for your children, grandchildren and the world?
Speaker 2: And my great-grandchildren--I have five great grandchildren. (laughs)  I honestly believe that first of all a, a spiritual connection is primary to everyone's life.  I believe that very emphatically.  And I think secondly, once that happens, everything else will fall in place. You don't have to beg someone to feed the poor if they're connected spiritually.  You don't have to beg someone to have compassion if they're connected spiritually.  You don't have to beg someone to respect women or men or people or elders or parents if they're connected spiritually.  So my message would be simply, get connected spiritually.
Story_ID: 10984
Speaker 1: What visual art or artists have most influenced your work?
Speaker 2: I can't really say, in all honesty that I've been influenced by someone's style or someone's work.  I certainly have admired, without question, works of many artists.  But I can't say, "Well, this person's style is what--it inspired me.  I want to, I want to duplicate that person's style."  I, I just do film as I see it, through my eyes.  And I don't, I don't try to copy someone else's style or even, even modify what I'm doing to someone else's style.
Speaker 1: What films or which filmmakers do you most admire?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I don't want to necessarily say filmmakers necessarily, but one of the films that I most admire is, was 'Malcolm X', produced by Spike Lee.  I think it was a masterful job, and I think that particular film demonstrated a lot of, of talent, both on the part of Denzel Washington, in terms of Spike Lee's direction, in terms of the whole, the whole film, the way, the way it was done and carried out.  I think it was a masterful piece.
Story_ID: 10985
Speaker 1: The means of making and distributing films have become affordable for almost anyone.  What benefits and drawbacks do you see to this democratization of the media?
Speaker 2: I think it's, I think it's fantastic.  And the mold, if I remember, was really broken by Melvin Van Peebles when he produced 'Sweet, Sweetback ['Sweet Sweetback's Baadasssss Song', 1971]'.  He circumvented the traditional distribution network, and for the first time that I know of, someone got something on the market, in the market place that was significant.  The other side of that coin, the film that Bill Cosby did called 'Man and Boy' [1972].  I believe it was, some years ago, called 'Man and Boy', it had a very, very short life span; a very moving film, a very good film.  But it had a very short shelf life.  So sometimes it's timing, sometime it's finances, sometimes it's backing.  Sometime it's several things being combined, but I think to be able to circumvent that network and get film into theaters and into the homes of individuals is a great tool because that way, you don't, you don't suffer the censorship from people who have no interest in what you're doing.
Story_ID: 10986
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I don't think about legacy, I guess, very much.  I mean building the APEX [African American Panoramic Experience Museum, Atlanta, Georgia] to me, at this point, will be a milestone, but I hope only one of many.
Story_ID: 10987
Speaker 1: If we were gonna put one Dan Moore film in a time capsule to represent his work and his vision, which one should we use and why?
Speaker 2: Well, if it's a film I've already done, it would have to be 'The Journey', narrated by Ossie Davis.  I wrote 'The Journey' which is the--a kind of a capsule of what will happen in phase II.  It's called 'The Journey'.  It takes us from ancient Africa to contemporary American.  I wrote the script, and it talks and starts off talking about, "I am, I am the Motherland, and from my rich, dark soil, man was created."  That film represents, I guess the heart and soul of who I am up to this present time.
Speaker 1: What did--when was that made?
Speaker 2: In '96 [1996].
