Story_ID: 623669
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer and I have Matthew Hickey as the videographer and I've got--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): James Hammond.
Speaker 1: --James Hamilton as an ob- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) Hammond.
Speaker 1: --Hammond as an observer and M.--
Speaker 2: (M. COLE JONES): M. Cole Jones.
Speaker 1: M. Cole Jones as an observer.  And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and we gonna slate the interview.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I want you to state your name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm Herman "Skip" Mason, Jr. [HistoryMaker Herman "Skip" Mason], H-E-R-M-A-N quote, S-K-I-P end quote, M-A-S-O-N, Jr., J-R.
Speaker 1: And I'd like to have you give your date of birth.
Speaker 2: My date of birth is July 14, 1962.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is June 20, 2011.
Speaker 1: And the location is The HistoryMakers.
Speaker 2: The HistoryMakers international corporate headquarters.
Speaker 1: 1900 South Michigan (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 1900 South Michigan Avenue.
Speaker 1: --in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISICUSSION)
Speaker 1: And then I'd like to have your occupation.
Speaker 2: I am the college archivist for Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] and the director of the Learning Resource Center [Frederick Douglass Learning Resource Center] and I'm also the international president of Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Incorporated [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.].
Speaker 1: Now, but how would you--would you describe yourself as an archivist and civic leader, or archivist minister and civic leader.  I'm just--
Speaker 2: Well, I describe myself as a, an archivist historian and civic leader, but I'm also a ordained minister and a pastor who is on leave.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 623670
Speaker 1: Now I want to, I--we always ask people five People magazine-ish questions--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) so short answers.  I'd like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: Seafood. (Laughter) Any seafood, fish, shrimp, lobsters, oysters.  I love seafood.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Christmas holidays.
Speaker 1: Your favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Florida, the beaches.  I grew up there as a child and so sand and water goes very well with me.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Brothers will be shocked.  Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I got so many.  The one that I've been using lately is it is what it is.
Speaker 1: You know blue is a great color for black skin.  I just wanna say that, whether they're shocked or not.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I like blue.
Story_ID: 623671
Speaker 1: I wanna first talk about your family history--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and you've got a strong fraternity background on both sides, but let's start with your mother.  Can you state her name and tell us what you know about her background.
Speaker 2: Sure.  My mother's name is Deloris Harris.  She was married to my father, Herman Mason [Herman Mason, Sr.] and then she later remarried.  She's Deloris Harris Hughes now.  My mother was born in Jacksonville, Florida in 1933 to two very loving parents.  Her mother, my grandmother Lola Mae [Lola Pollock Harris] was the oldest daughter of about nine children from Georgia.  And her mother died when she was in her late teens and so my grandmother ended up rearing her siblings, and so my mother and her brother and sister were surrounded by a very large and extended family.  The family had come from Georgia in the early 1920s and they settled in a little small village called Yukon [Florida], right outside of Jacksonville, which is now the naval air station [Naval Air Station Jacksonville, Jacksonville, Florida].  And eventually they moved into the City of Jacksonville.  My grandmother met my grandfather [Henry Harris, Sr.]. She was working out at an old post office during the summers and she met my grandfather and they married and they had the three children. I've done a lot of extensive research on both sides of the family. So my Grandmother Lola was the daughter of Ellen Casterlow [Ellen Casterlow Pollock] and Charles Pollock [ph.] and both of them were from Macon, Georgia.  So our family history as far back as I've been able to research, stems from Georgia, and I'm able to research back to my great-great-great-great-grandmother whose name was Amy London [Emmie London].  We believe that she was a slave that had traveled with her slave owning family from North Carolina.  I, you know, grew up spending summers in Jacksonville.  My grandmother died when I was seven years old, the very same year that Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] died.  And I have some very fond remembrances of her, but very vague, as a little boy, but I knew that I was very special to her and family members would later tell me and it was in a family gathering that something had occurred in my life that was significant, and my aunt rose up and she said, "Mama always said that you were going to be special" or something, and that just really sent a jolt through my, my body, you know, to know that my grandmother spoke, you know, this, this sense of achievement and greatness over me which I had never heard, and so she's sort of like my, my, my icon, you know.  My grandmother was a very larger than life character, big sister, the oldest sister, she ruled with a heavy thumb.  They were all afraid of her, but she was very loving, afraid in the sense that they knew not to cross her, but she was very loving, loved to dance, could cook and my mother had so many of the wonderful characteristics of her mother and father and so my grandmother, my mother grew up in a wonderful environment, very loving, sisters would always come together on the weekend.  There would always be a lot of food, a lot of libations, and occasionally a family dispute and then they would all scatter and break up and the next week they would be right back at the same place again and this was a constant.  So those are some of the really rich stories that I have about my mother's childhood.  My father the same. Oh, you have to ask (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We can--yeah, I want--yeah I wanna go back--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --to Amy.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What year do you know approximately that was you've gone on to trace back?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Amy would have been born around early 1800s.  Amy and Harry [Harry London] who took the name London, had several children, including Ellen [Ellen London Barton] which was my direct descendant.  She was born in 1832.  My great-great-great-grandmother and Ellen had a brother named Bill [ph.] and a sister named Isabella [ph.].  Ellen married Floyd Barton and had six children, and their oldest daughter Lula [Lula Barton Casterlow (ph.)] is my great-great-grandmother, and Lula Barton married Henry Casterlow [ph.] and they had about eleven children, and their second oldest daughter, Ellen Casterlow is my great-grandmother.  She married Charles Pollock and she and Charles had the nine children including my grandmother Lola, and then Lola, of course, married my grandfather Henry and they had the three children and so it's a joy that I can recite and go back and then I'm teaching my kids [Jewel Mason and Jodari Mason] now the names.  We are very fortunate, we have a photograph of Ellen, my great-great-great-grandmother, which is just a cherished photograph that somehow survived considering so many of our family photographs were destroyed or tossed out or thrown out just because of either neglect or changing locations, you know, just typical family experiences when you move, when you relocate, et cetera.  But yeah, Amy, I've become very intrigued with Amy.
Story_ID: 623672
Speaker 1: A few years ago we did the African ancestry DNA and I, I swabbed and, of course, it was purported to trace the DNA of my maternal line, my mother's mother's mother's and so forth.  That's Amy's [Emmie London] line, and the results came back that we had a match from the, the Bamileke tribe in Cameroon, and so we unveiled that at a family reunion about three or four years ago in Macon [Georgia].  We were actually on the side of the plantation [McArthur Plantation], we found the descendants of the family that owned my family, the McArthurs, and we went to that site and it was just, it was so spiritual, walking down that long winding driveway to the spot that we had chosen.  There was an old Confederate flag in the yard from the owner who currently owns the property now, but he was just so embracing and inviting.  He said, "Y'all come on and make yourselves at home," and I couldn't help but to look at that Confederate flag and he also had a little, a little black figurine, a little jockey out in the yard as well.  Just the ironies of the time, but about one hundred and fifty members of the family gathered on that site and it was just spiritual.  The graves of the slave owning family were somewhere behind us.  And I proclaimed on that day, that somewhere on this land are the remains of some of our ancestors.  We didn't it, didn't know where it was, but we just assumed because most plantations or communities had an area where they would allow slaves to be buried.  Well, let's fast forward, we get a call from the Georgia Department of Transportation.  They're expanding the roadway, which was near the old side of the plantation, and a man who owned property that's part of this mansion, said, "Well, you may want to check, I believe, I heard that there was an old cemetery somewhere over there," and so DOT went out.  There was really no evidence of any, any graves, but they went out and they began to do some, some scanning of the soil and so forth, and they uncovered what appeared to have been shallows of what were possibly graves, and they began to remove the layers of soil, and pretty much confirmed that there're probably bodies buried here, and then they called me out and a few family members out the day they brought the cadaver dogs out.  And the cadaver dogs were let loose and each time the cadaver dog smelled human remains, they would sit right on top.  Well a hundred and ten graves were uncovered, and two years ago we took the family reunion back so they could actually see the excavation, so family members were walking on this old cemetery and they could look down and see the skeleton remains because they were very slowly doing an archaeological dig and study of it.  It was just the most amazing thing I've ever seen in my entire life, you know, and to have the little kids to witness and to be a part of this, and so the decision was made that the remains would be removed.  Now I didn't contest it or fight it, one, because the DOT and this company called New South Associates [New South Associates, Inc., Stone Mountain, Georgia] who specialized in archaeological studies and digs said they wanted to study, you know, the remains, and study that area and they found, they found, jewelry, coffin nails, and so we documented it.  I took a camera crew down as well, but it was just amazing.  Now we're going through the DNA process.  So what they're doing, they're taking samples of DNA from many members of our family and some of the people who lived in the community to see if any of them matched with the, the remains that they uncovered.  But I would have never thought in a thousand years that I would have located the possible cemetery that may contain some of the remains, of some of the unmarked remains of my relatives.  According to their research, the last grave was about, placed there may be around 1910.  So after that you have years of growth, dirt, growth, grass, under bush, that had totally covered, there were no markers, no headstones, but I just simply said that because I kind of called it out at that reunion and said, "Somewhere over there's a cemetery," but had no idea, so, and this means a great deal to me, you know, I think I learned very early on that I wanted to be a historian, and you know, I wanted to learn more about my family.  I think I shared with you earlier, Alex Haley's 'Roots' ['Roots: The Saga of an American Family'] just was a life changing moment for me at the age of, age of fourteen.  All of that has led to Amy, who was our oldest known documented ancestor, documented in the wills of the slave owner and with the amount five hundred dollars, that's how much she was valued at the time that she was being given to one of the sons of the slave owner.
Story_ID: 623673
Speaker 1: Now how many years have--has your mother's [Deloris Harris Hughes] side had family reunions?
Speaker 2: We started our family reunions in 1983.  That was our first reunion that I organized as a college student at Morris Brown.  It was held in Jacksonville, Florida, and then we kept finding branches of the family and we had another reunion in 1984, the historic old Paschal's Hotel [Paschal's Motor Hotel and Restaurant, Atlanta, Georgia], and so, we, it's kind of relatively late, you know in terms of some other families.  Some other families, some families have had reunions, you know, for years and years and years.  We didn't start until the '80s [1980s] and when I was, I went to college, Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia], I became even more intrigued and fascinated with wanting to find more about my, my family, and some pivotal information was shared with me in '82 [1982].  My Great aunt Minnie [ph.], who was in her nineties, I never met her, heard about her, and missed the only opportunity I had to visit her one summer.  We were in Jacksonville.  I was there, typical summer trip and we had the choice to go to the beach or to go see Aunt Minnie, and I wanted to go to the beach.  In my mind I said, "We can go Aunt Minnie anytime."  What was I thinking?  You know I often, sometimes question, and I say, "Lord why did you let me make that decision at that time?"  Well, didn't get to see Aunt Minnie but when I got back home to Atlanta [Georgia], by the time it was fall, Aunt Minnie had been on my spirit so I called Aunt Minnie and her daughter.  They were very happy to hear from me.  They know my mom well, my grandmother [Lola Pollock Harris] and Aunt Minnie's daughter were first cousins and best friends, and I asked the question because at that time I thought the family name was Smith [ph.].  Okay, that's what we grew up knowing that it was Smith.  My great-great-grandfather was Henry Smith [Henry Casterlow (ph.)], and she told me that her daddy had changed his name.  He had to get out of Georgia quick, fast in a hurry and he changed his name from Casterlow to Smith.  Well, I went to the archives the next day and it opened up a floodgate.  I found those Casterlows almost in one sitting, cause I had been researching Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson], Henry Smith.  Can you imagine how many Henry Smiths there are and were? And so that Friday I got home, Friday I think it was Saturday, got home, I was so excited with what I found.  I found out Aunt Minnie as a little girl, I found my great-grandmother [Ellen Casterlow Pollock].  I found their parents and I called Saturday and Cousin Bessie [ph.], Aunt Minnie's daughter, picked up the phone and she sounded very heavy like she had been crying.  And she said--I said, "What's wrong?"  She said, "Mama died last night," Aunt Minnie was just in that week and she said, "But Mama was so happy that you called and that somebody was going to help to document the family."  This is what Cousin Bessie, well while they were happy that I had called, I was devastated that I had really missed a golden opportunity to travel to Gainesville [Florida] to sit with her, to take a picture with her, and it was a very, very rude awakening for me, okay, and a life lesson.  I tell everybody get to the oldest relative that you have that you know call them, visit them, document, ask questions that only they could answer because as we know that old African proverb says, that when a ancestor dies, it's like the burning of a thousand libraries and I believe that.  I had so many questions I wanted to ask Aunt Minnie, you know. Did your father ever talk about what if felt like to be free and, what was that train ride for him, and they say, you all had to hide him in a well because they had the bounty out for him.  Just a ton of questions that, you know, I couldn't get the direct answer from, I ended up getting some additional answers from some other folks, but that was a very life-changing turning point moment in my life.
Speaker 1: So your search has really been for Casterlows then after that.
Speaker 2: Well it was Casterlows and the Bartons. Henry Casterlow married Lula Barton [Lula Barton Casterlow (ph.)].  Lula Barton was Amy's [Emmie London] granddaughter so, but they were all living right together, you know, and, of course when you, and I'm certain you've done since this is research, you go back and look at it and realize you have cousins living right next to each other in--sisters and brothers, the whole nine yards.
Story_ID: 623674
Speaker 1: Let's go to your father's [Herman Mason, Sr.] side of the family (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: So, can you tell me about that and how far back, you know, about your father.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes. My--
Speaker 1: 'Cause you're a junior.
Speaker 2: I'm a junior, I'm a junior, and I've asked my mom [Deloris Harris Hughes] a thousand times, "Why did you name me Herman [HistoryMaker Herman "Skip" Mason]?"  Herman was a very tough name growing up as a black boy, particularly in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s], there was this very popular TV show called 'The Munsters' and it had a character on it named Herman the Munster [Herman Munster], and when I tell you that the kids used to really give me a round calling me Herman the Munster, I was kind of a very sensitive kid, you know, and I didn't like that.  But when I was born my mom said that she didn't like the name Herman either, but my dad wanted his son to be named after him, and so she was watching TV so the story goes, that 'Captain Kangaroo' was on and I don't know whether it was a character on the show called Skip-A-Roo [ph.], but she started calling me Skip-A-Roo, and I said, "Mom were you under drugs, meds at the time," you know, and so that name stuck, so it's from Skip-a-Roo to Skipper to Skip.  I think at a certain point I shortened it to Skip.  I thought Skip-a-Roo was just a little bit much, you know, growing up, but all my friends who know me, whenever I go somewhere, high school reunion, I hear the name Skipper, that's what everyone calls me.
Story_ID: 623675
Speaker 1: My dad [Herman Mason, Sr.] was born in Jacksonville, Florida in 1930.  Like my mom [Deloris Harris Hughes] he was one of three children.  He had an older sister [Janey Mason] and an older brother [James Mason].  My granddad, James Mason was a boot black.  He shined shoes at one of the hotels, one of the nice hotels in Jacksonville, Florida.  My grandmother [Elizabeth Mason] was born in South Carolina, in McCormick, South Carolina. Very interesting history, lot of mixed relations, intermarriages.  It was a whole lot going on with my, my grandmother's side that I haven't really quite been able to put a, a real grasp on in terms of understanding, but I--here's what I know.  My grandmother would say that she didn't marry anybody her color.  She was a very fair skinned sister.  She wanted to marry the blackest man she could find and my grandfather, James Mason, was the blackest man she could find.  He was beautifully black and I finally found a picture of him some years ago in my research.  The interesting thing about it, as I was doing the research on my father's side and my mother's side, they didn't seem to keep a whole lot of photographs, or if they had photographs they--so I spent from 1982 to the early '90s [1990s] on a real dramatic pointed search trying to uncover photographs.  And some of my photographs came from some very unexpected sources. Friends who lived near my relatives.  For example, I found the only know photograph of my grandfather from an ex-sister-in-law.  She was married to one of my granddaddy's brothers and lived in Jacksonville and I called her and I said, "By any chance would you happen to have a photo of my granddaddy?"  And she said, "I do."  I was shocked.  Not only did she have a photograph of my granddaddy, but she had the photograph of her husband, which is my granddaddy's brother, another brother. Sister-in-law.  He had long been deceased.  And that's where the picture, my aunt didn't have it, my uncle didn't have it, so, you know, so it helped me to expand my research broader, you know, because I realize that some time people exchange photographs within the community, within the family.
Story_ID: 623676
Speaker 1: But my granddad was an ath- my dad [Herman Mason, Sr.] was an athlete, very talented athlete.  He played baseball, basketball, and football at Stanton High School [Stanton Senior High School; Stanton College Preparatory School] in Jacksonville, Florida, the same school that James Weldon Johnson was principal of.  In fact, both of my parents went to, to Stanton High. And he was very well liked, but very popular, very good looking man, and I get that all the time.  I shall never forget when I was in the eighth grade at Therrell High School [Daniel McLaughlin Therrell High School] in Atlanta [Georgia], and there was this teacher, Mrs. Anita Green [ph.] who had gone to college with my parents, and remembered their courtship and she had a very loud, kind of obnoxious voice, and she said, "You're Pop Mason's son?"  She said, "You look all right, but you don't look anything like your dad."  This was in front of students in the eighth grade.  She said, "Your dad was so fine, he was so good looking.  You look all right but you don't look anything--." I said--now talk about ego and, and self-esteem, booster, she didn't give it to me, you know.  But I came to later respect, you know, her love and it was consistent.  People went to Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia] would often talk about my dad and how nice a person he was and what a good looking person he was and that kind of thing, so I kind of grew up with that.  His father [James Mason] was from Hazlehurst, Georgia, a little small town in southwest Georgia.  I'm not quite certain how my grandfather ended up in Jacksonville.  I'm assuming, like most blacks, leaving the South, they were going to find work or there was some opportunities or there was a relative that had moved there, and said--ironically, a lot of my relatives went south as opposed to going north like many did with the Great Migration, you know.  My grandmother was from South Carolina.  She ended up in Augusta [Georgia], then to Florida.  My grandfather was in Hazlehurst.  They ended up in Florida, on my mother's [Deloris Harris Hughes] side.  So our migration patterns went southward, you know, for whatever reason.  But my grandmother was very quiet, my dad's mom, very quiet.  We called her Ma Mason.  She was sort of a very reserved, introspective.  She had a chair in the home.  That's where she sat.  In fact, my memories of her, she died in '74 [1974] which I was twelve, but even after my mother and father divorced, each time we would visit Jacksonville, my mother would always make sure I go by to see my dad's people.  And my memory of my Grandmother Elizabeth [Elizabeth Mason], Ma Mason, is her sitting in the chair.  The story goes that she would get up in the morning and get dressed, put on nice clothes, put on a little powder and all, and she'd sit in her chair most of the day, and I guess either she read or watched TV, or whatever he life was at that time and that was that chair of hers.  Last summer I had the opportunity to take my kids [Jewel Mason and Jodari Mason] to visit my uncle, my dad's brother, and he's sitting in the same chair.  And so I put one, my daughter on his lap and my daughter, my son on Uncle Bubba's [James Mason] lap in that same chair.  I wanted to capture that moment because that was my memories of her.  She was a very sweet lady and, of course, she said, "You look so much like Papa."  This is what I remember her saying.  And she died of cancer in 1974, but I remember her.  That's that grandmother I remember well as a, as a almost a teenager going into teens.
Story_ID: 623677
Speaker 1: But my dad [Herman Mason, Sr.] had a pretty good childhood.  He graduated, he married a, his high school sweetheart, not my mother [Deloris Harris Hughes], and they had one daughter.  I had an older sister.  She's deceased.  And then he went to the Korean War.  And they were divorced either when he got back and this was in the fall, this was in the fall of 1954.  He was home.  He may have just gotten back and my mother was home from college, her second year, I think, of college, and she was with her, her friends.  My mother was a majorette and all of her friends seem to have been majorettes too.  They were all given scholarships to go to Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia].  That's how they ended up at Morris Brown.  So my mother and father were attending a club, a dance at the Two Spot, which was a big ballroom in Jacksonville [Florida], and that's where they met.  He came up to my mother and he said, "So where are you in school?" And my mother said, "Morris Brown College."  Well either the following semester of the year my mother looked upon the campus and there was my, who would become my dad, who had applied and enrolled at Morris Brown College and he went on a walk on basketball scholarship, and so my mother was dating someone else, Mr. Emory [ph.], who's a very dear friend of our family now.  And Mr. Emory was a very nice man.  He was a musician, but he could not match my dad who had been to Korea, who had a check, who had a car and he was good looking and worldly and my mom dropped Mr. Emory like a hot potato.  We laugh at it now, you know, and it's a wonderful family joke.  I said, "Mom, you know, you would have been a church musician's wife had you stayed with Mr. Emory."  So that's the, a running joke in the family.  But she met and married my dad right after she graduated.  She finished Morris Brown in '56 [1956] and he would come out two years later and they were married for about ten years and divorced and then he moved to Detroit, Michigan, and so that's the immediate family.  They appear to have had really solid childhoods given the time, the '30s [1930s], you know, and the '40s [1940s], and the '50s [1950s], you know, and I, I appreciate, you know, that sense of stability that they seem to have grown up under.  That's, that's, that's, that's for me real encouraging.
Story_ID: 623678
Speaker 1: And then your mother [Deloris Harris Hughes] stayed there.
Speaker 2: My mo- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did she ever go back?
Speaker 2: She never went back.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: My grandmother [Lola Pollock Harris] so wanted, because my mother was the first one to go off to college in her family and that was a big deal.  My grandmother was a domestic and she worked for the Hackel family.  The Hackels owned--
Speaker 1: Your mother's mother.
Speaker 2: My mother's mother worked for the Hackel family.  They owned most of the black theaters in Jacksonville.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: The Strand Theater [Jacksonville, Florida]--
Speaker 1: I see. We should hold off.
Speaker 2: Oh you want to hold off?
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. Oh you are? Okay. Sorry (unclear).
Speaker 2: Okay. They owned the theater.  My mother was the same size as Mrs. Hackel [Rose Hackel].  She was a white Jewish woman, family had lots of money.  Mrs. Hackel gave my mother tons of clothes when she went off to Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia].  I mean we're talking about clothes from Regenstein's and Macy's [R.H. Macy and Co; Macy's, Inc.] pa- and those were the stores at the time.  When my mother arrived to Morris Brown, all of the students thought that my mother came from money.  My mother was wearing clothes and carrying purses and shoes that no black girl from Jacksonville, Florida, in a middle class family whose mother was a domestic and whose father [Henry Harris, Sr.] worked for the owner of the Cadillac Company [Cadillac Motor Car Company; Cadillac Motor Car Division] could afford.  She came to school with all those.   So my mother said she, she pretended as long as she could, (laughter) you know, until the story got out, you know.  But that lady supplied her with some of the most beautiful clothes that she wore, and my mother had small feet so she's always loved shoes.  So she said her mama would send her money for books and she'd take half of that and go downtown Atlanta [Georgia] and buy shoes, you know, but, you know, that domestic piece, I got a chance, I tracked down the daughters of the family, the Hackels, and spent an afternoon, I had lunch with them and they pulled out pictures.  I was hoping they had a photograph of my grandmother while she was working there, but they, they didn't, but they were a very wonderful family, and it brought meaning because I used to hear my aunts say, and particular when I started doing my family history research, that, "Mama had good white people."  That's what she would say, a reference to the family that she worked for.  Now subsequently I have heard that term used over and I'm certain you've heard it before.  You either had good white people or those folks were no good. But she had good white people.  I'm interested now because there's a new movie that's coming out called 'The Help.'  Are you familiar with that?  In fact, we're showing the trailer at the convention.  It is the story of a group of black domestic workers in Jackson, Mississippi in the late 1950s and '60s [1960s] and how they were almost treated as invisible people until one of the white daughters decides she wants to interview them for a piece in one of the magazines and all.  I've seen the trailer, it's magnificent.  Viola Davis stars in it.  It is just going to be great, a great movie, particularly for those people who can relate to their mamas and granddaddies, mamas and grandmothers working as domestics, you know, in many of the white homes across the country so I'm, I'm kind of looking forward to, to seeing that piece as well.
Story_ID: 623679
Speaker 1: Skip [HistoryMaker Herman "Skip" Mason] how did your parents [Deloris Harris Hughes and Herman Mason, Sr.] meet?  We know that they met on, you know, on the campus of Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia], but--
Speaker 2: Actually before.  They met at, during the Christmas holidays of '54 [1954], they were at a Christmas dance at the Two Spot club [Jacksonville, Florida]--
Speaker 1: You said the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) a very popular club, right, and he saw her and he approached her.
Speaker 1: And then he came later.
Speaker 2: And then he came to Morris Brown the following year--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --and enrolled as a student and that's where they resumed or rather began their courtship, yeah.
Speaker 1: And can you describe the two of them.  Your, your father, let's see how old were you when they divorced?
Speaker 2: I was four.
Speaker 1: Oh, so you were young.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was young.  They had been married for ten years--
Speaker 1: I see, okay. So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I was born six years after they were married.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And there were no other children prior to that.
Speaker 1: No there weren't.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So you have two other siblings, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have two other siblings.  They are half sisters, yes.
Speaker 1: Can you give their names too?
Speaker 2: Yes, Dion Conley Backford [ph.], and she's forty-two, and my other half sister--
Speaker 1: What year was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Okay, and you were born in 19--?
Speaker 2: In 1962.  And then I had a stepsister, Mignon Conley Backford [ph.], who was born in '63 [1963], not Backford, Mignon Conley something.  She was born in 1963.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my stepfather had her when he married my mother.
Story_ID: 623680
Speaker 1: So when you, so what is your earliest memory then of growing up?
Speaker 2: My earliest memory, really I think around the age of four.  I remember a birthday party.  It think it was my fourth birthday party.  I remember that event, it was in our apartment and all of my friends were there.  My dad [Herman Mason, Sr.] came though I think he and my mother [Deloris Harris Hughes] were either separated or divorced, but I remember, I remember that moment.  I remember the house that we eventually moved into on Chappell Road, and it was a nice home.  It was a small home.  I remember our neighbors.  I remember people walking up and down the streets.  Across from it had a large hill that I always said that one day I wanted to climb but I was afraid to climb it because it was a really, really steep hill.  I remember when my grandmother [Lola Pollock Harris] died, it was on a Saturday.  My mom had been out.  I was with the babysitter who was a personal friend of the family, and they had called the house to let my mother know that her mother had suffered a heart attack, but my mother was out most of that Saturday.  I don't know, she may have been shopping or, you know, just out, and so the babysitter had to carry that, you know, most of the afternoon because at that time you didn't have cell phones so there was really no way of reaching her.  Mama was probably at the beauty parlor, shopping.  She was just doing her usual Saturday routine, but I do remember her coming home and being told that her mother had died, and I can remember the scream, the initial reaction that she gave because every Saturday my grandmother would call.  She would call every Saturday and you know what, I can't remember and I need to ask my mother, she may have even called that Saturday morning.  She would always call in the morning, and you know, and it was just a routine 'cause I can vaguely remember speaking to her on some Saturday mornings, you know, mom would give me the phone and, you know, say, "Hey grandmamma," and grandmamma would just go on and on and on and so I remember that, you know, I have kind of fragmented memories of, you know, my earliest days.  I remember flying for the first time to Jacksonville [Florida] with my mother on one side and my uncle, on Delta [Delta Air Lines, Inc.], on Delta or Eastern [Eastern Air Lines], at the old Atlanta airport [Atlanta Municipal Airport; Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia] sitting in between them because they were going to Jacksonville to take care of family arrangements.  I kind of remember when Martin Luther King Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] died.  I was about seven.  I knew something was going on because I was pulled from school [Berean Christian Junior Academy, Atlanta, Georgia], maybe not the day that he died, it may have been the day of the funeral, but I remember being pulled from school early because my mother and my uncle and several of their friends, they actually marched in the processional from Ebenezer [Ebenezer Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] up to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Story_ID: 623681
Speaker 1: Christmas memories are all there, you know.  Christmas really is a wonderful time of, of memories and I think that God knew how much I loved the holidays and Christmas that my son would be born on Christmas day.  And so it is a constant reminder, and he is such a happy child, loves Christmas, loves the holiday and the celebration and meaning, you know, behind it, so we named him Jodari Charles Herman Mason [Jodari Mason].  Jodari was a name taken from one of my students at Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia].  My wife [Hermal Cody Mason] met this little boy, little boy, young man by the name of Hadari [ph.], very articulate and well mannered, and she said, "What a fine young man.  If I ever have a son, I'm gonna name him Hadari," and our daughter had been born.  We named her Jewel [Jewel Mason].  And I said, "Why don't we put a J with him and instead of Hadari, we'll name him Jodari."
Speaker 2: So it's spelled J--
Speaker 1: J-O-D-A-R-I, and then Charles from my grandfather, [maternal] great-grandfather [Charles Pollock (ph.)], but I also wanted initials in there that would remind him that he was born on Jesus Christ's birthday, so he has J.C. in his name, and then I threw Herman in just out of guilt, you know.  And I said, "Well one day he may decide to be J.C. Herman Mason," (laughter) you know.  But at least that name is there. Because everybody thought because of my love for history and family that my son would be Herman Mason, III.  In fact, folks had really, family members were shocked that I did not have a Third, you know, and I said no, I just couldn't do that to him, you know.  I wanted to give him another name and kind of throw Herman, you know, up in there.  But, my, my childhood memories are, are good memories.
Story_ID: 623682
Speaker 1: Let's go back a couple--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) things and just sort of clear up. So--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --at age four, you're living in an apartment.  Do you know where that apartment was located?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  It was the Delmar Lane apartments.
Speaker 1: Address?
Speaker 2: Yes, 3006 Delmar Lane.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact our visit, in fact, when we get back I'm gonna take him because something I've always wanted to do, I wanted to go by all the locations that I lived, the house where I was born, the apartment that we lived in, the house that we moved in and then the house that I grew up in as a teenager.  I just kind of want to go by and, and capture that.  In fact, where my parents [Deloris Harris Hughes and Herman Mason, Sr.] lived when I was born, they've shut it and boarded up, you know, the apartment, and I said I need to really get over there quickly before they get a bulldozer and tear it down, and if they tear it down, then I need to get over there and get some bricks from it, you know.
Speaker 1: Now how long were, did you, so age four to what age did you live in, you known, in the apartment, cause then you said--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we lived in the apartment up until 1966, okay.  And then we moved into, well my mother remarried, we moved into our house at 273 Chappell Road.
Speaker 1: So your mother remarried shortly after she div- shortly after she had divorced (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, shortly after she had divorced, yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay. And, and so do you remember her getting remarried?  Do you remember that and how you felt, or--
Speaker 2: I don't remember her getting remarried but I remember my, my stepfather and what I even remember more is his daughter who would become my stepsister.  And we hit it off.  We were, we became playmates, you know, so--
Speaker 1: And the difference in age there was?
Speaker 2: Just a year.
Speaker 1: Just a year, okay.
Speaker 2: Just a year.  He was divorced from his wife and his wife didn't want the daughter, you know and so my stepsister has sort of had to deal with that piece because her mother lives in Atlanta [Georgia], you know, and it's been a challenge, you know.  What mother doesn't want their child, but that's the reality of some mothers' lives, you now.  And my stepfather's mother and father and his grandmother lived up the street from us.  We lived on the same street.  And they immediately embraced me and took me in.  I used to love going, I mean they were grandmamma and granddaddy.  I had my grandparents in Jacksonville [Florida].
Story_ID: 623683
Speaker 1: I remember my dad's--my stepfather's grandmother.  She was a very older lady then. But when you go into the house, there was this old Singer sewing machine, the one that had the little pedal, I used to wear that pedal out.  I mean it was, I would put my foot on it and just press it until somebody came and stopped me, you know, but I loved that sewing machine.  It was just something about sitting right there and just pressing down on it and hearing that wheel turn and all.  So some years later I found one of those same sewing machines when I was in my, my antique, flea marketing days and I bought that sewing machine and brought it home, so now my kids [Jewel Mason and Jodari Mason] they, they press on it.  I think they've broken it now, but, you know, it sort of become one of those, those kinds of things, you know.  And you know I think it strange, well not strange, but I've learned that, you know, things that I have memories of I've tried to go out and, physical things, you know, I've tried to kind of go out and find.  I remember the Victrola being in I think a great aunt's house cause I remember the handle turning so when I got a little older and I got some money, I just went out and started finding those little pieces that kind of reminded me, you know, of, you know, my childhood and the memories of some of the older people who are no longer around.  Hats.  My grandmother [Lola Pollock Harris] was a very big hat wearer in Jacksonville, Florida, loved hats, and my mother [Deloris Harris Hughes] would always buy her a hat every year, and I could see hat boxes.  So I got this thing not for hats, but hat boxes, you know, so I got a collection of hat boxes.  As, as my wife [Hermal Cody Mason] said to me one day, she said, "Now I know you like to collect and all that." You know my basement is just filled, but there's a show on, is it TLC, called 'Hoarders' [sic. 'Hoarding: Buried Alive'].  She said, "Baby you better, you better watch it.  You know you might be a prime candidate at the rate you're going." And I got so tickled 'cause I look at some of those hoarders, have you seen the show?  Aw, it's incredible.  I said, "Okay, but I'm collecting history."  I can throw out some things.  I can weed some things, but it's just, it's just something about having these things that remind you, but you can't have everything.
Story_ID: 623684
Speaker 1: Let's go back to some of that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me what sights, smells and sounds remind you of your childhood [in Atlanta, Georgia]?  Now you've talked about the hats, but let's go--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --let's go to sights first.
Speaker 2: That reminds me of my childhood?  Colorful lights, music, well we're doing sight, not sound. Gold, the color gold, plastic, my mom [Deloris Harris Hughes] had bought some new furniture, I'll never forget, from Carson's or Levitz [Levitz Furniture Corporation; Levitz Furniture, Inc.], she kept the plastic on it, I mean, and we weren't supposed to sit on it at all, the matching lamp shades, I mean it was really for me avant garde.  As I look back now, I say, "Mom what were you doing this kind of fancy furniture in this house that we lived in," but it was very nice.  But I remember that plastic and seems like everybody's house we went over to they had plastic.  I guess that was just the thing, you had to protect that.  Gold, she loved gold.  Gold draperies and, and I remember the knick knack stands.  I can see one on the wall, one standing, but there were different things, you know, on it.  As a child, salt and pepper shakers.  These square salt and pepper shakers that I think she may have purchased or they may have been wedding gifts, wooden salt and pepper shakers which I guess as an adult I found, I discovered in the house.  She had 'em in a cabinet, a drawer.  I don't think she realized they were there so I took them.  I kept them because I said I don't want my mother to get in one of her cleaning moods and she decides to throw things out. Broken glass, decorative glass.  You remember in the '70s [1970s], they had these glass panels.  You could buy these square panels and put 'em on the wall.  Well my mother used to call herself an interior decorator of some sorts and when we moved into a much larger home she just went berserk with glass and all and then one of her girlfriends called and told her you ought to break up the glass and then create designs.  I could see my mother breaking glass up and gluing and creating designs and all that kind of stuff.  I mean you should be with us at Christmas and we laugh about some of this crazy stuff that she called decorative, you know, but I can see the broken glass, I can see all kinds of beautiful frames and pictures on the wall, you know, and because she liked to decorate, you know, it was just real colorful throughout the house.  Plastic plants, plastic plants, tall plants with, with big leaves, you know, in the den and in the dining room corner. I can see the stereo.  We had a stereo, a hi-fi, four legs, and I can see albums in front of them because the area inside where you would put albums had filled up.  I can see [HistoryMaker] Dionne Warwick's cover, [HistoryMaker] Gloria Lynne's cover, Jimmy Smith and [HistoryMaker] Ramsey Lewis cover.  I just see those covers kind of sitting right out in front, you know.  And food, I see lots of food, you know.  We all, you know, had, I mean I, my family, I come from people who enjoyed eating, as much as they enjoyed cooking, you know, so lots of good food.
Story_ID: 623685
Speaker 1: What about smells?
Speaker 2: Pineapple upside down cake.  I can smell the pineapples.  Chitlins, I can smell chitlins 'cause we always had chitlins for Thanksgiving and Christmas.  Perfume, I just smell my mother's [Deloris Harris Hughes] scent, you know, in putting on her perfume.  Magic Shave.  My dad, my stepdad shaved with Magic Shave.  Hated it, hated the smell, you know it was real pasty, put it on and let it dry, and then he would scrape it off.  It always smelled like rotten eggs.  I can, I can smell that.  When my sister was born, baby powder.  You know I can smell that because we thought she was just the most adorable little thing, so I got to put powder on her.  You know I think that was a way of our being able to participate, so my job was to just sprinkle, you know, powder on her.  And, and I can smell diapers.  We had a, my mom had a diaper service, was it, what was the name of that service.  This was in '69 [1969].  They would come to your house 'cause she was, they was still using cloth diapers, you know, there were no Pampers period.  And so I can see the soiled stained diapers in the bag and I could see the diaper truck coming up and picking up the diapers and then dropping the diapers off, but you could, you know, it had a little scent to it.  It wasn't a very pleasant smell, but I can, I can smell that.  And grass, cutting grass 'cause that was my job growing up.  And I said when I got grown, I wasn't cutting any more grass.  I said, "Lord if I, let me get to a point where I can get somebody to cut my grass," and I have stuck to that.  Occasionally I thought I might break down and buy a lawnmower.  I said no, I cut enough grass in my childhood, 'cause that was my job on Saturday.  And I kind of made my little side change money and my stepfather got me gigs at a couple of apartment complexes and my job was to mow it and I think I end up getting like five or ten dollars.  It was, I tell you, it was slave labor.  I didn't know much about at the time, (laughter) but the smell of grass.  I can, I can smell that.  Ice cream, you know, because we loved going to the old Dairy Queens and I could smell fish and chicken because every Tuesday we were at Howard Johnson's.  It was all you can eat chicken, all you can eat fish.  Now one of the cool things about my stepdad, he loved to travel, he loved to get in the car, it was, you know, we would go out to eat.  I remember when we went to Piccadilly [Piccadilly Restaurants, LLC] in 1967 which it first opened in Atlanta [Georgia], Six Flags Over Georgia [Austell, Georgia], you know.  It was nothing for us to get in the car and travel down to Jacksonville [Florida], which would be a seven hour trip then.  You can now get there in about four hours, four and a half or five hours, you know.  And then he would always take his own water 'cause Jacksonville water has that sulfur in it, so it has a scent.  I can smell Jacksonville.  It's like as soon as rolled into Jacksonville, you could just sniff the air and smell that sulfur that was in the, that was in the water.  I can smell the beach, you know, and the waves.  It was just something about the sand and the beach and the heat all, you know, all mixed together, you know.  Those were really some, some good senses, you know.
Story_ID: 623686
Speaker 1: What about sounds?  You had started on sounds.
Speaker 2: Yeah I had started on sounds, music.  My mother [Deloris Harris Hughes] loved music.
Speaker 1: What kind?  Music.
Speaker 2: All kinds.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: You mentioned [HistoryMaker] Dionne Warwick.
Speaker 2: Dionne Warwick, but she introduced me to Burt Bacharach and I remember her introducing me to 'Moon River.'  In fact, on my iPod and iPad now, I have all of Burt Bacharach's songs and I have 'Moon River' which was in Audrey Hepburn's movie, 'Breakfast at Tiffany' ['Breakfast at Tiffany's'].  And I, I think she introduced me to that song, she was doing, she was a school teacher and her students were doing something, a dance.  She used to teach creative dance.  But I've always remembered 'Moon River.'  I just think it's such a beautiful, beautiful song.  And 'What the World Needs Now is Love, Sweet Love' ['What the World Needs Now Is Love'].  I think probably the Dionne, the Dionne Warwick version.  Sounds, Earl Grant.  Do you remember Earl Grant?  Earl played the organ and so throughout the Christmas holidays, that's all we listened to.  Earl Grant's rendition of 'Silver Bells' I think is the most magnificent Christmas song, even close to Nat King Cole's 'The Christmas Song.'  Earl Grant's 'Silver Bells' is just a, is just a classic piece.  So she loved music.  She was in the choir and, of course, we were in the choir, you know, as kids.  So I hear, I hear a lot of wonderful music and, and exposure to different types of music, you know, growing up.
Story_ID: 623687
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now what was family life like?  Can you describe that
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --because you have a stepfather--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) was there any of those conflicts that happened, you know, or--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --was it you, 'cause you speak a lot of you and your mother [Deloris Harris Hughes] too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well my mother and I are very close, very close.  I'm close to my stepfather, but I think when my mom and my dad [Herman Mason, Sr.], during the small, the ages of one to four, they had to, they had to have been separated.  I don't see him a lot, I don't see him in my memory a whole lot.  I have, you know, just vague memories of him, so I'm very close to my mother.  I remember my stepfather a lot more because he was, he was there.  By that time my dad had moved to Detroit, Michigan, but I, you know, I think I had a very good childhood.  I think I adjusted well with a, you know, with a stepfather.  He was a kind man, you know.  I think the only whipping I may have gotten from him was, it was a, I call it a tag team, spanking.  My stepsister would not eat her food.  They would fix our food, I remember sometimes we would be back in the little table back in the little kitchen.  She wouldn't eat her food.  She would take her food and stuff up under the refrigerator.  The refrigerator had a vent or something.  So one day, I think mom said they began to see ants, some roaches or something, crawling out up under the refrigerator.  Well they moved the refrigerator back.  I don't know how long she had been--I ate my food. That was never a problem.  You can still see I'm still eating my food.  I eat what's put in front of me, so I don't know how long that food had been there.  I mean we were children.  Well, boy she got a good spanking, and I got a spanking 'cause I didn't tell.  That's the only spanking I remember him giving me because they said I should have told them that she was stuffing her food, you know, up under there, up under the refrigerator.  But we got along well.  He was very family oriented.  He loved to take pictures and I remember sometimes he would pose us.  We would be on the floor like we were getting ready to pose to be in Ebony magazine, drawing or coloring.  You know he was really creative in that kind of sense and, you know, I remember really good childhood, you know, growing up and eventually they would divorce but we, everybody has remained very close, you know, and very much still a part of the, the family.
Speaker 1: Now when did they divorced?
Speaker 2: They divorced in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: So how old were you then?
Speaker 2: I was probably a teenager.
Speaker 1: Okay, like fourteen, or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm thinking, let me see, yeah, around thirteen or fourteen, yeah.
Story_ID: 623688
Speaker 1: Now I want you to describe yourself to me as a--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --a young boy, so were you--just how were you?  Were you, you know a lot of young boys have a lot of energy.
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you serious, were you introspective?  I mean, what were you?
Speaker 2: I think I was serious.  I think, I didn't, I didn't really care for a whole lot of outdoor playing, you know.  I played out, I loved games, I liked more inside--
Speaker 1: Like what games?
Speaker 2: Operation, Toss Across.  You remember any of these games?  Operation was this little game where you had to take these little tweezers, it was battery operated, and you had to remove parts of the body without touching the edges because if you touch the edges it would get a little shock, a little jolt in it.  I can see the Operation board now, and I always considered myself to be very skillful to be able to move the little heart out, the little organs.  Toss Across was like a flat game of tic tac toe.  And that was a real, I like games.  I enjoyed games, playing chess, playing checkers.  I wasn't into a whole lot of sports, you know.  I didn't, I didn't do, growing up, Little League baseball or soccer or any of those kinds of things.  So I never really felt that I was coordinated athletically and that would be interesting because my blood father [Herman Mason, Sr.] was a big athlete and so there were always comparisons.  Even when I was in high school [Daniel McLaughlin Therrell High School].  I went to a high school in Atlanta [Georgia] and a lot of teachers had graduated from Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia] because Morris Brown had one of the best teacher education programs in the country.  So my high school basketball coach was Coach Bear [ph.] who had graduated a few years from Morris Brown before my dad, but because he was a former basketball player, he knew my dad, you know, and my dad played basketball at Morris Brown and was a good player.  I, I, you know, I could, I was just okay, you know.  And Coach Bear just had a hard time trying to understand why I was not as good of a basketball player as my father, you know, and that was just not my, my cup of tea.  I remember some years ago, earlier maybe when I was in the third grade [at G.A. Towns Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], you know, and I think this may have been my mother's [Deloris Harris Hughes] attempt to try to get me more sports oriented.  My dad sent from Detroit [Michigan] this huge box.  It had a basketball in it.  It had baseball in it, gloves, tennis racket.  I think it had every piece of athletic equipment you could name and I remember looking at this this and said now what am I supposed to do with this.  So I took the box outside, you know, and my friends came.  Oh, they just had a ball, you know, with the basketball.  We were dribbling and passing and so forth and so we were doing some game and they were choosing sides, and I didn't get chosen, yet they were using my stuff, so I did what any child would do, I took all my stuff and I ran home, quickly, and I said, "If you're not gonna let me play on the team, then I'm gonna take my things and run."  But I never, you know, really got into sports.  Now music I loved, you know.  I got a drum set.  I've learned how to play the drums.  I thought I wanted to be a professional drummer until I think in elementary school my band director Mr. Raymond Rosser who was also in school with my mother and father at Morris Brown, we would just be practicing and he, he had this habit of popping when you didn't do the right rudiments, or you're not holding the sticks correctly.  And I think after two days after that, I told my mom, "I'm through with this."  I said this man not gone be popping my knuckles all the time, so I said what can I learn how to play.  Well, a buddy of mine--
Speaker 1: What year, how old are you at the time of the (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I think I'm in the sixth grade at the time.  So a buddy of mine, I also had a little mini bike and I did enjoy the mini bike, riding around the mini bike. And a buddy of mine, I was at his house, he had a clarinet and I picked up the clarinet and I started blowing it.  He said, "I'll make you deal," I said [sic.], "I'll trade you my clarinet for your mini bike," and I traded, you know.  I don't even remember my mother being upset about my trading that, and I ended up with this clarinet and I learned how to play the clarinet, and ultimately went on to the tenor saxophone, you know, and I just really found a lot of joy in music, being in the marching band in high school and then, of course, being in the marching band in college, you know, so it was just interesting how that is changed from a mini bike to a clarinet kind of divinely created my path into music and to wanting to learn how to, you know, play that instrument.
Story_ID: 623689
Speaker 1: I wanted to, give me your elementary, junior high and high school.
Speaker 2: Okay, I--elementary, started off at Berean Academy [Berean Christian Junior Academy].
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: Berean Academy, it was a Seventh-day Adventist school.  We weren't Seventh-day Adventist, but it had an excellent academic program.
Speaker 1: Now was that located near where you lived?
Speaker 2: That was in Atlanta [Georgia], right, located near where we lived, and I went there from maybe age of four until the first grade.  They had the kindergarten graduation.  I gave my first speech at graduation, and so, you know, my mom [Deloris Harris Hughes] said even very early on, she said the speech was wonderful, I got a big applause.  I've enjoyed speaking, I've enjoyed being behind a microphone and found the photograph my play aunt had a photograph of me giving my first speech, however, I had the photograph in my briefcase with the plans to take it somewhere to be enlarged and someone broke in my car and took the briefcase with the only known photograph of my giving my speech.  Now I have photographs of me on the stage in kindergarten, but this is a photograph of me standing at the mic with my little white gown on and my cap giving my first speech.  So obviously that was devastating, you know to have lost that little visible link, or visible image of that. But I went to Berean Academy, stayed there until the first grade, probably would have stayed there until the teacher came home, teacher told us to tell our parents that we should not eat pork.  Now I'm, we're not Seventh-day Adventist, I was just in a good school and I did as the teacher said, I came home and my mother was a teacher in Atlanta public school system [Atlanta Public Schools] and, so after that, I think I finished the year, but she took me out of that because she thought then that they may be attempting to try to teach what their doctrines are and so forth.  And I ended up going to public schools in Atlanta.  E.C. Clement [Emma C. Clement Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], the second grade elementary school and then G.A. Towns from the third grade through the seventh grade.
Speaker 1: Why do you think you stayed at the one school just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) One year?  We moved.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we moved.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you moved where?
Speaker 2: We were still living on Chappell Road and then we moved out to the southwest side of Atlanta, 3804 Gordon Road [Martin Luther King Jr. Drive], and--
Speaker 1: Now that was a move up though, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah it was a move up, right, yeah, it was a move up, yeah.  And so I went to G.A. Towns Elementary School [Atlanta, Georgia].  I was the, the patrol, I had my little patrol belt, orange belt.  Did a lot of things.  I was in the chorus.  I was in the band for a little while, a minute when I thought I wanted to try to play the drums and did drama and theater.  I enjoyed my school.  I had some great teachers, many of which I'm still in touch with today.
Speaker 1: Like who?
Speaker 2: My fourth grade teacher who just recently died, Mrs. White [ph.].  My fifth grade teacher, Mrs. Woods [ph.].  My sixth grade teacher, Mrs. Dawkins [ph.] and then my seventh grade teacher was Mrs. Wyatt [ph.] and then I transferred to another seventh grade school which was Ben Hill [Ben Hill UMC Christian Academy, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Why did you transfer there?
Speaker 2: Because we moved into another house.
Speaker 1: I see, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we moved into another house.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, this was my first white teacher, and--
Speaker 1: And this is what year? 'Cause this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is 1974.
Story_ID: 623690
Speaker 1: So by this time Atlanta [Georgia] has desegregated its schools.
Speaker 2: Atlanta has desegregated its schools--
Speaker 1: Cause didn't it take Atlanta a little longer?
Speaker 2: It took Atlanta a little while and the teachers--my mother integrated one of the white schools, all-white schools.
Speaker 1: Do you remember her talking about that?
Speaker 2: Not only do I remember her talking about it, I remember in nineteen sixty--the Christmas of '68 [1968], the same year that King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] died, the same year that her mother [Lola Pollock Harris] died.  She went there in the fall of '68 [1968], and I remember going there the first time for the Christmas program.  Now my mother always kept me immaculately dressed as a little boy.   I always wore turtlenecks.  My face was always greased.  I always had on nice shoes and pants, and I had this black leather coat with the little fur around the collar.  So we pull up to the school, we get out and we walk into the building and the auditorium is to the left and she say, "You go in down to the front and have a seat."  Well, "Okay mama."  You forgot to tell me that this was an all-white school.  I had never been around whites before.  I walked into the auditorium and there was nothing but white people in it.  And I stopped, I looked.  I didn't know what to do so I kept walking on down to the front.  I could, I could sense people looking at me.  Here's what I heard, I'll never forget it.  Somebody said, "That's Corey Baker."  Do you know who Corey Baker is?  No.  Do you remember the show 'Julia'?
Speaker 1: Oh yes, yes. Right.
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll.
Speaker 1: Yes, okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, of course, and that was one of my--we watched that show.  I heard somebody say, "Oh, that's Corey Baker," 'cause I had my little--and I kind of looked like Corey Baker.  If you see a picture of him, as I said to my mama, I said, "They called me Corey Baker," you know, and she said, "Oh, they did?"  I don't think mom had a clue even at that point what a shock and a life changing moment that was for me 'cause I'm about seven years old.  I can't, I can't communicate to her, you know, you just sent me in there to an auditorium where I was the only, I'm talking about the only black person in the auditorium, 'cause there were only two black teachers at the school.  There were no black students period, you know.  She never knew what a life changing moment, and I had no other choice but to walk down to the front.  I didn't' know what to do.  All I remember her saying is, "Go down to the front and take a seat."
Speaker 1: Now did she talk about difficulties there, with integration, or you don't remember (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't, I don't, actually what I remember is she really loved that school.  What she would say to me is that the kids would come up to her and wanna touch her skin and pull on her hair.  You know they just, they were not used to, not accustomed to a black woman either.  She remembered those early days as that.  She loved the school.  She said it was a wonderful experience because she had been at a school previously, which was Slater [Thomas H. Slater Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia].  And Slater was a very nice school.  All of the teachers there were graduates of Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia].  The principal was a graduate of Morehouse, and you know, she liked the school, but she welcomed this opportunity and she stayed at that school from 1969 until 1991.  She was, she ended up teaching her students' children who had gra- and at her retirement ceremony, one of the most moving moments was to have a young lady that she taught, I think in the second grade in 1969, to come back with her daughter with whom my mother had taught sometime in 1980s, late '80s [1980s] or early '90s [1990s].  I mean that was really--'cause I remember them getting up and saying, "Guess what, my teacher is retiring," the mother said, and the daughter said, "And my teacher's retiring too."  And she said, "Well my teacher was so sweet and charming" and da da da, and the little girl would say, "And my teacher was too."  And she said, "Well what's your teacher's name?"  And she said, "Mrs. Deloris Conley [Deloris Harris Hughes]," because my mother was a Conley [ph.] at the time.  And she said, "Well, that's my teacher's name," you know.  I mean it was just such a cute, of course my mama was boohooing by that time, you know, and they were two white students, you know. But just to see them get up and know that she had spanned, you know, that period, and at her retirement ceremony I did get up and tell this same story I just told you, how I was introduced to white folks at a Christmas party and I was called Corey Baker, you know. And my mother said she never knew that, she never knew, yeah she said she wasn't thinking, she was going to the Christmas program and she needed to check on her students and she just sent me in.  Now my son [Jodari Mason], had that happened, my son wouldn't have gone in there.  I know him.  My son would have ran out, or he would have come to look for me but I was just, you know, I wasn't afraid, you know, I was just more shocked than anything, and shocked because I'm telling you, all of the eyes were just looking at me. Just on me.  You could just sense the stares and, and the look, you know.
Story_ID: 623691
Speaker 1: So the schools that you were taught in up into seventh grade, right--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --were all black schools.
Speaker 2: All black schools (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you, and you had black teachers. Okay.
Speaker 2: All black teachers until my seventh grade year.
Speaker 1: Okay. And now then the seventh grade, that school--
Speaker 2: Ben Hill [Ben Hill UMC Christian Academy, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: --Ben Hill.  So was it an integrated school, or was it a private--
Speaker 2: No, it was a predominately black school, few white students there.
Speaker 1: But you had a white teacher.
Speaker 2: I had a white teacher, Mrs. Luna Ransbotham, and she was an absolute, most absolute, sweetest teacher, and all my teachers were good, but because I had transferred there probably a few weeks after school had started, she really embraced me and I remember when she picked me up from the office, you know, on my first day there to walk me to the class and I said, "Ma'am would you please not call me Herman?  Would you call me Skip or Skipper?"  And she said, "Sure," and she introduced me to the class and she said, "Everybody, this is Skipper Mason [HistoryMaker Herman "Skip" Mason]."  And I was so in love with that teacher.  For her to do that and not ask why, you know, but just because I asked her if she would do that because some teachers would say, "Well that's not your name, that's your nickname," you know.  And so we became so endeared to each other.  She was at my high school graduation [from Daniel McLaughlin Therrell High School, Atlanta, Georgia].  She was at my college graduation [from Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia].  She just recently turned ninety-two and I sent her a card or flowers every January 26th on her birthday, and I hadn't talked to her in a while and I didn't realize her husband [Robert Ransbotham] had died because I was very close to him.  I mean they would just visit.  They would just keep up with me, you, and every time I talked to them, the daughter says, "You know my mom wants you to say something at her funeral when she, you know, dies," and, you know, I said, "Mrs. Ransbotham gonna be around a long time, you know, but if that time comes and I'm still here, I'd be happy to, you know, do something."  But she was a very sweet teacher.
Story_ID: 623692
Speaker 1: So that school [Ben Hill UMC Christian Academy, Atlanta, Georgia] went to eighth grade, right?
Speaker 2: No, that school went to seventh grade. Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seventh grade, oh, and then so your middle school--
Speaker 2: Then I went--see I--we didn't have middle school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went from seventh grade right into high school.
Speaker 1: Oh, into high school. So and you were at--
Speaker 2: Therrell High School [Daniel McLaughlin Therrell High School, Atlanta, Georgia], yeah from eighth grade until the twelfth grade.
Speaker 1: And so in, in, at Therrell who were your, who were the teachers that influenced you there?
Speaker 2: Quite a number in fact, two of my teachers, favorite teachers, I invited to come to the convention here in Chicago [Illinois].  These teachers, Mrs. Jacqueline Burke [ph.], who was the English teacher, advanced placement.  We loved her.  She never wore the same outfit ever.  We just wonder, where did she get all these clothes from and she was so articulate and just expected us to be the same and to challenge our vocabularies and to use words that we wouldn't commonly use, you know, around students so that they could ask, "Where did you learn that from?"  I guess it was something about her style.  She was the first one, some years after I graduated from high school, I went back to Therrell High to speak and she predicted and declared, and she said publicly, and she said, "One day he is going to be the general president of Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Incorporated [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.]."  She did that.  She planted that.  What I didn't do and I regret so, when I was inaugurated as president of Alpha and we had this huge ceremony at King's chapel [Martin Luther King Jr. International Chapel] at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], I did not, I recognized the guests, but I failed to mention that pivotal moment, so I get to mention it this week in the presence of my--and of course, she has never said a mumbling word about that, you know.  But it's been on my heart and it's just something that I need to fix to let the brothers, you know, that this is the woman that planted that seed.  The second teacher that's coming is Mrs. King [ph.].  I was editor of our yearbook--
Speaker 1: In your senior year?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my senior year I was on the yearbook staff for two years, and Mrs. King had been advisor for the yearbook for twenty years and they, those two were graduates of Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia].  Mrs. King had been in school with my parents [Deloris Harris Hughes and Herman Mason, Sr.] as well.  So they became very close.  See I was close to a lot of teachers at Therrell, from eighth grade on up.  This past May I had the honor to return back to speak at the school's baccalaureate and now I've been out of high school now for thirty-one years and none of the, I think the last teacher who was there when we were there who was our advisor, she retired this year so I was able to come back at her invitation to speak and then to celebrate her retirement to give her her roses and all of that, and to try to encourage the students, you know, who are, who are now graduating from the school that taught me so much and helped me to, you know, define and become the man that I am, that I think I've become and still working on becoming, you know. But Therrell was a great place.  I was involved, very active, president of my junior class.  The only office I ever lost, whenever I'd run for any office, was running for president of Student Government Association at Therrell.  And I was being advised by a social studies teacher and he was telling me these are the kinds of things that I need to talk about.  Well the things that I was talking were a bit too heavy for students.  My opponent, Cedric Miller [ph.], who is now deceased was telling them, "We're gonna have more after hours events and parties," and this, that and the other and I'm saying "We need to," and I'm saying, "we need rally and support our parents and the PTA association [Parent Teacher Association]."  These kids didn't care anything about no doggone PTA association.  So my message was all wrong.  And the fact that on the ballot they had Herman Mason [HistoryMaker Herman "Skip" Mason].  Nobody knew Herman Mason.  They knew Skipper.  They knew Skip, and they just didn't connect the two.  I remember a student saying, "I thought you were running for president. I didn't see your name on the ballot."  I said, "It was on there," I said, "Herman Mason."  "Ah, man, I didn't know that was you."  I can remember, you know, so when I ran for (laughter) president of Alpha Phi Alpha, I made sure that Skip, you know, and so for the last twenty five years Skip has become a part of my name.  It's Herman "Skip" Mason, Jr.
Story_ID: 623693
Speaker 1: When you met Alex Haley you were fourteen.  Do you remember that, 'cause there's that picture of you with him (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, right.
Speaker 1: What, where was that? Was it--
Speaker 2: That was at the Atlanta History Center [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: So it was a book signing?
Speaker 2: It was a book signing and lecture.  He was, this was the aftermath of 'Roots' ['Roots: The Saga of an American Family,' Alex Haley], and he was doing a tour.  And so that was a wonderful moment to meet him then, and then I met him some years later at the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] and subsequently I'd become very good friends with his brother George.  Have you met [HistoryMaker] George Haley?  Have y'all interviewed him as well?  Yeah.  George is a great friend and a fraternity brother, and so we named our African ancestry initiative with the fraternity after their dad.  Their dad was a member of Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.], Simon Haley, yeah.  But meeting Alex Haley was just--nobody will ever know how life changing 'Roots' was for me.  I was in the ninth grade [at Daniel McLaughlin Therrell High School, Atlanta, Georgia].  My English teacher, Mrs. Guy [Jaye Rudolph], whose daughter is [HistoryMaker] Jasmine Guy, the actress, she said, "I want you to do a diary to record your, your thoughts and feelings about 'Roots'."  And at that time, of course, they--none of them knew I had any love for history.  I didn't even know it.  She said, "I just want you to keep a diary as an assignment."  And so each night I would record my, my thoughts and so forth and so on, and she just thought it was, she said, "Wow," I mean I think she may have assigned it to all of the students, but I think I went a little bit overboard.  I was just really writing how intrigued, I didn't know we had family members that went this far back.  For, you know my family, I thought the world started and stopped with my [maternal] grandmother [Lola Pollock Harris], you know.  I couldn't even conceive she had parents, and so it was at that pivotal point immediately after that emotional heart wrenching, life changing week for me watching 'Roots.'  All, from Sunday to Sunday that this curiosity was piqued in my spirit to learn more about my family history.  And I asked my mom [Deloris Harris Hughes] questions.  Well, my mom gave me information I didn't even realize she knew.  You know kids just don't ask questions to parents unless you been prompted to do so.  And my mother began to tell me about the family that she knew of in growing up and talking about Yukon [Florida] as much as she could and then she said, "I want you to write letters and make phone calls."  By that time I still had three great aunts left, three of her, her aunts, her mother's sisters and some other family members and she said, "Call your uncle."  He knew a lot about the family, you know.  And I still even have those notes that I took.  The phone bills, because I was calling everybody and I think at one point in time they all had thought I had lost my mind I was so obsessed with wanting to learn more about my family history.
Story_ID: 623694
Speaker 1: I took a Greyhound bus during my spring break.  Everybody was going to Florida.  I said, "I'm staying."  I took a Greyhound bus to a little town called Lumber City, Georgia, which is where Ellen Barton [Ellen London Barton], my great-great-great-grandmother and her family had ended up.  I located some relatives there and I said, "I wanna come down," and I took a Greyhound bus and I, I, the bus pulled up at a service station and store and the man said Lumber City, and I didn't move.  I was afraid 'cause I said, "But this isn't the bus station."  And he said, "Sir, this is Lumber City."  I'm looking for a big Greyhound bus station and then I looked out the window and I saw the little Greyhound sign and then I got out and then I saw two guys, cousins that I had talked to, kind of standing over behind a car, 'cause they were kind of peering at me.  I guess they wanted to know what fool was this coming to Lumber City researching his family history.  Well, they picked me up, we had never met, put me in their car and drove me to their grandmother's house.  And I'm telling you when I walked in, it was like time had stood still.  Everything was intact as it had been, you know, when you walked in and you saw the old pictures on the wall.  It had the outhouse.  It had potbellied stove in the middle.  It was so cold 'cause this was still March, and I remember at night it would get very cool, and I slept under quilts and jackets because I'm kind of cold natured.  And that whole week they introduced me to relatives, they took me to places where the family had lived, we went through the woods where the houses probably, where the houses were when they had come out of Macon [Georgia], you know, in 1880s and so forth, and I had my little camera and I was taking notes.  Didn't video because I, I didn't think about videotaping at the time.  That's one of my biggest regrets, and I used to have a movie camera in high school [Daniel McLaughlin Therrell High School, Atlanta, Georgia], and I had home movies and my mom [Deloris Harris Hughes], bless her heart, one day she was cleaning out my room and the box where I had all of my home movies, she threw out.  She, I don't know, she, I don't know whether she looked in the box.  I had a old suitcase.  It was her suitcase that she brought to Atlanta [Georgia] when she came to Atlanta on the train to go to school [Morris Brown College].  I had kept a lot of little things in there.  And she tossed that out.  It was in the basement, and so I think it's those events, those kind of events, I'm pretty sure, you know, that has sparked this deep passion of collecting things and holding onto things because I've had a, so many, a number of incidents where things that were very close and dear to me were thrown out.  Either just by accident or by neglect, you know, and I had to kind of explain to my wife [Hermal Cody Mason], I said, "I love my mother, but if there was a moment that I was so upset with my mom," but she didn't know, you know.  And my mother didn't have that same sense of history and keeping and collecting, you know, some folks who--I never had a baby book, you know.  You know some families back in the, you remember the little cloth covered baby books and that kind of thing, but she, you know--so when I became old enough to start collecting and saving, I did.
Story_ID: 623695
Speaker 1: So you're in, you're at Thoro- Thorrell, Therrell(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Therrell High School [Daniel McLaughlin Therrell High School, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Therrell High School.
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: You're active there.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So is it assumed you're going to college?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And is it assumed that you're going to Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: It was assumed that I was going to Morris Brown because my parents had gone there, but I did not go to Morris Brown my freshman year, and I later told the story why.  I was in one of the counselor's office and she graduated from Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and, you know, there were people who kind of looked down on Morris Brown.  She said, "You, I know you're not going to Morris Brown, I know you're not, I can see it, oh, Morris Brown," I mean, and she just went on and on.  So there was a friend of mine who had graduated the year before who attended a school in South Carolina called Newberry College, predominately white Presbyterian.  She invited me down for a weekend and I went down, had a ball.  Of course when new, when potential students come down, they roll out the red carpet, parties, the whole nine yards and so I told my mom [Deloris Harris Hughes] I was going to Newberry College.  My mother couldn't believe it, but she didn't stop me from going to Newberry.  I ended up my freshman year at Newberry College in Newberry, South Carolina.  Well the other part of that was that my dad's [Herman Mason, Sr.] grandmother was born in Newberry so in the back of my mind, by that time, you know, I was still doing a little research and I had learned, I thought I could go there and I can dibble and dabble and see if I can learn a little bit more about her, which I didn't do at that time. But I went to Newberry College, quite an experience, predominately white college there, no fraternities or sororities for African Americans.  There must have been a little over, a little under a hundred black students there out of about three thousand students so we were very tight knit, you know, group of students.  That was a really life changing experience for me.  But by December of that year, I wanted to leave.  My mom would not let me transfer to Morris Brown.  She said, "You have to stick it out the whole year."  What had happened, I had come home for Christmas and the band director at Morris Brown, Mr. Cleopas Johnson, was looking for students that could march in Morris Brown's band during the Falcon's [Atlanta Falcons] football games, because many of the band members had gone home for the Christmas holidays and they had been invited to play.  So I got invited to march.  I put on that Morris Brown Marching Wolverines uniform and I said, "Oh, this is where I wanna be." But my mom said, "No, you got to finish out that, that year."  So I finished out the year at Newberry College and then I transferred back--or transferred to Morris Brown, you know, where I ended up graduating in.
Speaker 1: No you went to Morris Brown from 1981 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From 1981 to '84 [1984]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --when I graduated.
Speaker 1: Now who was president at the time?
Speaker 2: Dr. Robert Threatt, who was a Morris Brown graduate, was president.  In fact, when he, I graduated in '84 [1984], we were his last class because he had resigned, or he had retired or he was stepping down, and I was president of my senior class and so we were his last class.  We gave him a reclining chair.  We said, "We want you to go and just sit back and relax and recline."  The commencement speaker was Christopher Edley [Christopher Edley, Sr.] who was the president then of the UNCF [United Negro College Fund].  I protested that.  I wanted Alex Haley to speak and I protested vehemently.  I said, "You all didn't even ask the senior class who they wanted to speak," you know.  And I was really upset about that because I had my, I wanted Alex Haley to come and be the commencement speaker.  Well, I didn't know that that was kind of a political decision to get the president of the UNCF to speak at your commencement, you know.  And so I remember getting up because it was my job to present him, his gift and to make remarks, and I said, "Initially we--I did not want you to, to speak, but I am so glad you did.  You gave us a magnificent commencement message and we were very appreciative," you know.  I know Dr. Threatt and the rest of them had, were sinking down in their seat when I said what I said, but I fixed it 'cause he did give a great message.  I don't remember what he said now, but it was a really, really good message that he gave us.
Speaker 1: Now how did Morris Brown change you or was, first of all did you ever think of Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Never.
Speaker 1: 'Cause Morehouse was so predominate.
Speaker 2: People, people are shocked.  Morehouse was just never an option for me.  I had a good friend, one of my best friends in high school, George Lester, he went to Morehouse.  Morehouse was never, and I think I was so, you know, like--
Speaker 1: Legacy, it's the legacy (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the legacy.  You know you got folks, like families who go to Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama]--
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: --like families who go to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], or Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  It was just Morehouse was never an option.
Story_ID: 623696
Speaker 1: Now during the time there isn't that when you start working or interning at Herndon family?
Speaker 2: You have done your homework.  Well, yeah, I did. The Herndon Home [Herndon Home Museum, Atlanta, Georgia] was that magnificent museum.  Well it was a magnificent house that belonged to the founder of Atlanta Life Insurance Company [Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia], and it was right on the campus of Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia].  I had heard about the Herndon Home.  My dad [Herman Mason, Sr.] used to talk about that.  My dad said he used to play cards and gamble over at the house, 'cause the young Herndon who was a recluse, who was single, who was gay, used to enjoy inviting athletes over, you know.  He had this thing for athletes.  I don't think it was anything sexual, but he just loved for them to be in their company so he would invite 'em over.  He would have liquor for them and they would play cards and that kind of thing and he would just enjoy being in their company, so my dad, who was an athlete, would go over there with some of his other friends.  I had had heard about the Herndon home.  Well, I, one day I went up to the mansion and I was peeking into the windows because I had hear about it.  It had not even opened yet officially for tours.  I peeked into the windows and somebody peeked back out at me and scared me to death because there was always rumors that the house was haunted, that there were ghosts and that kind of thing.  Well, the housekeeper, Mrs.--what was her name.  The housekeeper opened the door and she said, "Baby you don't have to peek, just ring the doorbell."  And she said, "You wanna come in and see it?"  And I mean I stepped into that house.  It was just magnificent, you know, this Victorian sort of neoclassical design with the large columns, and I walked in and it was splendid.  I'd never seen such.  And Carol Merritt.  Have you met Carol?  Carol was director.  She had just been hired as a director and I went through the house, went downstairs, introduced herself, myself and I said, "I'm a sophomore, sophomore, junior at Morris Brown," and I said, "Wow, this is great."  And she asked me if I would be interested in working here doing tours.  She asked me if I could type.  And I could type fairly well.  I sat down and I did a little typing test, and I left out of there that day with a part-time job as a tour guide.  In fact, I gave one of the very first tours when it opened as a house museum.  And we would guide people throughout the rooms and tell them about the history of Herndon [Alonzo Herndon] who was this former slave, born in Social Circle, Georgia, who walked to Atlanta [Georgia] on foot, who started this barber shop, saved his money, invested in real estate, became very wealthy, he acquired this fledging benevolent insurance company from a church, created Atlanta Life, and became one of Atlanta's first black millionaires.  He married this dramatic teacher from AU [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], arts teacher who was friends, close friends of W.E.B. Du Bois and his wife Yolande [sic.] and, and she died, and he wanted to build this house for her.  And so he built this house, had this theater on top and just before they were to move in, she died, so the wife never got an opportunity to live into the house.  And I told that story day after day after day, you know, to the point that the house, everybody associated me with the house.  I had keys to the house to get in and you know, I had a couple of frat functions over there, a couple of sorority functions as well.
Story_ID: 623697
Speaker 1: So your interest in history really sort of came alive then?  At this--I mean, was it the Herndon house (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was the Herndon Home [Herndon Home Museum, Atlanta, Georgia], yes.
Speaker 1: I mean you had the Alex Haley--
Speaker 2: It kind of helped to solidify my love and I can say that my career choices have been spiritually and vicariously guided by certainly something greater than me.  I didn't go to the Herndon Home looking for a job, I was just curious, I'd heard so much about it and ended up with a job.  And working there opened up and exposed me to, you know, museum work, archiving, giving tours, because they, the arch- there was an archivist who was developing the archives.
Speaker 1: Now who was the archivist?
Speaker 2: Rosa [ph.], aw gosh, what was Rosa's last name?  She had just, she had graduated from Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she had been hired to, to organize the Herndon Home's papers.
Story_ID: 623698
Speaker 1: You graduate you said in 1984 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Four [1984]. From college [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay, and then you--okay wait a minute, but you had, you had pledged though, right?
Speaker 2: I pledged yeah, two years prior to that.
Speaker 1: Prior to that, okay.  And there was no, I mean, okay, so you pledged.  Were you active on campus?
Speaker 2: I was active, I was the chapter president.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's right.
Speaker 2: I was the chapter president.  I was very active with the fraternity [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.], but very much involved with my family history research.  Everybody knew it.  My line that, well, my name--
Speaker 1: Is that where you started doing your family history?
Speaker 2: That's when I resumed doing it.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: That was the summer I came back from Jacksonville [Florida] and Gainesville [Florida]--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --and that was the fall that Aunt Minnie [ph.] died.
Speaker 1: Okay, I see.
Speaker 2: So when Aunt Minnie died, you know, I'm full speed ahead now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's almost a daily obsession, class and then to the archives.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Then you, how you were using what archives to do research (unclear)?
Speaker 2: The Georgia Department of Archives and History [Georgia Archives].
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's located?
Speaker 2: That was located downtown Atlanta [Georgia], near the Atlanta Stadium [Atlanta Fulton County Stadium] and then I was going to the National Archives [National Archives at Atlanta] which Atlanta had a branch, the Federal Records Center [Atlanta Federal Records Center],  which was out in, which was located out in East Point, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Who are you relying on as sort of resources to do that research?  Is it really the archivists at those places, or you were motivated at your (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I was very motivated, you know, to do it, a real easy learner once I understood.  During that time you had to do Soundexing to create the code for your name.  But, let me tell you, there were a number of old little white ladies who just--
Speaker 1: Were very helpful.
Speaker 2: --took me in.  One was Miss Rita Rosia [ph.].  I can see her.  She had to be a hundred at least.  She looked like it. And then during the break she would go out and take a cigarette, and she could pull on it.  I'd be standing out there with her and she said, "Baby you gonna have to check the families living before you and the families living after."  They would give me all kind of little tips.  I'd be sitting at the old microfilm reader and they would come over.  I was like their token child (laughter), you know, they just guided me because there were not any other young black college age males researching at that time.  Now occasionally we would run into some older black ladies, an occasional older black man or something doing some research.  This is '82 [1982] so there was still, this was still during the height of the interest following 'Roots' because 'Roots' really spawned that craze as you know well, of people wanting, you know, get out and learn more about their, their family history, so even five years afterwards. And plus, in Atlanta, we had organized the African American Family History Association and that was an organization devoted to people researching their family history.  Eventually I would edit the newsletter and become president of the organization.
Speaker 1: Now what the organization began in '82 [1982] or '83 [1983]?
Speaker 2: No the organization began in the early '80s [1980s], maybe the late '70s, [1970s], right after 'Roots.'
Speaker 1: Oh okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I didn't join until much, much later.
Speaker 1: So who was active in that organization?
Speaker 2: Carol Merritt who would hire me at the museum [Herndon Home Museum, Atlanta, Georgia], was very active.  In fact, she may have been one of the founding presidents.  They got in, they got a grant to do a couple of exhibits.  The exhibit at the Woodruff Library [Robert W. Woodruff Library, Atlanta, Georgia], 'Finding a Way' ['Finding a Way: The Black Family's Struggle for an Education at the Atlanta University Center'].  She did this huge exhibit for the Atlanta Fulton Public Library [Atlanta Fulton Public Library System, Atlanta, Georgia] called 'Homecoming: African American Family History in Georgia' ['Homecoming: African American Family Life and History in Georgia'].  And that's where I was first introduced to, to them where they had really documented and found artifacts documenting the African American experience, and published a very beautiful catalog from that exhibit, and so, you know, those are the kinds of things I surrounded myself with, that organization.
Story_ID: 623699
Speaker 1: Right after college [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia], I, I was out one semester and then I went to graduate school.  I went to AU [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --to get my master's in African American studies, and then while I was in the African American studies program, I discovered a relative who, blood relative, her grandfather and my great-grandmother was sisters and brothers.  She was the dean of the library school [Atlanta University School of Library and Information Science, Atlanta, Georgia] and so she talked me into, and it didn't take a whole lot of coercing, to go into library school.
Speaker 2: At Clark Atlanta.
Speaker 1: At that time it was Atlanta University (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was Atlanta. I see.
Speaker 1: The schools had not formally merged.  They were in the merging stages, and I said, "Library school."  I remember saying, "I don't want to be a librarian."  I mean my description of librarians were old women.  I said, I said, "Do I look like a librarian?"  Well, of course, she changed that and I went to library school and during library school I took my archives class and I did my internship at the Woodruff Library [Robert W. Woodruff Library, Atlanta, Georgia] and I participated in the Archives Institute [Georgia Archives Institute], which is sponsored by the Georgia Department of Archives and History [Georgia Archives].  So I didn't really grow up, or even in college, saying I wanted to be an archivist, but I learned that there was a formal process for you know, making sense out of collections.  As I kind of stumbled into, into that piece of archives, but I enjoyed teaching.  I also taught at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] part-time as a history professor.
Speaker 2: So Clark Atlanta, its library school doesn't exist anymore (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It doesn't, unfortunate, very sad.
Speaker 2: Right, 'cause I think it was the last of the HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities].
Speaker 1: It was one of the last of the HBCUs to close.  That's so unfortunate 'cause they are still--
Speaker 2: So much work.
Speaker 1: --so much to be done and they're still, you know, they're still training for librarians and archivists, yeah.
Speaker 2: So when you told people you wanted to be an archivist, or when you decided, what was the time that you decided you wanted to be an archivist?
Speaker 1: This was in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What happened--
Speaker 2: But a lot of people don't know what that is see.
Speaker 1: They don't know and they still don't know how to pronounce it as well.  I've been places where they called it activist, you know, so that's, that's funny.
Story_ID: 623700
Speaker 1: Let me back up because there's a couple of missing pieces I think that might connect.  After the Herndon Home [Herndon Home Museum, Atlanta, Georgia], I worked at the Herndon Home, I think I was still in graduate school [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], I got a job at the park service [National Park Service] as a park ranger.  The Martin Luther King Jr. National Historic Site [Atlanta, Georgia] where I was giving tours of the King birth home and the whole King center wearing the straw hat and the green pants and the uniform, the whole nine yards.  And either during that time I, I was collecting a whole lot of stuff, you know, and you know I was in school, working, didn't have a whole lot of money.  I said I need to sell some of my pictures and things, you know, get some cash.  I went to the library, the Atlanta Fulton Public Library [Atlanta Fulton Public Library System, Atlanta, Georgia], and went to the special collections and the director, Miss Janice Size [ph.] I walked in and, "I want to sell these photos," and she said, "Are you in interested in working here at the library?"  I said, "Yes, I would love to do that."  I was still in graduate school working on my master's in history.  And she hired me and I began working in the black studies collection at the Atlanta Fulton Public Library and then after I finished my work, coursework for the master's in history, that's when my cousin said, "You ought to go to library school."  And I was working in the library, but I still really didn't think that that's what I was gonna do.  I thought I was gonna teach and I end up going to library school [Atlanta University School of Library and Information Science, Atlanta, Georgia].  It took me about three summers to, two or three summers to finish it 'cause I was only taking one or two classes.
Speaker 2: You were going part-time.
Speaker 1: Part-time, taking only one or two classes at a time, but it made all the sense in the world, and again it was such a divine revelation and intervention because as I said, all of my professional career has been guided by God's spiritual hand.  I have never sought any job.  I've never had to apply.  I didn't have to apply for the King job, for the Herndon Home job, for the library job.
Story_ID: 623701
Speaker 1: And then after I finished library school [Atlanta University School of Library and Information Science, Atlanta, Georgia] I was working at the library [Atlanta Fulton Public Library System, Atlanta, Georgia] and I get a call from the chair of the history department at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] saying "We need--." I had done a genealogy workshop, and he called me, he said--this was January 1992, he said, "We need, would you be interested in teaching part-time?"  I said, "Well, let me think about it, let me get back with you in a week or two."  He said, "I need to know tomorrow." 'Cause this was the beginning of the school year.  I never taught and I, you know, me, I'll take a challenge, you know, and so I went and I began teaching freshman history.  You went to Georgia Southern [Georgia Southern University, Statesboro, Georgia], right?  I began teaching freshman history, 111, 112.  I remember being so frightened my first day of class because here I am teaching college students and then I remember someone saying early, they said, "They don't know anything," you know.  "You're the teacher, you're the authority.  Whatever you teach--," you know." 'Cause in my sense I'm saying I'm gonna be challenged by these students, but I realized they didn't know, you know, and so I begin in '92 [1992] and I taught at Morehouse from '92 [1992] to '99 [1999] as an adjunct professor.  Some semesters teaching two classes, some teaching five in one semester, you know, but that was one of the most rewarding experiences of my entire life.
Speaker 2: Now why?
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: Now who was president at the time?
Speaker 1: When I arrived there, Leroy Keith [Leroy Keith, Jr.] was president of Morehouse, and then Walter (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Walter.
Speaker 1: --Massey [HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] came to Morehouse.  I remember when he got there because he arrived at the really tumultuous period in the history of the college.  Walter's back here now, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: He's president of the School of the Art Institute [School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  I thought he had retired.
Speaker 1: But Walter is such a consummate president.  I mean it's, if he took that job, it's because it's a breeze.  It's because they need a president for someone of his stature, but trust me it's not because he has to do a whole lot of working, thinking and raising funds.  I know Walter and Shirley [Shirley Massey] very well, his wife.
Story_ID: 623702
Speaker 1: And so I had a great time teaching at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. I took a year because I had created a company called Digging It Up, which was a research company and I got two big jobs to do the historic markers for the Olympics in 1996 [1996 Summer Olympics, Atlanta, Georgia].  The ones on Auburn Avenue and the ones on the Atlanta University Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia] side.  I never seen that much money in my life, personally, that my company was awarded to do that history.
Speaker 2: But it was your idea thought, right?
Speaker 1: It was my idea, right.  It was my idea.
Speaker 2: And why, when did this idea start?  I mean when--
Speaker 1: To do the markers?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Did it start, do you think its origin was even when you were a park ranger [with the National Park Service] or--
Speaker 1: Probably so because Auburn Avenue was the historic street, but there was nothing designating, you know, some of the historic buildings and structures and through that period of conversation it was realized that if we bringing the world to Atlanta [Georgia], the world needs to know.  And so I had that wonderful opportunity to do, to work on those two projects and to get those markers, research the history, we had banners up and down the street with images.  It was a great time, really, really great time.  And I think I'm still teaching a few classes.  By that time I had my own company office, Digging It Up.  We were in the Odd Fellows Building [Odd Fellows Building and Auditorium, Atlanta, Georgia] on Auburn Avenue, but I learned that it's hard trying to make money and survive and sustain on researching black history.  The niche I think is there, but the consistency of it, you know, was a challenge.  I got a movie project.  I was hired to be the onset historical consultant for Alex Haley's final story called 'Mama Flora's Family,' and so for two months I spent on the set of that movie, it was a magnificent experience and Cicely Tyson was in it, Blair Underwood, Queen Latifah, Mario Van Peebles, great story and I really got to watch movie making cause very quietly that was something that I, I wanted to do, to do more documentaries than anything.
Story_ID: 623703
Speaker 1: And so I just began to kind of see little things unfold.  I end up giving up the office [of Digging It Up], moving back home working out of my house 'cause it was just cheaper. More cost effective, not cheaper, but more cost effective to do that.  And then I ended up at Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia] teaching, got invited to teach there, and--
Speaker 2: Now who was president at Morris--?
Speaker 1: Well, Dolores Cross [HistoryMaker Dolores E. Cross] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Cross, right.
Speaker 1: Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I really need to get in touch with Dolores while I'm here.  I read her most recent book.  Have you seen her most recent book?
Speaker 2: No, she was just here.
Speaker 1: Was she just here?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Well she, she wrote a book to--
Speaker 2: That's what she told me.
Speaker 1: --clear up a lot of things, and she makes a reference to me that, that particular book and we all had such high hopes for Dolores.  Dolores was very brilliant.  She was pegged as the other Johnnetta Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole] from Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia], but just, there was just some real unfortunate decisions made that began the beginning of the end.  And I was dean of students and vice president of student services at Morris Brown and I do thank her because she appointed me.  I had never been dean of students.  And she told somebody, she said, "We need somebody who is really into these students, who understands the culture, tradition of the college," and somebody recommended to her Skip Mason [HistoryMaker Herman "Skip" Mason].  I was already teaching a couple of classes and, and she hired me or appointed me to be dean of students at the college.  And it was a good fit.  It was a challenging time cause she had a real interesting leadership style that we had to kind of understand and adjust to, but that was a great (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For the South.
Speaker 1: For the South, for the South.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) She had not been in the South.
Speaker 1: She had no--
Speaker 2: She was New York [New York], Chicago (unclear)
Speaker 1: New York and that doesn't play well in the South at all.  And that was also too kind of part of her personality quirk that just didn't set well with, with people.  Southern, even southern leaders are more genteel, you gotta have, you may manipulate but you gotta have a way of doing it, a southern charm about it.  You can still get folks to follow you to the sea, but you can't demand or make them to do that.  You got to convince them that this is the very best thing you ought to be doing.  "You need to follow me.  You need to walk with me 'cause some great things are gonna happen," but her style was different.  But I appreciate her because she gave me an incredible opportunity.  So I was the college, I was Morris Brown's college archivist, I was a dean of students, ultimately the vice president of student services.  I think I was still teaching a orientation class and it was just a great time.
Story_ID: 623704
Speaker 1: And then the bottom fell out in 19- in 2003.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And actually, 2002, the college lost its accreditation, reapplied, appealed and the appeal was denied.  And the clouds fell over Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia] just like the clouds came over Chicago [Illinois] this morning.  And by that time Dolores Cross [HistoryMaker Dolores E. Cross] had gone.  We had another president, Dr. Charles Thomas [sic. Charles Taylor], Thompson, and he said, "Gather the students together," and by that--we had about three thousand students.  It was one of the saddest days of my life when we went into that auditorium and the gym to tell the students that the college's appeal for accreditation had been denied, you know. And students began to storm out of there.  They were so upset.  They were fussing and they were cussing.  "I can't believe Morris Brown has brought me here and just left me hanging."  We ended up doing an accelerated semester because, as long as we got the students out before April or May, they could still graduate under the accreditation.  We doubled the semester, doubled classes, students were taking classes all day and all night, extra hours, so they could finish.  And we graduated and marched our last class out of Morris Brown in 2003, March or April.  I wanna say [HistoryMaker] Glenda Hatchett was the keynote speaker.  I think she was.  It may have been Glenda Hatchett.  It wasn't Bill Cosby, he spoke prior to that.  And then about a month later I'm out of a job.  They have shut down the entire student services division.  I'm driving home one night, I'd been to the gym, that's when I was going to the gym, and one of my good friends who worked in human resources, he called me.  He said, "Skip [HistoryMaker Herman "Skip" Mason] I may be fired for telling you this, but I just thought you need to know, you my friend.  Your name is on a list to be terminated tomorrow."  I'm driving, going around a curve.  I literally almost went off the side of the road.  I mean the shock of it all.  I thought that okay, we gonna downsize.  I'll still be around, you know, 'cause I had demonstrated my loyalty and commitment to Morris Brown.  Just before I had raised twenty thousand dollars for my fraternity brothers and (unclear).  I just didn't think I was gonna be on that list, and so I was so angry.  I tried to call the bishop that night.  I wanted to know am I being fired, nobody responded.  So I--my wife [Hermal Cody Mason], I had two small babies.  My son [Jodari Mason] was probably about six months, my daughter [Jewel Mason] was probably two years or so, you know, and I'm trying to figure out how am I gonna tell my wife I don't have a job.  Well, as it turned out she became the source of energy.  She said, "Don't worry about that, we'll be fine."  Those were her words, "We will be fine," and that lifted a burden off of me somewhat, but I was still unemployed.  And I had to go up to the school and get all my stuff, and anyone who's ever been in any of my offices know that you can't just get a box and throw your things in.  I had pictures and things all on the walls.  I told the human resources person, Lisa [ph.], I said, "Okay, I'm a need a few days to get all my stuff out."  And she said, "Skip, fine, no problem," you know, and so I got all that stuff out and I was unemployed, and I had to humble myself and go to the unemployment line, and because I am who I am, I thought you had to wear a suit.  I'm sitting, I got on my nice suit and people are standing in line, most of whom didn't have on suits.  You talk about a humbling experience.  It was humbling.  So I was out of a job for, from May until October.
Speaker 2: May of?
Speaker 1: May of 2003.
Speaker 2: To October.
Speaker 1: And until about October--
Story_ID: 623705
Speaker 1: In August of oct- August of 2003, I faxed my resume over to Walter Massey [HistoryMaker Walter E. Massey] because I read an article in the paper that they had the Maynard Jackson papers, and I just sent a note, I said, "Well, if you need any assistance with that collection, I'd be interested."  The next day I got a call from the provost.  He said, "Well we have a position that we been trying to fill for two years, the director of the Learning Resource Center [Frederick Douglass Learning Resource Center].  It required one to have a degree in library science."  And I said, "Well I have a degree in library science."  He said, "Well why don't you come over to the school?"  We went over to the school, he walked me through and he said, "We'd love to have you, are you interested?"  And I wanted to say, "Am I interested?"  I say, "I been unemployed for five months, you know, yes, I'm interested," and so I was hired to come to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] to direct the Learning Resource Center and then he also included in my contract that I would be appointed the college archivist.  But Morehouse didn't have an archive.  They didn't have an archive.  Dean Carter [HistoryMaker Lawrence Carter] had a collection of material, but they did not have a formal archive because they shared with the Woodruff Library [Robert W. Woodruff Library, Atlanta, Georgia] and he said, "We need our own archives here at Morehouse."  And I was kind of shocked, I said a school like Morehouse, the Morehouse, Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] school, educating black men for a hundred thirty-five, forty years does not have its own archives, and they didn't.  There were boxes of papers, Benjamin Mays papers scattered all over the campus in this orchestra pit, in the gymnasium, in the back rooms, hallways, everywhere, Morehouse papers were scattered all over, and so part of my job was to begin to collect, to bring in, to gather all of the historic material that had been displaced everywhere.  Walter Massey, no, Hugh Gloster, who was the previous president.  His robe was over in an empty building that had been a laundromat, his robe sitting over there.  Walter Massey's first robe was over there.  See what would happen, you know, they would, the campus operations folks would take boxes and they just put 'em anywhere, cause they didn't, they didn't know where these things were supposed to go, so fast forward, now today we have our own facility.  We got a grant from the save the treasures [Save America's Treasures] and IMLS [Institute of Museum and Library Services] early to do an inventory and then to begin the processing of the Benjamin Mays papers, and so that--
Speaker 2: And when did you get that grant?
Speaker 1: The IMLS grant we received in 2004.
Speaker 2: Okay, so a year after you came.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a year after I came and we did our preliminary inventory of archival material there, with that grant and then to save the treasures grant we got two years ago, which has allowed me to hire two archivists, processing archivists, to begin to process the voluminous collection of papers of Dr. Benjamin Mays as president of Morehouse College.
Story_ID: 623706
Speaker 1: What about also the King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] papers?  That happened during that time unless it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The King papers happened during that time but I didn't have any direct working relationship with the King papers.  Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] owns the King papers but the papers went to the Woodruff Library [Robert W. Woodruff Library, Atlanta, Georgia] and that's where they processed them and digitized them, and that's where they are.
Speaker 1: That's part of the AU Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: That's part of the AU Center.
Speaker 1: So maybe you should explain just the relationship.
Speaker 2: Of the AU Center?
Speaker 1: The AU Center and the relationship, you know, with--
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, of course, the AU Center consists of about five schools, used to be six with Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia].  You have Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], Spelman, Morehouse, and Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia] were the initial members in 1929, and then later Clark College [Atlanta, Georgia] was added.  Now Clark Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia] and Morris Brown was added, and they created this AU Center, Inc., and the library services would all be merged together and even the archive services, but Spelman said no, we're not giving up our archives, and Spelman maintained their collection.  And as they love to say, they have everything from 1881, and they do, but the other schools did and, and so Morehouse, through the City of Atlanta [Georgia], acquired the Martin Luther King, Jr. papers, but because--excuse me for one second--but because Morehouse acquired the Martin Luther King, Jr. papers, but we didn't have the space, the resources or the manpower on the campus to, to manage them, and the Woodruff Library did.  I think they got a couple of grants and they were able to, you know, to do that.  Now Morehouse has a director of the ML King project, Dr. Vicki Crawford.
Story_ID: 623707
Speaker 1: I am the college archivist and I handle Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] institutional collection, papers of presidents and anything related to the college itself, the photographs, textiles, and I mean, I started this from scratch.
Speaker 2: Now how far back does your collection go now?
Speaker 1: Sporadically, we go back probably to the 1890s, just a few fragments.  I mean there's a whole gap of years of material missing.  John Hope, who became the first black president, his papers were already at the Woodruff Library [Robert W. Woodruff Library, Atlanta, Georgia].  We have that on microfilm and so we primarily pick up from the '20s [1920s] on up with the complete, as far as we know, complete archives of Benjamin Mays.
Speaker 2: But you are, I mean everybody speaks of him in such--
Speaker 1: Well, his collection is incredible.  I mean it is the hidden treasure of black intellectual thought and black academia, black college president, because it has not been processed.  There are letters in it from every major notable black man and woman, black men and black women of the 1940s from Langston Hughes to Carter G. Woodson to Richard Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] to Martin Luther King, Jr. [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] to Marian Anderson, all of the major college presidents, Frederick Patterson [Frederick D. Patterson] with the United Negro College Fund.  I mean it is a scholar's goldmine and when we get the collection processed, it will yield books, it will yield volumes of the papers of Benjamin Mays.  It's just a marvelous collection, and I'm excited because nobody has used it.  No one has sat in it, you know, cause we haven't opened the collection yet.  Occasionally we will allow a few to come in, if they're very pointed about what they're looking for, we'll pull that, but I'm excited about it.
Speaker 2: So how far are you through processing it?
Speaker 1: We still have quite a ways to go.  We finished Mays and the UNCF archives.  We've done a lot of his correspondence with families and students.  I mean it's a pretty huge collection.
Speaker 2: So what, how many boxes (unclear)?
Speaker 1: There are probably about fifty or sixty boxes of material, of correspondence, letters that we've gone through, that we have.  It's a huge collection.
Story_ID: 623708
Speaker 1: Weren't you at the department of labor at one point?  No? Not?
Speaker 2: I've never been at the department of labor (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But let's talk about your publications.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: 'Cause somehow I had you at the--
Speaker 2: Department of labor, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, okay. When I first--
Speaker 2: I've spoken at the department of labor--
Speaker 1: Maybe--right.
Speaker 2: --but no I never worked.
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your recent, let's go back, and, 'cause I think we glossed over the markers and I just wanna say--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --that one day I, you know, took the walk, and I was really paying attention to markers and brought tears to my eyes.  Now I was upset about Auburn Avenue and the condition.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's gotten better now, but I was just thinking, you know, how absolutely fabulous the work that went into that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know.  But I wanna go back to your graduate--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --your thesis as a graduate student, and then talk about, you know, the material you learned and also your work with the fraternity [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.]. But let's separate the books from the--
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  I did my thesis on studying rural families between the period 1880 and 1900, primarily using my own family as the basis of my, my research, looking at a number of variables, living conditions, work and available documentation for documenting African American families during that period of time.  That's a really challenging period because, one, the 1890 censuses were destroyed by fire.  So most black folks cannot document 1890, you know, and so from 1880 to 1900 you have this huge gap.  What--and let's look at our lives over the last twenty years.  Twenty years ago I was twenty-nine.  A whole lot has happened in my life in twenty years, and so my premise was a whole lot happened within that period of time as well and how do we reconnect the dots and so forth.  My love and passion as always been, you know, of course family history and rural family history since that's where I found so many of my family members living in that, that setting.  I decided that I wanted to publish books that would help to document unknown facts and images about black folks in Atlanta [Georgia] and the surrounding areas.  My first publication was called 'Going Against the Wind' ['Going Against the Wind: A Pictorial History of African Americans in Atlanta,' Herman Mason, Jr.] and it was a coffee table book, pictorial history, filled with tons of pictures, text, timelines of the history and development of black folks in Atlanta.  Interesting enough nothing had been written on black folks in Atlanta.  The definitive books for blacks at the turn of the century was a book by E.R. Carter called 'The Black Side of Atlanta' [sic. 'The Black Side: A Partial History of the Business, Religious and Educational Side of the Negro in Atlanta, Georgia'].  Working at the library [Atlanta Fulton Public Library System, Atlanta, Georgia] I was just shocked in all that very little had been written about black folks.  Atlanta is a progressive city, you know.  It was supposed to be the melting pot.  Folks were moving in.  You had your black mayor, Maynard Jackson and Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young], but very little had been written about it.  So I decided to document that and then in '96 [1996]--
Speaker 1: But wait.  This is, so that was what year?
Speaker 2: That was 1992.
Speaker 1: Now who published that book?
Speaker 2: Arcadia press [Arcadia Publishing], which was owned by Cox Communications [Cox Communications, Inc.], who also owned the Atlanta Journal Constitution newspaper.  They also published [HistoryMaker] Xernona Clayton, you know Xernona.  They published her first book.  Xernona will be here this week, yeah.  And then I came across by fax a little unknown publisher called Arcadia press.  This company was located in Charleston, South Carolina and they specialize in small towns, local histories books, publications, and asked me if I was interested in doing a book and so I did a book on blacks in Jacksonville, Florida, which became Arcadia's first publication in their African American heritage series.  Now they have published hundreds of books, all across, they're small books, brown, have you seen any of the Arcadia books?  The series African American life books.  I know they've done some here in Chicago [Illinois].  I've seen them.  I published their first book and then I subsequently published 'African Life in Jacksonville, Florida' ['African American Life in Jacksonville,' Herman Mason, Jr.]; 'African American Life in Washington, Georgia' [sic. 'Washington, Georgia,' Herman Mason, Jr.], which is where I pastored a church, 'African American Life in East Point' [sic. 'East Point, Georgia,' Herman Mason, Jr.]; 'African American Life in DeKalb County' ['African American Life in DeKalb County, 1823 - 1970,' Herman Mason, Jr.]; 'Black Entertainment in Atlanta' [sic. 'African American Entertainment in Atlanta,' Herman Mason, Jr.]; and 'Black Atlanta in the Roaring Twenties' [Herman Mason, Jr.].  So I had about six books, seven books published all by Arcadia.
Speaker 1: By that was over what period of time?
Speaker 2: That was between '96 [1996] and 2000, 2002.
Speaker 1: So this is the time between Digging, Digging It Up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I still had Digging It Up, yeah, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Between that and then 2003, you said--
Speaker 2: That was the time between Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].  I was working at Morehouse part time, and--
Speaker 1: Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia] hadn't started yet.
Speaker 2: Morris Brown had started.
Speaker 1: Had started, had started. Okay.
Speaker 2: Had started, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 623709
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you're gaining quite a reputation then as this, as this local historian.
Speaker 2: Yeah, as a local historian.  I--it's kind of interesting, you know, I get calls from TV reporters and journalists wanting sound bites and comments on particular issues.  So my niche became Atlanta [Georgia] history.
Speaker 1: So what are you learning?  Are you attending other conferences and presenting and--
Speaker 2: Yes, I became a member the Association for the Study of African American Life and History, John Fleming was president, Sylvia Cyrus [Sylvia Y. Cyrus].  I know you know both of them, was presenting there.  The black, the African American Genealogical Society [Afro American Historical and Genealogical Society, Inc., Washington, D.C.].  I would go there and present.  I was doing workshops, I was doing lectures.  During that time, we had slides.  This was long before the PowerPoints, so I had developed slide presentations of, you know, many of the images.  Early on, in '89 [1989], actually my very first exhibit was called 'Hidden Treasures: African American Photographers in Atlanta' ['Hidden Treasures: African American Photographers in Atlanta, 1870 - 1970'].  I've always loved photos.  Just loved historic photos, and so I researched, we had a small grant with Fulton County [Georgia], I think in the humanities council, to document every known black photographer in Atlanta, and then to find examples of their works.  Because in doing so, we began to see this panorama of images documenting black Atlanta's history, and I did an exhibit.  [HistoryMaker] Michael Lomax then--Michael Lomax who's president of the UNCF [United Negro College Fund]--was then chairman of the Fulton County commission [Fulton County Board of Commissioners] and very much a historian, historical buff and enthusiast, and he became very supportive of the work that I was doing.
Story_ID: 623710
Speaker 1: But, you know, I just wanted to--it, it wasn't about trying to be a noted person in this area, I just wanted to document, you know, and I committed myself to just trying to document, even in the fraternity as they know, I did our major centennial exhibition which took a whole year (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was called?
Speaker 1: That was 'The House of Alpha' ['The House of Alpha: The Centennial Exhibit of Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.'].
Speaker 2: 'House of Alpha,' right.
Speaker 1: And it was filled with tons of artifacts.
Speaker 2: Now how long did that take you?
Speaker 1: I worked on it about two years, and it unveiled, we unveiled it in Washington, D.C. in twenty- in 2006.  In fact some of the brothers would say after I did the exhibit that my, my desire to become national president was almost a given, you know.  And really I would say--
Speaker 2: Do you think that's true?
Speaker 1: I do.  Senator Edward Brooke [HistoryMaker Edward Brooke] got up at the public program to give his address and before he did, he said, "Let me pause."  He said, "I have just walked through the centennial exhibit.  I've never witnessed anything like it."  He said, "This fraternity owes a debt of gratitude to Mr. Skip--to Brother Skip Mason [HistoryMaker Herman "Skip" Mason]."  My heart was beating, my son [Jodari Mason] was sitting in my lap, my wife [Hermal Cody Mason] was bumping my knee, another brother was touching me.  I mean it was just a stellar moment, that, the great senator from Massachusetts would, out of all of the things he could have discussed or acknowledged, he paused and after that folks, brothers who had not been and wives who had not been, were flocking to the exhibit to see what we had transformed to tell the story of Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.], you know, and to give it some life, so yeah, I kind of felt good about that in terms of my, my, my role in the fraternity and future desires, which I had not made known then, you know, brothers would say, "Yeah, we always knew you wanted to be it," but really I had not made that known, but I figured if I do a good job on this exhibit, you know, that thy works would prove themselves and, you know, no one proclaimed to know as much about Alpha's history as I, I did.
Story_ID: 623711
Speaker 1: And when I take a project like Atlanta's [Atlanta, Georgia] history, I mean I'm sure there are a lot of people who know, but I, I kind of feel like I'm one of the most, not the most, knowledgeable people when it comes to Atlanta's history, and particularly some of the unknown facts.  And I just spent years collecting material, images, newspapers.  I mean in my garage going all the way around the garage I have shelves, and I got boxes, I got file cabinets, just filled.  And I look at it sometimes, I'm trying to say, when did I, when did I have a chance to collect all of this material, and occasionally I'd go back.  I have photographs, I have negatives, you know, and eventually at some point in time those will end up, you know, hopefully in a very reputable archive.  I tell my wife [Hermal Cody Mason] I say, "I won't leave you stocks and bonds but you'll have a hell of a collection to share or to sell or auction, however you so choose, you know, to do it," because I spent a lot of time, I started years ago pulling posters off of street posts, concert posters, you know, of entertainers coming to the city.  'Cause you know those companies would post them up and that was their form of advertising, and I would pull up to a pole in a minute and pull it off, and I think I have a hell of a collection.  An old '50s [1950s], '60s [1960s] club in Atlanta had been closed and I tracked down the owners.  We went into there and there were a couple of old Sam Cooke posters.  Sam Cooke was appearing here in 1958 and James Brown and all, and I asked for 'em.  She gave 'em to me.  I've never been afraid to ask for, you know, and now of course, they tore that building down.  Of course, I wish now I had gone in and gotten some of the other furniture and other pieces, and you know I really think at one point I wanted to be a museum curator, director because I liked the visual piece, the telling of the story, you know, so after I finished the stint with Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.], of which I have eighteen more months to do, eighteen months counting down in a good way, I can get back to the other loves of my life, including my family, but including collecting and writing more.  There's so many Atlanta stories that have not been told.
Story_ID: 623712
Speaker 1: But isn't it amazing that you would be president during the, the unveiling or the completion of the Martin Luther King Memorial [Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial, Washington, D.C.] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think it is.
Speaker 1: --because you're at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, remember you said, "I didn't think about going to Morehouse," but you have this long affiliation with Morehouse, you know.  Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was a Kappa, you know I mean so--
Speaker 2: Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.].
Speaker 1: Alpha. Sorry. Sorry (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh, that's okay.
Speaker 1: I (unclear) sorry. And so can you talk about the monument and--
Speaker 2: I can.
Speaker 1: --and, but I, yeah, before you do that though, can you talk about your run for the presidency?
Speaker 2: Sure, sure, in 2000 and--
Speaker 1: Aren't you relatively young though?
Speaker 2: I'm forty-nine.
Speaker 1: But aren't you--
Speaker 2: Well, our, our earlier presidents were very young men and then at a point we shifted and began to elect older men.
Speaker 1: At what period?
Speaker 2: Probably in the forties and fifties, and older meaning they were in their forties.  And most of our presidents have been in their forties and I may even be older than some but because Alpha has been around for a long, long time, it appears I'm a younger president, but I'm, in fact, kind of older than some of the ones who were elected.  But I've been a member of Alpha since 1982 and--
Speaker 1: And you were a member of the I- Iota--
Speaker 2: Iota Chapter at Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia], yes.  I attended every convention since I've been in except my first one cause I didn't know anything about it.  You know, my first convention, my second convention was in New Orleans [Louisiana] in '83 [1983] and my first national convention as national president was in New Orleans, in the same hotel in the very same ballroom in the very same space that I attended my first convention as a college student so that was really special for me.  You know I took a different route to general presidency because typically those who run have served as state director, they saved as a regional vice president, and I didn't, you know.  I took a kind of historical path or the path less traveled to get there, and I had to demonstrate to the brothers, you know, that my love for the fraternity could channel into my leading the fraternity, you know, at this time, and it was a exhausting campaign.  You run just like the president of the United States.  You know, you have fifty states, you run a national campaign just to get on the ballot.  There were five, I think, running at the time I was running.
Speaker 1: And who were they?
Speaker 2: They were Darryl Peal out of Ohio, you had Elvin Darling [ph.] out of New York, Cecil Howard out of Florida, Ralph Johnson [Ralph E. Johnson] out of Baltimore, Maryland, and then the brother from Ohio and I ended up on the ballot together.  And then we had to run again, so we could get out to the chapters and get them to vote in the mail in ballot.  And so I was told about something called Facebook.  This was 2009--no 2008.  Some college brothers said, "We gone set up a page for you on Facebook."  I said, "Okay, what is Facebook?  I never heard of Facebook."  And so they said, "We'll show you, just put in Facebook.com," et cetera, and I did that.  They set up a page for me and college brothers began to join the page and so I learned how to maneuver and manage Facebook and to reach out to my college brothers, many of whom had never voted for a president.  Because they would get the ballot in the mail and toss it aside, and so I said, long before Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] worked Facebook for his campaign, or around the same time, we were doing it with Facebook.  Now, of course, if I had Twitter in 2008, 'cause Twitter is the real deal, in terms of instant messaging and getting the word out to thousands of people in a very short and quick time, you know.  But we worked Facebook, we walked brothers into how to vote, how to get the ballot back, you know.  I was up answering instant message chats and brothers would, you know, send me a message, which I responded back.  I still do that now, you know.  I still respond to every brother who emails me, who texts me, who tweets me.  It's just a personal touch that's, that's needed, you know, I think in these kind of organizations.
Story_ID: 623713
Speaker 1: And so, it was an exhausting campaign, but the joy came the same week that O- President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was inaugurated.  My family went, and I, we traveled to D.C. [Washington, D.C.]  We participated in all the wonderful events and then we left there and came back to Atlanta [Georgia] for my inaugural ceremony which was at Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] in the King chapel [Martin Luther King Jr. International Chapel].
Speaker 2: And that was on January--
Speaker 1: That was January the 24th, and the ceremony was full of every bit (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two thousand and nine [2009].
Speaker 1: Two thousand and nine [2009].  Every bit of pomp and circumstance that you could fit.  We had African drummers, we had flag bearers carrying the flags of the founders and the jewels.  We had the grand processional of officers.  We had an orchestra.  They had, they had to compose a fanfare for Skip [HistoryMaker Herman "Skip" Mason] and it was just--everybody was on such a cloud because we had just witnessed Barack Obama, and folks were making comparisons with the Obamas and the Masons cause I had a wife and two kids.  He had a wife and two kids.  I mean it was, it was just great.  Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young], Marc Morial [HistoryMaker Marc H. Morial], [HistoryMaker] Michael Lomax, Martin King [Martin Luther King III], who was not a member at the time, were all there to be a part of the program, all of the national presidents of the Divine Nine.  Have you done any of them?  I think, have you done Barbara, [HistoryMaker] Barbara McKinzie, I know you know Barbara.
Speaker 2: We did Barbara.
Speaker 1: You did Barbara, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we did the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause Barbara had asked me almost a year ago had I met you.
Speaker 2: Right.  No, we been trying.  We, you know, we've done a lot more Links [The Links, Incorporated], well Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity], we've done Boule a lot.
Speaker 1: Boule, yeah. Okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: But we haven't, and I--it's my plan but it just takes time--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it takes time, yeah, it takes time.  But then--
Speaker 2: --to get to the leaders.
Speaker 1: And then the leaders change.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Every two years in some, every four years.  All--
Speaker 2: With you it's every four years.
Speaker 1: Every four years.  All of the presidents will be here on Wednesday--
Speaker 2: Oh, see that's--
Speaker 1: --at the public program so I, that's why I really want you to be there and then come up to our reception afterwards.
Speaker 2: Do you know what ti--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm gonna, it's gonna, seven o'clock at the Grand Ballroom at the Hilton [Hilton Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], but I'll make sure you get that when we get back to the hotel.
Speaker 2: When you, so really, it's, you know what's interesting is that, 'cause we, you're younger for us, in terms of interviews.
Speaker 1: Okay, as an interview?
Speaker 2: Yeah, most of our interviews are sixty-five and above.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: So, yeah, fourteen hundred people, sixty-five and above.  Ninety that are ninety and above, so we have, we have not done many, you know, people in their forties or fifties.
Story_ID: 623714
Speaker 1: So when you, you know, when you're telling a story and you're mentioning Facebook, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --and you think of the age of the fraternity [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and it's the oldest fraternity--
Speaker 2: It is, yes.
Speaker 1: --and here new technology really helped, you know, you get elected.
Speaker 2: I, I think it's been a plus and I know Brother Hammond [James Hammond] would agree.  I communicate to the brothers constantly.  I express my likes and my dislikes and if something has really perturbed me, as something happened a couple of weeks ago, I put it out there.  I mean you have to in this day and time.  You got to meet brothers and members where they are.  Now I have my older brothers who don't know anything about Facebook or Twitter and so I communicate with them as well, but my college brothers I know where they are.  College brothers and young brothers in that group are on Twitter.  I know where they are and I can get a message to them, you know, in a heartbeat on things, but it's a good thing.  I think, I think if President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] could, and I understand that he's gonna start back tweeting now, but I think that if he could he would.  You have to be careful, you have to make sure you get the right message out and can't nobody misconstrue what you're trying to, to say, but I still think it's a great tool to have.
Story_ID: 623715
Speaker 1: So what are your hopes for the, what, what was, what is your platform and what are you hoping to really accomplish to move the organization forward (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I'm in three years, three years now in the fraternity [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.].  My platform was built upon the concept from the high chair to higher education, and that is getting our chapters, seven hundred plus chapters and our members involved in activities educationally and socially that would nurture young men from the age of four to seventeen to be the supportive mechanism for educational institutions and charter schools to provide that additional enhancement and, and support, and exposure for them and to ensure that these young men would make the college, would graduate and go to college, and we have a lot of mentoring groups throughout the country and with our chapters.  Also, we adopted a brother's keeper's program [Brother's Keeper], which is a national program designed to allow the members to serve, support our widows, our senior brothers, our elderly brothers to participate and to support them in natural disasters and so the most recent tornadoes and hurricanes, you know, in Alabama, chapters mobilized and went to provide support, clean up, to bring clothes.  We did it with Haiti.  We were the first and the only fraternity to travel to Haiti on a mission trip.  I lead a delegation of about fifteen brothers.  We took food, supplies, clothing, but we have Haitian brothers and we located the families of our brothers, many of them, and we took them money, cash, you know, because we knew folks needed immediate.  We took a physician and I'm telling you it was just like Jesus walking through places because everywhere he went and stopped, they came by the dozens.  They just wanted him to touch, to look at an old sore, bruise or something that was not, that had just healed because they had no medical care and so we, we found a school that was owned by one of our brother's fathers and we adopted the school, renamed the Alpha Academy [Croix des Bouquets, Haiti], and we had provided funds to renovate the school because this was a school that had nothing but concrete walls, no roof and no supplies, no desks, tables.  And so we finished the roofing, we're getting ready to, I think they have ten rooms.  We're gonna have the rooms furnished.  I'm asking, I've asked organizations to contribute a couple thousand dollars, the National Bar Association, the members of the Greek letter organizations, so that we can get these rooms furnished, you know, provide hot meals during the day, provide some clothing and some uniforms.  I asked brothers to bring to this convention supplies, clothing, underwear, tee shirts for boys, that we're gonna eventually ship back over to, to Haiti and to the area where we have our school located.  The Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial [Washington, D.C.] started with the fraternity twenty-seven years ago.  We--were five brothers, older brothers who said we need to build something for Dr. King on the Mall [National Mall, Washington, D.C.], approaching the fraternity, the fraternity initially denied it, said, "No we can't do this," and eventually went back and supported it, and now twenty-seven years later a hundred and twenty million dollars later, the memorial is scheduled to be dedicated by the president.  He's confirmed for Sunday, August the 28th, which is the anniversary of the March on Washington, which is the anniversary of Dr., the March on Washington, the anniversary of Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] accepting the Democratic nomination in Denver, Colorado, and also the anniversary of the day they found Emmett Till's body.  It was August 28th.  So tomorrow morning my board of directors will join me and we'll travel to Oak Burr cemetery [sic.], I believe that's it.
Speaker 1: Oak Burr (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oakwood?
Speaker 1: Oh, no Burr Oak [Burr Oak Cemetery, Alsip, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Burr Oak.
Speaker 1: Oh we have--right that's where he was--that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's where he's buried.  So we can place flowers on his grave, and remember him and we're gonna visit Harold Washington's grave. [HistoryMaker] Eugene Sawyer, who was our fraternity brother and second black mayor of Chicago [Illinois], and John Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] and Jesse Owens, both of whom were members of the fraternity.  So I said we gotta do this first before we open up this convention and begin, you know, we gotta pay tribute and honor to some of these giants.  And Wednesday night I'm honoring a filmmaker by the name of Keith Beauchamp. Are you familiar with Keith?
Speaker 1: I've heard he's--
Speaker 2: Keith did the Emmett Till piece ['The Untold Story of Emmett Louis Till'].
Speaker 1: That's right.  I know, I know I heard his name.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Keith did the Emmett Till piece and has helped to keep Emmett Till's story alive.  I think they had [U.S.] Congress to reopen the investigation on the murder of Emmett Till because the initial persons charged were, were acquitted.
Story_ID: 623716
Speaker 1: I wanna go back just to cover a couple of things.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This whole area of--let's look at your career, historian, scholar, I mean historian, scholar, archivist.  What are your feelings about the, you know, black archivists.  There are not many that have existed.  I think currently, do you know the numbers?
Speaker 2: I don't. I know the Society of Archivists [Society of American Archivists] had an African American group--
Speaker 1: Brenda Banks?
Speaker 2: Brenda Banks, yeah.  Karen Jefferson are some of the icons in it.  I'll be honest with you, I, I have never--how can I put it? I've never kind of fallen into the stereotype of a, of an archivist.  Most archivists are just archivists.  That's all they do.  I just happen to be an archivist, you know, who enjoys the civic, social, political piece, you know.  The fraternity has never had an archivist as national president.  I mean you wouldn't even think an archivist would wanna be national president or could be qualified to be national president of that.  So I just kind of never grouped myself in, in just that category, but understand the importance of archives and how it is so important for us to have people who are designated, who are trained to help to preserve, catalog and document our rich history because that's what's so important now.  The documentation of it, and accessibility of it.  It's one thing to have it, it's another thing to preserve it, but can you get to it?  Can you assess it?  And now this age of digital technology, makes it even more important that these important papers and photos and videos are, are accessible, you know, to all who would desire to want that.  It's something that's innate.  I think you're kind of born this way, if I can, you gotta have, it's something in you.  People can like history, but the tedious process of going through paper after paper and arranging in a catalog and trying to make it fit to give it some sense of structure, that's, that's work.  I don't do much processing anymore.  You know I hire processors because that takes a whole lot of time to do, but I wanna make sure.  We just acquired from Sotheby's, the fraternity, the papers of Charles Wesley [Charles H. Wesley], which was on auction.  Charles Wesley was the fourteenth president of Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.], eminent historian, published the books on the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity], on Alpha, on Prince Hall Masons, president of Wilberforce college [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio], president of Central State [Combined Normal and Industrial Department at Wilberforce University; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio].  He was an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] bishop and that's my mentor, that's my hero in the fraternity.  We got a lot in common.
Speaker 1: So you acquired them off of auction?
Speaker 2: Off the auction block.
Speaker 1: But how, who put them on the auction?
Speaker 2: His stepdaughter in Florida.  She had them.  They really belonged to him, but Wesley remarried her mother, who was a famous librarian at Howard, Dorothy Porter [Dorothy Porter Wesley].  Dorothy, yeah, Dorothy Porter and the daughter, stepdaughter, after he died and the mother died, she had all of his things.  Now Dr. Wesley had a daughter, has a daughter in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] who gave her things to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] where our archives is.  She put 'em on the auction black, block.  And so, we end up having to pay over thirty thousand dollars for those papers.  I was at the auction.  But I said, "These papers can't go anywhere else.  The fraternity's history is in here," you know, I would hope that if that lot fell to me, that somebody would, in the fraternity or somewhere would say, "Look but Skip Mason's [HistoryMaker Herman "Skip" Mason] papers, you know where they gotta go.  We can't just let a private dealer buy them."  And so we were hoping that nobody would bid for them, but there was a phone bidder.  I have no idea who was bidding against us.  I was just praying and said, I was praying and said, "Lord please let 'em stop," you know.  But the starting bid was fifteen thousand and we got up to thirty-six, at two thousand dollar increments, you know, but we got the papers.  And it's an incredible collection.
Speaker 1: You know it's fabulous because we need to do more of that in our community.  We're losing papers on a daily basis (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah we do. We're losing papers. Yeah, we losing 'em.
Story_ID: 623717
Speaker 1: What is the thing that you have learned about either Atlanta [Georgia] history or Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.] history and--or the projects that you have done that surprised you?  What is the most surprising details that have--or your family history?  What, what has been the thing that has surprised you the most?
Speaker 2: Let me do it by subjects.  Atlanta's history that we had at one time so many black folks who owned their own businesses, doing it for themselves.  Probably more between 1900 and 1940 than we have now, you know.  They owned their own shops, the stores, the companies, a real keen entrepreneur spirit.  Now, of course, they may not have had any other choice but to find their niche and do it, but that's been the most revealing piece in Atlanta history.  And Alpha Phi Alpha's history, just the, I've learned and really have tried to understand what type of organization this is that has attracted so many prominent men.  And I don't think it's just because we were the first, that may have had a little bit to do with it, but there's something that was poured into the foundation of this organization early on that has just attracted, you know, some very powerful dynamic men.  When I look at a John Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson], who pledged, joined Alpha in 1939 here in Chicago [Illinois], Theta Chapter, or Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], 1952.  A Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] in 1909 or Thurgood Marshall in 1926 at Lincoln University [Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] in 1950 at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] or [HistoryMaker] Eugene Sawyer.  I mean a lot of the men that we, Jesse Owens was, before he won his Olympics, gold medals, four gold medals, he joined Alpha in 1932, so it's speaks a lot about the organization's reputation, you know, and the draw to it.  I mean the other organizations are great and they're fine.  They got great men in it, but I've just always been, you know I said perhaps I could answer that question best by looking at my own self.  Why did I become a member of Alpha?  Well, I had heard about Alpha Phi Alpha, but when I learned that Martin Luther King, Jr. was a member of Alpha Phi Alpha, I said, "That's the fraternity I want to be a part of."  I said, "If he became a member of this fraternity," I said, "I don't need any more thoughts.  This is what I want to do."  So that's been real revealing with that.
Story_ID: 623718
Speaker 1: My family, in terms of what have I kind of uncovered, it's, it's been eye opening, you know.  I don't come from very wealthy family members, no land, no major landowner.  I don't have any land or property that was passed down, you know, to me.  They were primarily hardworking people, you know, who did the best they could with what they had, you know, and a sense of, you know, a sense of hardworking, you know fairly honest.  You know, of course, like any family, we got our rogues, but just good family values and morals.  It's kind of been, you know, consistent with that, you know, and that's been revealing and encouraging.  I have a photograph in my office at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] of my great-great-great-grandmother Ellen [Ellen London Barton] and she's standing out, she has some rag on her head and she had a long kind of cotton sack dress with a hoe in her hand, and I guess some photographer was going by and just told her to pose.  That was a very striking image and I was thinking about what was going on in her mind, and what was that life like?  I've heard some stories that have been shared, you know, about some things, but to see her face, you know, and to know from her so many people have come, probably six, seven hundred people that we know of are descendants of this very lady and now to have discovered her mother, Amy [Emmie London], and all, just makes them human to me.  It takes them from the pages of the microfilm and research where you have a date dash date, you know, to really making them real, that they lived here.  They were sisters, they were daughters, they were wives, they were mothers, you know, and so that's been a real great experience for me to have this sense of my family, generations back, and the desire to keep, keep moving, you know, to keep researching and uncovering that.  The first two years of my administration is Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.] and folks know I love history.  I have talked a whole lot about history because they expected that, you know, and I knew that they were not electing a historian, but I've gotten most of my platform in, so they gonna be in for a rude awakening at this convention because I'm gonna slay them with things and facts and images and people, you know.  So it's gonna be a really historical, historically oriented convention because I'm on the downside of my administration and the few things that I wanna do are all historically related.  Because that leaves your legacy and it documents, you know, the, the great story of our people and the fraternity, you know, so I think I've hit (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, so--
Story_ID: 623719
Speaker 1: With that said, what are your thoughts about the future of the black community and where do you put this time in the, the history of our people?
Speaker 2: I am kind of troubled by our people, our inconsistencies.  What I saw and what we saw with the fervor and the energy and the excitement of electing Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] is something that we've never witnessed.  We all can remember that period of time, even the folks that didn't support him when he announced in Springfield [Illinois], who came on board.  'Cause I tell people a lot of time in speeches, I say, "Don't sit up and act like y'all were on page one with him.  Many of y'all doubted, you know, that he could do it.  Many of you said no black man can be elected president and many of you brought with you your own experiences and your own time that it was just impossible for a black man to be elected."  But I remember the night of the Iowa Caucus.  When it was announced that he had won the caucus, my wife [Hermal Cody Mason] and I we jumped up and down, like kids, okay.  And my wife would say I don't really know all about the Iowa Caucus, but the fact that this black man pulled the Iowa Caucus and was able to win understanding that that kind of sets the tone for the election, excuse me, for the campaign going on, we were ecstatic and throughout the campaign I would see him on a number of occasions at the Urban League [National Urban League] meeting and a couple of other places and just to be in his presence.  And now, I've been to the White House [Washington, D.C.] five times.  I would have never imagined really that I would get to the White House other than maybe just to do a tour with the family and then to have been invited for the fatherhood conference the intimate prayer breakfast, you know, and to see him seated right across, to talk to him because he came by and he shook everybody's hand and took pictures, you know.  I've just been, I took the kids [Jewel Mason and Jodari Mason] and the wife to the Easter egg hunt and so it's all surreal in a sense, the most famous house in the world that occupies the most powerful person in the world, you know, as somebody that was kind of at arm's length distance, but I'm concerned that now after two years we've fallen back in to a mold and the energy, excitement and I realize that the times are hard, that the jobs are, are few and I don't--we're kind of a wishy washy kind of group of people.  We don't stay consistent.  The same energy and efforts that got him there and should hold him accountable, is still needed.  I hate to see this verbal ongoing spat between he and Cornel West and, and [HistoryMaker] Tavis Smiley.  I was talking to Joseph Lowery [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Joseph Lowery] on the phone Friday and he wanted to know, because Joseph Lowery is a brother.  He just came into the fraternity [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.].  He wanted to know if Tavis was a brother.  I said, "No Tavis is a Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity, Inc.], but Cornel is a member."  He said, "Well I just wish they would stop it."  He said, "Now I, I got some bones to pick with the president too, but I'm not gonna do it publicly."  He said, "I'm just gone call him and let him know what my concerns are." And so I hate to see that played out publicly because I say to you Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson], it's gonna be a long time after Barack Obama comes out of office, that another black man gets elected president.  I just feel it in my spirit.  I say you will have a white female or black female before you get another black man as president.  I just believe that.  I just believe that.  No matter how qualified.  So much was riding on his shoulders and is riding and I understand too that a lot of what he has to deal with he inherited, but there are some decisions that have been made that have been truly his, you know, and until we get folks back into jobs and working, I know what it's like to be unemployed, okay.
Story_ID: 623720
Speaker 1: If you talking about, if you want a new poster child for unemployment at that time, he came in a suit.  I was the only one in that line with a suit on.  I looked at, humbly, I have published books and I've been to this place, I've traveled to that place, and I was standing in an unemployment line so I could get me, I could apply for assistance, you know, over the next few months, humbly.  But one of the greatest experiences of my life to be there and to have gone through that scenario, you know, and I really didn't have to do it, but I said every little bit helps.  My wife [Hermal Cody Mason] was excellent with money, of course, been saving, you know, and putting money aside, which, and I'm so busy traveling I didn't even know that.  When she said, "Everything's gonna be okay," well, you know, she knew that it was.  We could get through 'cause she had been, you know, as she does, but I still needed to do my, my part because I think after I lost my job I, I kind of went into a little state of depression, very quietly.  I'd be down in my basement most of the time still kind of in just disbelief.  First of all, I'm mad with Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia], not because of my job, just mad with Morris Brown because of what had happened to it.  Now how did it get to this, this point, you know, but we survived, you know, we survived.  And that's what I've learned throughout all of my research, that we are survivors, you know, no matter how tumultuous the period of time is, challenging, we're resilient and we somehow learn how to bounce back, you know, and that's just been the story of people, our people, people of color.
Story_ID: 623721
Speaker 1: What do you hope for the future of black people and what do you want your legacy to be (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To be more engaged, more involved, more knowledgeable about things that are going on in the world and issues that affect us, that's what I want people, the community to be, you know.  I look at my kids [Jewel Mason and Jodari Mason] because of the exposure, they know a whole lot more about things than I think I ever knew at that age.  They, they followed the election of the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama].  When Michael Jackson died, I got home, they say, "Daddy, daddy Michael Jackson died."  I said, "I know," I say, "I'm so sad."  I said, "I grew up with Michael Jackson." And we sat up in bed and we watched about three hours of whatever they were doing on TV, which was all Michael Jackson's songs and specials in his life, you know.  And, and so they are a part of that group that has been exposed, you know.  They're the part, they are a part of a society of kids now that can go on the internet for the good reasons and learn, you know, about things, so, you know, I hope, my wish and my hope for our people that we, that we become more knowledgeable.  Knowledge is power, and that we seek it.
Story_ID: 623722
Speaker 1: And I think your question was what do I hope my legacy will be?  Well, that he exhausted every resource possible and that he dug up and found every photo possible that would help to paint a better picture, a clearer picture to provide a story of something that was not, not known, facts and individuals, you know, cause I kind of feel like I'm a grassroots historian.  I cover the things that are not widely known, the communities and neighborhoods, the people, the events that could literally just go unknown, you know, because we're looking at the big picture, we're looking at the Martin Luther King, Jr.'s [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], the Harriet Tubmans, the Frederick Douglasses, Booker T. Washingtons and, you know, we're not looking at the, the mothers who make sandwiches to take down to the students who have been jailed because of the sit-ins, very much a part of that story, you know.  So my facts and my love are for the least known, the other events surrounding, you know, the lady [Claudette Colvin] who sat on the bus before Rosa Parks, you know.  There had been a previous sit-in, you know.  So how do we continue to shape and, you know, and tell those stories?  And that's what I've tried to do with the fraternity [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.], you know, and, of course, with my own family history.
Speaker 2: Okay, and that's it. (Cough) Thank you.
