Story_ID: 71376
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Observing today is Oveed (ph.) F. Pearson, and sir could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my name is Art Minson, A-R-T, M-I-N-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: All right and could you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I, I was born in West Virginia in 1914.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm, I'm a retired, I'm supposed to be a retired activist, active in the community of the City of Akron.
Speaker 1: Okay and what, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: This is the 1st of August 19, 1st of August 2002.
Speaker 1: All right and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at West Akron Library in the City of Akron.
Story_ID: 71377
Speaker 1: And, yeah okay, before we get into any in-depth question, there are five "People" magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask you.  And the first one is--and they just require a short answer.  The first one is what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Say that again.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I love the fall year.  I like to see the leaves fall from the tree.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite vacation destination?  Don't mind him.  Okay, is there, is there--do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes I do.  Treat people like you wanna be treated.
Speaker 1: That's a good one.
Story_ID: 71378
Speaker 1: Okay, now let's talk about your early life.  Now you, you say you, you were born in West Virginia.  Can you give us your mother's name and her date of birth please?
Speaker 2: My mother was born in Fitzgerald, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that?
Speaker 2: F-I-T-Z-G-E-R-A-L-D, Fitzgerald, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Fitzgerald, Georgia, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was--oh go ahead.  You want me to elaborate?
Speaker 1: Yeah, what, what year.
Speaker 2: It was--she was born in the year of 1896.
Speaker 1: Okay and what--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: She lived, she lived to be almost 100.  She died in 1995.  She lived to be 99 years old.
Speaker 1: And what was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Florence Minson.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how do you spell Florence?
Speaker 2: F-L-O-R-E-N-C-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and your father?
Speaker 2: My father was named Walter Minson, and he was also born in Fitzgerald, Georgia.  He was born in 1892--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and
Speaker 1: Now do you--
Speaker 2: --he, he, he lived to be around seventy-five years old.  He died out in Honolulu, Hawaii.
Story_ID: 71379
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did your parents have a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: Well, they were sharecroppers in Georgia, and they was trying to find a new home where they could do better, and my daddy heard about Henry Ford was hiring people to work for a dollar an hour, so he headed off to Detroit [Michigan], but he never made it to Detroit [Michigan].  He had a friend in West Virginia, so he, in Fairmont, West Virginia, so he stopped and worked in the mines for a, a year or so and he couldn't cut it in the mines so he decided he would go over to Detroit [Michigan].  But he had a friend in Akron, Ohio, and they was building a Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company theater and gym, so his, his friend persuaded him to get a job building the gym for Goodyear and in the meantime when he got through building the gym and theater, the company offered him a job and so he went inside and he started sweeping floors.  The only job that he could get was sweeping the floors at that time, it was for Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company.  He never made it to Detroit, so that's why I'm here.  So he sent back, he sent back to West Virginia and, and got his kids, which I had a sister who was born in West Virginia.  He sent back for us.  That's, that's why we're here.  That's why I am in the city of Akron [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay, now did your father or mother have any stories about their ancestors and about, about the days when they were sharecroppers?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, well, really they didn't talk about it too much, but often you know how kids are they wanna know things and so I was one that wanted to know, and I did get a few things out of my mother.  I got a few things out of my father, and I put 'em together and so the things, the thing, the thing about it putting it together the, the bottom line was trying to find a better place to make a living for the family and that's why he stayed in Akron [Ohio].  And Akron was a good place to make a living, and so he stayed in Akron.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did, did, did, your mother or father talk about their parents or talk about their ancestors and what--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, well my, my dad never said too much about his parents, even though his parents, his mother come to live with us periodically, but he never mentioned his, his people, but my mother did the most talking about her people, and they were sharecroppers and her sisters, she had two sisters, had a chance to go to school.  Her, her daddy would take the money every other year and send one of the sisters to school.  There was three sisters in the family.  Two sisters went to school to learn how to be school teachers, and when it come my mother's time, he said he couldn't afford it that year, and so that's why she got married.  She got married at a young age.  That's why she got married, and actually they run away from home and got married.
Story_ID: 71380
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this is--had, had, had your family been in Fitzgerald [Georgia], I mean, as far as, as long as you know, I mean, as far as you know the family always, was always in Fitzgerald?
Speaker 2: Stayed right around the vicinity of Fitzgerald, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did, did they have any stories about slavery days or--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, Fitzgerald had, had a good climate.  You could--good farming. The sun shined all the time.  We had plenty of rain.  In fact, you could, you could plant some things.  You could have three crops a year.  It was a rich soil, and when the Yankees won the war, the Civil War, the Yankees, a lot of the soldiers, didn't want to go back north.  There was good weather, and they could till the soil and, and make good money and so the Yankees took one side of town.  They made an agreement among themselves.  The Yankees took one side of town, and the people that was originally in Fitzgerald they forced them to stay on the other side of town.  Well, it was a divided city and if you go to Fitzgerald right today you will find the same thing it, it's a divided city.  One side of town is the Yankee people, and the other side of town is the, the southern people that was there.  It's, it was a rich, it was a rich country.
Speaker 1: And did this division make things any better for black people?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no it didn't make it any better for black people because it was, it was just agriculture, and I would say sharecropping.  And, and we never could get out of debt when you sharecropped, because we, we didn't have-- we, we couldn't read and write.  We didn't have education, and they could at the end of the year you, you was in the hole all the time.  In other words, you still a slave, I would say, because you never could get ahead.  They had to start all over again because they had what you call a store where you went in the winter or when you, before you harvest your crop, and we had to have things and you was always in the hole and that's why after we got free, that's why they expanded and they went nor, north, west, east.
Speaker 1: So your saying in, in Minson--(unclear)--Fitzgerald your saying that, that really it didn't matter how hard you worked at the end of the year you gonna owe--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: That's right, you you--
Speaker 1: So you were starting at zero every year.
Speaker 2: Every year.
Speaker 1: Where you had a deficit because you owe.
Speaker 2: That's right, you owed on it.
Speaker 1: Yeah and--
Speaker 2: And the only way you could get away is just run.  You had to move by night.  Of course people don't wanna talk about that, but that's the way it was.  That's the way it was.  Very few people who will talk about how they got away.  And, and incidentally the men--some of the men that left they families they never sent back to get their families.  That's that, that's a bad thing, but that's what happened.  Some of them never sent back and some of the women when they found where they husband was they went and they went to where they was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 71381
Speaker 1: Now did you know your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew my grandparents.  They, they used to come every once in a while and live with us.
Speaker 1: Did they tell you any stories or have any good discussion with you about the past?
Speaker 2: Well, very little, very little.  They was kinda tight, tight-lipped about things, very little.  They didn't, they didn't talk too freely.  My grandparents--I had--I could remember I had two, two grandparents and one of 'em had polio, and she couldn't do anything for years.  In fact, the doctor only give her a year to live, but she, she survived for about twenty years.  It wasn't no cure for what she had.  They called it polio.  But, she used to come and visit us every once in a while, and she didn't, she didn't tell us very much because she was kinda sickly and she would stay with one of her sons, and she'd stay with the other son.  She--it wasn't no way--it wasn't no hospitals or nursing home back in them days.  They had to depend on the son.
Speaker 1: So, so you didn't get any stories out of her?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Any, any of the other grandparents talk about anything, about, about, about their history or about what conditions were like during reconstruction or slavery or--
Speaker 2: No I didn't--I couldn't--they didn't--like I said they didn't, they didn't talk too much about--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 71382
Speaker 1: Okay, then can you think back to when you were small and think about what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up here in Akron [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: You know I could, I can visualize when I first come to Akron we, we stayed in a little community.  They called it Tobin Heights.  It was a--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how old were you then?
Speaker 2: I was about five.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you remember something--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I re, I can remember. Yeah, I can remember.  And that was when the rubber industry, you know, was just beginning to, you know, and so they needed people to work, and they would send south and get black people.  The Goodyear and other factories would send south to get people to work.
Speaker 1: Okay, now can, can you spell Tobin Heights for us?
Speaker 2: Tob, T-O-B-I-N, T-O-B-I-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, Tobin.
Speaker 2: Tobin, Hei, Heights--and they built houses for us on top of a hill.  It was on top of a hill, and these houses was insulated on the outside with what you call tar paper and they had four rooms.  All these houses had four rooms.
Speaker 1: So then outside--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: The outside was with, with this black paper, tar paper I call it.
Speaker 1: What they call tar paper shack?
Speaker 2: Yeah, these shacks.
Speaker 1: And tar paper is what, what, what is it a--(unclear)?
Speaker 2: Like you put on a roof.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, like, like roofing material?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and these houses was in a circle and no plumbing.  You had to have an outside privy.  It was in the middle.  In the middle of this little area where these tar paper houses was a big toilet in the middle.
Speaker 1: Okay, was it, was it a toilet or an outhouse or what?
Speaker 2: Outhouse with the--outhouse.  No, no water, no water.  They had a well, and you had to go down to the well, down a hill and get your water, had to tote your water up.  That, that's the living condition that we lived under when we come to this city in 1920.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were these houses built by the rubber company?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well yeah.  They, they had, they had to build em' to house the people to come up here.
Speaker 1: This is an all black community?
Speaker 2: This was a black community and most everybody that come to Akron have lived on Tobin Heights.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they had another community and it's where Akron University is located right now.  Right around the Akron University was a little area that black people used to live, but that is all taken up by the university now, but a lot of the university people really don't know that that was black area.  It was the university come to Akron and around 1875 and it's--the building is still standing at the University of Akron.  They call it the Hilltop.  That building is still standing, but surrounding Akron University was a black community, and they worked at Goodrich and Firestone, which was located on the west side of town and the people on Tobin Heights worked for the Goodyear that was on the east side of town.
Story_ID: 71383
Speaker 1: Now when you were small could you smell the rubber factories?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, that, that, that was money when you smelled the rubber factory that, that meant that you could work.  Yeah, you smelled, oh yeah, yes sir.
Speaker 1: That, that, that's a kind of peculiar smell, isn't that you--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, but that's, that was the money.  You know people come from all over the world to work in the rubber factory 'cause it paid good money and not only black people from the south, but people from Russia.  A lot of Chinese come here and people from Europe they come to Akron [Ohio].  Akron was a place where you could come and you didn't have to have no education.  Some, some of 'em couldn't read and write they name, but all you had to have was a strong back.  Yeah, yeah Akron was a good place.  At one time, Akron had more millionaires than any city of its size in the country.  In fact, Akron had just a population of 10,000 in 1910 and, and it grew to 250,000 by 1920 in ten years' time.
Speaker 1: That's all basically due to rubber --(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, rubber it, it, it was the only, only place in the country that they made rubber tires.  They had ninety, ninety-five percent of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they was filthy rich.  I mean, they got rich quick.
Speaker 1: I guess with the invention of the automobile in Detroit--(unclear)--kicked off the--(unclear)--industry too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  In, in fact, in fact this could have been automobile manufacturing town.  Now, International Harvester had a factory here, and they, they built trucks.  International Harvester built trucks, and they was located in the same area of Akron University.  In fact, E.J. Thomas Hall, one of our, the theaters that sets on the campus of Akron University, that spot used to be International Harvester and for some reason they didn't stay here but about twenty-something years and they went, went to Fort Wayne, Indiana.  But they worked, they worked a lot of black people, and that's why the community around the university was a black community because they worked at International Harvester.  In fact, the guy that persuaded my daddy to come to Akron that's where he worked, International Harvester.
Story_ID: 71384
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now tell me now how many brothers and sisters did, did you, do you have--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: I, I got, I had two sisters, and I'm the only boy.  I got, got a sister who lives in Dayton [Ohio], pardon me.  She went to school in Wilberforce [University], and so she married a man in Dayton, so she stayed in Dayton.  But, I got one sister in Akron [Ohio].  Both of us living.  Both of my sisters is living.  My sister in Dayton is living, and my sister in Akron is living.
Speaker 1: Wha, wha, what, what's your order of birth coming up?
Speaker 2: Well, my youngest sister was born in 1923, and the sister who live in Dayton she was born in 1919.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: She, she was born in 1917.  She--'cause she was born in, in West Virginia.
Speaker 1: So you're the eldest huh?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.  I was born in 1914.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what, what kind of little boy were you when you were growing up?  What kinds of things did you do--(simultaneous)--to do?
Speaker 2: Well, tell you what, yeah.  Well I--where I lived after we ventured away from Tobin Heights, we didn't live there too long.  I say we lived there maybe two years or three years we lived there.  My daddy moved out in, in east Akron area, and I didn't have no black boys to play with.  I had one friend.  He was a Syrian.  He come from Syria, and he was my boyhood friend.  And from maybe seven or eight years old up until I got to be thirteen or fourteen he was about the only one that I had to play.  We was play, little play buddies 'cause we lived right close together, not too far from where I live now.  So he, he was almost as dark as me, and so one day we was playing, I guess I was about nine, about nine, maybe ten years old, maybe, maybe not that old.  One day I was playing, we was playing out in the field, you know, and he said, he said you know I'm white and you, you're black.  I think we--I don't where he got that from, and I looked at him and he said yeah, you know, I'm white and you're black.
Story_ID: 68140
Speaker 1: Here's the story we've been waiting for.  How was that?  Your, your, Syrian--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --boyhood friend, what was his name as a matter of fact?
Speaker 2: His, his, name was Sam.  His name was Sam Jacobs.  Sam Jacobs.
Speaker 1: State that one more time on camera.
Speaker 2: His name was Sam Jacobs.
Speaker 1: Okay, that, that's your Syrian boy friend?
Speaker 2: Boy friend yeah.  Yeah, his daddy was a wrestler and back in them days they would have medicine shows.  Medicine shows was real good shows where they would come into community and they would ask for somebody to wrestle they wrester, you know.  And his daddy used to wrestle these medicine show people.  Well, anyhow the boy he was a good boy.
Speaker 1: Can you sit back a little bit.
Speaker 2: Yes okay, okay.  And so to go along with my story, he, he said to me one day I'm white and you're black.  Well I didn't, I didn't--right out of the clear blue sky I didn't know what to say because I'd never heard that from him or anybody else.  From that day on, our relationship kinda ceased.  We just leveled off.
Speaker 1: How old were you then?
Speaker 2: I think we was around, I guess we was around the third grade or maybe, maybe third grade in school.
Speaker 1: So you, you--
Speaker 2: And but, but, but we, we was casual friends.  I mean, I mean, you know, we would speak and we would play every once in a while, but I kinda went by myself from then on and--
Speaker 1: Were you the only, one of the only black kids in the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Yeah I was, I was the only one around until, until some of the other people come from down south.  They started coming, coming from down south, and so I had other little black boys to play with.  But anyhow, we got to be friends--it--when he went, he went to the Army.  He went to war.  He volunteered and went to the war.  I didn't go to the Army because Goodyear [Rubber and Tire] said that they wanted me to stay and help 'em in the war effort.  I didn't have to go to the war, and he went to War World II, this friend of mine.  And when he, when he come back from the Army, we regained our friendship because he got to be a hero.  They had a parade for him in the City of Akron [Ohio].  What happened he was down in North Africa where most of the war--War World II was fought in Africa.  And he went in a cave and it was a lot of people around the table in this cave that he went in, and he had his rifle with him and I guess it was they was searching for the enemy.  Well anyhow when he seen all these here people around this table, these, they was Germans, he didn't know what to do so he just started firing his gun.  And to make a long story short, all--it was thirty-seven of them sitting around a table and he captured all those Germans by himself.  They thought he may be the [U.S] Army or something and so I--they had a big parade for him downtown so, so I went down to be with him and so we regained our friendship.  But, I never will forget that's when I guess the boys at school told him that, that I was colored, because he never mentioned, we never mentioned anything like that.
Story_ID: 68141
Speaker 1: Did your parents tell you, you were black?  Did they ever tell you that you were colored or negro or black--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, well I got to tell you this, my daddy, my daddy you couldn't tell him from a white man when he was young, and I guess that's why we had so much trouble.  These Ku Klux Klansmen that I've been telling you about used to burn crosses in front of our house.
Speaker 1: Here, here in Akron [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Right, right here in Akron [Ohio], only three or four blocks from where I'm living right now.  And I often wondered why they was burning crosses in front of my house.  Now I'd go to school with the, with the Grand Dragon's son and, and they burned crosses in front of my house.  And I never could figure out why they would burn crosses in front of my house.  Well, my daddy and my mother they would be scared.  They'd just look out, but they set this cross on fire and they'd take off.  I guess they thought that it was an inter-marriage, because that didn't happen back in them days.  It wasn't no inter-marriage, and so I guess they thought my daddy was white.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my mother was dark skinned.  She was dark skinned.
Speaker 1: So, they never bothered you, but they--
Speaker 2: No, no
Speaker 1: --burned crosses in front of the house because they thought that, that there was an interracial marriage--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, no they didn't bother me.   And so it's hard for me to forgive people that did that to me when I was so young.  It's it's hard and that's, that's, I guess, that's why I don't hate anybody because I had people that always hated me and right now I still remember that.  The people in the south think that they had it bad, but it was bad, it was bad right here 'cause I'm--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah was there, there a lot of Klan ac, activity?  So you knew the Grand Dragon's son, huh?  You knew he was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to school with him.
Speaker 1: How did you know he was the Grand Dragon's son?  How, how did you--
Speaker 2: Oh, it wasn't no secret.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's in the history.  It's, it's in the Akron [Ohio] history.  It's--but they don't talk about.  They--the people that made the history of Akron don't talk about that, but it's in the history book.  It's--I don't know whether it's in the history book, but it's on record that Akron was the, was, was, was one of the biggest sponsors of the Klu Klux Klan, Klu Klux Klan.  Akron was one of the, one, one of the headquarters.  At that time, they was headquarters, and this Tobin Heights I'm telling you about they used to parade up, down.  These people that lived on Tobin Heights they used to have a parade right in front of they houses.
Speaker 1: Oh the Klan would?
Speaker 2: The Klan, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And I was helpful in, in helping Tamika Jones to write the history of rubber, and the history of rubber a tell you about the Klan.  The Klan was one time took over the school board.  The Klan at one time had the majority of the school board members, and they almost wrecked the public schools in Akron, the Klansman.  So, it's a, it's a, it's a--but they don't, they don't--that's a part of history they don't stress.  They just don't talk about that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so when you were a little boy then what, what--did, did this worry you when you were a little boy?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, all my life it, it worried me.  Yeah, sure it worried me.  Sure it worried me.
Story_ID: 68142
Speaker 1: And when I, when I graduated from high school, you know we had baccalaureate sermon, you know, and that's when the Klan was really high.  We, we, we couldn't have the baccalaureate sermon, services, in our neighborhood.  We had to go downtown to a church to have our baccalaureate sermon because the Klan was so heavy in the east part of town we had to go downtown.  I never known why we had to go downtown.  I said we all, always had baccalaureate sermon in, in our vicinity of our school, but we had to go downtown to the First Congregational Church which is still downtown.  It's a, it's, it's a liberal church and, and they received us.  But that's how bad it was in Akron.
Speaker 2: Now this is about 1934.
Speaker 1: 1934.  I grad, I graduated in 1934.  It was five blacks, five black folk in 1934.
Speaker 2: What high school was this?
Speaker 1: East High.
Speaker 2: East High, okay.
Story_ID: 68143
Speaker 1: Now, let, let's go back to grade school.  I wanna know what grade school did you go to?
Speaker 2: I went, I went, I went to Glover school that was in, in the area.
Speaker 1: G-L-O-V-E-R.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to Glover school and that's where I had learned how to fight.  Now, now it wasn't no gang.  They wouldn't, they didn't gang me.  Always one-on-one and they would stand around and, and observe.  They didn't gang me, but I got beat up.  I got beat up, but my parents told me don't come back home you go to school.  Don't come back home and so all I could do was try to protect myself.  And I found out I could do pretty good, and they, they let me alone after.  After I defeated a couple of them, they left me alone, but--
Speaker 1: So, there, there, there weren't many black students at school.
Speaker 2: One.
Speaker 1: Just one.
Speaker 2: One, and I got, I got a--I can show you the picture.  It's just one, one girl.
Speaker 1: And you, that's two in the whole school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how was it like in class, I mean, did you--did teachers take any interest in you or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: In class?  Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh yeah, oh they, they, they didn't discriminate.  They taught everybody.  You know there wasn't no discrimination in teaching.  Yeah they treated everybody--the teachers treated everybody the same.  That, that's one thing I can say in the City of Akron you, you can get, right know you can--the teachers are fine, but back in them days the teachers they just, they just taught everybody.
Story_ID: 68144
Speaker 1: Okay, did you like school?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I liked school.  I liked school.  I even had a chance to start to be a musician in ni--in my early life I took up the trumpet.  I took up the trumpet, and I learned, I learned it in, in the school.  Of course, I had a private teacher, but by playing in the band in school that, that helped me on being a trumpet and I made a good living for quite a few years playing the trumpet.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you got good enough to play and earn money?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you, did you play in bands?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I, I played in different bands, and then I had my own band for a short period of time.  But I never was a band person because you have to travel, and back in them days you had to travel to make any money and so I was what you say a home boy.  I married young, and I was a home boy and so I never was successful of being a musician because I didn't want, didn't want to travel.  I would get home sick.  I wanted to come home, and so that's the way it was.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you learned how to play the trumpet?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I learned how to play.
Speaker 1: What else, what else did you like to do in school?
Speaker 2: In school?  Well, I was on the track team.  I like to--on the track team, and I went out for football.  A couple of years I went out and played football, but that was a little, little rough for me.  So, I have several letters in track and medals, and I was mostly a cross country runner.  My, my school had a cross country team.  We run two miles, yep, but, but being an athlete and playing music it was a clash there because playing music I'd be up at night and, and I, and, and I couldn't train, you know.  I wouldn't have enough rest.  They, they, they thought that, that I was gonna be a great runner, but that clashed, you know, staying up night and back in them days athletes was--they didn't do the things that the athletes do today.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't have an economic future as an athlete so much?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It was better to play the trumpet I gather?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah, oh yeah, I, I helped my parents.  I, help, helped, helped my parents playing the trumpet.  I helped them, yeah.
Story_ID: 68145
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so when you were in high school, high school and grade school and in the community who--did you have like role models and mentors that you looked up to that, that you wanted to be like when you grew up or, or who encouraged you?  Did anybody take, take, take time with you and try to develop you?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Well, when I was a young man I still volunteer for this organization.  It's East Akron Community House.  That was the only place that I could go that I was welcomed.  It was two ladies.  It was just a house, and they had a room that you could box and you could wrestle and just in this one room and you could, you could play, you could play a little basketball.  They had a little space that you could, with a hoop, that you could play with the basketball.  And I would be with my little white buddies when we go to school.  I'm talking about where I live right now.  I would be with them.  It was gym all over the place.  It was gym--school--the churches had gym, the libraries had, not the, churches, and the Salvation Army had gym.  And when I got to the door with them I couldn't go.  That, that's far as I could go.  And the East Akron Community House was the only place that I was welcome to. Now this was, this was after I was twelve or fourteen, twelve, thirteen years old.
Speaker 1: So it stayed seg, segregated for--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so I started, I started--when I got grown I started volunteering for the East Akron Community House.
Speaker 1: Who was in charge of it?  Can you give--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: These two, two women.  It was just a couple of women.  They, they, they--I don't remember they names, but they used to have boxing gloves and when we come around they gave us some boxing gloves, but we didn't, we didn't never had a director until 1940, '40 [1940].  I think Pettengill come to us in, it was around 1948.  That's the first director we had.  We didn't have no organizer.  Wasn't no, no organization.  It was just a building where--
Speaker 1: You go and have some recreation.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 68146
Speaker 1: Well except--and so, so that's why, that's, that's why I started my volunteering from the East Akron Community House because when Pettengill come there, well I'd come by from Goodyear, you know, and do things for him and then, then he hired, he hired a couple of young, young black boys that couldn't get a job that year.  They were school teachers, and they couldn't--they wasn't hiring school teachers that year and so he hired them and then I started volunteering for them, Cazzell Smith and Grady Appleton.  And that's where, that's where I really did all my volunteering.  Then when you volunteer for one group, somebody else want you to do something over here and so you, you when you get involved in volunteering it's--if you really volunteer other people would want you and so that's why I expanded my volunteerism, but I never did--when Grady Appleton and, and Cazzell Smith went to school to be social workers--see they were school teachers in the first place, but they never had the opportunity to teach, teach school and Pettengill--
Speaker 2: How, how do you spell his name?
Speaker 1: Pettengill.
Speaker 2: And what's his first name?
Speaker 1: Homer.
Speaker 2: And he, he was the director of Akron Community House?
Speaker 1: East Akron Community House.
Speaker 2: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 1: And he trained these two young men, [Cazzell] Smith and [Grady] Appleton.
Speaker 2: Pettengill, how do you spell Pettengill?
Speaker 1: How, how you spell Pettengill?  P-
Speaker 2: I believe it is P-E-T-T-I-N-G-A-L-E
Speaker 1: You're probably right, Pettengill.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Correct.
Speaker 2: It's, it's on there.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Story_ID: 68147
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's, let's move on.  If you--when you were at your, your senior year in high school, did you have any idea what you wanted to do?
Speaker 2: Oh, when I was senior?
Speaker 1: Um-huh.
Speaker 2: Well, I always wanted to be a weatherman.  You see I got a job when I come out of high school at an airport, at the Akron Airport [Ohio], and the weather bureau was just starting to set up.  It wasn't, it wasn't nothing, it wasn't, it, it was the beginning of the weather bureau.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See the airplane was just coming into being and so they had to have weathermen, and so by me being a RedCap, I was a RedCap at the Akron Canton Airport, the Akron Airport before we moved to Canton [Ohio], and the weatherman said to me, he said you know, you know I'd be--his, his office was right in the building of the hanger where the airplanes come in, and he say you, you know, you, you interested in what I'm doing.  I said yes I'd like to be a weatherman, and he said you know they don't teach this.  They, they just setting up now, they don't teach this any place.  It's only a few weathermen in the country, and I'm one of 'em.  They don't teach this, but I'm gonna teach you everything I know about it and when it comes time for the examination I'll let you know.  So, he would--I never will forget him.  His name was Robinson, Robinson.  I forget this first name, but he was from Green Bay, Wisconsin, and, and so well I just kept on learning whatever he taught me and so one day he said to me, he says, are you a citizen?  Now I'm about eighteen, eighteen, yeah I'm about eighteen, nineteen, out of high, out of high school.  I said yeah.  He says are you sure?  Now that's what--in 1936 he told me this, in 1936, and you know I just walked away, I didn't think nothing about it.  So the next day I went in and talked to him.  He said you, you, you better check and see whether you a citizen.  He said they, they have, they have an examination, so you can take the examination, but I don't think you can get a job 'cause you not a citizen.  Now, I wasn't a citizen in 1936.  And now I can see why President Johnson had to sign a bill in eight, 1965, had to sign a bill of citizenship.  Actually, black people wasn't a citizen 'til Johnson signed in 1965.
Story_ID: 68148
Speaker 1: So, that, that amazed me that I wasn't a citizen.  That, that, that really stuck with me.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it hard to be a citizen if the, if the government officials around you don't treat you as a citizen, right?  If they don't treat you as a citizen, then whose gonna recognize your citizenship, right?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so that's kinda of a dilemma.  Are you a citizen and you say well I'm supposed to be but--
Speaker 1: But, actually I found out I wasn't no citizen until in 1965 when President Johnson signed the Civil Rights of 1965.  So, we, we actually wasn't a citizen until 1965.
Speaker 2: Now, you sound as if--now the way you tell these stories you sound as if your someone who is becoming more and more politically aware of who he is and what's going on around him?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause these, these are like benchmarks.  You discover your--there's a difference between black and white.  You discover that you may not be a citizen, you know, or your not a citizen actually in certain situations.  So, the weatherman didn't teach you the weather, weather?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, he taught me all he could, but he said it wasn't no need of me taking the examination because I wasn't no citizen.
Speaker 2: So did you take the examination?
Speaker 1: No, no, no, no I didn't take the examination 'cause he told me, he said they done had the examination, but, but you, you ain't no citizen.  And actually I wasn't a citizen.  You had to be a citizen of this country to be a weatherman.
Story_ID: 68149
Speaker 1: So what--how, how long did--well what did you--you worked at the airport for a while?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I worked at the airport for a year.  I worked with--
Speaker 1: And, and then what did you do next?  What did you do--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, I went to play my music.
Speaker 1: Play music?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went about and played my music and, and worked on, I worked on the WPA.  I went--I worked on the WPA [Works Progress Administration], and they took me from digging a ditch.  I was digging a ditch.  They say we gonna put you in school, we gonna put you in school.
Speaker 1: Just for the record though, WPA is the Works Progress Administration under--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah under, under [Franklin D.] Roosevelt.  They say we gonna put you in school 'cause it's, 'cause it's gonna be trouble coming along.  That's before the war, before World War II, and we taking so many people and we're putting them in school, and they put me in school to be a pattern maker.  They, they looked at my high school records and things, and I used to pretty good in, in my, in my printing.  I used to--they give you shop.  I used to be pretty good in shop.
Speaker 1: In a print shop.
Speaker 2: In the print shop and I took metal, metal shop.  They had print shop, metal shop, and I was pretty good in that.  They had that on record.  The WPA  [Works Progress Administration] had that on record that I--my high school, you know, activity, and they say that we gonna put you in school.  We gonna put you in a pattern making shop, learn how to make pattern.  They took me from digging ditches, so I went in the pattern school, pattern making school, and I stayed there.  I seen two or three classes go, leave, and they put 'em in different places, different airplane factories.  For instances they--places where they were making war, war stuff.  So, the professor of the school told me well we gonna try to find you a place.  He said now we got a place down here in West Virginia, no in the southern part of Ohio, Ripley, Ohio.  It's, it's a black man that's got a pattern factory down there, and he may hire you.  And so he never did need anybody and so I just forget it.
Story_ID: 68150
Speaker 1: Okay, now at this time you were married--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you have children?
Speaker 2: I had, I had, I had, had this one boy, one boy.
Speaker 1: And you were settled here?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah and so Goodyear offered me a job, a plan.  They had a band and we'd go around and entertain the soldiers and, and recruit people to come to the Goodyear Aircraft to work.  So, I said I wasn't gonna never get no job of pattern making, so I just go right back to music.  So, that's, that's another thing I found out that I wasn't--they didn't want me in these positions see.  They wouldn't even hire me to do the thing that they trained me for.  That, that, that really, that really ex, experience to know that you couldn't serve the war effort.  That, that showed me where I wasn't, really wasn't a citizen.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you, did you, so you went on with Goodyear to the band thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I, I played, I--during the war we, we, we worked.  We worked during the week.  We'd we'd work in the factor during the week, then we'd take off the weekend and go to these different places and we, we never had to stay all night.  It was seven day a week job.  We'd go to different hospitals, different places where we represent Goodyear, and they would recruit people to come to work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That, that, that was a part of the war effort, the war effort and after the war they disbanded.
Speaker 1: Okay, but did--
Speaker 2: I went, I went--they give me a job in the factory.  They disbanded the band, and they give us all jobs in the factory and I got one of the heaviest jobs.  They give me a job in the factory, but they give me a heavy job.  All the rest of 'em they had collar and tie position.  Some of 'em had--couple of 'em that traveled with me was vice presidents.
Speaker 1: Okay and these are white people?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well they just give me, give me, they just give me a job, give me a heavy job too.
Story_ID: 68151
Speaker 1: Now, tell, tell me about the Art Minson Orchestra?
Speaker 2: Well, that's that's, that's the band that I had.
Speaker 1: When, when did you start that?
Speaker 2: I started that when I was in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had that then.
Speaker 2: Yep, and when they first started well they had--when I, I was in high school I had--I, I went to--well--you, you wanna how I started?  I just got boys together and then we and--
Speaker 1: How many were there and what, what kind of music did, did you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, well we, we, oh we played, yeah we played, we played jazz, yeah.  That's, you know back at the beginning of jazz we played.
Speaker 1: How many people were in the band?
Speaker 2: I had, I had quite a band one--at one time I had fifteen, sixteen people playing.
Speaker 1: Did you have a singer?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yes sir.
Speaker 1: Who did you sound like?  Did you sound like any of the popular names of people we know today?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you play original stuff that you wrote--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, yeah.  We was about right along with Jimmy Longford.  He was playing at the same time we was playing.  Cab Calloway.  A lot of boys that I had with, with big band.  In fact, it's a band out of Chicago [Illinois], Hershel Barnes.  Maybe you heard of him.  He went down to Natchez, Mississippi, and they set the dance hall on fire and they burnt up a lot of people.  They burnt about 200 people.
Speaker 1: Now, what, what happened?  Somebody set it on fire deliberately?
Speaker 2: They don't know.  They don't know in this day.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And one boy that played in my band he was supposed to go with Hershel on that trip, but for some reason he didn't, he, he didn't join him.  But, I, I used to play with--maybe you heard of Chico and the Man?
Speaker 1: Um-hum right.
Story_ID: 68152
Speaker 1: Well, I played with Scatman Crother, Scrothers.
Speaker 2: Scatman Crothers, right.
Speaker 1: I played with him.
Speaker 2: He had a radio show in Dayton [Ohio] for awhile--(unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, you know it's, it's an odd thing you know Scatman Crothers was in Akron [Ohio] for over two years.  He never said anything about him being in Akron.  I don't know why.  Yeah, Scat--I played with him.  One summer I played with Scatman.  It's out here where the Six Flag is now.
Speaker 2: Sandusky [Ohio] or something.
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: Cedar Point.
Speaker 1: No--(unclear)--Lake.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We, we played out there.  It was just--it had a merry-go-round out there, and they had a dance hall.  Yeah, I played with him out there.  One of his boys that played trumpet he had to go and get his--go back to Illinois and get, get his plate repaired, and he never did come back.  But, I played with Scatman out there a whole summer.  And he never, he never, he never said nothing about him being--I don't know why, I don't know why he, but he was Ak--in fact he got his wife from Canton [Ohio].  She's from Canton.  But he never said anything about him being in Akron.  And I always said, I said oh Scatman, I said you just, you ain't nothing but an actor.  And he just laughed, he just laughed, yeah.
Speaker 2: What did he play?  Did, did--
Speaker 1: He didn't play nothing. He could, he could--had, had that--he, he had that thing you shake.
Speaker 2: I know--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: He had, he had that, that thing you shake and he would do that and he would play a little, little drum.  He could--but he just clowned, you know, he just clowned.  He was just a clown.  Yes sir, I never could understand that.  You know, he didn't, he didn't make no money until he got to be up in age.  Yeah, Scatman.
Speaker 2: So he was more or less a personality on stage?
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh yeah he was a good entertainer.  He was good.  He always could entertain.  He had one girl named, was named Juanita.  She was good.  I don't know what happened to Juanita.  But, he, he had some good musicians with him.  He had one boy with him that made a record.  His name was Sammy Taylor.  You ever hear of a Sammy Taylor?  He made, he made a record.  He was a tenor sax player, and he made one record and he sold a whole lot of them records, but that's the only record that he made.  And he played with Scatman.
Speaker 2: Did he play the trombone?
Speaker 1: No, he played the tenor sax.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Scatman, Taylor.
Story_ID: 68153
Speaker 1: Tell me about--Now, tell me about what happened at Firestone.  Now you, you worked at Goodyear?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Did you, did you move to Firestone too.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So, so what, what was the Firestone experience?
Speaker 2: Firestone?
Speaker 1: Yeah, somebody told--yeah.  I've been informed that you were involved in something with Firestone, some racial discrimination case action at Firestone.
Speaker 2: You couldn't play up there.
Speaker 1: Huh.
Speaker 2: Oh, you couldn't play, you couldn't-
Speaker 1: Yeah, I could play there, but they couldn't, they, they, black folks didn't.
Speaker 2: Oh, black people couldn't come to see you.
Speaker 1: No, no.  Right, right now I belong to an organization that brought [Bill] Clinton to Akron and they office is right there where I used to play for Firestone.  They had a whole lot of thing going.  They had a club.  It was a club, clubhouse, clubhouse.  People come from all over the world, you know, these, these, the executives had a clubhouse and I used to play for 'em.  I used to play for 'em.  You know they didn't have it every night, but they, they've have these here thing and I used to play for 'em.  And they had Negro waiters and things, but I never seen no black people in there, but just think I'm volunteering for an organization that Firestone is giving that space, you know.  And I used to go in there to play music where no black folks--
Speaker 2: No, no blacks folks were allowed there--(simultaneous)--right, okay.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right, that's right.  But, you know that's, that's a plus--my--that's plus living for to see things happen like this, you know.  Things are happening, things are happening, but it's a slow process.
Story_ID: 68154
Speaker 1: Yes sir.  Which brings me to this, now this, this I think is the main--but what, what, what's you're noted for is community leadership and how did you get involved in the community leadership and, and what happened, I mean, to get you involved in community lead, leadership and tell me some of the stories that--(unclear)--leadership.
Speaker 2: Well, I--yeah I guess, I guess, I guess that just slipped my--(unclear)--  Well, anyhow, I think it was the East Akron Community House that got me really in, in, in community leadership, or maybe you know I, I was a union official.  I was a rubber worker.  Well, by be, being a union official I got this, the good chance to go to Washington and see how the government was working, and I, and I, I, I could see that I could get involved in the political process to help my community who--I got started organizing people.  We'd go to Washington [D.C.].  Instead of taking a vacation someplace else, we would go to Washington [D.C.].  People in my community they'd--we'd go to  Washington [D.C].  Sometimes we'd take seven or eight of us.  One time we went down, just five of us, and sometime we, we start raising money and taking fifty.  One time we took seventy-five, and we got acquainted with the legislature, our congressman, our senators, and we found out that we could bring things back to the community.  It, it wasn't easy.  We did it, we did it a long time before really we could make an impact, but when they found out then we got in the political process and got people to vote.  At one time, all of my community we, we voted.  We went to the polls and voted and, and, and the congress person they seen that we could, that we voted and they rallied around us.  Could do--they, they kinda helped us out.  They built the East Akron Community House.  They helped us build a community house, helped us to build a park.  Oh, they, they was good to us.  We had some good ones too.  We had some good, good representatives.  We had John--(unclear)--.  We had Mr. Sawyer, Tom Sawyer, [John] Glenn, the astronaut.  We had Howard Metzenbaum.  He, he stay--they still friends of ours.  They still come around every once in a while.
Story_ID: 68155
Speaker 1: But do you think that without--th, th, th, there's a value in community organizing in the sense that even if you have good politicians they don't know what to do unless the community tells 'em, do they?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right and--
Speaker 1: They don't, I mean, unless the community is or, organized past priorities.
Speaker 2: Organized.  That's, that's where it is.
Speaker 1: Ya'll start to organize and start to understand that you could make a difference.
Speaker 2: Can make a difference.  Yeah, we can make a difference.  You can make a difference.  Right today you can make a difference.  You can make a difference if you organize yourself.
Speaker 1: So, so, so, so you think that any community can make a difference if they organize?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah, oh yeah.  Now there's certain things that they can't do unless they have the votes.  You know you put em' in and if they know that they gonna have your vote that's, that's what it's all about.  That's what this country is founded on, people getting involved.  If you don't involve yourself, you gonna be left by the wayside.  You take for instance what we got going on now.  It's because people wasn't watching, but, but that's that's that's the way of life and until--but it's good, it's good that we can get together and do things.
Story_ID: 68156
Speaker 1: Tell me about that, tell, tell me about the housing victory?
Speaker 2: The housing?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a good question.  That's one, that's, that's a victory that, that I can really tell you about.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ronald Reagan, the president, he put all his energies and bankrupted the Russians.  He did a good job, he bankrupt Russia, but he left the housing agenda on the backburner, not only in Akron [Ohio], but all over the country.  You see people have to have a place to live. Whether you rich or poor you have to have a place to live.  So, after he bankrupt, bankrupt the Soviet Union he was, he was almost finished, Ronald Reagan.  That's that's, that's what he did.  That's what his priority of being president.  Okay, and, and, and he wouldn't address the housing if it wasn't for people getting together letting him see that that's important.  So, I was one of the ones that helped organize getting people to go to Washington [D.C.] for housing.  We had 1989, we had a March on Washington for housing to put housing on the front burner and get if off the backburner.  And we found out since we was the leaders that other people joined in.  Well, we had, we, we had the papers, the "Washington Post", said we had 500,000 people, and Jesse Jackson and some of the entertainers out of Hollywood [California] helped us, and a group from Chicago [Illinois] they helped us, and they come--and South Carolina, North Carolina.  They come from Texas and they helped us with this march and they put it on the front burner.  So, therefore, the housing boomed.  See because we, we always did work on housing, but we got national people and we went from there.
Story_ID: 68814
Speaker 1: Yeah, East Akron Neighborhood Development Corporation, can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Okay, the East Akron Community House was affiliated with, with a group from all over the country and our director told us that we have to get in the economic development.  And so we formed a unit from the East Akron Community House, and we called it the East Akron Development Corporation to deal with those subjects of economic development, to deal with economic development.  That's, that's was the purpose of the East Akron Community, East Akron Neighborhood Development Corporation to deal with economic development.  Economic development meant for housing, jobs, you know, housing and jobs.  See we had to separate the social agency to deal with the economics.  That's why we formed the East Akron Neighborhood Development for economics.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Did, did you understand me?  Do you understand that?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And, and this is the arm that's really dealing with one subject and the, and the community house itself is a social, but it had--you can't mix a social activity with economic activity; it don't work, it don't work.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you all organized nationally with other groups that were--other neighborhood development corporations around the country?  --(Unclear)--
Speaker 2: We, we, no, no we, we, we organized with other people.  We had church people.  We had church people.  We had community people.  Anybody we could get that wanted to develop the activity in housing.  See, we found out that this, this come, come to us, you know, real right fast.  It come down--(unclear)--.  We found out other people was interested in housing, and they come from, come from all over, even the churches.  In other words--I don't know how to say this.  In other words, the government wasn't looking out for the ordinary people.  You know what [Ronald] Reagan did.  It ain't no secret what he did.  He built golf courses.  He had all these golf courses around the country.  He had a secretary that built golf courses.  He even went to jail.  I don't know whether he is out or not.  [Samuel] Pierce, Pierce went to jail.  He built golf courses and bankrupt Russia.  Nobody talks about that, but that's what happened.  These golf courses was subsidized with monies that they were supposed to be giving to the people.  USDA [U.S. Department of Agriculture], whatever it is, that money--
Speaker 1: Housing and Urban Development.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: HUD money.
Speaker 2: HUD money.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: He was building golf courses with HUD money.  He went to jail in back of that, [Samuel] Pierce.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: He was a black guy too, you know, yeah.  You know him, Pierce.
Story_ID: 68815
Speaker 1: Now how, how did you feel getting involved in, in--how do you feel as a, as a community leader.  I mean, how does it make you feel?  Is there, is there a lot of pressure on you.
Speaker 2: Well, well the reason it's no pressure on me is because I never, never would accept elected, elect--I never did accept the running for any office.  If I was, if I was selected to run for office, I wouldn't be the person that I--see I'm a volunteer, and it makes no difference, you know, I do the right thing.  I can do the right thing.  I don't have no pressure from nobody.
Speaker 1: Okay, so people can't threaten you with a job.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: They can't say we'll take your job away.
Speaker 2: No, no, no they can't, they can't say it 'cause I won't take a dollar.  I won't even take a cigarette from you.  I don't smoke, but I won't take nothing.
Speaker 1: And they won't, they, they can't say I won't vote for you, right?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I'm my own person.  People ask me that all the time.  Why didn't you ever run for nothing, you could win, you'd win, but my hands are tied, and that's all politicians.  I don't care how good you are, your hands is tied.  Your hands are tied.
Speaker 1: Was--is, is that another reason why the community is important because politicians need an excuse to do something, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So they need the community that's organized.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's organized.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes sir, yes.
Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 2: If we could ever organize all the communities, we could have a better life.  That's, that's, that, that's pure democracy.
Story_ID: 68816
Speaker 1: Can, can you tell me about how to organize?  How do you organize people?  How do you, how do you get--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: You, you, you got to go out in the community.  You got to, you go to--we, we, we went door to door, talked to people.  You have to get people interested, and you got to show people that you interested in them, and you can't do it over the telephone.  You, you, you got to group yourself together.  The way we did it we grouped ourselves together in blocks clubs, then we come together.  When we have an issue, we come together.  All of us get together.  It's togetherness.  It's, it's toge, togetherness.
Speaker 1: Well, well sir you know people say that, that community people are not interested in their own community and if you, if you knock on somebody's door they might close the door on you or something, shut the door in your face.  Does that kind of stuff discourage you?
Speaker 2: No, it didn't discourage us.  It didn't, didn't discourage us.  We, we even, we even when the voting come if you didn't get, if you didn't get out to vote in the morning time, they put a list, list up on the board and we had telephones.  We'd get on the telephone and ask you wh, wh, why didn't you come to vote, why didn't you come to vote.  We, we kinda encouraged people.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Show people that you're interested.  If you show people that you are interested in 'em, they say well these guys ain't kidding, they ain't kidding.  Then some people discourage you, say you shouldn't be telling people how to vote.  Well, yeah maybe that's wrong telling people how to vote, but it works when they vote for the right thing.
Speaker 1: So, well do you have to do a lot of education with people to tell them what--
Speaker 2: Oh, oh yeah, you have to, you got to, got to educate them on the issues, whether it's right or wrong 'cause most of 'em really don't wanna take time to study the issue and if you can break it down to them, you know, break it down to them where they can understand it, but a lot of them don't have time to study, but if they, if they got confidence in you and you break it down to them they'll listen to you and perhaps they'll see it your way, but, it's, it's a continuing job, continuation.  You just can't give up.  It's, you know, just like the preacher he have to, he have to preach Jesus.  He can't give up. 04:11:56:19
Speaker 1: He can't preach about it one week and not preach anymore.
Speaker 2: Nah, you can't give up.
Speaker 1: So, this is like a way of life.
Speaker 2: That's the way of life.
Speaker 1: Organizing the community--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Is a way of life.
Speaker 1: So, you never really say that you're done?
Speaker 2: No, you're never done.  I'm eighty-eight years old and I ain't through yet, and the Lord has been good to me.
Speaker 1: So, so you mean in all these years, I mean, there's no time when you can sit back and say well the community is perfect now and so --(unclear)--
Speaker 2: I got kids--we got kids right there now.  We working with kids right now, right, right as we speak we working with kids right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And just like somebody worked with me, you know.  Somebody worked with me seventy years ago, somebody worked with me, and that's life.
Story_ID: 68817
Speaker 1: Now what's been your greatest victory?
Speaker 2: My greatest--
Speaker 1: Greatest victory as a community leader?
Speaker 2: Let me think about that.
Speaker 1: Was it the housing victory or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know.  Can I, can I expand on that?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir, you can.
Speaker 2: In 1946, I seen a house that I wanted to buy.  The house that I live in now.  I seen that house, and I interceded for this house, and they said yeah we'll sell it to you, but what they asked for the house I couldn't afford it.  So, I had a white couple that I met and I asked them to intercede.  I said buy the house, and the price that they got was half the price. Twice as much.  They wanted twice as much from me than they did want this white couple.  In other words, I had to pay twice as much money.  So, they bought the house for me.  They bought the house for me, and in a few years I paid, paid them back enough money so I could get a loan on the house.
Speaker 1: That was very gracious of them.
Speaker 2: Yeah it was just a friend, just a friend and found out that's what the--you know they--you couldn't buy, you couldn't better yourself by getting in debt for these expensive houses.  The bank wouldn't lend you no money.  The bank wouldn't lend you no money to buy a house they know wasn't worth what you had to pay for it.  So, we lobbied the banks.  Lobbied the banks to, to make it lenient on us and then that's that's the way we started.  You could live better if you had a better house, and that's something else I lobbied Ronald Reagan.  I just--every time I turn around I was--(unclear)--and wanted to know about len, len, lending policy of HUD [Housing and Urban Development] and they finally, they finally agreed to have fair housing.  The fair housing was the big, biggest vic, victory we have in this country.  People living in fair housing.
Speaker 1: And, you received awards for your participation in this and--
Speaker 2: That's right, fair housing.
Story_ID: 68818
Speaker 1: Mr. Minson like what, what would you consider as, as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I wouldn't ask anybody to put as much effort in one thing like I did.  But, I would encourage you to always do the right thing.  You can't go wrong when you do the right thing by your fellow man.
Story_ID: 68819
Speaker 1: Did, did your family suffer at all with all your activities?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  I always had time for my family.  I always had time for my church.  In, in fact right today my church has got a kitchen they opened and you can always get a piece of bread.  All you have to do is stop by.
Speaker 1: What's the name of your church?
Speaker 2: I'm a Methodist.  St. John's Christian Methodist Episcopal Church.  Yes sir.  My Minister said to me one day you going around here doing all these many things we got poor people, we got some poor people how about feeding 'em.  And we took off feeding them, and we still feeding them.  You know, you know when we got, when we got--we used to have somebody, you know, with a little clock tick, tick, tick, tick and when we got to 5,000 we just quit, quit, just feed everybody, don't count no more.
Speaker 1: --(Unclear)-count the ones you fed--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we used to count.  When we got to 5,000, we just throwed the clock away 'cause you gonna have, always have the hungry with you.  They'll always be with you.
Speaker 1: So now--did your--I, I know your mother lived a long time.
Speaker 2: Yeah ninety-nine.
Speaker 1: She had a chance to see you get involved in all this kind, kinda work.  Was she proud of you?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess so, she always showed up.
Speaker 1: She showed up on--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she always showed up.  She always showed--in fact she, she went down to Washington [D.C.] with me a couple of times.
Speaker 1: Now, now that--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah she went down to Washington with me a couple of times, yeah she'd show up.
Speaker 1: Now that's one of the key features of organizing people by getting a turn out, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Gotta have that turn out.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: If you can't get a turn out, then it's no point, right?  You got to have somebody.
Speaker 2: You got to have somebody in back of you.  You got to have somebody in back of you, yep.
Speaker 1: Great.
Speaker 2: It's a good feeling when you have some good people in back of you.
Speaker 1: When people take part in those, in activities where they, they do take action and they, and they see their neighbors in action and does that make 'em, that, that makes 'em feel good don't it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And good things come out of it too.  Good things come out.
Story_ID: 68820
Speaker 1: Te--tell me how, how would like to be remembered?  I know you're still doing things now and you got a lot of stuff still to do more than likely, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: That, that's gonna be hard.  That's gonna be--you asking me something that I don't think I should--I just--what he, what did he put down?
Speaker 1: Oh, he said that, well there's, there, there, there's a street named after you.  Is that--
Speaker 2: Oh, oh yeah they named the streets and houses, apartments.
Speaker 1: So people will, will see the name, but, but will they understand, you know, who you are, you know?
Speaker 2: I, I think, I think people know who I am, but I got--I, I go and make speeches every once in a while, and I got a little, little poem.
Speaker 1: Yes sir, yeah, read the poem.
Speaker 2: Yeah, where is it at?  --(Unclear)--where is my phone?  Is it there?
Speaker 1: Now Mr. Minson--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --yeah I was asking you how you wanted to be remembered?  How do you--have you ever thought about that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: How do you hope you will be remembered based on what you've tried to do?
Speaker 2: Well, I tried to make the world or my community a better place, a better place to live.  I always tried to make it better than, than I found it.
Speaker 1: --(Unclear)--
Speaker 2: I figured--
Speaker 1: Do you think that you're a citizen now?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, well I feel better knowing that I am a citizen of this country, and I'm thankful that I lived long enough to see and to witness to the changes that have been made.
Speaker 1: Thank you sir.  Thank you very much.
Story_ID: 68821
Speaker 1: Okay, you got the, oh you got, oh you--this is a picture of the Akron Community Foundation.  This is a program for the children that they initiated two year ago that mostly goi, going to minority activities.  It was founded--it was initiated by John Dotson, the president of Akron Deacon General and Jody Bacon, the president of Akron Community, Akron Community Foundation.
Speaker 2: This, this, this, this is a picture of the founder of the "Reporter" newspaper that's located in Akron, Ohio.  He was--and there's a picture of me with, taken with him.  He was one of my speakers at one of our community forums, and he spoke on full employment, and this has been twenty years ago.  He told us in this picture and in his speech that day that the United States wasn't, wasn't fulfilling their obligation, and he claims if we don't get full employment that we, we'll be lost in world affairs.
Speaker 1: This is a memorial that they built for Franklin D. Roosevelt in December 19--oh, oh this was a certificate that, that by working in the--let's see--I was on the committee, I was on the committee from Roosevelt.  Let's see when, when this--
Speaker 2: You hit it on the head.
Speaker 1: This is me taking a picture with one of the members of, of the Akron Foundation.
Speaker 2: When was this picture taken, sir.
Speaker 1: Last, last year.
Speaker 2: This was a picture that we--was taken--we had--let's see.  Let, let, let me see what that was?
Speaker 1: That's Williams, Judge William's son.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it some kind of election because--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, we had a voter, we had a voter registration.  We had a voter registration drive and Jesse Jackson was running for the president, and we had a drive to get out the vote for President Jackson.  In other words, we, we endorsed Jesse Jackson.
Speaker 2: This was in 1984?
Speaker 1: 1984, we endorsed--(unclear)--and that's when we, we turned in over 5,000 new voters.
Speaker 2: That's the Akron Community House having a parade.
Speaker 1: Let me put it up, let me put it up.
Speaker 2: Here the East Akron Community House had a Labor Day parade, and I was the chairman of the Labor Day parade that year.  In fact, I was the originator of the Labor Day parade.
Speaker 1: Okay, what year was this?
Speaker 2: 1990
Speaker 1: 1990.
Speaker 2: This is, this is the year we had a drive for our Development Corporation.  What was we doing there?
Speaker 1: East Akron Community House.  Art Minson at the East Ak, Akron Community.  East Akron Community House 1989.
Speaker 2: Right, East Akron Community House in 1989.
