Story_ID: 665595
Speaker 1: So I'll begin by saying, I'm [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole.  I am the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Matthew Hickey is our videographer.  Also present are Darlene Scott and Sabastin Commas.  And it is September 23, 2016.  We are at Skadden, Arps [Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom LLP] at 4 Times Square in New York City [New York, New York].  I would like for you, please, to say and spell your name.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Tell us who you are, and tell us your birth date, please.
Speaker 2: Oh, my birthday, the real one (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Please (laughter).
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Meli'sa Morgan, M-E-L-I-S-A--there's an accent mark in between the I and the S. M-O-R-G-A-N.  And my birthday is December 6th, 1960--between '60 [1960] and '63 [1963] (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  And what do you do, Meli'sa?
Speaker 2: I sing.  I am a performer.  I am an entertainer.  I am a producer.  I am a writer.  I am a entrepreneur.  I own my own production and management company, but, basically, you know me as Meli'sa Morgan the R and B singer.
Story_ID: 665596
Speaker 1: So I have some fun quick questions, People magazine type questions, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is red and then yellow and then black (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  And your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is seafood, yes.  And macaroni and cheese (laughter).
Speaker 1: You're making me hungry.  Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Aruba.  I own a house there, yeah.  Well, it's a condo with my BFF.  We bought there like years ago, Darlene Scott, and so we go there every year for my birthday, yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Excellent.  Your--do you have a favorite saying or phrase?
Speaker 2: The first law of nature is self-preservation.
Speaker 1: Very good (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Story_ID: 665597
Speaker 1: So I'd like to talk about your family history now.  We'll do your mother and your father [John Morgan] and as far back as you recall for both.  But let's start with your mother.  Please tell me her name.  Spell it for me and tell me her birthday.
Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh, Marjorie--it's Morgan but Marjorie--I think it was Johnson [Margie Johnson Morgan], and her birthday is March 23rd.  The year, I have to give that to you later (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We don't, we don't do years much in my family (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You don't do years. And can you tell me she's from and tell me about her?
Speaker 2: She was born in South Carolina, and they migrated to Flushing, New York, where I was born, and all of my family was from Edgefield, you know, that area of South Carolina, and they migrated to New York, yeah.
Speaker 1: And did they migrate when, when your mother was a child, or do, do you know when they came?
Speaker 2: I think she came, you know, like after high school, yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Tell me about her parents.
Speaker 2: Her parents, my grandmother, Evelyn Johnson, and she was married to Bluford [Bluford Johnson].  That was my grandfather's name, yes.
Speaker 1: And what did they do, what work did they do?
Speaker 2: Housework, and I don't remember what my grandfather did, but he worked, but my grandmother did do housework, yeah.
Speaker 1: How many children did they have?
Speaker 2: Oh, Lord.  There's Aunt Lena [Lena Johnson].  There's Aunt T [ph.].  There's my mother.  There's my uncle.  And Aunt Irene [Irene Johnson].  Are we missing anyone?  I want to say five, five or six, yeah.  I wish I knew my family history more, but. Who else?  Six? Seven?  Oh, we got Frances [ph.].  That's right, seven.
Speaker 1: And where does your mother fall in the birth order?
Speaker 2: She was one of the youngest, yes. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, and the, the town in South Carolina where she grew up was, was this--what was the town called again?
Speaker 2: Edgefield.
Speaker 1: And was this a large town?  Was it a--do you, what do you know about the--
Speaker 2: From what I know from Edgefield, it wasn't.  It wasn't a large town.  From my, my father, which now I have a place in Aiken, South Carolina, which was my father's side of the family's house, and from what I know of Edgefield, it wasn't a big town, no.
Speaker 1: So was, was it rural? Do you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm, I'm quite sure.
Speaker 1: Was it a farming town?
Speaker 2: I'm quite sure, yes.
Speaker 1: How far, how far back can you trace your mother's family?  Can you go all the way back to slavery?
Speaker 2: I can go back to slavery with my father.  I think my father's mother's mother was, yeah.
Speaker 1: So we'll do your father's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --family--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in a second.  Let's stick with your mom for now.  Do--so do you--can you go back past your grandparents?  Do you know--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can't, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so when your--when the family moved to Flushing, do you, do you know why they moved there?
Speaker 2: I think one of the sisters came to New York.  I think it was my aunt Lena and then she brought my mother because she, she had just, I think, had her baby, and when she brought her baby to New York, she brought my mother to babysit, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what--did they talk at all about what life was like in the South?  Because this would have been--
Speaker 2: In the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, in the '50s [1950s] when--
Speaker 1: Did they talk about that at all?
Speaker 2: They didn't talk about--you know, only thing I remember is that they had traditions that they did, like canning.  Every year at Christmastime, they would make fruitcake, and they would can peaches and pears and things like that.  They talked about that.  And I just think that they wanted a better way of lifestyle because it was very rural, and when I first went back, I, I went to South Carolina every summer, but, like I said, I went on my father's side to Aiken, South Carolina, and even back then when, when I would go, I would go--I started going from like two years old.  So when I would go back then, you could see that it was rural compared to what it is now.  I mean, now, I'm five minutes from the police station, and downtown is all built up.  Where it was nothing but roads back then.  It, it was no, no inkling that it was going to be a town of Home Depot [The Home Depot, Inc.] and shopping and all that stuff because there were no roads, yeah.
Story_ID: 665598
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your father.  What's--can you say and spell his name and tell me his birth date?
Speaker 2: John Precious Morgan [John Morgan], and he was born October 10th.  The year, I, I don't know.  What year was my dad born?  (Laughter) This is terrible.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  The 10th.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It had to be around there, but I, I didn't, I didn't bring his obituary, but October 10th he was born.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: And he died at sixty-two, and that was 2009, right?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so that gives you an idea.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and you said he's from Aiken, South Carolina.  Is that where he was born?
Speaker 2: No.  He was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --born, you know, in that Edgefield [South Carolina] area--
Speaker 1: Okay, the same area (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) but they, yeah, but they, they--oh, that was you doing that (laughter).  But they migrated to Aiken.  Aiken, South Carolina was like a step above, and his, his father was a preacher, Macaroy Morgan.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And Rebecca [Rebecca Jennings Morgan] was his mother.
Speaker 1: And what did Rebecca do?
Speaker 2: Rebecca--I, you know, I never met her.  She died before I was born.  She died before I was born, but he--I remember my father telling me that her, her family and her ancestors came from slavery, yes.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So it's his, his mother's family--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that you can trace.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And when did he think that--who was enslaved?
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm quite sure her mother.  I'm quite sure.
Speaker 1: Her mother.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I'm quite sure her mother was picking cotton and that kind of thing, yeah.
Speaker 1: So he talked about that a little bit.
Speaker 2: A little.  Yeah.  He talked about it a little.  And he loved his mother.  And, and I have my uncle, Uncle Joe Chester [Joe Morgan] what was his brother, but they, you know, Rebecca died before I was born, so I never got to meet her.  I only got to meet my step-grandma, who Macaroy, Reverend Macaroy Morgan married who was Ceola Morgan [ph.], yes.
Speaker 1: And what did she do?
Speaker 2: She did housework, too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She did housework, cleaning.  But I loved her because she was like one of the first people I knew that, you know, that they owned a house, yes, and now I have that house which is--
Speaker 1: So this is after they moved to Aiken.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But, but when they--so in growing up times when, when your father, John, was growing up, how many siblings did he have?
Speaker 2: It was him and his brother.
Speaker 1: Oh, so just the two of them.
Speaker 2: Yeah, just Joe Chester Morgan, and my father, John Precious Morgan, yes.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  And--
Speaker 2: And I think they had a stepsister, and that was Ivory Miller [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And that, I think, was from the father, you know, maybe stepping out a little.  I don't know why--
Speaker 1: Oh, before, before Ceola.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, stepping out a little.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: I think, yes, 'cause my--I always remember my aunt Ivory, yes.
Speaker 1: And was she older, or she was younger?
Speaker 2: Younger, younger.
Speaker 1: Oh, she was younger.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did she live with the family?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: But you remember her coming around (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember her, yes.
Speaker 1: When did your father's family move to Aiken?
Speaker 2: Now, that I don't know.  I don't, I don't know.  But I want to say that it was in the, the early, early '60s [sic.] because like from the time that I was little--and I want to say two, three years old--that's the house that we went to, the house in Aiken, South--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Carolina, yes.
Speaker 1: So what did the Morgan family do?  They--this is--it's--
Speaker 2: They were well known for Macaroy Morgan being a preacher.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yes.  So that's what they--he was a minister, so that's what they were known for, yeah.
Speaker 1: And you would go every summer.
Speaker 2: Every summer, yeah, from New York [New York].
Speaker 1: And so Aiken is a suburb, you said, of, of what town?
Speaker 2: I don't know if it's a suburb.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: It's a city.
Speaker 1: Sorry.  It's a city.
Speaker 2: City.
Speaker 1: A city.
Speaker 2: A city of South Carolina.  Yeah.  It's--
Speaker 1: A city.
Speaker 2: --twenty minutes from Augusta [Georgia], yeah.  So the, the big town was Augusta, Aiken.  When you came from Aiken, you went to Augusta, or you went to Atlanta [Georgia], or you went to Columbia [South Carolina], but Aiken is a city.
Speaker 1: So what--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --did you do when you came there each summer?
Speaker 2: I played with my girlfriend, Cynthia, Cynthia Mackie [ph.], who was our next door neighbor, and I just, I just entertained and was entertained and loved by my grandmother.  My grandmother, who was my stepmom [sic. step-grandmother].  She loved me very much.  Ceola Morgan, so I loved going down there with her and sitting on the porch and, and playing and getting in trouble and getting stung by bees, and, you know, things that little girls do, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: And the Morgan family held family reunions, correct?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: I think that our family reunions were Thanksgiving, Christmas--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --yeah.  I, I don't really remember like a family reunion in a park, but every summer we would make sure that we would have things, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 665599
Speaker 1: How did your parents meet?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  They met in New York [New York], I think.  I think they met in New York when they first--when my father [John Morgan] and my mom [Margie Johnson Morgan] first came to New York, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what brought your father's family to New York?
Speaker 2: That, I don't know.  I think it was schooling.  You know, because he went to Paine College [Augusta, Georgia], and then my uncle [Joe Morgan] went to, to college, and then he moved to Washington, D.C., and my father didn't want to go to Washington, so he came to New York.  'Cause I think he had more friends in New York than my uncle did, yes.
Speaker 1: So it was not the family like with--
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in, in your mother's case, the family moved.
Speaker 2: It was the family, but it wasn't in any, in my father's case, no.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So he went to Paine College to study what?
Speaker 2: Chemistry.  He was a chemist, yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: And, and he got work as a chemist in New York City?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, for a very reputable paint company, yes, so he was the chemist at the paint company, yes.
Speaker 1: Did he also move to Queens [New York]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you think that your parents met kind of in the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They met, they met in Flushing [Queens, New York], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They met in Flushing between the Flushing and Corona [Queens, New York] area because they all would party.  You know, there was certain places that you would go.  Now, let's get something straight.  My family partied.  Okay.  They went to bars.  They had parties every weekend from house to house, you know.  That's, that was their thing.  You know, where the party was, my aunt Irene [Irene Johnson], my aunt Lena [Lena Johnson], my Aunt T [ph.], my, my cousin Sue [ph.], my mom, they was going to the party, so I think that's what--my, my mother met my father.
Speaker 1: And can you describe (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I want to say that they, they had to come to the New York like in '58 [1958], fifty--between '57 [1957], '58 [1958] around there in the '50s [1950s] 'cause I was born, you know, like a few years after that, yeah (laughter).  So--
Speaker 1: So Queens becomes a magnet for a lot of--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) African Americans around--
Speaker 2: Yes, it does.
Speaker 1: --this time.  So you, you are born shortly after your parents get toge- a couple years after your--
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --parents get together and marry.
Story_ID: 665600
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest memory has to be a 109th and 34th Avenue, yeah, in Corona [Queens, New York].  I don't, I don't remember anything about Flushing [Queens, New York] even though I was born in Flushing Hospital [Flushing Hospital Medical Center, Queens, New York].  I don't remember living in Flushing.  I just remember the house on 109th Street across the street from church, yeah, from Mount Horeb Baptist Church [Queens, New York], and my mom [Margie Johnson Morgan]--I mean, from little, I just remember being in church every Sunday, 'cause that was the thing.  "I don't care."  And I remember her straightening my hair and always burning me (laughter).  Always burning my ear.  Good Lord, that used to--I mean, like this (gesture). Like--I mean, she was a great hair stylist, but she would always burn my ear.  I don't--you know, she would say, "Sit still."  Just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She didn't put the Vaseline on the ear?
Speaker 2: Yeah, afterwards (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Where was she doing your hair?  Was this the--in the kitchen?
Speaker 2: In the kitchen.
Speaker 1: There you go.
Speaker 2: Baby, in the kitchen on the, the gas stove with the iron straightening comb, and I, I do remember that.  She prided herself on making sure we didn't have nappy hair.  Even though, I have a picture that I went to a bask- a baseball game with my father [John Morgan] because they had a baseball team, and my hair was so nappy.  I was like--and this one little strand.  Said, I look like Alfalfa.  I was like, why she didn't straighten my hair when she sent me?  I mean, you should have seen the--my, my shoes was all raggedy.  I don't know why she sent me out like that, that day.  She did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How old were you?
Speaker 2: God, I had to be about, what, five?  God, I, I looked like Alfalfa--
Speaker 1: But, but--
Speaker 2: --from 'The Little Rascals.'
Speaker 1: --but preparing for Sunday service--
Speaker 2: Oh, god.
Speaker 1: --it was Sunday morning or Saturday that she was doing your hair?
Speaker 2: Oh, Sunday morning.
Speaker 1: So, so it was fresh.
Speaker 2: Fresh, yeah.  No Saturday morning get your hair done for church.  You know, 'cause we went to the ten o'clock, you know, eleven o'clock service, and we was up eight, seven, eight o'clock, you know, getting our hair done and getting our clothes pressed and everything, yeah.  It was no night before.  Because the night before they partied.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: See (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  So it was getting up in the morning. (Laughter) Party on Saturday, church on Sunday.
Speaker 2: That's right, church on Sunday, yes. With the kids, me and my sister [Rita Vinson], yeah.
Story_ID: 665601
Speaker 1: So your sister is who?
Speaker 2: Rita Vinson.
Speaker 1: And she's how much--is she younger than you?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I'm--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the youngest, yeah.  And I have a brother Ronald Langford.  Yeah, I'm the youngest, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So tell me the birth order in--
Speaker 2: My, my brother is the oldest.  I, I don't know how much older.  We're kind of estranged, so I got to, I got to get his history, but he's older.  He's got to be like in his sixties now.  He's sixty-seven, sixty-eight.  My sister will be probably sixty next year.  Yeah, she's, she's three years older than me, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, and these children are from your two parents.
Speaker 2: From my mother.
Speaker 1: From your mother.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, we all have different fathers, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And so did your mother marry any of these--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --guys.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Your father [John Morgan], did she marry your father?
Speaker 2: They said she married my father.  I don't know that story, but all I know is she's Margie Morgan [Margie Johnson Morgan], so they said that they got married, and, and it was not a big wedding, it was court. But the other ones I know she didn't marry, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did they--were they in their children's lives at all?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  And that was the thing that even when they broke up, the fathers still came around.  It was never that.  My mother never had that.  They might have fought and, and didn't like what this one did.  Didn't like what that one did, but it was never like, like I hate you, you can't take the children.  We never had none of that, never.  I, I don't even understand that to this day why people would do that because a father is a father, and a mother is a mother.
Speaker 1: So your brother is quite a bit older than you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: By the time you were a little girl, he was--
Speaker 2: He was grown.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did--
Speaker 2: He, he lived in the basement, yeah.  He fixed up the basement, and that's where he stayed, you know, and we stayed upstairs, so he had his own space until he moved out, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what did he go on to do?
Speaker 2: Truck driver but he played football.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He played football (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Professionally?
Speaker 2: No, but he was close.  He was very good. Played football, basketball.  He was very athletic, yeah.
Speaker 1: And your sister?
Speaker 2: She works for the IRS [Internal Revenue Service], so you better be careful (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) When you--and, and how many--well, so you all are close enough in age that you grew up together.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  We were all in the same house on 109th Street and 34th Avenue [Queens, New York] at one time, yeah.
Story_ID: 665602
Speaker 1: As you think of that house, you close your eyes and think of that house [in Queens, New York], what are the sights, sounds, and smells that you remember?
Speaker 2: Fried chicken.  Oh, my goodness.  Always good cooking, fun, laughter.  I just remember the big bedroom in the middle of the house, and the kitchen was smaller, and the living room had the big bay window, so I remember that, and I just remember a big backyard, and we used to give shows in the backyard.  And what else do I remember?  I remember watching 'Bewitched,' and we didn't have a color TV, and we went and got the, the colored screen.  Remember the colored screen that you could paste on top of the, the TV and make you think you had color.  I remember that, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's a good one.
Speaker 2: So fun things like that (laughter).
Story_ID: 665603
Speaker 1: And you say we performed in the backyard.  Who was that?
Speaker 2: I, I don't know, I've always wanted to sing, so we would have shows in the backyard, and, and charge the kids like ten cents, and we would dance or we would sing, and--
Speaker 1: This is you and your sister [Rita Vinson]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  No, we would do shows.  Yeah, yeah.  And, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) From what age?
Speaker 2: Oh, my god.  I want to say at least by nine. Nine, ten.  Darlene [Darlene Scott] was at some of them, my BFF, Darlene is here, so she's kind of like my memory (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, so from what age did you know that you wanted to be a singer?
Speaker 2: About seven, eight, nine (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And did you sing in church [Mount Horeb Baptist Church, Queens, New York]?
Speaker 2: I didn't sing in church until later until I joined the Starlets of Corona.  But I sang for my mother's--and my aunts--I will put on, you know, their clothes and I would sing Aretha Franklin, 'Respect,' and, oh, my god, all, all the songs back in the day, the--oh, god.  I want to think--what was that one? (Sings 'Pata Pata').
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  'Pata Pata.'
Speaker 2: I started singing that, yeah, when I was young, yeah.  (Sings 'Pata Pata') Yeah, I used to sing that to my, my mother's friends and stuff, yeah.
Speaker 1: And you--when you put on these shows in the backyard, for the local children, they paid.  They came and paid.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I wanted ten cents.  I wanted a quarter.  I was--shoot, if I could of got a dollar, I would of.  But they paid to get--you know why they paid because they wanted to see what we was going to do, and we always made sure they had cookies and stuff afterwards, yeah.  My mom [Margie Johnson Morgan] always (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you make the cookies or did your mom?
Speaker 2: No.  My mom went and bought them, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 665604
Speaker 1: Where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: I went to school P.S. 143 [Louis Armstrong School, Queens, New York].  I don't know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what--was that your elementary school?
Speaker 2: That was my elementary school.  I went to preschool, but I don't remember where I went preschool.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Because I graduated early.  I graduated sixteen and a half years old, so I went to some preschool somewhere, but I don't remember.  But I went to 143.  Then I went to 61.  I.S. 61 [Leonardo Da Vinci School, Queens, New York], and I graduated there from sixth grade, and then from six to nine, I went to I.S. 73--173 [sic. I.S. 73, Frank Sansivieri School, Queens, New York], and then I went to John Bowne High School [Queens, New York].
Speaker 1: So the--you were in public schools in Queens [New York].  These are all public schools.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Correct?
Speaker 2: No private.
Speaker 1: And who, who was attending school with you?  Because Queens at this time is--there are a lot of black families who have moved there.  A lot of interesting people came out of, came out of Queens.  And who was in school with you?
Speaker 2: Well, you know what?  The people that was in school with me didn't go on to be famous (laughter).
Speaker 1: It was just--
Speaker 2: It was just me, so a lot of people that you're talking about went to schools in Jamaica, in Jamaica, Queens.  I went to schools in Corona, Queens, so most people that I know, Paul Frolonz [ph.], yeah.  He went to school with us, and he's now a anchor for one of the major networks, but just my friends. Just my friends (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And so I guess growing up in Corona, Kool G Rap was in that neighborhood, right, and Eric B. and Rakim.
Speaker 2: I didn't know them.
Speaker 1: You didn't know them.
Speaker 2: Here's the thing why I didn't know them because wasn't in rap.
Speaker 1: Right, sure.
Speaker 2: See, I was a R and B singer.  I, I was singing in the talent shows and things like that.  So when I, I kind of knew that I wanted to be a singer, I went and auditioned for bands, yeah.  I, I wasn't in the rap scene.
Speaker 1: Got it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And in school, what, what were your favorite subjects?
Speaker 2: Gosh, the stenography which I failed (laughter).  Typing, gym.  I liked gym.  I always liked gym.  Didn't like history too much.  Math I wasn't that great at.  Lunch (laughter).  Lunch is my favorite.  Really, the, the social part was my favorite.  Yeah.  Anytime we got to sit down outside and talk to friends and stuff, that was, that was my favorite part.  I, I got through the science.  One time I did a beautiful science project, though, that wound up making the science fair, so--
Speaker 1: And what was it?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh.  What was it?  I think I did like a-- the history of the skeleton, the skeleton like growing up, you know, how you grew from, you know, little to the monkey to the--yeah, and--
Speaker 1: And you won, you won a prize.
Speaker 2: I won to be in the science fair in the school, but win the prize.  You know, and, and I tell you, I was so uninterested in it.  I didn't even know I had won.  I gave it to the, the science teacher, and the first day of the science fair, I wasn't even there, and I came to school the next day, and it was like, "Where were you?"  I was like, "What?  I gave it to him."  He was like, "You were supposed to be there to show your--," and I was like, "Oh, god.  I'll be there tomorrow."  That just wasn't my thing.  I was a singer.  I liked hanging out in the park playing handball.  Those were my things, hanging with my friends, walking up and down the street.  That was my thing.
Speaker 1: Were there music programs at the schools you attended?
Speaker 2: There was but I was so--I want to say that--I, I went to one in I.S. 73, but I was already advanced into like R and B by that time.  The, the things that they was teaching in the school just, just didn't keep my attention.  It really didn't.
Story_ID: 665605
Speaker 1: You started auditioning for R and B bands when you were in what grade, do you think?
Speaker 2: See, I started singing gospel music when I was about nine or ten, so the Starlets was about ten? Yeah, um-hm.  So on the weekends, I was already performing.  By the time I was in high school [John Bowne High School, Queens, New York] and stuff like that, I was performing at local churches.  We were going to Washington, D.C. singing.  We were, we were a community choir, as opposed to just a choir for a church, so we went all over.  Hornrette Washington, God bless her.  God bless her.  I love her.  She just took me under her wings and we flew.  We went all over the place (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Say her name again.
Speaker 2: Hornrette.
Speaker 1: How do you spell it?
Speaker 2: Washington.  H-O-R-N-E-T-T--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear)
Speaker 2: H-O-R-N--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  R
Speaker 2: H-O-R--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  N-R-
Speaker 2: N-R--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): E-T-T--
Speaker 2: --E-T-T-E. Okay.  H-O-R-N-R-E-T-T-E Washington, yeah.
Speaker 1: And she was the--
Speaker 2: Choir director.
Speaker 1: --choir director.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How--can you describe the Starlets of Corona? Like how many singers were there?  What--
Speaker 2: Oh, my god.  At one time, we had up to seventy-five people, yeah.  It was huge.  When she first started, we were little.  We was on Northern Boulevard and like 112th Street, and her mother had--they owned the whole building, so they lived upstairs, and her mother [Inez Thomas] had the church downstairs 'cause her mother was a preacher, and they were from West Indian? West Indian descent, yeah.  And we would go there.  She said, "I want to start a choir" because she played the piano.  Oh, my gosh, she played.  And she was short, and, and most people say if you have small fingers, you can't play the piano.  Ms. Washington could play the piano.  And she wanted to start a choir outside of her mom's church, and she started auditions, and then somebody just told my mom [Margie Johnson Morgan].  They were like, "Your daughter can sing.  Why don't she go around the corner and audition for Ms. Washington, and she can be out of the house on a Saturday."  (Laughter) And my mother was like, "C'mon, you're going."  I was like, "I don't even want--I'm not going, mommy.  I'm not going."  And when I got there, I just fell in love with everybody.  I was scared at first, but they just opened their arms up to you, and everybody was my age, and Darlene [Darlene Scott] was there, and people in the neighborhood that I never met, and we just all fell in love with each other, and we had the best childhood singing for the Starlets of Corona, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Excellent.
Story_ID: 665606
Speaker 1: So by the time you are--you've, you've been performing with the Starlets of Corona.  For how many years do you perform with them?
Speaker 2: I want to say, we did--well into about seventeen, eighteen because here was the beautiful thing that I will never forget is that when Ms. Washington [Hornrette Washington] dispersed the Starlets and said they were going to be no more, we all got checks.  Yeah.  We all got checks because she had collected money, and she used money for our, our costumes and stuff like that, but when she said it's going to be no more, we all got checks.  And I got a check for seventy-five dollars (laughter).  You know, 'cause there, there was about a hundred of us by then, and it was just out of hand, and I guess it was too much for her, and she wanted to do something.  So I got this seventy-five dollar check, and my stepmom, at the time, Rosa Morgan [Rosa Bellamy Morgan], who had married my father, John P. Morgan [John Morgan], and so now we're in Sherwood Village by Left Rock City [ph.], still in Queens [New York], she took me down the street and opened up my first bank account, so--and I was still in John Bowne High School [Queens, New York], so I want to say about fifteen, yeah.
Speaker 1: And was that your first check for singing?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So all the time that you have been working with the Starlets, whatever money came in was used to fund--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: --the--
Speaker 2: And, and the parents, you know, she would get funded from the parents, and, you know, it was a community family oriented thing with the Starlets.  They, they gave.  They participated whenever needed, yes.
Speaker 1: And you said you want to Washington, D.C.  Was your first time leaving Queens going--traveling with the Starlets?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Or not Queens but New York.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No.  I, I think some--
Speaker 1: Well, you were going to Aiken [South Carolina]. Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  We were going to Aiken.  And in, in junior high school [I.S. 73, Frank Sansivieri School, Queens, New York], we were supposed to visit the White House [Washington, D.C.] with one of my favorite teachers, Mrs. Vite [ph.], and we did a field trip, and it snowed, so we never got to go to the White House.  And I still haven't gone yet.  That's, that's on my bucket list, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, when you went to D.C. with the Starlets of Corona, where were you performing?
Speaker 2: At a church, yeah, at a church, yeah.
Story_ID: 665607
Speaker 1: Then you said in--by the time you get to high school [John Bowne High School, Queens, New York], you are now performing R and B more too. That's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  I'm kind of full fledged.  I'm, I'm performing in like little local bands and in talent shows, and the talent shows at the school and stuff, so, so they're starting to hear me.  And then this opportunity comes up for me to audition for this band called Business Before Pleasure, and I go after school, and I auditioned for them, and, at the time, it was a big band, eight piece band.  They were older than I was, but even though I was like--I think then--about fifteen, sixteen, getting ready to graduate from high school, I had a big voice, so it was a year--it was about a year and a half before I graduated from high school that I'm sure that I, I joined them because they had to get permission from my father [John Morgan] to sing in the bars around New York City, and my father and my stepmom [Rosa Bellamy Morgan] would come and sit at the bars while I performed, yeah.
Speaker 1: What music were you singing at the time?
Speaker 2: Oh, [HistoryMaker] Dionne Warwick. What songs? You came.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Which one?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Chaka Khan.
Speaker 2: Chaka Khan, lots of Chaka Khan.  Let me tell you, Chaka, and I told her, too, because--later on, you'll know that I sang background with her.  But lots of Chaka Khan, all the hit songs at that time.  We did Earth, Wind and Fire, you know, all those kind of things.  Deniece Williams.
Speaker 1: Patti?
Speaker 2: Not Patti too much.  'Cause let me tell you about Patti with me.  Patti LaBelle songs didn't really become popular to me until she became solo.  The Patti LaBelle, the LaBelle stuff wasn't quite as popular, you know, for a female singer to sing.  You had to be in a female group to sing that, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I didn't sing.  You know, The Emotions, we would sing that, you know, but that LaBelle stuff was kind of hard to sing with an all-male band, yeah.
Speaker 1: And so when you're with the band, you are, are you the only singer?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I'm the lead singer, and then we had a male singer, Bryant [ph.], yeah.
Speaker 1: From the beginning when you're--you, you were the lead singer.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you're primarily singing like singing the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The lead.
Speaker 1: --most popular songs of--
Speaker 2: Female songs.
Speaker 1: --of the day.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes, yeah.  So to try to do a (sings 'Lady Marmalade').  They wasn't singing that.  They was not singing that.  The Rufus and Chaka Khan, they were singing that because, you know, that was another female with male singers.  Things that were high with all, all female singers and stuff, those kind of songs, we kind of stayed away from those a little bit, yeah, so that was later on.
Story_ID: 665608
Speaker 1: Did you ever toy with writing your own songs?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  We, we--I started writing songs from the beginning with them, yeah, and we did a, a song--we actually got signed to Sylvia Robinson's label [Sugar Hill Records] at the time before the whole Sugarhill [Sugarhill Gang] and all that, and Sylvia Robinson had just came out with 'Pillow Talk.'  Do you remember that?  (Singing 'Pillow Talk').  I was like, oh my god, this is what singing is?  I don't want to do that.  But when she came in the studio, we did this song called 'Prime Of Love' ['(I'm In) The Prime Of Love'].  That's what I learned from her.  Everything doesn't have to be hard.  That's what I learned from Sylvia Robinson.  She said when it comes to recording, you have to, you have to paint the picture.  You can't just go out scream and holler 'cause if, you know, (makes sound), she said, "No, no.  You have to paint the picture," and she would always go back to her songs.  She said, "You know, 'Pillow Talk,'" she said, "it was just whispering and all that, but I painted that picture for them.  If you don't paint the picture, you know, with your voice, they'll never get it.  It will just be screaming and hollering."  So she did teach me that.
Speaker 1: And that was a dif- a big difference from the gospel.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Because gospel is all (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which is shouting sometimes.
Speaker 2: Now, let me tell you about gospel.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) When I first got my first lead song, 'I Must Tell Jesus,' I was so nervous.  I was so nervous, and we sang it at Mount Horeb, Mount Horeb Baptist Church [Queens, New York] across the street from where I lived, so the whole community, my father [John Morgan], everybody was there.  I was so nervous, and I was little then.  What was I, about eleven?  Yeah, about eleven.  That all, all I could think--I was so nervous.  When, when I got to the mic [microphone], I think I might have said like one word, and then I started crying.  But here is the key.  I was singing through my crying.  It became one of the biggest entertainment things for, for the Starlets [Starlets of Corona] because I--it--I don't know how I did it, but I could sing through my crying and hit the notes and everything, and I'd still be crying, and I'm telling you, the people just loved it.  And Ms. Washington--I mean, one time I sang it without crying.  She said, "Girl, go back to crying," (laughter).  "Go back to crying.  They love it.  It's, it's, you know, it's one of the highlights of our show."
Speaker 1: And you were able to turn it on later.  You were able to find the tears?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: Even though the first time, obviously, it was out of your--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --your fear.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The first couple of times out of fear, and then it was like, okay.  I'm, I'm building up, and, you know, I did it without crying.  She's like, "Girl, unh-uh, unh-uh.  Show that emotion.  Go back to crying.  It's a--you know, they love it."
Speaker 1: So the transition from the big performance of gospel before the live audience, the congregation, where the exception--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --about gospel music is that it's big, and it's loud.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: To Sylvia then telling you about the value of being quiet.  This is part of your music education.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  This is part of building stylization.  Yeah, for, for your vocals because even nowadays, I hear people and they sing one way, and that, that's the gift that I have that I don't have to sing one way.  I can sing something very sexy.  I can sing something very gospely, or I can sing something very soulful, yeah.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And I can incorporate all three if I need to.
Speaker 1: So you got training from Horn- Hornrette.
Speaker 2: Hornrette Washington.
Speaker 1: Hornrette Washington.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then from Sylvia Robinson.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What other training did you receive as a singer?
Speaker 2: I, I want to say everything else was, was basically experience, being with the band [Business Before Pleasure] 'cause I don't know if you know about singing with a band, and you're the only female singer.  They try to drown you out, so that--I learned strength from that.  See, there's, there's one thing about singing strong, and then there's another thing about having strength and singing strong 'cause you can sing strong and have no strength whatsoever.  Yeah, but hearing and knowing, okay, my thing now when I go in with a band is that I can literally tell a band, "Listen, I can sing louder than all of you if I need to, so if you want to play that loud, then go ahead 'cause I'm going to sing louder than all of you because I have that in here from my experience.  Now, but do you want that, or do you want a good show?  Yeah.  So, you know, unless I'm going--," and some of them try it, you know, and I sing louder.  Then, then it's like, you know, okay, you're not gonna out--you know, you're not gonna play louder than me.  That's not gonna happen.  Not now.  You gotta wait 'til I'm ninety something.  You know, but right now, that's not gonna happen, so, you know, play under me, and let's make it all work.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you've had to show that muscle with some frequency over the years.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes, yes.  'Cause I played with star musicians who think sometime they should be heard more than me, yeah, and female vocalists go through that (laughter).
Story_ID: 665609
Speaker 1: When did you record your first piece of music?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Let's go through that.  So I went through Business Before Pleasure.  That was my first recording.  We did a song called 'Prime Of Love' ['(I'm In) The Prime Of Love'].  It got a little air play, which was nice.  And then we toured Canada.  I graduated from high school [John Bowne High School, Queens, New York], and we toured Canada for about a year, a year and a half.  We--Saskatchewan [Canada], Alberta [Canada], Toronto [Canada], all of that.  We toured that, so that was experience.  And then I came back to New York [New York] and got into the singing background scene, and Debbie Allen and her husband, Win Wilford [Winnfred Wilford], heard me, and I did a cover of a song.  I got to remember it.  It might have been a Patti LaBelle song (laughter).  I got to go back in my archives and remember that, but I did a cover for them.  I recorded for them, and they wanted to manage me, and that kind of like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And this is--you're about how old now?
Speaker 2: Right now, about--
Speaker 1: What, yeah, yeah--
Speaker 2: About eighteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so before that, tell me, is this a recording, or what is it?  You--The, The Shades of Love debuts with 'Come Inside.'  Is this a, is this a recording?
Speaker 2: 'Prime Of Love.'  The, the--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Shades of Love is (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh, Shades of Love.  Oh, no, that, that comes a little bit after.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  'Cause I--
Speaker 2: That comes a little bit after.
Speaker 1: --had this is you just being fifteen.
Speaker 2: For?
Speaker 1: For that--but is that not right?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Debbie is about seventeen.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah in between--yeah, okay.  So--
Speaker 2: So were you still in high school is what--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Then let me go back.  No, no, wasn't still in high school.  What happened--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I graduated, came back--see, I got to tell the story--came back from Canada, right, did that one recording for Debbie and them and then went to work at Chase Manhattan because nothing was happening.  See what I'm saying?  Nothing was happening.  So while working for Chase Manhattan, we--I started doing background stuff with Don Hamilton and, and the people in that area, Jocelyn Brown, people like that, and we got called in to do a session for Patrick Adams, yeah, so I was still in my teens when we got--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --called to do a session for Patrick Adams, but I'm out of high school, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm out of the high school because I was working at Chase Manhattan Bank [JPMorgan Chase and Co.].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: 'Cause the secretary stuff kicked in.  I was like, I got to make some money. So, so they call us in to do this song.  We did the background and the lead singer never showed up.  Well, what happened is that the song was so high, Cookie Watkins--I don't know if you--Cookie Watkins, Don Hamilton and myself, we did the background, and Cookie Watkins now does the living legends ['Legends in Concert'] in Las Vegas [Nevada], and she plays Tina Turner.  Yeah (laughter).  So Cookie sings, you know, alto.  Don sings a false high set--a false--
Speaker 2: Falsetto.
Speaker 1: Falsetto, yes.  And none of them could sing the song because it needed--
Speaker 2: This is 'Come Inside'?
Speaker 1: No.  This is--
Speaker 2: Which one song is it?
Speaker 1: --Shades of Love.
Speaker 2: Shades of Love, yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Keep in Touch (Body to Body).'
Speaker 2: Okay.  Got it.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So none of them could sing that, so Patrick Adams who was--god, he was a big producer then.  He had did '(Push, Push) In The Bush' ['In the Bush'].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And all that stuff, and he--you know, he looked.  He said, "Well, what about the other little one, can she sing?"  And I was eating a apple, and I was like, "Well, yeah, I can sing it.  But how much you gonna pay me?"  (Laughter) 'Cause we had only got like forty [dollars] to sing background a piece.  And he says, "I'll pay you seventy-five."  So I was like I'm going to make seventy-five extra just to sing?  I was like, "Sure, sure.  I'll sing it.  Let me finish my apple," and so I went in, and I sang 'Keep in Touch (Body to Body).'
Speaker 2: Which became a big--
Speaker 1: Dance song.
Speaker 2: --big dance song.  And you were about how old then?
Speaker 1: I want to say, yeah, about seventeen, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And when did you work with Jacques Fred Petrus?
Speaker 1: Oh, that was after that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was after that because 'Body to Body' was a number one.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And we, we toured all over New York City with that.  Petrus came--
Speaker 2: And this is--just with, with 'Body to Body,' this is at a time when disco is king.  I mean, the--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: You know, the clubs in New York City--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --are on fire.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Everybody is--you know, this is a new kind of sound.
Speaker 1: It is, because it, it was around the time of-- the only thing I remember is around the time of Jocelyn Brown's 'Somebody Else's Guy,' yeah. Yeah, so, so it, it was a time when dance music--
Speaker 2: Dance.
Speaker 1: Yeah, dance music--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --was very, very popular because the clubs were hot.  The Studio 54 [New York, New York] was hot then.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, all the, the Garage [Paradise Garage, New York, New York], downtown, all hot clubs, so my first time performing 'Body to Body' was at the Garage in front of like Sylvester.  You know, I mean, that, that was the crowd that was there.  I mean, you know, it was transitional.  It was, you know, international.  It was the gay crowd.  It was the straight crowd.  I mean, we were all--we were all like a melting pot, yeah.
Story_ID: 665610
Speaker 1: And at this point, now, you're old enough that you're allowed to go and your parents don't have to go with you (laughter).
Speaker 2: No.  They don't have to go with me. Yeah, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, describe the club scene during this period as you're, as you're coming into your own.
Speaker 2: Crazy, over the top.  There were people that would come in like groups, and this group was just known--they were going to come in and dance and dance and dance and, you know, they got all the attention, and it was just really a happy time.  That's all I remember.  I, I don't remember anyone being sad until AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] came in.  You know, when AIDS came in, it was like, okay, people started dying.  They didn't know what--but during that whole transition with 'Body to Body' ['Keep in Touch (Body to Body)'] and 'Somebody Else's Guy,' and Fonda Rae, 'Over Like a Fat Rat' and all that stuff, there was nothing but happiness and party, party, party.  What outfit what is you going to--oh, and Bonds [Bonds International Casino, New York, New York], yeah.  Bonds on, on the-
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): International.
Speaker 2: International on--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): 42nd.
Speaker 2: Yeah, on 57th Street was it--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): 42nd.
Speaker 2: 42nd Street, yeah.  Just, just big gigantic clubs that--
Speaker 1: That was, that was a big club.
Speaker 2: They, they--you have to understand that the gays and the straights and the, the thugs and the gangs, they all could come and, and release, and everybody got along.  There was no fighting, you know.  It was kind of like--
Speaker 1: And what about racially, totally mixed?
Speaker 2: Totally, mixed.  I mean, white, black, Chinese.  Everybody was there, and everybody loved being around everybody, you know.  This, this--there was no, there was no racial in the, in the music then.  Yeah, 'cause dance, dance, you know, intertwined everybody.  We was listening to Madonna.  We was listening to France Joli.  We was listening to--you know, it was wonderful, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, there were a lot of drugs on the scene at that time.  Did you see that?  Did you--did--were you aware of it?
Speaker 2: Here is the thing with drugs with me.  I don't know why people just didn't think that, that was my thing.  I was always protected from that.  I--I don't even know what, doing any cocaine or anything like that.  I think when we were younger, we might have--my sister [Rita Vinson], my sister had me smoke a little weed [marijuana] one time, but, you know, it just wasn't our thing.  You know, and as we got older, maybe we drank some champagne or something like that thinking that we were older, but the whole drug scene and, and being high to escape, I've never had anything to escape, so I never wanted to be high, you know, so you, you--I think that's the whole thing with, with drugs and stuff that I hear from people.  Oh, I was miserable.  My life wasn't the way it was.  Something happened in my, my childhood.  I had a happy, you know, home, you know, a--I had a happy life at home.  My stepmom [Rosa Bellamy Morgan] loved me.  My father [John Morgan] loved me.  My stepbrothers loved me and my brother [Ronald Langford] and sister loved me, so I had no--I didn't want to escape anything.  Only thing I wanted to do was just perform and, and make people happy and see people dance and scream while I was performing, yeah.
Story_ID: 665611
Speaker 1: So you lived with your father [John Morgan] and stepmom [Rosa Bellamy Morgan].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Where was your mother [Margie Johnson Morgan]?
Speaker 2: My mom was still alive.  I had chose after a while to live with my father because my mom, my mom drank, so it was better for me and my schooling and, and the things that I was going after to live with my father, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you stay in touch with her?
Speaker 2: Always, always, yeah.  It was--there was no abandoning her.  She was just ill, yeah.
Speaker 1: At what age were you when you, when you moved with your--when you stayed with your dad after--
Speaker 2: I want to say about twelve.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Twelve.
Story_ID: 665612
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So I had mentioned Jacques Fred Petrus, who--you know, he produced 'The Glow of Love,' right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But we wasn't a part of that.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That was a hit (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, I mean like one of the biggest songs (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Feeling, Feeling Lucky, yes, "Feeling Lucky Lately" ["Feelin' Lucky Lately"] was a so-so hit.  C'mon now.  What Petrus did, he came over--what did he--from where?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Belize [sic.].
Speaker 2: Belize, yeah.  And he just started pulling the great musicians in New York [New York].  He found out who was doing what and who was great, so he pulled in the Timmy Allens, the Luther Vandross.  He--all the top musicians at that time was Change, and he pulled them in and took them into the studio.  Money was no problem, and he paid--by this time, they were really just high paid studio, studio musicians, and he said, you know, come in.  We're going to do this record.  You're going to do this.  You're going to do that, and they produce it, and then here we go.  They had Change.  They had the, the biggest record of that time, so after he had that success, then he started going to the underlings.  Okay.  Who else is more successful that I can get and do this same thing with?  But he really--he didn't want anyone to be stars.  That's why Luther left.  He wanted it to be the group, and he wanted to be the star.  And it's like, you can't be the star off of my talent, you know.  You can be the star producing it, but he wanted to control and, you know, and that's why Luther said, eh, forget it, you know.  And I said, eh, forget it, because--
Speaker 1: Well, but before you said forget it, you--he invited you to join the studio group High Fashion, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So you tried it.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So what--tell me about High Fashion.
Speaker 2: Well, the first thing--let me tell you about--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --Petrus is that he, he didn't want me as a singer at first.  He wanted me to date him because I came in to, to a session for Timmy Allen and them, and, you know, he, he was like, "Well, who is that?"  And they was like, "Oh, that's Meli'sa [HistoryMaker Meli'sa Morgan], she sings," (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And tell me who is Timmy Allen?
Speaker 2: Timmy Allen, bass player.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and brilliant songwriter.  He wrote for Joe.  What's the Joe song?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear) write--who didn't he write for?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He wrote for everybody (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 665613
Speaker 1: He wrote the Change song, some of their biggest hits (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But because you were a background singer, you were coming in, in that role with him?
Speaker 1: Um-hm. Timmy Allen and I played at a place called the Cellar in New York [New York].
Speaker 2: Oh of course, a huge--
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter).  Some of us go back a bit.
Speaker 2: --place called the Cellar.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Let's go back a little bit.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Let's describe the Cellar please--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) There's so much--
Speaker 2: --that little--
Speaker 1: --history here.
Speaker 2: --place.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  The Cellar and Mikell's [New York, New York] were--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --two places on the weekends that from Thursday, Friday, and Saturday, you could perform if you were the hottest group in New York, and you did two shows a night, and we, we made fifty bucks [dollars] a night, so we basically made--but it was--once again--the best time.  Talk about honing your skills.  That's when we started doing the Patti LaBelle songs, 'If Only You Knew.'  That's when the Patti LaBelle start coming to the Cellar talking about who is this girl singing my song.  I want to meet this Meli'sa [HistoryMaker Meli'sa Morgan], you know, so--
Speaker 2: And was Brad Johnson--
Speaker 1: Brad Johnson (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Running this--c'mon now.
Speaker 1: And his father Howard Johnson.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: So, so this is now the--
Speaker 1: Johnny Kemp, yes, I mean.
Speaker 2: --early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: When--right?
Speaker 1: This is like mid, mid--early, I want to say '82 [1982], '82 [1982] going into--between '82 [1982] and '87 [1987], yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: When--well, so Brad was like finest guy in the world everybody thought.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He's running this place.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He and his dad are running this--
Speaker 1: I dated him, too (laughter).  Yeah.  All the cuties I dated.  I--nothing happened but I would go--my thing is that I just wanted to go out to dinner and stuff like that.  I never wanted to go back to the--that wasn't my thing, yeah.  It's just like--
Speaker 2: But at that time--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was--
Speaker 2: --Brad was--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you know, the, the one.
Speaker 1: He was a one, yeah.
Speaker 2: And the Cellar was the--
Speaker 1: The hottest club on the weekends in New York City that you could hear, not good music, great music.
Speaker 2: Right. And the--
Speaker 1: Great music from all the musicians in New York City, everybody that was a musician in New York City or they wanted to be a musician, that's where they went.
Speaker 2: And this is also the time in New York City where-- well, around the country, you know, they, they, another group they called buppies.  Remember that?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: It was during this time the black urban professional.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So lots of--
Speaker 1: Money.
Speaker 2: --money is in the--in town.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: A lot of people going out to bars.
Speaker 1: Spending.
Speaker 2: Going out to get--spending money.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And this place was very hard to get into.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Because it--what happened is that if, if you had the hottest group, everybody wanted to see you. And we would do two shows, and the line would be around the corner, be around the corner because it was just the place to be.  The Chaka Khans would come in there, like I said, Patti LaBelle, The Isley Brothers, anybody that was hot. Maurice White from Earth, Wind and Fire.  Anybody that was in town that maybe performed at Madison Square Garden [New York, New York].  Where do you go afterwards?  You go to the Cellar or you go to Mikell's, yes.
Speaker 2: Now, Mikell's.  Tell me about Mikell's.
Speaker 1: Mikell's was more jazz.  I didn't perform Mikell's as much as I did the Cellar, and Under the Stairs [ph.].  I did Under the Stairs a couple of times--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --too, yeah.  But Mikell's was more jazz, so the jazz musicians would, would be there or the Broadway musicians would be there.  Zane, I, I dated a guy named Zane Giles [Zane Mark].  He--his father was a Broadway musician, and, you know, I would go there and play with him and Trevor, Trevor Gale. Yeah.  It--but it was more jazz with, with them.  I think I kind of found my own at the Cellar more.
Speaker 2: And did people perform at Leviticus [New York, New York]?  Because that was popular then, too.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Oh, wait a minute, c'mon.  Leviticus, Sweetwater's [New York, New York].  We could go on and on and on (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah but I want you to--
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: --paint a picture of what was--
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: --happening because this was a time when there was a lot--there were many establishments--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --that were--
Speaker 1: That were--
Speaker 2: --that were popular.
Speaker 1: You know, and it was showcases for talent, so I remember performing at Leviticus and doing 'And I'm Telling You' ['And I'm Telling You I'm Not Going'] and tearing the house down, yeah.  And Roz Ryan was--is there who went on to became--become a great singer and musician for Broadway.  Um-hm.  She's now in Chicago [Illinois] touring the world, yeah.  So met so many wonderful people during that time, yeah.
Story_ID: 665614
Speaker 1: During this time when, when there's so much energy, lots of music, lots people appreciating music, this is when Petrus [Jacques Fred Petrus] is trying to make the--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) this group High Fashion.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That he's invited you to be a part of.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so who else has he brought together to be part of this?
Speaker 2: Alyson Williams, and a guy named Eric.  I don't remember Eric's last name.
Speaker 1: McClinton [Eric McClinton].
Speaker 2: McClinton, yes.  And let me tell you something.  I didn't know Eric.  I haven't seen Eric since then.  I really--I mean, me and Alyson, we are New York [New York] born and raised, bred, so we see each other, and we in the same circle (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And Alyson continued her career.
Speaker 2: Yes.  But basically Eric was a part of High Fashion, and I, I never seen him again, really.
Story_ID: 665615
Speaker 1: So did you--with High Fashion you made 'Feelin' Lucky Lately.'
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How did that do?
Speaker 2: It did okay.  They also had another group out called B. B. Q. [B. B. and Q. Band], and before High Fashion, before the record came out, Petrus [Jacques Fred Petrus] sent me on tour with B. B. Q., so it--I mean, he was just really--and that's really when I first met Patti LaBelle.  We (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) With B. B. Q.
Speaker 2: Yes.  We opened for her, for her tour, and this was when she was coming out solo. So I don't know if you know, Patti had about four or five solo records with Philly International [Philadelphia International Records] that kind of like did okay, but she toured so much, you know, she was just getting out there and letting people see her, and that's when I first met Patti LaBelle, you know, singing for B. B. Q.
Speaker 1: So there was value to being with Petrus even though--
Speaker 2: Yes, it was. Yes, uh-huh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) it wasn't long term.
Speaker 2: And then, you know, I, I was lucky 'cause he didn't want to pay either, but going out on tour, he had to pay, so that was a first time I made like a thousand dollars a week, yeah.  That was good money back then. Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sure.  So you're getting paid and you're on the road, so they're pay- are they paying for your travel and--
Speaker 2: Everything.
Speaker 1: Everything.
Speaker 2: Everything, yeah.  And then they paying you a thousand dollars a week, yeah.  So that, that was pretty good (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you put any of that money in that account that you started?
Speaker 2: Yes. Um-hm, Astoria Federal [Astoria Federal Savings and Loan Association] (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Which I still have an account there.  I don't know why.  Probably, you know, sentimental (laughter).
Speaker 1: But, ultimately, you didn't stay with Petrus and with High Fashion.
Speaker 2: Because High Fashion was a studio group.  He really didn't want to--he didn't--he didn't want to make us.  He, he wasn't doing like Motown [Motown Records].  Let me explain that, and, and maybe that, that will give you a better picture.  Motown was making stars.  When, when they did Diana Ross and The Supremes, they wanted to make The Supremes stars.  The Temptations.  They wanted to make them stars.  Marvin Gaye, they wanted to hone him so he could be the best Marvin Gaye that he could be.  Petrus wasn't making stars.  He was making recording groups, so he--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --didn't want us to be stars.  He just wanted us to be a part of a group and that was it.  And if this group didn't work, then you go to another group, and so that wasn't working for me, so after--once I saw that, I was like, this will never work for me because I'm an individual that wants to be a star.  I don't want to be a part of just a group, so I, I was the first one to leave.  I was always the first one to leave groups.
Story_ID: 665616
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you left [High Fashion] around '83 [1983].
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I--yeah.  I, I was gone.  That, that didn't work for me.  Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did you do next?
Speaker 2: I did touring.  I met Kashif.  Yeah.  And I started doing a lot of background stuff.  I, I--from doing the Cellar [New York, New York], Vesta Williams was singing background with Chaka Khan, and she was leaving to go and tour with The Commodores 'cause they were going to pay her more money.  It was going to be a world tour, and she came up to me and said, "You need to audition for Chaka.  I told her about you, and you need to take my place, and go on tour with Chaka Khan."  And this was through the whole 'Ain't Nobody' tour.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: So I toured with Chaka Khan who taught me so much from singing on her records, you know.
Speaker 1: So you knew the music.
Speaker 2: Yes, knew the music, yeah.  And that was very important with her.  I, I got to tell you the first time I meet her, and excuse me for cursing 'cause she curses, not me.  So Johnny Kemp--actually, I was singing at the Cellar, and they said, okay, you got to meet her at a place--it was on 90th something Street, you know, in Manhattan [New York].  I was so nervous.  I said, "Johnny Kemp, come with me and stay with me," you know, and Johnny Kemp came, and, and he stayed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And explain who Johnny Kemp is.
Speaker 2: Oh, Johnny Kemp is a singer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Just Got Paid.'  Yes.  That was my good friend.  We did many shows at the Cellar, many shows.  Johnny Kemp could sing a song, jump on the bar.  The bar would be filled with drinks with people drinking, and he was so light on his feet, he could dance in between the drinks and still sing and not spill one drink.  It was amazing.  He was just an amazing talent.  So he came with me, and he stayed with me, and we had to wait for Chaka because she had did Sue Simmons.  I'll never forget it.  She did Sue Simmons who was NBC [WNBC-TV, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Right, news anchor.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  And she had did that afternoon show, and so we're waiting for her, and I'm so, so, so nervous, and then in with this hair and this cape and this, you know, and I'm waiting downstairs, and, and her doorman says, "Chaka Khan, this young lady, Ms. Morgan [HistoryMaker Meli'sa Morgan], is waiting for you."  She says, "Oh, you're the singer.  C'mon, bitch" (laughter).  I'm like, okay.  So I get in the elevator with her, and she's like, you know, "I don't care whether you look good, though, but can you sing?"  You know, and I was like, "Well, if I couldn't sing, I wouldn't be here."  She says, "Oh, this is my kind of bitch.  C'mon," you know.  And she took me upstairs, and we sang a little bit.  She's like, "She knows it.  We'll see you on Saturday."  And, yeah, the first time I met her, she called me a bitch.  And she still calls me a bitch 'til this day.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: "That's my bitch."  That's what she calls me (laughter).
Story_ID: 665617
Speaker 1: And the negotiation for, you know, your terms what you're paid, et cetera, are you doing that with her, or do you have a manager at this point?
Speaker 2: No.  You're doing that with her manager and her accountant, who, Marvin Zolt, wound up being my accountant 'til the day he died about a month ago, yes.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Isn't that something?
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: That, that was my accountant, Marvin Zolt.  I met him through Chaka Khan, and how I met him is because--
Speaker 1: How do you spell his last name?
Speaker 2: Z-O-L-T.  I met him because I went up to get paid and she docked me.  (Laughter) I'll never forget.  Chaka, Chaka, paid well.  Chaka Khan paid her singers better than her musicians.  I mean, I'm sure she doesn't do that now, but the singers were her gems.  We always rode in the limousine with her.  We always got our own rooms.  Singers get their own rooms.  I'm sorry.  'Cause she said, "'Cause bitches fight, and I'm not having you all fight each other on my tour, so everybody gets their own room." You know, so the singers always got their own room, and we always rode in the limo with her, yeah.
Speaker 1: And you met Zolt because--why did she dock you?
Speaker 2: It was like the last gig of the 'Ain't Nobody' tour, and we did New York [New York].  We did a college.  I want to say York College or one of those colleges we did, and I was late.  I was late because there was a accident.  I was late, and I--and she was so nervous, and I had just made it, you know, and glad I had my outfit and stuff on, and I just made it like right before she was going to go on, and she got so upset at me, and she, she was like, "I was so nervous.  I thought something happened to you," and da, da, da, da, da, and I did the show (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And this was way before cell phones.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  I don't know what cell phone you would have been calling on (laughter).  There was no cell phone.  And she was so upset, and then when I went to get paid in New York, then she had docked me.  She tried to dock me like five hundred dollars.  I was like, no.  I did the gig.  No, no.  That is not going to happen.  I understand a dock, but that's, that's ridiculous.  And I think at that time, it was about fifteen hundred dollars we were making a week, yeah.
Speaker 1: And were you able to negotiate some money back into your pocket?
Speaker 2: Yes.  She docked me about two fifty.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And was it because you were negotiating with Zolt?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We were back and forth with--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --her and her manager, yeah, yeah.  And it was like, this is just ridiculous, you know.  I, I understand I was late, but you just can't dock somebody five hundred dollars.  You ain't paying me like five thousand dollars a week, you know, so, so she, you know, she came around.  Yeah, but she was so upset at me.  She's like, "I was so upset at you for being late, and I was scared something happened to you," you know.
Speaker 1: You say you learned a lot from Chaka Khan.  What else did you learn?
Speaker 2: Let somebody else invest in the talent.  That's, that's a key thing she taught me.  Let somebody else in- invest in the talent.  Don't spend your money on, on your own talent.  You have the talent.  Let somebody else pay for that.  And she taught me the easiest part is the singing.  The hardest part is getting there.  And just watching the demand that they, that the music industry and her fans and stuff had on her taught me a lot to, to reserve, to reserve because--I mean, you know she's gone through her bouts or whatever, and, and that's not for me to say, but you could tell--
Speaker 1: But you were there during that time (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  But you could tell that the demands is what was making her do this.  Once again, the, the drugs and everything is always because you're escaping something.  You know, it's always because you're, you're escaping something, and you feel that if you do that, it's going to make you feel better, and it really never does, but you feel that way for some reason, and, yeah.  I, I saw that.  At one point, we were like singing and, and dubbing things for her, you know, because, you know, she just wasn't always, always all there, and we wanted to protect her.  We would do anything to protect her, so--
Speaker 1: How long did you work with her?
Speaker 2: I worked with her for about a year and a half through the whole 'Ain't Nobody' tour, which was, I mean, sky is the limit.  That's when we was opening up for Marvin Gaye and people like that, and I never got to meet Marvin Gaye 'cause I was scared 'cause I was the youngest one in her camp, you know.  When she hired me, I was the youngest singer in her camp, so when we opened for Marvin Gaye, they, they had a thing.  It was like, okay, everybody can go in and meet Marvin Gaye, but they had machine guns.  They had machine guns protecting him at that time 'cause he felt his life was threatened and everything, and I was too scared to go in to meet him, so I started crying.  I was like, I'm not going in there.  I'm not going in there.  And I didn't get to meet him.  He died like a month later.  Yeah.  So that's one of my regrets (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But that also means he knew that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I mean, I don't--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He just--
Speaker 1: --think he expected it to be--
Speaker 2: --he was paranoid.
Speaker 1: --his family.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  It was just crazy.  I, I never seen anything like that.  I'm, I'm coming from the Cellar, and, you know, the dance music, you know, scene in New York.  And, you know, let's go meet Marvin Gaye, and there's two guys with machine guns.  It was like, I'm not, I'm not going in there, you know, so--and Chaka was like, "She doesn't understand that.  Don't, don't force her.  She doesn't understand that."
Story_ID: 665618
Speaker 1: You also worked with Whitney Houston.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was--this is also--I guess, was it around the beginning of her career?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Early on.
Speaker 2: --well, see, after Chaka Khan, then, then, I'm like the hottest go to singer, background singer in New York [New York] after that.  After you work with Chaka Khan, you know, everybody is calling.  "Sing on this.  Sing on that.  Sing on that."  That's when I met Kashif.
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And Kashif is now the hottest producer in New York 'cause he's producing Evelyn "Champagne" King, [HistoryMaker] Melba Moore, Lillo Thomas, and he's working, you know, with Hush Productions and all these people.
Speaker 1: And he also is engaging technology differently.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right?  He became very well known for--
Speaker 2: He's the first musician to, to have a Synclavier.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Which is a duplication of, of sound; especially vocal sounds, yeah, so he, he didn't need you to come in and sing ten parts.  You know, we would--before the Synclavier and, and all that, we would go in and sing.  If you had to sing one note you--four times, you'd go in and you'd sing it four times.  With the Synclavier, you sang it once, and they could duplicate as many times as they needed to make it as big and as full as they wanted to. So he introduced me to that and taught me a lot of studio technology that I didn't know before meeting him, yeah.
Speaker 1: And so was it Kashif who introduced you to Whitney?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Um-hm. Because I was singing with him, singing on his album at that time.  Now he's signed to--
Speaker 1: Now, which music is he singing now?  Was--he had some popular music at that time as well, in addition to being a producer.
Speaker 2: 'Stone Love,' all that stuff, his first album, 'Baby Don't Break Your Baby's Heart.'  All those songs I sang background on. And so now he's with Arista making these hits.  Not, not--I mean, I don't, I don't know if he had number one hits, but he had popular hits, and so now he's getting in with Clive [Clive Davis].  Clive is now honing Whitney Houston, asked Kashif to do two songs on Whitney Houston, and one of those songs is the song that I sang background on.
Speaker 1: Which is?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, hey, give me a second.  He--she had--he did 'You Give Good Love.'  And, oh, where's Darlene [Darlene Scott]?  I just drew a blank.  It's right at the tip of my head, and I can't think of it.  (Singing), "I keep thinking about you, baby."  That one.  Yeah.  (Singing), "Got me thinking about you, you.  All I want to do is--," yeah, that one ['Thinking About You'].
Speaker 1: And so at this point, music making is still where you're in the studio together, right?  You're not--
Speaker 2: Yes, we're in the--
Speaker 1: Like today is a totally different--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --story.
Speaker 2: No, she, she walked in.  We're in New Jersey.  He used to have a go to studio in New Jersey, and, actually, that is the same studio where I recorded 'Do Me Baby.'  Because I remember recording with Whitney there, and I wanted the--that magic, and in walks this young lady with short hair and her friend Robyn [Robyn Crawford], and they said, this is Whitney Houston, and she's on Arista Records, and her mom is [HistoryMaker] Cissy Houston who's a, a famous singer that sang with Aretha Franklin, and that's how we met (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And about what year is this?
Speaker 2: I want to say this is about a year before her album came out, so we're talking '85 [1985].
Speaker 1: Yeah, about '85 [1985].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Eighty--yeah, '85 [1985].
Speaker 1: Do you remember recording with her?  Can you describe that?
Speaker 2: We hit it off right away.  You know, she was like, "Hey, hey, what's up?  You know, you sing with Kashif?"  You know, I'm like, "Yeah."  She's, "I'm doing this thing, you know.  I'm really--you know, I'm just a tomboy at heart.  I don't know nothing about all this, you know," but she says, "My mom sings.  I love singing.  I sang at church.  Did you sing at church?"  I was like, "Yeah, I sang at church."  We're talking.  She's like, "I played basketball."  I was like, "I ain't played basketball, but--." You know, then her mom called, and, and she's trying to, to find out about it.  She says, "Mom, if you keep calling, I'm going to change my number again."  I said, "You talk to your mom like that?"  And she says, "Yeah, 'cause she just keeps bothering me, and I'm going to change my number."  And, you know, we, we were just like girlfriends.  We, we hit it off right away, and then Kashif came and said, "Okay, enough of yakking.  Get these notes together."  And once we found the, the song and everything.  He--she's like, "You sing that part.  I'll sing this part."  And we just became instant friends.  She was just like that, yeah.
Speaker 1: And did you tour with her?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't tour with her.  But she would come to dates.  I toured with Kashif.  'Cause, actually Kashif's record came out before her and he toured, so she would come to a lot of the shows.  Yeah.  She would come to a lot.  As a matter of fact, the last show I did with him on Broadway with Gladys Knight, we opened for Gladys Knight, and that's where I got my deal with Hush Productions.  She was there.  She was there when they said, "You know, you need to, you know, do your own thing."  Said, "Yeah, Meli'sa [HistoryMaker Meli'sa Morgan] needs to do her own thing."  I don't know why--you know.  Yeah, yeah.  She, she was encouraging.  Yeah, she was there.
Speaker 1: Did you stay in touch with her over the years?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Story_ID: 665619
Speaker 1: And then you also were a backup singer with [HistoryMaker] Melba Moore.
Speaker 2: On, on records.  Just like a little bit of the Kashif stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay. It was with Kashif.
Speaker 2: I didn't, I didn't tour with her. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: So this work in the studio, working on different people's records, was that--
Speaker 2: Excuse me.  I drank.
Speaker 1: No.  That's okay.  Was, was that a consistent source of income for you during those years?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  And then what happened is the more popular that you became, the more money you could ask for, and then you tried to get with like AFTRA [American Federation of Television and Radio Artists; Screen Actors Guild-American Federation of Television and Radio Artists], and people like that so when you recorded on people's songs, if it went gold or platinum and stuff like that, you would still get more money for it, so I was, I was working towards that when I got my own deal because Jocelyn Brown and all those people that sang on all those gold records and stuff like that, they was getting, you know, residuals, so you would get paid, you know, what they were going to pay you to sing background, and then if it went gold or something, if you was registered with Arista [Arista Records], with the union and stuff, you would get more money.
Speaker 1: With AFTRA.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And how long did it take for you to get registered with AFTRA?
Speaker 2: It took a while because you, you had to be a part of a project that was registered, and some, some projects didn't want to register through the union 'cause they didn't want to pay scale, so by the time I left my last background session with Whitney [Whitney Houston], I think I was getting double, double and a half because she was paying me like double and a half, some- sometimes triple--
Speaker 1: So what does that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) triple scale.
Speaker 1: --mean, double and a half, triple of what?
Speaker 2: The, the scale, I think at that time, might have been 125, so you were basically making like 375 to $400 a session.
Speaker 1: And then if the--later when it sold, you're making money on every sale when you--no (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.  It's just, it's just like a sliding scale.  They give you like a little bonus for being a part.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, 'cause it was--they figure it's making so much money when it's platinum, double platinum, triple platinum, you got to give back to the people that put in, so, you know, you might get a check for like fifteen hundred dollars, two thousand dollars or something like that.  Yeah.  But you wasn't getting money off of every single.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 665620
Speaker 1: So you signed with Hush Productions when?
Speaker 2: We did Broadway with Gladys Knight and the Pips.  She was still with the Pips then.  And we did Broadway and we opened for her, and Hush Productions came in, and they had just started managing Kashif. And Charles Huggins and his brother, Beau [Beau Huggins] came up to me and said, "We hear you're doing big things, and we see you all on the road with Kashif.  Don't you think it's time you, you do your own thing?"  And, like I said, Whitney [Whitney Houston] and them was in there.  "Yeah, she needs to be doing her own thing." And it's just like when you said that now, I remember her and Robyn [Robyn Crawford] there, and I was like, "Well, I don't know.  Yeah, I guess so."  And they said, "Come into the office on Monday," and that was like Saturday.  We did Saturday and Sunday, and the next day I came into the office, and they signed me right on the spot.
Speaker 1: And this is 1986?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Early 1986, yeah.
Speaker 1: Early 1986.  So you--
Speaker 2: 'Cause 'Do Me Baby' came out the end of 1986.
Speaker 1: So you record Prince's song, right (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, yeah, now, I know you had been singing all the popular music all along from the beginning of your career.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: And then you choose--how do you come up with this super provocative, sexy song that even when he sang it, people lost their mind, and now a woman is going to sing it.
Speaker 2: I didn't come up with it.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: That's the key (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) How did you come to sing that song?
Speaker 2: And, and here is the thing.  I, I knew of Prince because he played a place called the Bottom Line.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Do you remember that?
Speaker 1: Sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the Village [Greenwich Village]. And that was his first performance in New York City [New York, New York], and I went to see him with Andre Cymone with the plastic pants on and all that stuff.  I was, I was a Prince fan, loved seeing him perform.  Didn't get to meet him then, but, I mean, we was all, all the musicians was at that show, and I was in, in like--right in the front.  Loved it.  So then I get signed by Hush Productions, which is Capitol Records, and I'm like, okay.  I'm going to be a Capitol 'cause they--it was a production company.  It was like, you sign with Hush, and then we'll tell you who you're signed with, and we'll take it from there.  You're going to be on Capitol Records.  I was like, oh, okay.  I'm going to be on Capitol Records.  Okay.  So what does that mean?  That means that there's a president at Capitol Records named Don Grierson who has a say so over your project with us.  And Don Grierson had, had 'Do Me Baby' on hold for two years.  Prince let him hold it for two years, and his time was running out, and he said the next R and B singer that I sign has to do this song, and it was me, so that's how I got to do, 'Do Me Baby,' and, and, again, I like--I'm like eighteen, nineteen [sic.] now.  I've gotta get permission from my father [John Morgan].
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Because I'm like, I'm not singing that song and my father hear that,  He's going to think some sort of, you know, like I'm switching my whole, you know, demeanor. So I go to my father, you know.
Speaker 1: And had you seen Prince perform this song?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  This song I hadn't seen him perform.  Believe it or not, this was a B song that never charted for him.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It never charted.  It was a B song on his album that never charted, never did nothing.  But Don Grierson saw something in this song, and if you don't know Don Grierson, he's, he's responsible for the success of Sheena Easton.  And remember the group Heart on Capitol Records?  So he's got all these big groups, so he, he's picking great songs, and this song is the song. So I go to my dad, and I say, you know, "They asked me to do this song 'Do Me Baby' by Prince," you know, and he's like, you know, "'Do Me, Baby?'  Oh, okay."  I'm like, yeah.  And here I'm like eighteen, nineteen.  I'm like, you know, I don't know.  And so he said, "Well, here.  Here's the thing.  Can you sing the song?"  And I was like, "Yeah, I can sing the song."  So he says, "Well, then go sing the hell out of it," you know, and so I did.
Story_ID: 665621
Speaker 1: And they didn't get Kashif to produce me which I don't understand.  They got Paul Laurence to produce me, who, at that time, was producing Freddie Jackson.  So Paul Laurence, we actually went in the same studio where I met Whitney Houston in New Jersey, and we, we recorded 'Do Me Baby.'
Speaker 2: And what happened with 'Do Me Baby?'
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, first of all, the, the one thing you need to know about the recording of 'Do Me Baby' is that the high note, I had to sing that high note about twenty-five times, and I did not understand why.  I did not understand.  I didn't understand what Paul was doing.  And he kept saying, "Sing it over again.  Just not right.  Just not right."  So, at that time, that's when they was working on technology of, of the Synclavier and stuff like that, and what he did to make that, that part exciting, he, he pitched it.  He pitched it a little off because I was singing it so on, that he had to have me sing it 'til I actually sang it off, and then he could pitch it back on to make it just a little higher.  It was the weirdest thing, but it worked, you know, and I, I kept saying, "What are you doing?"  He says, "No, it's not right yet.  It's not right."  He said--
Speaker 2: Can you sing it so we know which note we're talking about?
Speaker 1: (Sings 'Do Me Baby').  That one, yeah.  And I kept singing it just--I guess the, the technology and how it was, I kept singing it so on pitch that he couldn't push it up a little bit more to make it exciting for the record, so he kept saying, "Sing it, say, don't sing it quite so on pitch.  Don't sing it--," and I was like, "What do you mean?  You got to sing it on pitch."  And, and I got it where it was just like a little off pitch, and then he put it back on pitch, but then I pushed it like higher, and it just made all the difference in the record, 'cause when I heard it, I was like, I didn't quite do it like that, but I can do it like that now, but that's what he did (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) After you heard what he wanted.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And that was just like that's when that whole recording technology with the Synclavier and the pitch tone and all that stuff was coming in, and, and he was getting into that, yeah.
Story_ID: 665622
Speaker 1: And how was it received in the public?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was, it was wonderful.  Wow.  I, I had no idea that people wanted women to be so nasty (laughter).  I just had no idea.  You know, and then after that, I mean, c'mon, from the Apollonia [Apollonia Kotero] to the, you know, up to the Nicki Minaj now and what they're doing now, the Lil' Kim and stuff, I mean, you know.  This was light stuff, but back then, it was like, she is nasty.  I want to get to know her, and I wasn't nasty at all.  I was, I was totally the opposite of what they expected to me.
Speaker 1: How did others respond?  Because, remember, you've been in this gospel group [Starlets of Corona], and, you know, folks back home.  You got the okay from your daddy [John Morgan].  But how did your community respond when they heard this nasty song?
Speaker 2: Well, because it was so sensual and sexy the way that I did it, I don't know how the men responded.  You know, I tried to stay away from that.  But the women were kind of happy that, you know, somebody was expressing sensuality.  Yeah.  So some of the older women, you know, a little bit at first.  You know, "You sang that?"  Let me tell you something that's so funny.  When 'Do Me Baby' came out, and it was a hit, it went number one, and Whitney was out at the same time, and she did 'You Give Good Love,' and, oh, I want to dance with somebody ['I Wanna Dance with Somebody'] everything like that.  We went to New Orleans [Louisiana].  I had a show in New Orleans.  On one side of the street (laughter) where the retail and everything was, they was playing Whitney Houston.  (Singing), "You give good love to me, baby."  On the other side of the street where the brothel was, they was, they was playing 'Do Me Baby' as loud as they can.  I was like, wait a minute, here.  C'mon, that's not fair (laughter).  That's not fair.  Why my music gotta be in the brothel and hers in the retail stores?  That's not right.  That's not right.  I mean, I was down the street saying, that's wrong.  That's so wrong.  But, yeah, and I mean, and a woman was out there, you know, in her little scanty clad and, you know, dressed up, and they were blasting 'Do Me Baby.'  I said, that's so wrong (laughter).
Story_ID: 665623
Speaker 1: So I want to go back to Kashif for a minute because I--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I remember going to--I saw the Synclavier.  The--I mean, he had this--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) incredible production space in Connecticut.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And did--you worked there with him as well?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Why did you move from there into that--
Speaker 2: He was living, he was living in Manhattan [New York] at first, and after the success, some of the success of Whitney Houston, he bought the mansion in Connecticut.
Speaker 1: Which is the Jackie--the old Jackie Robinson mansion.
Speaker 2: The Jackie Robinson mansion, and he moved there.  And this was just like at the height.  We were just starting, but they knew.  They knew there was about to be some money made, and we would all go there 'cause he would have parties.  He--Kashif had the best parties.  He had a loft in Manhattan.  That's the first time I had ever been in a loft.  I mean, he threw a party there.  It was fabulous and so when he moved to Connecticut, he gave a big party in the swimming pool and everything, and we never even got to swim or anything because while we're there, you know, "Oh, Kashif wants to see you in his studio," you know.  We go into the studio.  "Meli'sa [HistoryMaker Meli'sa Morgan], just sing this part."  I was like, "I was getting ready to go swimming."  But, "No, just sing this part right here," you know, and I'd sing that part, and then he'd leave.  And he was working on his album, so all the 'Baby Don't Break Your Baby's Heart' and all that stuff.  Like, if he'd hear anything, a little part, and you was there, Whitney was come in.  "Whitney, sing this part.  No, just sing this part right here, and then, then you can go back and party." So, you know, I, I never even got to get in the pool, because I--every time I had went there, he always had something for me to do in the studio, yeah (laughter).
Story_ID: 665624
Speaker 1: 'Do Me Baby,' Prince's song, did you ever--well, let me say this.  I know that Prince didn't like many people--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --singing his music.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So how did he feel about you singing his music?
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm happy to say that he liked it, yeah, and, especially after it went number one for four weeks (laughter).  That man loved success, so I was in Los Angeles [California], and they arranged for me to meet him back stage at a Lionel Richie concert.  He did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And is this around the same time--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, it--
Speaker 1: --the song is out?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was number one, and they said, "Okay.  Prince is going to be in the green room before the show, Lionel Richie concert.  This is where you're gonna meet him." And I, I never forget North Beach Leather [sic. North Beach Leathers].  You--do you remember that?
Speaker 1: Of course.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We had money then.  We was rolling.  You know, because those, those outfits is like thousand dollars a piece, so I went and bought this really nice North Beach Leather outfit, white, and, you know, I'm going to meet Prince.
Speaker 1: White leather.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And it's so funny, when I got there, he was in white leather, too (laughter).  So and it was, you know, I walked up to him.  He shook my hand, and, and he said, "Thank you for a great song."  And I was like, "No, thank you for a great song, you know, you wrote it."  He said, "No, but you made it great." So, and we were friends.  You know, I would see him.  He never--I never took any pictures with him.  He would--still wouldn't let me take pictures with him, which I kind of found that, kind of, you know--
Speaker 1: You're not alone.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But he would always invite me to his parties, and through the years, I've been to Paisley Park [Chanhassen, Minnesota] 'cause I tried to do some stuff with Jimmy Jam [HistoryMaker James "Jimmy Jam" Harris, III] and Terry Lewis, and while I was there, he had a party at Paisley Park, heard I was in town, invited me, and--
Speaker 1: Did you perform with him?
Speaker 2: No, never got to perform with him, and--
Speaker 1: 'Cause I know that some of those parties, he would just grab people to come up on stage.  That didn't happen?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No.  It wasn't that kind of party.  These were like real parties, and even the last party I went with--it was in--on 14th Street in downtown Manhattan [New York]--
Speaker 1: Darby.
Speaker 2: --about a year before he died, and we--I want to say--who else was there.  Doug E. Fresh, Wendy Williams, a lot of people was there, and he was introducing his new group, the, the female group, yeah.
Speaker 1: 3RDEYEGIRL.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  So I was at that, and he still didn't take a picture with me, but he laughed and danced and everything, but he still wouldn't take a picture.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: He didn't take pictures with people, so--
Speaker 2: I know.  That's raggedy (laughter).
Story_ID: 665625
Speaker 1: 'Do Me Baby' is a huge success, and that's followed by 'Good Love.'
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or is it immediately followed because you're still with Capitol Records.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So this is the next album--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --right?
Speaker 2: And this is the next album, 'Good Love,' yeah.
Speaker 1: This is in 1987.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me about 'Good Love.'
Speaker 2: 'Good Love' was, was a good follow up.  I recorded 'Do Me Baby' with Lesette Wilson, so and Lesette Wilson is famous for being a part of "Funkin for Jamaica," and that whole Jamaica sound that came out of the Jamaica Queens [New York], so we, we collaborated together again because we--by that time--we had a company and--called Fuss Music, and, and we enjoyed recording together. And I got to do something with Kashif, which I went back up to the mansion.  He called me up to the Jackie Robinson mansion, and, and they were like, "Okay.  It's time for you to do something with him."  And we didn't know what was we going to do.  I just went up there, and he was saying congratulations, and I was saying congratulations to him, and it was sad that we didn't get to do something on, you know, on the first album.  And he said, you know, "I'm doing this song, "Love Changes.""  And I said, ""Love Changes" by Mother's Finest?"  He says, "Yeah, I'm going to record that."  And I said, "Who's going to do the female part?"  He says, "No, I'm recording it as a solo thing."  I was like, "Nah.  You can't do that.  You got to have the female part."  And he said, "Really?"  He said, "Would you be interested in doing it?"  And I said, "Yeah," I said, "let me hear it."  And said, "Well, the studio is booked right now," he says, "so go in my Rolls Royce and listen to it."  What a--you know (laughter).  What?  C'mon now.  So he brought the tape in his Rolls Royce, you know.  He played it.  Closed the door.  He said, "Listen to a couple of times and let me know what you think."  So there I am in the Rolls Royce listening to it, and I liked it, you know, 'cause, I mean, his productions were big and luscious, and you could just envision your vocals and hear them on there, and I was like, yeah, let's do it.  So he said, "Okay.  Come back in a couple of days, and let's do it," so we did it.  Yeah.  And "Love Changes" be- it was a huge hit, huge hit for both of us.
Speaker 1: Can we hear a little bit of it?
Speaker 2: Oh, my god (laughter).  My part or his part (laughter)?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Your part.
Speaker 2: (Singing) "You're wondering if it's real this time or just another half goodbye."  There you go.
Speaker 1: So you did well picking music that already existed to make your own.
Speaker 2: I'm good at that, yeah.  You know what, what made me good at that?  The Cellar [New York, New York].  'Cause that's all we had was--I mean, we did two sets a night, Thursday, Friday, and Saturday doing cover songs, so we was good at taking someone else's song and twitching it just a little bit to make the, you know, the band sound a little better, the band sound bigger, or, you know, in this song, you know, we want to do more vocals, so let's break it down here and do that, so that experience made it very good for me.
Speaker 1: And, and this song, "Love Changes," that you made with Kashif has been remade a few times.  I mean, Jamie Foxx and Mary J. Blige, right?  They did it.
Speaker 2: I loved them, but I don't know what y'all was doing with that song, and I told both of them that.  I love y'all dearly, I really do, and you know I love me some Mary J. and Mary J. loved me, I know that.  And I like Jamie Foxx, too.  I met him with Babyface [Kenneth "Babyface" Edmonds].  But I don't know what y'all is doing to that.  I would leave that alone.  I would leave that alone.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 665626
Speaker 1: You know, one of the things that many artists--and, and really many African Americans have loved over the years is the editorial covers, in particular, in black publications.  You were featured in Ebony in 1988.  Do, do you remember that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: This is, 'cause this is early.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: This is early.
Speaker 2: Oh, with my dad [John Morgan], yes, yes.  I remember with--my dad was there, and--let me tell you.  We was rolling in the dough then.  Yeah.  I had, I had a beautiful one bedroom place, at Tower 67 [New York, New York] and, yeah, Ebony and the, the photographer, he's a famous photographer came and took pictures, yeah, for Ebony magazine.
Speaker 1: And so that's like--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --for the family.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right?
Story_ID: 665627
Speaker 1: Now, in 1990, you're still with Capitol Records.  You released 'The Lady in Me.'
Speaker 2: Well, what happened is that I was not happy with Hush [Hush Productions].  Not that they wasn't doing wonderful things, just I had went on tour with Billy Ocean, and I went on tour with Freddie Jackson, LeVert, came back, you know, went on tour with, with other artists at that time, and when I got off tour, you know, they, they handed me a check for like fifteen hundred dollars, and I'm like, I had been on tour for like six months.  I'm like, that, that ain't gonna--that's--that ain't gonna happen.  So by then, Marvin Zolt, Chaka Khan's accountant, is my accountant.  I call him in.  He does the records to find out, you know, that they have to give me a check for thirty thousand dollars, you know, and they was trying to give me fifteen hundred dollars, and then my contract was up, and they had to give me--I was very good with my contracts.  I don't know how I got the--I think my dad [John Morgan].  But, anyway, I had a management that--had a production and a management contract with them, but my management contract required that I make a certain amount of money, and they were twenty-five thousand dollars short.  And it was like either you pay me the twenty-five thousand dollars or I'm going to walk.  And they paid me five thousand dollars, and they was like, we're not going to give you anything else.  So I walked.  Capitol didn't want me to walk from them, so I had to sign with Capitol.  Well, Hush and all them threatened to sue me, and Capitol was like, you know, well, I, I don't know what to do, so what I did, I said, you know what?  Who was the last person who sued Capitol Records and won?  And they said it's a, it's a lawyer firm down in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York].  They won for The Beatles, and I said, well, I want to hire them to sue Capitol and Hush.  And I hired them, and I walked in to the guy, and I'll never forget.  He said, "You know, we just won a big lawsuit, you know, with Capitol Records," and I explained to him what was happening.  He said, "Oh, this will be fun.  Just give me eight thousand dollars, and I'll get it all straightened out." And I gave him eight thousand dollars, and I wound up getting a two hundred fifty thousand dollar contract with Capitol and leaving Hush.
Speaker 1: Wow.  And so this--that, that was very smart--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --strategy.
Story_ID: 665628
Speaker 1: And the two hundred fifty thousand dollar contract with Capitol [Capitol Records] was for how many projects, years, how did that work (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was supposed--it was supposed to be for three, supposed to be for three, three albums, and so we did 'The Lady in Me.'  What happened after that, 'The Lady in Me,' was really a good album, but what happened is that Don Grierson left.  He was the president, and another president came in, and he didn't know anything about who I was or 'Do Me Baby' or anything like that.  He was just, you know, a corporate person that they hired, and then at that time, Capitol had MC Hammer.  So all, all attention went to MC Hammer because he was making all the money, and at that time, it was a transition from R and B going into hip hop, so the company didn't--you know, he didn't know who I was. So they did 'The Lady in Me,' and they was making so much money with MC Hammer that he called me in one day, and he said, "I don't really know you.  I didn't sign you.  Don Grierson signed you, you know, and, and we're going to let you go."  Well, thank god I had a manager that said if they let me go before the three albums, they'd have to pay me another $175,000, and he didn't know that, and so when he let me go and he found out, he says, "Oh, no, no, no, no.  We're going to resign you."  And my manager was like, "She's not coming back there."  So we negotiated, you know, to get me money, and then that was it.  So that's how I lived.  A lot of people asked me, what was I doing--during that transition.  I was living.  We was going to Aruba.  We was traveling.  I was--you know, I had my place in Manhattan [New York], and I was living.
Speaker 1: Because you had gotten the money, the first money, plus all--basically almost double.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I had got the $175,000, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In addition.
Speaker 2: And then he negotiated another publishing deal with me with EMI [EMI Records] for a hundred and fifty thousand, so it was rolling, you know.  Now, where it went now, I don't know (laughter).  I don't know I got a couple of--
Speaker 1: Aruba.
Speaker 2: --things, but, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But, yeah.  I mean, but, you know, living, ten years later, you just, you know. But, so that's how I was able to live, and, and let me tell you, back then, people were doing smart things like that.  I found out that Stephanie Mills did something that was so brilliant.  I wish I would have done that.  When she signed her, her deal, instead of getting all of her advance at one time and paying that kind of taxes, she told them, pay her monthly until it ran--you know.  Who knew?  If we would've been doing that, so pay me, twenty-five hundred, three thousand dollars a month, you know what I'm saying, until it, you know, runs out, and then I know I have this money, and then I'm not paying all those taxes at one time.  Brilliant, brilliant stuff like that.  People were--Sade, at that time, we didn't know.  She was saying, yeah, give me a little bit of something, but give me stock in, in Columbia.  Now, she's, she's one of the richest artists ever because she has stock in Columbia Records.  The things we were doing, didn't even know.
Speaker 1: And so you took the money.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: And ended up--was it right after that, when, when did you start dancing with the IRS [Internal Revenue Service]?  Having to create--you, you've--I've read about you having to create your payment plan, which a whole lot of people have, to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --be sure that you are on course.
Speaker 2: I, I want to say it was a few years after--excuse me.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: The IRS, well, what we did because we got that money, it was a lot to pay back 'cause the more you get in bulk, the more you have to, you know, pay back, so what I did instead of, you know, saying, I'm going to take, you know, ten thousand dollars or whatever it was and just pay them in a lump sum, I was like, I'm not going to do that, so we just, you know, Marvin [Marvin Zolt] just worked out payment plans, and, and that's what people need to know.  You, you don't have to pay it in bulk.  You can work out payment plans, and as long as you're paying them, they won't bother you, so that, that was just my choice because I don't like paying nobody in bulk but me (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 665629
Speaker 1: So after you--you walk away from Hush [Hush Productions] and Capitol [Capitol Records], and, and even though you negotiated a good deal, I'm sure it didn't feel so good to leave under those circumstances.
Speaker 2: No, it didn't.  And they still had people like Freddie Jackson and, and [HistoryMaker] Melba Moore and, and, and they were--you know, Freddie was still successful, so they, they tried to do a little, little black balling, and, you know, say that I was difficult to work with and all that kind of stuff, but I, I really wasn't.  I'm just a--I'm a great singer with a great business head, so both of them are just as important to me, so I'm--I'm not going to let you slight me on one to do the other, and, and most artists will just say, well, I just want to sing.  I just want to perform, and if I don't perform and people don't see me, and, da, da, da, you know what I'm saying?  You know, so I'll just do that, and I'll just let them rip me off, you know.  We'll worry about that later.  And, and, later, like you say, they wind up being on drugs or homeless, cars getting repossessed.  I've never had any of that stuff because both of them were just as important to me.  Do I have more passion for one than the other?  My singing I have passion for, but I, I love wearing my business hat and saying, no, you're not gonna get away with that.  So in this industry, I always say, you're gonna get ripped off.  It's just how much.  You know, there's nothing you can do about getting ripped, 'cause the powers that be are the powers that be.  The, the rules are the rules, you know.  You're not going to know everything.  Somebody is telling you they're paying you a hundred percent of something that you don't get accounting for but once or twice a year.  Hey, c'mon now.  Somebody--it's going to get fluffed, but it's just how much, you know.  How much is when you get to the point of, okay, enough?  Yeah.  Eighteen percent, now we get 18 to 20 percent of royalties.  Now, that's nothing.  You, you barely can live off of that unless you are selling, you know, a million, 2, 3, 4, 5 million.  You, you can't live off of that.
Story_ID: 665630
Speaker 1: After you come back from your travels and kind of, you know, making that transition--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I got--didn't I get married during that time, too?  Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, '93 [1993], '93 [1993].
Speaker 1: And who did you marry?
Speaker 2: Shelly Garrett.  I don't want to talk too much about that, but I did.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, you can say who Shelly Garrett is.
Speaker 2: He's a--I think he's--(laughter) he, he wrote--he was the first black producer that they considered--of the plays.  They called it the, the Chitlin' Circuit plays.  He wrote 'Beauty Shop' and 'Beauty Shop 2' ['Beauty Shop: Part 2'], and made millions and millions of dollars, introducing those type of plays to the African American community, because we, we was wasn't going to Broadway.  You know, it took a certain type of person to go to Broadway.  And he, he brought theater to, to the community, to, to the black community.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And how long did you all stay married?
Speaker 2: No less than a year.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Short time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it didn't work.  Yeah, it didn't work.
Story_ID: 665631
Speaker 1: As you are now going back into your music, the--the musical landscape has changed, as you've described.  You know, R and B, which was everything, is now being pushed by hip hop.
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't even think it was being pushed by hip hop.  It was being incorporated if they wanted it to.  Yeah.  Hip hop was taken over and becoming a whole different era.  It was like, you know, you had your disco.  You had your dance.  You had your R and B, and you, you always thought R and B and soul would be at the helm of everything, and this is what happened.  R and B became very expensive and hip hop became very cheap at first, and so the record companies found it more advantageous to use a LL Cool J or somebody like that and, and bring them up because at that time, you have to understand that Patti LaBelle or me or something like that, we're asking a half a million dollars.  A million dollars just to even go in the studio to, to record, to, to do the video, to do the that.  And then you have the rap acts that was coming in and say, oh, well, shoot.  We can do that.  Pay me, take--pay me five and do a video for fifty, and you can make five--sell 5 million records, and we're, we're out the gate and running, so hip hop became more advantageous financially than R and B.  We, we was asking too much.  Everybody was asking too much from me to Miki Howard, Hewett [Howard Hewett], everybody was just asking too much, and hip hop was just pushing us out, and that's what happened, so I always say that R and B lost about fifteen years because of hip hop.
Speaker 1: And hip hop changed the global landscape.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.  'Cause it was cheaper.  It was cheaper to get them over there.  We was coming with entourages.  And I mean, if you had a Chaka [Chaka Khan], you had, you had--or me, you had ten, fifteen deep before we--well, how many people?  They always ask, "How many people is she bringing with her?"  You have the manager.  You have the road manager, had the producer.  You had the production company.  You had the bodyguard.  You had the hair.  You had the stylist.  You had your, your BFF, you know.  Then, then you have the band.  You're talking twenty, twenty-five people, you know, before you can even, you know, get us over there.  Where hip hop was saying, look, I got me and my boy, and (unclear).  We're ready to go.
Speaker 1: Right.  So it was economics.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Which I don't--I'm not sure that people realize--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that aspect of the industry.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I, I will never forget.  [HistoryMaker] Russell Simmons and them, I had a show to do with them, and Russell Simmons and Run-DMC, they, they came to the airport.  It was just Russell Simmons and Run-DMC.  Here I am with the manager and the road manager, the this one and that one, you know, and, wait, this was the thing that was so funny.  I had all these people, but they had, they had the car.  My car wasn't even there because they had to get a--
Speaker 1: A van.
Speaker 2: --van and the this and the that.  And Russell sees me standing outside, he's like, "C'mon get in the car with us, Meli'sa [HistoryMaker Meli'sa Morgan].  You can't stand out here with them."  And so I get in the car with them, Run-DMC.  I says, "Who else you got with you?"  "That's it.  We're going to do the show.  We got our truck.  We're done."  Meanwhile, my people is still at the airport.  Yeah.  It was a big transition.  I mean, now, you know, Jay-Z, I'm, I'm sure he's twenty deep now or whatever, but, I mean, that's how it was, and it just became economically more sensible for the companies to concentrate on hip hop.  It was selling more.  It was new generation.  The younger kids was, was feeling it more because they were the beat of the streets and we wasn't.
Story_ID: 665632
Speaker 1: As you could see this writing on the wall, did you try to pare down?  What, what did you do to--for your survival as an artist?
Speaker 2: I toured.  I worked.  I, I didn't integrate.  I think at that time I just toured and worked in, in--and waited.  I really waited.  And because I was able to work because of the success, it, it didn't hurt me as much.  I wasn't quite as desperate.  There were people that released records during that time that I think is--some of those records destroyed their career because they just didn't know what to do and how to do it to make it work in between this transition, so--and, and most of the ones that worked are the ones that--where they integrated and they worked with them.  Just--R and B was just going through some things at that time, so I, I just worked.  I worked and, and I lived.
Speaker 1: Well, and as hip hop is evolving and, and rap, you know, is really taking a big part of, of the oxygen, but there also are people like Mary J. [Mary J. Blige] who--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know, was dubbed the queen of hip hop soul.  She kind of was, was mixing it, too, and you performed with her.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, what, what happened is Mary J., when she, when she came out, she, she acknowledged, you know, her, her like for my music, and her idolization for the things that, that, you know, that I did, and, and she, she ran with that.  She, she knew how to incorporate what she liked into her era, and a lot of people--I, I remember one time, Charles Huggins said, you know, "Mary J. made millions that [HistoryMaker] Meli'sa Morgan should have made."  And I was like, no, because I wasn't incorporating stuff like that.  I was still just Meli'sa Morgan and give me a good R and B, you know, three, four, beat, and, you know, you got me.  She knew how to integrate, you know, some of the things that she had learned from idolizing me into her generation, and it worked, and I'm thankful that, you know, she called me, you know, to do some things with her, and one of the songs was on an album, 'The Breakthrough' where, you know, she sold 3 million, and I still get money for that, so--
Speaker 1: And what was that album (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I'm thankful.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): It was in the movie too.
Speaker 2: And it was the movie, too.  Yeah, that's right.  Tyler Perry's, 'I Can Do Bad All by Myself.'  Yeah.  So--
Speaker 1: And I think that's 2005.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Is it 2000?  Yeah, you, you can get that, that information, yeah.
Story_ID: 665633
Speaker 1: Her really having a lot of respect for you and your sound and your music and bringing you in was bridging you also into this space.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was the key to me recording with Jay-Z.
Speaker 1: How so (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  Because when she recorded with him, "I Can't Knock the Hustle" [sic. "Can't Knock the Hustle"] then Jay-Z wanted to do it with the original, and I was the original, so then he said, "Well, you know, since I did that with Mary [Mary J. Blige], you know, on the album," which I, thank you, Jay-Z 'cause I still get money for that, too.  He said, "Let's do a remix with Meli'sa [HistoryMaker Meli'sa Morgan]," and they called me into to do a remix, and that's how I met him and went in the studio and, and did the remix with him, yeah.  And he was so tall, you know.  I just, I just remember--'cause we, we did it like the old days.  You know, it wasn't like I did my part and then he came in and did his part.  We did it together in the studio, and I just remember my mic [microphone] being here and his mic being up there, and he's rapping, and then he'd nudge me, and then I get to singing, you know, so, it was really cool.
Speaker 1: When did you do that?
Speaker 2: I did that--that had to be like right after his 'Reasonable Doubt.'
Speaker 1: And, let's see, what was year (unclear).
Speaker 2: I want to say that it's two thousand--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: (Unclear) when was 'Reasonable Doubt' made?
Speaker 1: Well, so Tyler Perry, the, the film ['I Can Do Bad All by Myself'] where--it was 2009.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, so 'Reasonable Doubt' had to be 2005, two thousand--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): No it was made in '96 [1996].
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-six [1996], really?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): But that's not when you did it.
Speaker 2: So I did 'Reasonable Doubt' about a year after.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: About a year after that, yeah. That was 1996?  Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 665634
Speaker 1: So as music is changing, you're still making your music. Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You--in 2006 [sic. 2005], you released your fifth solo album, 'I Remember.'
Speaker 1: Yes.  But before then, I, I recorded with Elektra [Elektra Records]. With Ruben Rodriguez.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And we did 'Still in Love' ['Still in Love with You'].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And 'Still in Love,' tell me about that one.
Speaker 1: That was really--that was a good time for me because Ruben had, had started his label Pendulum [Pendulum Records], and he was looking for a female, and I met Ruben in--he fell in love with me.  Yeah.  And we just--he was like, "I want you.  I want you to, you know, be my female artist.  I want a classy female artist," and it was just a respect there (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So when was this?
Speaker 1: Oh, god.  When was 'Still in Love'?  That had to be 2002, 2003 [sic. 1992].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  But so he started his label with Elektra, and I became the first lady of his label, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And how long did you stay with him?
Speaker 1: About two years, about two years, and he's, he's also responsible for Digable Planets.  Remember them?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, of course.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, see, rap was still coming in (laughter).
Speaker 2: So they're coming in, but you were still--
Speaker 1: Yeah, viable (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) claiming your space, and--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --and have--being tremendously respected.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 665635
Speaker 1: And the wonderful thing about 'Still in Love' ['Still in Love with You'] is that I, I think Louie Vega [Little Louie Vega] and them came in and did a remix on it, and it went, like number one, number two, on the dance charts, so--and Bernard Belle, who was responsible for, you remember the time, I remember the time ["Remember the Time"] he co-wrote that with Teddy Riley and them, and he produced it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, given that you're not writing this music, what happens for you?  Do you get a cut when somebody remakes a song that you made if you're not the writer?
Speaker 1: If you're not the writer, you don't get any writing and producing, but what happens with that for me that I, I find good is, like you say, you still--if you get a hit, you're viable and you work, and the work money, you know, is, is very important.  It's important to have a hit that you can tour, that people are picking up the phone calling, saying I want [HistoryMaker] Meli'sa Morgan.  I mean, that, that's priceless, so sometimes it's not always about the writing.  And, you know, a "Fool's Paradise" and "Do You Still Love Me" and all that kind of stuff, the, the royalties was coming in, but it was viable to--you know, it was important to get a hit, yes.
Speaker 2: So it's PR [public relations] in a sense.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.  It keeps you working.  It keeps Meli'sa Morgan's name out there and what I represent and my talent out there in the game.
Story_ID: 665636
Speaker 1: And speaking of "Fool's Paradise" 'cause we didn't talk about that.  "Fool's Paradise" came out when?
Speaker 2: Well, "Fool's Paradise" was on the first album ['Do Me Baby'] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: Eighty-six [1986], '87 [1987].
Speaker 1: And remains popular.
Speaker 2: That song, "Fool's Paradise" has a life of its own.  I did not even know that song was a hit.  I was on tour with Billy Ocean and Freddie Jackson, and we did Radio City [Radio City Music Hall, New York, New York], was coming back to New York [New York], and my BFF, Darlene [Darlene Scott], who's here.  She says, "So what songs are you going to do?"  I said, "I'm going to do, "Do Me Baby," "Now or Never," this, da, da, da, "Do You Still Love Me"."  She says, "Girl, you got--where's "Fool's Paradise"?"  I says, "What do you mean?  What--where's "Fool's Paradise"?"  She says, "You got to do "Fool's Paradise"."  I says, "No, that's, that's just a song on the album."  She said, "Where have you been, girl?  "Fool's Paradise" is a hit in New York City.  They're playing it like, like crazy in New York."  I didn't even know.  So she said, "You have to do this." So I've been on tour for like six, seven months.  I don't know nothing about what's a hit or not, you know.  So you have--
Speaker 1: So you were traveling all over where?
Speaker 2: All, all over the, the country.  We're doing, you know, Ohio, little--Arkansas, Kansas, you know, I mean, we're just doing all kind of places.
Speaker 1: Are you traveling international as well?
Speaker 2: No, not yet, not yet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I, I don't know even know anything about this, so I go into the office.  I said, "Well, I have to do "Fool's Paradise."  I gotta get the band together and do "Fool's Paradise"."  Well, they told me, "Yeah, you have to do that because it's number one in Europe as well."  I'm like, "What?  Are you kidding me?"  I'm thinking that "Do Me Baby" is still--and they're like, "No, it's "Fool's Paradise"."  So we go.  We do Radio City.  Sold out.  Me and Billy Ocean.  I hit the first note of "Do Me Baby" and five thousand people jump out of their seats (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Of "Do Me Baby"?
Speaker 2: No, I'm sorry.  Of "Fool's Paradise."
Speaker 1: Of "Fool's Paradise."
Speaker 2: Of "Fool's"--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --"Paradise."  And five thousand people jump out of their seats and start dancing all in the audience.  I'm like, what the heck?  I didn't even know it was a hit.  That is crazy.
Speaker 1: And could we hear a little "Fool's Paradise"?
Speaker 2: Oh, Lord.  She's got me singing.  (Singing), "Fool's paradise.  You better think twice 'cause it's not very nice." (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Thank you (laughter). Having a hit that lasts over decades.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: That, that has.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What does that mean for you, for your career?
Speaker 2: Huge, huge.  That means that I can still continue.  Recently, last November, I played Wembley.
Speaker 1: That would be in 2015.
Speaker 2: Twenty fifteen [2015], I opened for Patti LaBelle at Wembley Arena [SSE Arena, Wembley] in London [England] 'cause of "Fool's Paradise" and, and "Do Me Baby" because they're still hits.  Yeah, so we just came from Toronto, Canada.  I'm getting ready to go to South Africa.  I'm getting ready to play Dominican Republic, and all of the United States.  It's, it's huge because I can still work and, and be viable and make money.  I've been able to open up for people like Joe and, and Ginuwine and Keith Sweat, and, you know, still Freddie Jackson and The Temptations and the Four Tops and Blue Magic and all these people because of my hits, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 2: So it's very viable.
Story_ID: 665637
Speaker 1: Tell me about, 'I Remember,' which came out--this is your fifth solo, solo album that came out in 2006 [sic. 2005].
Speaker 2: Well, you wouldn't believe. (Laughter) Hush Productions that I left and got all that money from and I sued them, and they didn't pay me the twenty-five thousand dollars and all that stuff, and blah, blah, blah.  They started another company called Orpheus productions [Orpheus Music], and they said, "Who, who else are we going to have be our leading lady but you?"  So they resigned me.
Speaker 1: You made up.
Speaker 2: I--we made up.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) What is it?  We had--I hate to say it.  We had makeup sex (laughter).  And it was good. (Laughter) So I resigned with them, and I released, 'I Remember.'  It was, it was a musical bond with Beau Huggins, who had picked all of my hits, Do Me- "Do Me Baby," and "Fool's Paradise," and "Do You Still Love Me" and all those good songs, "Love Changes."  It was great getting back to somebody who appreciated and knew what I was about, and we sat down and we picked out songs, and, and we did "Back Together Again," me and Freddie Jackson, yeah.
Speaker 1: And [HistoryMaker] Valerie Simpson played piano on this album too (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  'Cause by that time, the Sugar Bar [New York, New York] is happening, and we're going to the Sugar Bar with her and Nick [Nickolas Ashford] on, on Thursdays, and they're hiring us to come in and, and sing, and I had done shows there and everything, and, and we're like good friends so when the opportunity to do a new album came along, I was like, well, I got to have my friends on it, yeah, so got to have Nick and Val.  I mean, c'mon, ain't nothing like the real thing.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 665638
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And so tell me a little bit about Sugar Bar [New York, New York] because they--Sugar Bar comes, obviously, it's, it's after the, the reign of so many great nightclubs and dance clubs that closed.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In the early tw- in the early '80s [1980s]--or mid-'80s [1980s].  Now, this is many years later that Ashford and Simpson [Nickolas Ashford and HistoryMaker Valerie Simpson] opened Sugar Bar.
Speaker 2: Well, first, let me tell you, they opened a club called 20/20 [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Right, 20/20.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And, and, believe it or not, as it was faltering and not doing well, Brad Johnson came in and tried to save it, and I actually did one of my listening parties there.  I think it might have been for 'Good Love' or, or one--might have been the Pendulum [Pendulum Records].  I don't remember.  But we came in and we did something with them, so that started the bond, and then a few years later, they said, well, 20/20 was so big, they just wanted to open up something smaller.  I think they owned the building where the Sugar Bar is, they had owned that building for a while, and they said, well, you know, on the bottom floor, Nick just said, I want to open up a club, and it, it was just a small club, you know, and it just turned out to be the place to go. And everybody supports, you know, Nick and Val, and God rest Nick.  He's not here now.  But Nick was about bringing the, the music back to the Sugar Bar, so when we would go on tour, he would say, you know, I can't pay you all what you would go on tour with, but in between before, you know, you go out on tour, if you want to try some stuff out or you want to do some new material, come and do a show at the Sugar Bar.  You know, we'll pay you a little something, and that will help us.  It'll help you.  You work out your kinks, and then you, you know, then you go make your big money, so that's what the Sugar Bar became.  It became a place to go to work things out, and now they have their, their Thursday showcase where they're introducing new artists.  There's--Valerie is responsible for artists being on Broadway and stuff like that and, and getting gigs touring with other people because they've seen them at the Sugar Bar, so the Sugar Bar is like the new Cellar [New York, New York] to me, yeah.
Story_ID: 665639
Speaker 1: In--so that album ['I Remember'] comes out, and then here, here's some more collaborations sort of old school, new school.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You--in 2010, you are featured on Cool Million's track, "Sweet Baby."
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness.  I think it was Myspace or--Myspace and, and Facebook was just starting to come out (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that was technology, right.
Speaker 2: And that's how they contacted me, yeah.
Speaker 1: They found you because of your social media presence.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  And they, and they said, you know, "We're, we're producers, and we work with this one and that one.  We'd love to work with you," and I kind of--at first, I don't know who you are and blah, blah, blah.  Then I talked to a couple of people in the industry, they said, "No, no.  They're legit.  They're overseas, and, you know, they produce songs" (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.  They're Danish and German.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And we talked on the phone, and we worked it out, and they sent the track, and I wrote on it, and in the middle of it, my dad [John Morgan] died.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I remember that, that my dad died, and so I was like, I don't want to do anything.  I don't want to do anything.  And, and they said, "You know what we're going to do?  Take a minute, and what we're going to do, we're going to, we're going to come over.  We're going to fly over there, and we'll meet you in the studio, and we'll work with you."
Speaker 1: Oh, because at this point, this is 2010.  A lot of people aren't ever meeting at all.
Speaker 2: Right, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They're just making their part--
Speaker 2: Do it and fly it, you know, and send it back, yeah.
Speaker 1: And then, and then push a button, and comes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I was like, I just--I was just out of it. And, and the producer, he flew in, I think, with--and he brought Tommy Mottola, somebody like that, with him, and he flew in, and we did "Sweet Baby."  Yeah, and it just--it warmed the atmosphere, you know, it was just--it was touching that he came over during that time to help me get through that, yeah.
Story_ID: 665640
Speaker 1: Another challenging time for many, not just in the music industry, but also was when Whitney Houston passed, so this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --two thousand twelve [2012].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you, obviously, knew her from the beginning of her career.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Went to her wedding with Bobby Brown, know her and Bobby Brown, and, yeah.  She protected me from, from a lot of things, too, because, like you said, during that time, you know, the drug scene was kind of, kind of steep, and I just remember going to one of her parties, and, you know, and just being under her, you know, and then it was like, "Okay, we're going to go in this room.  We'll be right back."  And I was like, "I'm coming in the room, too."  She says, "No, you're not," (laughter).  "No, you're not coming in this room.  Don't let her in here," you know.  And, so she, she protected me from, like I said, "No, not her."  So I appreciate that she did that.  'Cause who knows what would have happened, I--you know, just trying to keep up with the Joneses.  You're going and you do something, and it winds up turning your whole life around, and she said, "No, not you."
Speaker 1: She knew.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So it was really hard.  I think I was going to New Jersey, and they called and it was like, "We--pull over somewhere," you know, "because we don't want you on the highway when we tell you," and I just cried like a baby.  And I, I'll never forget, my friends Dwayne [ph.] and Rajean [ph.], you know, I went over their house, and I spent the night because I couldn't move, yeah.  It's really rough.
Speaker 1: Did you know her daughter [Bobbi Kristina Brown]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah, yeah.  And that is just crazy 'cause when I went to her funeral, her daughter was in the bathroom, and they only let me in the bathroom, and I hugged her and, you know, and just said, "If you ever need me, let me know," and, I mean, this--who knew, a year later, you know, she was going to be gone.  It's, it's too tragic.  It's too tragic.  You know, but there was love for her, yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 665641
Speaker 1: On a much brighter note--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I'm going to need a tissue in a minute.
Speaker 1: In 2014, you record "Thank You for Leaving Me" with Cheryl Pepsii Riley and Full Force.
Speaker 2: Oh, my god.  Them boys (laughter).  Let's take a break.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Them clowns.  Don't say boys.  Them clowns.
Speaker 2: Them boys, yeah.  That's for you, Whitney [Whitney Houston].  Bowlegged Lou.  I have known Bowlegged Lou and Full Force for so long it seems like.  I did a song with them with [HistoryMaker] Isaac Hayes.  "Float On" ["Float On With Us"].  Yes, yes, during my transition.  When people would say, "What was you doing?"  You know, I would do little projects like that, and before Isaac Hayes passed away, they did--they always do these albums called 'Full Force and Friends' [sic. 'Full Force: With Love from Our Friends'], and they pull me into it, and, and they asked me to come in and do "Float On," and I did "Float On," and, and my interaction was with Isaac Hayes, and it--that, that was really wonderful.  Radio really liked that; especially, Quiet Storm, yeah.  They, they really loved that.  So I think coming into--where are we now, 2014?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yes, 2014, they got another project to do, 'Full Force and Friends,' and this time they wanted to do a collaboration with me and Cheryl Pepsii Riley 'cause we're friends, and we're all friends, and Paul, Paul Anthony wrote the song, and we went in, and we recorded it, and it's so strange that you know people, and you work with people, but our voices are kind of similar, me and, and Cheryl's, so, you know, it was kind of like a little rock 'em sock 'em.  You hit it that high, I'm going to hit it that high, too, you know, so, you know, but it was a, you know, a camaraderie.  You know, like I did that all right, girl.  Go in and do your thing, so it was playful, but it was a lot of fun, yeah.
Story_ID: 665642
Speaker 1: Over the years, as you have been--we've looked at some highlights.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Are you performing all along the way?  Are you--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So is there ever a period where you just aren't performing, or you're, you're consistent?
Speaker 2: If I'm not performing, it's because I don't want to, yeah.  It's because I'm taking a break, and I'm going to Aruba, or I'm going to South Carolina, renovating my house or, you know, or those kind of things, but all along, people are always calling me.  Here, here's is, here is the thing that, that I found.  When we was at the height of our career, we made certain amount of money.  If, if you hold onto where your career is at that time, and you're here, and you still want that kind of money, then you're going to be in trouble.  Then you're going to be in trouble. Because there's only a few that do that.  Some of the legends do that, and some of them still have to, you know, be negotiable, the Patti LaBelles, and the--let me tell you something, I did a show with Patti LaBelle, and they closed the door 'cause they was counting her money, and they didn't come out 'til an hour later (laughter).  We was like, we want to make that kind of money, Patti (laughter).  They was counting that money, honey.  I was like, wow.  So--but you just have to be negotiable to what your career and where you are, and if you do that, you can consistently work and consistently be happy and consistently take care of yourself.  Sometimes you're going to get the big money.  Sometimes you have to negotiate and say, you know, okay, I've got to take this because I gotta live, you know.  So I'd rather get ten of those I've gotta lives, than none waiting for that.  So--and they all balance out after a while, yeah.
Speaker 1: When you aren't Patti or Mary [Mary J. Blige], or, you know, some of these people with the biggest names, some people don't realize that you are still working.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, you know, I know that in 2015, you were the subject of TV One's 'Unsung.'  An amazing series--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that, that kind of showcases--
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: --people who, perhaps, folks don't know what they're doing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and I read that when you were first approached about it, you weren't so sure you wanted to do that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I didn't want to do it because 'Unsung,' unfortunately, has a little stigma about doing artists that have fallen on bad times, and they kind of like were depreciating their value, and that scared me 'cause I don't want anybody to depreciate my value 'cause, like I said, I work all the time.  I do outside projects.  I crochet and I do fruit sticks, you know, that are like Edible Arrangements, and, and I, I perform.  Like I said, I still open for people like Joe, and, and Keith Sweat, and, and my goodness, I just did a show, Valentine's with Ginuwine.  These are, these are viable people that, that I still work with, that, that you might not know, but I'm still working, so I didn't want them to depreciate my value, make them think like I had fallen on, on hard times 'cause I saw the unfortunate one with Sly and the Family Stone, and it scared the daylights out of me, you know, 'cause, I--you--I, like I told them.  I'm not living in a van.  I, I own a co op.  I, I have a house.  I have a place in Aruba.  You know, I live good, so they just assured me that, that wouldn't happen.  They could only tell the story that could be told, and that was a good thing.  I don't hate the industry.  I don't--I'm not mad that I don't have more records, that my legacy is not bigger 'cause I, I always feel like I'm a work in progress, yeah.  So I wanted them to project me in that way and they did.  It's one of the most positive 'Unsungs' that they have, yeah.
Story_ID: 665643
Speaker 1: What is the Meli'sa Morgan Foundation?
Speaker 2: It's a foundation now for educational excellence.  Before, it was for battered women, and I started it, I started it actually when, when I married Shelly Garrett.
Speaker 1: Which was when?
Speaker 2: Ninety-three [1993].  And we, we did for battered women then, but now we do for educational excellence, and what we did that I'm so proud of with Meli'sa Morgan Foundation was when Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] happened, we did backpacks for the kids starting back in school across the country, did New York [New York].  We did Washington, D.C.  We did Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  We did Brooklyn [New York].  So we gave out backpacks to the kids.  I haven't done anything in a while, so I'm going to kind of pick that back up and do something.  It just has to touch my heart, and then when it touches my heart, then I'll say, okay, we, we need to do something and give back there.  And we've given scholarships to a young lady that went to Boston U [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] and graduated.  She's now a doctor. So we, we do good things with that.  And that--when my dad [John Morgan] died, I wanted it to be more for educational excellence 'cause he was so smart.  I mean, being a chemist, you got to be kind of smart.  He is really smart, yeah.
Story_ID: 665644
Speaker 1: You mentioned your legacy, and when you were talking about 'Unsung,' and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --this is what we've been talking about all this time.  What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I want my legacy to be that, first of all, that I was a fierce R and B songstress.  And given what I was given, I gave the best that I had, yeah, yeah, 'cause I always give the best that I got with what I'm given.  You can--you--that's all you can do, so I want to be a positive role model.  I want people to know that, you know, that I never fell victim to drugs, and you don't have to fall victim to drugs to be great, you know, and I don't escape things.  I, I face things head on.  I'm not looking for escape.  I'm looking for a resolution.  I'm looking for an answer, and that, that's how I live my life.  What's the answer?  If, if this is not the answer, then let's find the answer and, and let's do it that way.  And growth, continual growth in life.  Be good to your friends, and, you know, when people are not good to you, it's okay to not be good to them.  I'm good with that (laughter).  I'm really good with that, so, you know, just being the best that I can be.
Story_ID: 665645
Speaker 1: What advice would you give to a young person who is looking to enter the music industry now?
Speaker 2: Don't think that you're a star before you're a star.  Social media does not make a star.  I've seen so many people that social media has, has made famous because they get a million hits, and, and they couldn't do a concert, a good concert if their life depended on it.  They don't know anything about the--as Chaka Khan said, you know, the hardest--it's, it's easy being, being a singer and a star.  The hardest part is, you know, getting there.  The, the backstage stuff, the, the working with the band, the knowing the music, the knowing how to relate to people.  All of that is missing.  You almost need to bring back the, the Motown [Motown Records] school to teach them how to be stars.  We have these wonderful people that have wonderful talent that, you know, they know how to dress up and, and sell a brand, but they don't know how to be a star, yeah.  So, don't, don't think you're a star before you're a star.
Story_ID: 665646
Speaker 1: Do you have any regrets?
Speaker 2: Regrets. Well, let me see.  There might be some because I, I think maybe in some things, I might have been a little more hastier than, than I should have been.  I think sometimes I have to be careful about, you know, treating people with kindness and, and admitting my mistakes, yeah.  Those, those are some of my regrets, yeah.  Regrets being in the music business, regrets on how I live, no.  I don't have any regrets like that.  But being a better person, I might have some regrets about that, but I'm working on that, yeah.
Story_ID: 665647
Speaker 1: Is there anything you'd like to share that I have not asked you?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm happy, I'm engaged, yes.
Speaker 1: Congratulations.
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm in love with my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And who are you engaged to?
Speaker 2: To my Sabastin Commas, and he treats me very good (laughter).
Speaker 1: Congratulations.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And, and love is real.  Yeah, love is real, and incorporate it in your life, people.  Everybody thinks it's about the music, the music, music, and the success, the success.  You got to have some love in there.  You got to have somebody that takes care of you, somebody that you touch toes with at night, so, you know, I hope everybody finds love.
Speaker 1: And how, how do you navigate love and business?  'Cause there's so many people who, in the music industry--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --who have partnered with their significant other, and disaster has been at the end of it.
Speaker 2: Well, if, if you're going to do a business relationship, and, and have love, know what you can control and what you can't. And know what somebody else can control and what they can't, and don't let them control things that they can't 'cause they can't (laughter).  You know, it's a simple as that.  There are some people that are good at money.  If they're good at money, then let them control that.  If they're not good at money, don't let them control it.  You know, if they're good at taking care of you, let them take care of you.  If they're not good at that, don't let them do it, you know.  But always--and I always say at the end of the day, even if you have a rock 'em sock 'em, you know, and you disagree about something, sit down and talk about it, yeah, yeah.  Don't, don't stay mad too long.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's it?
Speaker 1: That's it.  Thank you so much.
Story_ID: 665648
Speaker 1: So that's me as a baby on one of those horses.  Yeah, that was me on, on 109th Street and 34th Avenue [Queens, New York]--
Speaker 2: And you're about how old (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) as a baby.  It looks like I'm--it--I don't even know if--am I one there?  About one if I am, one, one and a half.  I'm a baby, (laughter) yeah.  But that, that's a, yeah, that's a baby shot.  You got it?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That is me with my cousins and my sister on Easter.  I'm probably about five or six, yeah, and, and this one here.
Speaker 2: Which, which?
Speaker 1: That one.
Speaker 2: Here?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  That's my daddy.  That's--
Speaker 2: And what's his name?
Speaker 1: John Precious Morgan [John Morgan].  That's my daddy.
Speaker 2: And this is--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --about what year?
Speaker 1: That has to be in the--'67 [1967] around there.  All those pictures was around there, yeah.  Very good.  That's, that's us at Easter.  That's my dad.  That's me right there, so you want to get that one.
Speaker 2: This one.
Speaker 1: This one here, right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's me on 104th Street, Easter.
Speaker 2: And you're about?
Speaker 1: I've got to be about six or seven.  And there's another one--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in--probably at one of my aunts' house.  That doesn't look like our house.  Our house wasn't quite that.  And then get my mom.
Speaker 2: Oh, sorry.
Speaker 1: Get my mom right there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The Christmas tree.
Speaker 2: Right here.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That was our house on, on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And so what's her name?
Speaker 1: Margie Morgan [Margie Johnson Morgan], and that was our house on 109th Street, and she always put the Christmas tree, that little Christmas tree in the window, yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: All right.  This is Juilliard School of Music [The Juilliard School, New York, New York], my ID, and it should have a year on there, so, yeah, that's Juilliard School of Music.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, Lord.  Just school pictures, school pictures through the years.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And Talented Teen pictures.  That's what they look like.  I was in Hal Jackson's Talented Teen.  That looks like some of those pictures.
Speaker 2: That's daddy, Christmastime on 107th Street.  Yeah, that's my daddy.
Speaker 1: Graduation pictures, high school graduation pictures [from John Bowne High School, Queens, New York].
Speaker 2: And that's the group, Business Before Pleasure that I was in.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, that I talked about.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's family picture with my mom as we got older (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can we go left to right?
Speaker 2: As we got older.  Nicki [ph.], my--the light skinned girl Nicki is my brother's wife.  That's my brother Ronald [Ronald Langford].  That's me in the yellow.  That's my niece Sheniqua [ph.], and that's my sister Rita, and that's my mom in the middle.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's junior high school [I.S. 73, Frank Sansivieri School, Queens, New York].  Can you, can--will it stay up?  Yeah.  Can you get it?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's junior high school, my diploma.  Wow.  That's me right in the middle.  Why did they put me in the middle like that?  Isn't that nice?  (Laughter) So, that's '75 [1975] gosh.
Speaker 1: And this was an award that we got when I was on the Chaka Khan tour.  Wow.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness, and we're going into the "Do Me Baby" era.  Yeah.  That's when I signed with Capitol Records.  That was one of my promotional pictures.
Speaker 1: So that's 19--
Speaker 2: Eighty-six [1986], '85 [1985], '86 [1986].  It says 1986, yeah.
Speaker 1: Eighty-five [1985].
Speaker 2: Eighty-six [1986].  Says 1986.
Speaker 1: Oh, it says '86 [1986] down here.
Speaker 2: Oh, look at that, see?  I knew I--oh, that's okay.
Speaker 1: Sorry.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: I know these people.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Babyface [Kenneth "Babyface" Edmonds] and Jamie Foxx.  What was you doing singing "Love Changes"?  Jamie Foxx is an excellent singer, but I don't know what he did with that.  I'm still going to say that.  Oh, that's my Auntie Melba, and Melba was--
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Melba Moore.
Speaker 1: Melba Moore was married to Charles Huggins, or who I signed with, with Hush Productions, so she was considered, yeah, my manager, my manager-producer.
Speaker 2: So this--that's you (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that's Mayor Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] and Melba Moore, yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness.  Wonderful people that we talked about and some of them not with us now.  We have Jacci McGhee in the middle, Fred Buggs, Bowlegged Lou.  Nick A- yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, who's--let's go
Speaker 2: Left to right.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Let's go top row all the way left.
Speaker 2: Okay, so we're going to go Bowlegged Lou, Nick Ashford [Nickolas Ashford], me, the wonderful, who--Vaughn Harper--who just passed away, [HistoryMaker] Valerie Simpson, Jacci McGhee, who sang with Keith Sweat, "Make it Last Forever" and Fred Buggs, yes.  Deejay, yes.
Speaker 1: Child, didn't we look good then?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Look at us.
Speaker 2: Who is that?
Speaker 1: That is Freddie Jackson and [HistoryMaker] Meli'sa Morgan.  I consider him my musical brother.  I just heard from him.  Yeah.  We did the song, "Back Together Again," yeah.
Speaker 2: That's my BFF, Darlene Scott--love her--me, and my sister Rita Vinson, yes.
Speaker 1: And here's what we just spoke about.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: "Back Together Again."
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So say, tell us.
Speaker 2: "Back Together Again."  That was one of my songs that I did on the 'I Remember' CD with Freddie Jackson when I resigned with Orpheus productions [Orpheus Music].
Speaker 1: There's my girl, Mary J. Blige.  And that was at the listening party of her 'Breakthrough' CD ['The Breakthrough'] that I was on, which was wonderful (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And so this is--
Speaker 1: Wonderful.
Speaker 2: --when?
Speaker 1: Oh, my god.  When was 'Breakthrough' with Tyler Perry ['I Can Do Bad All by Myself']?
Speaker 2: Oh, 2006 [sic. 2005].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Two thousand six [2006]
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Okay.  We got it.  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 2: Those are friends of mine.  That's Avant.
Speaker 1: On this side?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That I did shows with.  And that's [HistoryMaker] Eric Benet that I've, I've done shows with him as well.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's one of my Jet covers.  Wonderful, with the wonderful [HistoryMaker] Isaac Hayes at his birthday party in New York [New York].  It's me and Isaac Hayes.  Yes, and we did the song together, "Float On" ["Float On with Us"] with Full Force.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Child, who's that (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And this is about when?
Speaker 1: You know what, I want to say that, that had to be about two thousand--
Speaker 2: Two thousand.
Speaker 1: --and something. Because I was doing braids then, and those are actually braids I was doing.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Interlock braids, and those are braids.  That was at a listening party for a song that I did with a friend, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Those are my fruit sticks, Meli'sa Morgan fruit sticks, and that was a big barbecue that I did for the R and B national society [National R and B Music Society], and they asked me to do my fruit sticks as desserts.
Speaker 1: When?
Speaker 2: That had to be about six, seven years ago, yeah, so--
Speaker 1: About--
Speaker 2: About 2010, around there. Ten [2010], '11 [2011], yeah.
Speaker 1: It's a note postcard, and if you turn it this way--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --you have my information on there as well, yeah, all my Facebook social media.
Speaker 2: Good.  We did it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that's my company, yeah.  And anything else I can send to you.
