Story_ID: 296531
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers, today our videographer is Neculai Burghelea, observing is Mr. Paul Brock [HistoryMaker Paul Brock].  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Lorenzo Morris, L-O-R-E-N-Z-O, M-O-R-R-I-S.
Speaker 1: All right, now you don't have a middle name or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No--
Speaker 1: --nickname or--
Speaker 2: No, no--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay--
Speaker 2: Oh, I have a nickname that is very familial and not worthy of repetition.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  What is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: October 27, 1946, Poughkeepsie, New York, P-O-U-G-H-K-E-E-P-S-I-E--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --yeah which was quite an achievement to spell for the average resident.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a professor and chair of the Department of Political Science at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: All right now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: June 27, June 26, 2005.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: I guess the 28.
Speaker 1: It's the 28?  Oh, June 28, 2005.
Speaker 2: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) We are in Howard University, in the Department of Political Science in Douglass Hall.
Story_ID: 296532
Speaker 1: Before we get into depth I, I am compelled to ask five lightweight questions that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --only require a short answer.  The first one is--they're kind of a warm up--first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Probably not, I like food generally, I try to control that liking but I like food generally.
Speaker 1: All right--
Speaker 2: I think maybe turkey if I had to pick something.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: And your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Not really I like most spring, I think would probably be the--
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: --or summer.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I don't have frequent vacations, but I go so regularly to France people think it's a favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 1: Okay and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 296533
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family and then your father's [Henry Morris, Jr.] side of the family.  But we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My Mother's full name, Annie Leola Morris, and Leola is spelled, L-E-O-L-A.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Crouch, C-O, I'm sorry, C-R-O-U-C-H.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't know her date of birth, but she was born in Columbus, Georgia.  And I estimate that she was born in 1922, or '21 [1921].
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side of the family, how far (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 1: --back.
Speaker 2: --I don't really know a great deal and it's somewhat disputed.  I know that they're overwhelmingly African American; there may have been a little--as with most African American, a little Indian [Native American] mixed.  But at some point before the end of the Civil War they were free apparently.  And managed to take a large part of the land that used to belong to the plantation owner, I guess during the Civil War.  They had to pay for the land again at the turn of the century because of disputes over deeds and a solid deed was developed.  They maintained some small parts of the land but to, to what most of us would call shenanigans by a group of wealthy non-black lawyers they lost about two hundred acres of it if you--no--ten years ago.  So that they were largely on a farm, the farm was not farmed for much of my mother's youth because they worked in factories and, but they maintained the farm.  And, and there were several families related to my mother on the large farmland that belonged and was divided among the descendants.  And my mother moved to Poughkeepsie [New York] when she was pregnant with me so I'm the first one in my whole extended family to be born north of the Mason Dixon [Line].
Speaker 1: Okay now, back to your ancestors for a moment all right, are there any stories from that side about any of the ancestors about what life--
Speaker 2: None that--
Speaker 1: --was like?
Speaker 2: No, none that is not in dispute--
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: --accept that when they acquired the land apparently the great-great uncles were being chased into--now this is in dispute by, not by my aunts and uncles (laughter), but by my mother, were chased into a barn and obviously some sort of racial conflict, and somehow the story goes that the white men ended up in the barn and the barn burned up (laughter) and the black men stayed on the land.  So we can see why it would be in dispute because if it were true there would be some ambiguities about it.  I--what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) If it were true there would be some repercussions probably--
Speaker 2: --the thing that impresses me is I met someone whose ancestors were from the area and they had a similar story but in their story the blacks ran away so that I assume they were the other family, so it gives it credibility.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That is the only story that I have, there is no other story that goes back an earlier time.  There's a story about an American Indian who's supposed to be part of the ancestry and allowed them to maintain ownership of the land when black ownership was disputed.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, now, did your talk about--did she have any stories about growing up?
Speaker 2: Very little except the typical childhood stories, I mean, she--mostly good stories.  You know, living on a farm, going to school, being--I guess they all did pretty well in school, though very few of them went to college; there were eight of them.  Only story that comes to mind in--without--depending on the amount of time we have is that--a little--occasional stories of racism.  The thing--what sticks out is because they were in a small area outside of the main city of Columbus.  They rarely encountered racism directly; the few whites there engaged in business largely with the people in the neighborhood and were not actively racist.  I just remember one story about someone coming through the area giving children, little black kids, candy and it was Ex-Lax (laughter).  That's the only thing that I ever remember my mother telling me, but she tended not to tell stories that were unpleasant because I think she wanted to give us a more positive outlook on life.
Speaker 1: Now did you ever here that there's a famous Columbus, Georgia resident named John Henrik Clarke who wrote a short (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, of course.
Speaker 1: --called, 'The Boy Who Painted Christ Black,' and they made a little TV movie out of it with Wesley Snipes.  Did she talk about--was she in Columbus--I mean, I imagine the black community there was pretty small--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --does she remember that incident?
Speaker 2: No she doesn't, no she doesn't--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I'm--she would not remember any, if it's number--a negative incident she would not have repeated it to us.  I'm trying--unless it were something really unavoidable to--that was just not very common.
Speaker 1: Well, I thought I'd ask 'cause that was about the--she'd've been there during that time but, you know, you know, it's a lot of things probably go on that you--
Speaker 2: Well, she lived in the suburbs of Columbus. Columbus was a city and she lived in what was called Faustin [ph.], which is outside and while it's not totally separate you could avoid those kinds of direct encounters.  They rarely encountered people outside of their immediate neighborhood.  And the land was large enough so that the children rarely went out except to go to school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did your mother go to school in Columbus, Georgia?
Speaker 2: Yes, 'til high--she finished high school there and then married and moved to New York.  Later on she went to the community college in--briefly in New York.
Story_ID: 296534
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Henry Grady Morris, Jr.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born in Vero Beach, Florida and I think he's about two years, well I'll tell you, he's about a year older than my mother [Annie Crouch Morris], maybe two years older, around 1920 or '21 [1921].
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Very little, my grandfather lived in New York, who moved there just before we did.  He and my father came largely because where I grew up is right outside of Roosevelt's [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] home and at the end--and during the course of World War II [WWII] Roosevelt gave this typewriter company a big contract--adding machine and typewriter company, and they called themselves with this big contract, I think they--they called themselves, IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] and they started making these adding machines and the computers so as a part of that and the pressure on Roosevelt they decided to hire some blacks and my father was one of the first blacks to be hired in that area.  So he came there from France--from when he returned from the war.  The war had been over before he went to France so he really didn't do a lot of fighting.  I take that back, the war wasn't over but it was almost over and my mother moved there with my grandparents who had mo- moved there shortly before my paternal grandparents.  The only thing interesting about my grandfather who was a very pleasant man, who had been born in South Carolina, is that we discovered very recently at a family reunion that adjacent to his name was the word adopted.  And so we have discovered that his original name was not Morris, but McNeal [ph.].  And we know nothing about that, but that would have been four generations back.  But given the way black people families are structured and grown my--I'm not sure what they--the term adopted means it, it, in a--because his presumed father died just before my great-grandmother married someone else named Morris, therefore he had the name.  Interesting my grandmother's side, this could be really boring, but interesting on my grandmother's side is--great-grandmother's side, is that she said she was born a slave and she also told us she chewed tobacco and we met her she was about one hundred and my father said, "Nonsense, she was not born a slave, nor did she chew tobacco."  Begin with nice stories, we saw her chewing tobacco, hence (laughter) the slave part became very credible.  But she apparently had been born a slave in North Carol- in South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now, when you saw her was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was close to a hundred.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and that was in the, in the '50s [1950s] or the '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: It was the early '50s [1950s] yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Early '50s [1950s], yeah, that could be very well true actually, yeah.  Did, did you have any idea why your father rejected the idea that she was born in slavery?
Speaker 2: Well he, his grandfather, his father, had told him that he didn't think so and my father, like my mother, tended to discourage us from hearing anything (laughter) that was not--was negative, tended to discourage discussion of negative things.  When you grew up in a small town in Poughkeepsie [New York] we didn't--we lived in a sort of integrated neighborhood.  There weren't very many blacks in the neighborhood so they called it integrated, it wasn't a great neighborhood but we weren't allowed to go to places where we could meet more black children unless they took us there and not because they didn't want us to meet more black children but because most of them weren't going to go to college or do anything.  Hence any opportunity to encounter anything which would prevent us from being upwardly mobile or discourage us av- was avoided at all (laughter), you know with a great deal of effort.
Story_ID: 296535
Speaker 1: What's the story behind how your parents [Annie Crouch Morris and Henry Morris, Jr.] met, do you know (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There's no big story, they--my father was in the [U.S.] Army in Faustin [ph.] in Fort Benning [Fort Benning, Georgia], I think it is, in Columbus [Georgia].  And, the exact way was they met I don't know, but I think it was probably a dance or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm sure that my maternal grandparents were not particularly pleased but, I think she had just graduated from high school or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so after the war [World War II, WWII] they moved to Poughkeepsie [New York] or was it during the--?
Speaker 2: During, well it was after the war because she was pregnant with me.  But, he was still in the [U.S.] military when they moved so she moved by herself and I'm not--my aunt tells me, her sister, that she had to come on the train and that when she got to Memphis [Tennessee] they made her stay overnight in the train station with two girls, my two older sisters, when--they said she was unable to find a hotel or anything so she had to spend the two--two days in transit with, pregnant with me and two little girls and, you now, the racism of Memphis, Tennessee.  And apparently my aunt went to meet her there, my aunt was in from Washington [D.C.] and they--she accompanied her to Poughkeepsie where she had to stay with my paternal grandparents 'til they found a house.
Story_ID: 296536
Speaker 1: Now how would you describe your parents' [Annie Crouch Morris and Henry Morris, Jr.] personalities and who do you take after?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't take after either of them.  Well, they're both easy going; they were very well liked in my small hometown, at least among the black community.  Everyone used to tell us I don't; I sort of take the negative sides of how beautiful they both looked.  But, my mother was sort of quiet and reserved, very, very, could be a little bit critical and caustical--caustic, I suppose I take that from her, but no one would have ever known that because she was never that way in public, you had to be in the house.  My father was extremely polite and never said a word to offend anybody, or at least no one in known memory, unless of course it was my mother (laughter).  You know they had a--they rare--they never argued but they were very well liked outside. So they're very polite, very reserved, and--but friendly.  We always had--the house was always full with guests, constantly (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so they moved to Poughkeepsie [New York] just before you were born, so, around, around 1946 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Six [1946].
Speaker 1: --or something?
Speaker 2: Uh-hm, late 1946--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --or I think--maybe summer.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now do you have an--oh, I'm sorry, how many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: We had--there were four of us.  Two girls and two boys, a year apart except there was two years between the girls and the boys, girls are older. The older sister died fifteen years ago of cancer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The others, my, my brother has an M.B.A. in the works and--insurance company, at least 'til a few months ago, he retired.
Speaker 1: And where are you in the order, you're, you're the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm the third.
Speaker 1: --third, all right.
Speaker 2: The third, my sister is in Poughkeepsie still.
Story_ID: 296537
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: That's interesting (laughter) I have many early childhood memories, probably--
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest?
Speaker 2: An earliest childhood memory, yes.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It, it, sounds a bit exaggerated because I couldn't have been older than two, but I remember (laughter), you know, at child's height, everything being at a certain level and seeing my mother [Annie Crouch Morris] and my grandmother (laughter) an, an, in a house that we never lived in after I was two.  So that's it and then my own--after that I remember going to elementary school [S.F.B. Morse School, Poughkeepsie, New York], well actually I remember moving into the house.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, mostly that.
Story_ID: 296538
Speaker 1: What was it like growing up in the--did you grow up in the same place in Poughkeepsie [New York] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: All the time--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --what was the neighborhood like and what were some of the sights and sounds--
Speaker 2: Small town--
Speaker 1: --and smells of growing up--
Speaker 2: --small town, no black people around, there was one black person and a couple in the neighborhood.  Race was not a salient issue but it was ever present.  My grandmother did not like the idea of us playing with the questionable white children in the neighborhood 'cause she was unaccustomed to them, but they were the only ones in the neighborhood therefore the only ones we played with and we didn't play a great deal.  There was a tremendous racism in the school system so from elementary school on we encountered constant little incidences as if you were in the South except that they wouldn't be with other children it would be with the administrators.  It was prosperous; Poughkeepsie was one of the wealthiest small towns in New York State, so there was no sense of deprivation.  And since my father [Henry Morris, Jr.] worked at IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] no he didn't have a great job he worked on the production line, there was a sort of status given to working in a good company.  And there was the IBM Country Club [Poughkeepsie, New York] and we tended to be one of their only few black families in there but the only place to go was the IBM Country Club and my father sang, which is sort of how he got the job in the first place.  He had been singing in the [U.S.] Army and he sang--I mean he had a radio program part-time and somebody from IBM heard him, he had a very good voice, which created par- a large part of our social life and occasionally swooning women at various church events (laughter) which was--created a large part of my parents' divorce (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: The--that, so that dominated our life and hence, because it was somewhat--often church related it--we always had to be well behaved.  But in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so--
Speaker 2: --a small town there weren't many options I was always stuck by the fact that most of the few blacks in there who went away to school or did anything else were not from the town.  Most of the people in the town had been thee inter-generationally since the end of slavery if not before who were black and never saw any reason to leave because usually if you went to college you wouldn't make any more money than just staying and working.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was there like one black community there or was--
Speaker 2: There was no black community there were two churches.  And, the highest goal of most people my age was to leave town though most of them didn't for reasons I just stated.  And there was an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church which we belonged to and there was a Baptist church and the Baptist church had a little bit probably less social status than the A.M.E. church there--there were not the dramatic instances of leadership that you see in the south which was always a cause of depression for, I think my mother [Annie Crouch Morris] about the town.  Tha- this is why I went to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] because she had read about Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois], and Du Bois went to Fisk and they always said that if--we should go place where blacks weren't on the bottom and that was a town where blacks were largely on the bottom and so, all four of us went (laughter) south when we went to college and it was a--heavily influenced by the racial biases of the small town.
Story_ID: 296539
Speaker 1: Can you describe yourself as a little kid (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (OFF CAMERA SINGING)
Speaker 1: What, what were you--
Speaker 2: Well, I'd like to say I was--
Speaker 1: --what was your personality like and what--
Speaker 2: I was probably quiet-
Speaker 1: Appropriate sound effects for the question (laughter).
Speaker 2: Do you want me to wait, okay?  I was probably quiet, timid, the most striking instance for me is that I probably got mostly, Cs or something like that--they didn't give up until junior high school and then one day for the first time we encountered a black subject--all while I was in school never had a black teacher of any kind in the county [Dutchess County, New York], regular, but there was a substitute and she came to our social science or math--no I'm sorry, physical science class and she gave some--and she taught math or something and I got a hundred and I never in my (laughter)--and then I kept getting good grades and when she left my grades never went down.  And so I became much more of an academic type rather than just quiet after junior high school and--oh, one instance that sticks out was a little racial incident when I was in elementary school [S.F.B. Morse School, Poughkeepsie, New York] the teacher came in one day and said there was this class, which was a class where we charter children, and she called all the names of people that were supposed to go there including me.  And which was virtually every black kid, there were like three of us, black boy and maybe one black girl, a few others, and we all went to the class for retarded children, retarded readers what they called it, but that was the only such class.  And I told my mother [Annie Crouch Morris] about it that evening and she got upset and went to the school and they gave me a test and then they took me out.  And all the black kids who didn't get a test because their parents couldn't come remained there forever and never, you know, did anything and I always think of that as a critical moment because had she not gone I would probably have been locked in this class.  I remember one of the kids that I was--friend of mine sort of, he lived up not too far away he got into police trouble and I always thought that it was sad because he was always so smart and he was stuck in this class.  But I got out because my mother protested and I think that partly because she had very little faith in the school system.  She didn't accept their judgment, now that distracted me from another (laughter) less int- equally relevant story I think, well, when I got to junior high school after getting better grades I got involved in debating and, and things like that and that helped get some attention.  And some interest in other things social played a little tennis, very little.  I must have been nineteen out of twenty on the tennis team, but I often tell people I was at least able to beat out the guy with the wheelchair, so you know, if he hadn't gotten it caught in the net. Let's see, my brother played football, I didn't--I guess one brief moment of, of athleticism in, in junior high school but most of the time I was what was called a sickly child.  I had unexplained nose bleeds and what may have been polio but it was not diagnosed at the time.
Speaker 1: So you had, you had difficulty walking or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --had difficulty walking or--
Speaker 2: At very small age, before--I remember or recall--between two and around the age of one and two and, and, after that I fainted quite a bit, which is something I really don't tell a lot of people about now so hence I was limited, playing was limited because if I ran outside to play on a day like today I would probably pass out--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --so that's helped increase academic interest, but they, as anticipated the symptoms began to decline and so by the time I was pretty old they were--by the time I reached maturity they were largely gone though I did have occasional fainting spells (laughter) after college [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].
Story_ID: 296540
Speaker 1: Did you keep up with the news?  Now you're a political science professor now I just wonder if you had a proclivity for keeping up with the news as a young person.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I was a news reporter for a little hot moment right after undergraduate school [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] I worked on, the New York Daily News.
Speaker 1: Now wait a minute now, I'm not talkin' about then, I'm talkin' about way back, I'm talkin' about when you were a kid in grade school or high school [Poughkeepsie High School, Poughkeepsie, New York].
Speaker 2: Well, I got, The Poughkeepsie Journal.
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.
Speaker 2: In The Poughkeepsie Journal, remember when Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was elected president, it was in the bottom right hand corner of the paper and the governorship went republican, [Nelson] Rockefeller, even though he was Robert [F. Kennedy], was in the press that's how little new you got in The Poughkeepsie Journal they didn't like anybody as liberal as Kennedy.  My biggest interest was in high school. I did a study of, of poll, the first poll that anybody had done and actually predicted that [Barry] Goldwater would win and the reason I predicted it was because I knew our town was so conservative--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --Goldwater took my hometown by overwhelming margins, something like ninety percent (laughter) so I tried to keep up with the news but there was so little news to be had in my hometown that it was not great but--yeah, I was interested.  One, one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay--
Speaker 2: --time we were in high school we managed to get a list of all of the magazines that were considered suspect by FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] or somebody, I don't know, and we ordered them all (laughter) 'course then we didn't have any money they mostly didn't come but-so we tried to get news.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's--so did you listen to a lot of radio and television or--?
Speaker 2: A little, but you could only get the Poughkeepsie [New York] stations.  I can remember when we could finally get New York's [New York, New York]--television get the news when we watched the news my fine parents [Annie Crouch Morris and Henry Morris, Jr.] were insistent on watching the new--insistent on watching the news especially when King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was in the news and I can remember watching civil rights events with them and they would enthusiastically encourage us to do that.  That was basically it, when, when you get the New York City news you were much better off (laughter) thought it wasn't always that liberating.
Speaker 1: Was there--is there any reason in reflection that Poughkeepsie was so conservative, you know, for--?
Speaker 2: Well I think that, that, it was a town of upwardly mobile people, IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] expanded, and where people are upwardly mobile and ethnic, a lot of Italians, a lot of Jews that weren't necessary from wealthy Jewish families inhabited the town, these were all upwardly mobile people.  Everybody was making a lot more money than they had education relative to other things.  It wa- it was rated number one for housing segregation in New York State at one point.  I remember this because they had to have a black person go in the high school and talk about the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and some program and I saw my father's liberalism because he volunteered me, or at least permitted me to go.  I had been a debate winner so it was considered appropriate and I can remember the NAACP was considered an outrageous left-leaning organization and this was in the '60s [1960s], mid-'60s, [1960s] (laughter).  So, a reason I can't give you but there was a pattern and I think upward mobility, I think the fact that there was very little traditional--there were very few traditional liberal standards that you would associate with New York, in the town.  These were people who had come there for the money.
Story_ID: 296541
Speaker 1: What was the name of your grade school?
Speaker 2: Morse (laughter), M-O-R-S-E, [S.F.B. Morse School, Poughkeepsie, New York] this is incredible detail, the name of my high school was, Poughkeepsie High [School, Poughkeepsie, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, now, high school did you have a favorite subject in high school or did you have a--
Speaker 2: Social science or I don't know, somewhere between social science and math.  No, I liked physics but we only had one physics course so that was like the end of it.
Speaker 1: In the whole sch- I mean the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean you only had one there weren't like sequential physics courses, that was it, so I liked physics that was my favorite class.  I hated chemistry, though I like chemistry but when that was the only instances when we had to take the teacher to the principal for his racism.  My, myself personally, my mother [Annie Crouch Morris] had to do it with my broth- brother for other courses.  I like social science, history in particular because the teacher would engage us in active discussions.  And I think there was a moment in that class that made me want to become a political scientist or at least not become a historian because the teacher told me that it was, it was a sad--I can remember this today--it was the saddest incidence in history that Johnson [President Andrew Johnson] had been im- impeached by--because of his race--Andrew Johnson (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --was impeached in the Civil War, and I remember reading enough to think that it wasn't sad and that it was--and that he should have been convicted and so she ask--and I made such a stink, which being very quiet that was unusual, and so she asked the class of about thirty kids how they felt and nobody would agree with me and I can really feel--remember feeling really hurt and I wanted to prove to them someday that they were wrong--
Speaker 1: Now you really--you took a real tough minority position there because--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well it wasn't that tough; the teacher did encourage discussion--
Speaker 1: But you know, that was a era where [President] John [Fitzgerald] Kennedy wrote, 'Profiles in Courage,' they had a big piece on Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] and it appeared on this, I don't know if it's you are--one of those CBS shows, they dramatized the thing and, and they really made it seem like, you know, he was being persecuted and so forth and of course, you and I know it's not true, but--
Speaker 2: Well, no, but it was an honors class because by this time I'm sure the little testing--I ended up in the honors section and I, I, I wouldn't say of course, but I was the only black in almost all of my classes.  What made them uncomfortable but it also forced me to pay attention to things, and, it did not require a great deal of, of, of creativity on my part it just required the pres--response to the pressures of debate at the moment.
Story_ID: 296542
Speaker 1: Okay, you were, during the break you were talking about some of the interesting people in Poughkeepsie [New York] and at the high school [Poughkeepsie High School, Poughkeepsie, New York] and in the surrounding neighborhood and--.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know how interesting my involvement was I was just saying--you inquired--that the Roosevelt estate [Springwood, Hyde Park, New York] was in walking distance from my house and one of the few African American families--and the only ones to stay on that estate rented a house from there and I took the daughter of that family to the senior prom.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, in the, in the course of that there had been some opportunities to meet other people at the private school who were of interest and I--including someone related to Duke Ellington I believe and I wanted to take that person but I had to stick to my original commitment.  Now, about the high school I was talking about some of the racial encounters in the high school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --if that's what you want?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah let's--now, you, you were saying that your trigonometry grade was rigged (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I, I remember seeing the grade book of the teacher and I was getting the--what would be considered Bs now, (unclear) and I saw the grade book I had the highest grades in the class and I was astonished by that and the teacher snatched the grade book, he had left it open by accidents--accident and said mind my business.  And of course, there was nothing I could do about it.  I was sensitive because I had a chemistry teacher that we had to take to the principal, then to the superintendent of the schools because of his grading process.
Speaker 1: What did he do (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I was in the honors chemistry class, again I was the only black person in that, and every night I would do thirteen page or so, experiments, this was quite an arduous task--was handwriting but there--in, in the class for a high school student.  And I would get Bs or whatever, but there would never been anything marked wrong.  And it just happened that the only black teacher in the county was a chemist and a friend of the family's and she was a part--substitute teacher and she looked at them and said looked at it and said that there was a problem and the grade and the teacher had been unfair.  And so after considerable effort we got this to the superintendent of schools.  I don't remember that my grades changed dramatically, though he was put a certain sort of watchful eye we discovered that he was just a hateful person didn't like anybody and blacks he didn't like in particular.  So he didn't get much support because he wasn't very popular, he stopped grading my papers as harshly though.  The overall average didn't go up that much but it was a lesson about political action when you encounter injustice for me.  But I was amazed at the number of things you had to do to get any results.
Story_ID: 296543
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Annie Crouch Morris] like lead the political fight for your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it--few--jus- it wasn't a big public deal; she was the one that would insist on going often we had more encounters with my brother who was only nine months younger.  People would call him names; I don't mean students, professors, our teachers at the time.  Like I remember, I don't know where the name comes from but one teacher would call him Willie Lump Lump all the time, for no particular reason just, you know.  But he wasn't in the honors class, since I was in the honors class they had to be--they were a little bit more reserved in their treatment.  Probably the funniest incident that happened to me that is somewhat racial is that the senior oration, every year for a hundred or so years in the existence of the high school [Poughkeepsie High School, Poughkeepsie, New York] the senior with the most debating and public speaking awards gave the senior oration.  And my senior year was--I was far away, I mean there was nobody even close in terms of awards.  I had won the New York State oratory award, so, they cancelled it.  And I can remember that I was pretty upset and the debate teacher couldn't really explain it and I told my father [Henry Morris, Jr.] and there wasn't--and we never really made a big deal of it 'cause there might have been one good reason which was the name of it.  It was called the Senior Spade Oration (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's what the official name of it was?
Speaker 2: Yeah and so it would've (laughter)--at least one could have had--sympathized with that.  But there had been other instances in there, the whole debating process.  I can remember, you know, some of the contests.  One that I, I probably came in la- in the finalist out of four I came in fourth, this was in oratory contest, but I got a standing ovation when barely anybody else got applause (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --but when the American Legion judges judged it I came out on the bottom.  Good thing was that I was constantly getting support from my white debating teacher and from family and things like that so, being in a sort of liberal community did help with those encounters because you always had people who were there to be encouraging.  And of course, any of those activities meant that I was getting every year and every month close to leaving Poughkeepsie [New York] where I would encounter black people in different parts of the world.
Story_ID: 296544
Speaker 1: Okay, now you say your mother [Annie Crouch Morris] encouraged you to choose Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And how did you feel about that at that time?
Speaker 2: Fine, I, I wanted to go to a different place.  I'd been admitted with--first with hesitancy I thought because I had high SAT scores but with--to Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] with money.  But the money hadn't been cleared first so I was giving Fisk con- serious consideration anyway.  And then they offered me more money to come to Cornell and it got to be a profit making deal for me to go to Cornell as opposed to go to Fisk.  This is sort of pre-se- pre-affirmative action.  But I can remember getting to Fisk and I know the first call that I made I told my mother that there were twenty blacks here my age, the most I'd ever seen except for maybe a visit to the city.  So it was, it was a good deal about seeing part of the world and learning about not only African American history but learning about the world from a different perspective.  I can remember encountering the airport [Berry Field; Nashville International Airport, Nashville, Tennessee] and there was, you know, the hillbilly accents of Tennessee are a bit different from the South that we had visited with my parents and I couldn't get a cab, not because of racism but because I could not understand the cab driver.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I looked at him; he spoke, "Yun-yun-yun."  Nothing, finally this black woman came up from Fisk, it was very received, helped translate for me (laughter) and got me into the cab.  And from that moment to the time I left Nashville [Tennessee] with a three and a half-year interval I never had any extended conversations with the local residents, not out necessarily out of prejudice but because I was probably intimidated by that little encounter.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think that that we had some civil rights marches which helped to put things in clarity, little, you know--
Speaker 1: You graduated from high school [Poughkeepsie High School, Poughkeepsie, New York] in--?
Speaker 2: Sixty-four [1964].
Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964] and started Fisk in '64 [1964]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, right.
Story_ID: 296545
Speaker 1: My only southern encounter before that was the March on Washington, '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: Okay so you went to the march?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well that's a big deal.
Speaker 1: Oh, it's a big deal for me (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think, that's an exciting story--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah it was an escape, my parents [Henry Morris, Jr. and Annie Crouch Morris] did one thing they encouraged us to travel whenever we could, but never without them so it was a big deal for me to go.  But fortunately the young single minister was trying to date my aunt, who was a student at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and was visiting us during the summer and babysitting us during the summer so that in order to increase his social relations he promised to make sure that I was well supervised.  And I can remember there was no seat left on the bus and you know those busses went (gestures), and so they put a stool on so I sat on the stool (laughter) from Poughkeepsie [New York] to Washington [D.C.] but my aunt lived in Washington so I'd been here many times before and I was struck by one thing I always tell my students because it's sort of like a kind of social moment of political significance not for the world but as a symbol is that when you got to Baltimore [Maryland] and I knew how far Baltimore was from D.C. the busses almost came to a stop.  And as far as the eye could see, you could see them and there were these people singing, out and blacks off on the side of the road and I can remember them singing my grandmother's songs, 'Will the Circle Be Unbroken' and I thought, this was a whole new world.  All my life they told me there were only a few of us blacks 'cause I hadn't seen that many and all of a sudden there were all of these people.  All who thought the same thing, even knew the songs and it was the most moving moment for me, more than the--Mart- King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] speech which I liked, but it was that long slow movement from Baltimore to Washington where every fa- black people waved and symbolized experiences and things that I thought I knew.  And so you know it was an indelible point in my mind.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can see that, yeah, so were you very--when you were at the march were you very, were you close or were you far back in the crowd or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was close enough; I always look for old pictures to see if you can see this kid, believe it or not I wasn't tall, swinging feet over the reservoir near the front.  And you know, I got to see King as he came by and I remember [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young 'cause I thought he was young and he looked young.  I remember Mahalia Jackson song ['How I Got Over'] which I thought was wonderful.  As a snotty little debate student I analyzed King's speech so I really didn't pay attention to it as a moving--it just looked at the structure (laughter).
Speaker 2: What was the most, other than the numbers of people there, what was the most important thing about that day that you remember?
Speaker 1: I think it was the nervousness, not by me, everybody thinking--it's hard for--to remember that at the time people thought there would be violence.  And I had all these little umble [ph.] notes, numbers to call and places to go if anything happened and of course nothing happened.  But I can remember this sense of sort of success that it went off well that people came, that--oh and when I got back, my brothers and sisters--I had gone to something important.  Now in Poughkeepsie [New York] anything outside of three blocks was already a big deal.  I had gone to something important and come back.  It was a, I mean, I've been to Madagascar, and I've been to--but never nothing equaled that trip to Washington and will ever in terms of distance, distance from an enclosed little environment.
Story_ID: 296546
Speaker 1: Okay, now, 1964 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --when you start Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] a lot of the students--well I guess as the students were hitting the campus the [1964] Democratic National Convention was going on in Atlantic City, New Jersey--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that was the, that was the convention where the SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], volunteers from Mississippi brought up the freedom--Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party and Fannie Lou Hamer had a chance to be heard on CBS and did, did you--were you following that in those days (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, a little bit but I think that I--my memory is clouded by the very dramatic events of '68 [1968] at Fisk and '67 [1967] when the civil rights march started in earnest.  I can remember in '64 [1964] we had our own little march, it was actually '65 [1965] and so we were--that--my memory is filled by the smaller events that occurred around there.  I think it was in '67 [1967] that King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--that Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] came down and, and started to using the phrase black power and got involved in some altercations or at least altercations followed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah '65 [1965], '66 [1966]--
Speaker 2: --it may have been '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965], but before that again another little instance that, that grows out of my naivete if you don't mind my repeating it is in '64 [1964], '65 [1965] we had a march and Nashville [Tennessee] was a good place to hate the local authorities, not that there were many in South and so--but it was my first encounter with the southern police which I didn't expect.  And I remember, again not being tall, that they came up--we had a line and they came up a, their German shepherds and the dogs they were holding in front of us and I can remember the dogs were--they were holding them, for some reason, because I made a face, the dogs came and they came up to me and they said if I didn't do something they'd let the dogs (laughter) go and the dog was like biting, you know, breathing right on my face and I said, "I dare you to let the dog go."  And I assure you--I'm telling you this because there was no moment of courage whatsoever on my part, it's simply that I was from Poughkeepsie [New York], they--even though we had racism, the police would never let the dog go.  I had no idea that they would ever seriously consider doing it (laughter) 'cause I would tell, you know--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I dare you--and it's so--I often think of that and it, it's funny because I think some part of the success of the youth in the Civil Rights Movement is that they were little middle class kids.  But I had no idea that I could've--they could've let the dog go.  Four years later I'm the only (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You didn't know that at that--so you didn't see that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't think they would--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I really didn't care that they--
Speaker 1: They showed the Birmingham [Alabama]--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --scenes and--
Speaker 2: --but they weren't gonna--
Speaker 1: --sixty-three [1963] with the dogs--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, but they weren't--
Speaker 1: --ripping people's--up--
Speaker 2: --I understood the possibility but they weren't gonna let 'em bite me, after all I was from Poughkeepsie and they never, you know--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --there was a certain disconnect, I mean I understood intellectually but personally I didn't think it was going to happen.  If I had really thought it was going to happen (laughter) it would be courage, but (laughter) I didn't really think it was gonna happen.  I can remember--and I say that in retrospect because four years later the only other--there were three people and--whom could have gotten degrees in political science and would have been the first but I'm the only one to make it because one of them was shot in the back of the neck by the police and unfortunately I repressed his name but he'd gotten some national attention.  They said that he was threatening to shoot them with a gun, of course, the bullet entered the back of his neck, so, obviously their statements were questionable.  And this was--
Speaker 1: Do you remember who it was?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I just can't remember his name right now, he had, he's the person you would find in--on civil rights files, he wasn't super important, he was--
Speaker 1: Oh, Ralph--
Speaker 2: --he was involved in--
Speaker 1: --Featherstone?  Was it Featherstone [Ralph Featherstone]?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  Please don't try (laughter) to think of the name--
Speaker 1: David Lawrence?  I'm trying to think--
Speaker 2: No, it's not quite a big national name--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but it might ring a bell with some people.
Speaker 1: There was a story that Bob Moses [Robert Parris Moses] tells about somebody being shot in the neck while he was driving a car and it just went off the road--
Speaker 2: I think this person was walking--
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: And the other two dropped out or whatever due to the cr- the disruption of the moment, I can remember that last year that Ki- when King was shot, this was after the first set of disruptions, the police lined up in front of the dormitory and they shot another political science major in the leg but he was a junior so he wouldn't've graduated an, and I don't know how long it takes--story takes, but I was standing there and re- we were passing along copies of the [U.S.] Constitution to read the police--to the police who were assembled across the street in the park in front of [W.E.B.] Du Bois Hall.  And at some point the police got tired of this lecture and being a kind of intense person when I did things I was reading intensely when it came to me and didn't notice that everybody else had retreated inside and then the police charged and so I ran inside too and I can remember one of my more memorable moments was getting to the second floor of Du Bois--Bois Hall and trying to get around the corner as the police were coming in the other end and my room was in the middle but I must not have taken any more than an eighth of a second to get there because I somehow managed to get to the room before the police did.  And they left immediately, however, the next day The New York Times--when the police charged they broke the window next to the door and the next day The New York Times showed that window and said, "Police--Students Throw Each Other Through Window," (laughter) and I saw them break the door.
Story_ID: 296547
Speaker 1: So what were, what were the issues in, in '67 [1967] and '68 [1968] when you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) God only knows (laughter), racism and inequality and injustice right--then they claimed that--
Speaker 1: So you weren't protesting campus conditions--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: --but, but the--
Speaker 2: We were much, much more civil--the protest marches were about civil rights and--
Speaker 1: --where in Nashville [Tennessee], yeah--
Speaker 2: --voting rights, yeah--
Speaker 1: --in Nashville and stuff.
Speaker 2: --there was an attempt to--I remember one point the Tennessee Legislature passed a resolution to deport Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture], not realizing (laughter) that he was a citizen.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: They didn't--they weren't into higher education--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --in the legislature.  Civil rights issues, voting rights issues were primarily the target; we did occasionally protest what would be considered today antiquated social policy on the institution dormitory hours, there was some degree of snobbery.  I can remember a woman was in--got in trouble for being slapped and (unclear) she was expelled, or at least they tried to.  She was--because she shouldn't have known the kind of person who was not a student, but somebody who lived in the town, who would have slapped her (laughter), was the explanation.  So, policy was quite, you know, conservative in those days in many historically black institutions and at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] in particular.  And we protested that, occasionally there were anti-fraternity protests that we were, you know,--to be more serious about politics in the world.  John Oliver Killens had been there and a large part of the more politically conscious group came out of that.  I can remember my junior year and I think part of my senior year a former student returned who hadn't finished, [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni, and she would invite us to a number of things but it was a very politically conscious moment and I don't mean just in civil rights sense.  I can remember we invited people to talk about the war [Vietnam War] and just--the war in Vietnam and, and made one government agent cry (laughter) by the time we got through with him.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: You know, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was Gerald McWhorter [Abdul Alkalimat] there at that time?
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) from Chicago [Illinois], okay.
Speaker 2: --when I say no he was there briefly when I was an undergraduate, left, and then returned for whatever--(background noise) activities he engaged in.  He returned later.
Story_ID: 296548
Speaker 1: --Now, do you remember what you were doing when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed and you found out about that--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, again nothing dramatic, I wasn't saving the world.  I had accumulated my resources to go get ice cream (laughter) and I can remember hearing girls scream from the girls' dormitory [at Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].  In those days, the girls' dorms were on one side of campus and the boys' dorms were on another and I figured something had happened and I remember Muhammad Ali had just been in town I thought maybe he was back.  And of course, I went back to the dorm and shortly after that the police attacked (laughter).  And there's no other way to describe it, the police attacked, they came in droves on the campus, with guns and this was the shooting that I had just described.  But, I can remember going back and--to the dorm and everybody was, of course, very excited and intense.  And it might have been the next day that they came 'cause I remember that somebody had put the rumor out that we were gonna blow up the Grand Ole Opry [Nashville, Tennessee].  I was managing editor or something like that, of the school paper [Fisk Forum] (laughter) I think I tried to put a note out that we certainly would have succeeded (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --had we done it, but that's my recollection, of course, I remember the moment.  And since that was my senior year in the class of '68 [1968], I've since paid attention and often wanted to write more about '68 [1968] around the world because as you know politics of the period define a large part of the world.  They even have a--in France they call it, the '68 People, the, the, Soixante-Huit Gens, because it defined their--even in Quebec [Canada], where I've done some research, it was a, it's a year that sticks in my mind for its political significance even though my role in it was insignificant.
Story_ID: 296549
Speaker 1: Okay, now, how did--did you go--when you went to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] were you--was political science your first choice?
Speaker 2: No, I--
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: --went as a physics major--
Speaker 1: Yeah 'cause sounds as if you were a science--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, but the physics department was (unclear), what's called a high school degree in--I mean a science degree in New York high school system.  But the physics department had three people, one had just left, the other one was going on sabbatical so virtually it shrunk and I remember talking to the chair who didn't encourage me at that time considering the state of the department.  And I think I changed to philosophy, my father [Henry Morris, Jr.] did not find that of particularly good way to spend (laughter) my time and I wasn't that fascinated with it so I majored in economics for most of the time.  And then my senior year I changed to political science because the department just opened.  Until that period a professor who had--to whom Franklin [HistoryMaker John Hope Franklin], had dedicated--John--'From Slavery to Freedom[: A History of African Americans]' had insisted that blacks did not need to study political science, so I was the first political science graduate of Fisk.  And the others fell out during the riots for the reasons I just described.  And I enjoyed that but I remember a large part of it was still fairly philosophical because we had honors sessions in a little honors group.  I got a sort of honor--merit scholarship to Fisk which paid for a significant part of it and we had these honors classes and--
Speaker 1: Well who are the professors that you remember at Fisk?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember Courier [ph.] (laughter), the one professor with whom I had a great deal of problems.  Lunine [Dr. Myron J. Lunine] was the honors professor and a political scientist, which sort of interested me. Paul Pullier [ph.] was the first political science department chair and he came my senior--junior year so we had courses there and Jake Miller got to be well known.  Paul Pullier became pro-chancellor at U Mass [University of Massachusetts, Massachusetts], subsequently, Jake Miller was well known as a specialist in blacks and international affairs.  I remember one professor I--still teaching at--now at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], Jane, Jane, Jane Meadows, Jeanne Meadows.
Speaker 1: Jeanne spelled with a J or a G?
Speaker 2: J.
Speaker 1: J?
Speaker 2: J-E-A-N-N-E, she's at Spelman I've seen her recently (unclear) international affairs.  Tolli--
Speaker 1: Who else (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tandy Tolliver [ph.] died.  People whose names you may not recall, Steven Wright [Dr. Stephen J. Wright] was the well-known president who, whom we all loved (laughter) but he left before I graduated.
Speaker 1: Okay, now it's--
Speaker 2: It's ironic that at that time, at least for my freshman and sophomore year the president was adored by the students (laughter) because he was very sort of intellectual and, and straight forward with that kind of thing.  I think that it was the period in which there was a certain degree of intellectual activism or leadership on the part of historically black college [HBCU] administrators that maybe less visible now in some instances.
Speaker 1: I think you're right--
Speaker 2: And that was part of it.
Speaker 1: So, when--now did you do anything else in college--you were involved in political act- activism and--
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) mostly not, I was not a social person at all I--only thing--my junior and senior year I even got a part-time job in the honors library.  So I guess I could classify as a nerd except that I was politically conscious.  I'm--you know--I did enough little, social activities to not be a total nerd but nothing that I remember well. I'm sure I did enough of those things under the influence of adverse consumption so that I wouldn't remember them well.  I never took drugs (laughter).  I'm not saying that to brag because I'm saying that to be embarrassing.  I remember going to a parties and people having them and being offended and threatening to expose them, I guess that would have made me a nerd.  But I--you know--so, when I got to graduate school [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] I learned to be more circumspect about my social criticism.
Story_ID: 296550
Speaker 1: Okay. All right, well, how did you choose graduate school?
Speaker 2: It was easy, I wanted to go to school in the Northeast and I considered applying political science at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] because it was close and because it was well known.  My advisor said, "No," it was a conservative place and then--he had gotten to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  So, I applied to the University of Chicago and to law school [University of Chicago Law School, Chicago, Illinois].  And I, I had through some special program that sort of preliminary advanced admission to Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut] so I thought I was pretty well set, or at least a guarantee of admissions.  But then I decided when this guy got shot among other things that law would not help me change the world because a few too late (laughter) and so I decided I wanted to do political science and at the end the only place I'd applied and completed the application was Chicago and I had a fellowship to go anywhere and they gave me a fellowship as well so I went to Chicago.  And I remember that I decided not to go until the very last minute because I was sure I was gonna be drafted.  And I went to the physical and passed with flying colors which wa- I didn't think it would happen given my childhood illnesses.  But I can remember everybody told me that you have to be really stupid to pass the physical 'cause all the little bourgeois kids from my high school [Poughkeepsie High School, Poughkeepsie, New York] ended up on the same bus we went several cities away and we had to regroup and all of them had excuses, physic- all the football players had medical problems and all the rich kids had all these excu- I was the only one didn't have an excuse.  And so during my job as a reporter--a interviewee told me that if I went to Chicago I would be able to find someone who could affirm my medical disability and I would not be drafted (laughter).  I had a problem with my ankle (laughter), but for some reason it hadn't been detected in the, the, in the, they didn't care in the original entry.  So I decided like on a Sunday to go to Chicago and then school started on a Monday and I went and while there I did the best paper I did in graduate school a study of the draft board and showed how the middle class blacks were the most vulnerable to the draft given the way the thing worked.  And a somewhat interesting story is how that then helped me get out because I'd already passed the physical and I had to have it reversed so, I looked at the history of the way the draft boards function and discovered that if you--if they got letters on, I don't know, like a Thursday before a holiday or something like that, some period of time the secretary would have to answer them because they had a limited time in which they'd answer.  The secretary didn't know the laws so I arranged for my letter to arrive just at the right time--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --and sure enough the secretary sent an answer with all illegal statements.  I wrote them back pointing out the illegal statements and said they had ought to correct them before they sent them again.  So that took nine months during which time I found the--I had the physical exam too and got to see all the, the sergeant--surgeon general of the [U.S.] Army and the--in Chicago [Illinois], and the attorney general of the Army in Chicago, whatever the--I forgot what you call it, the office for the Army and got the classification reversed.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: And had the number, but it was kind of interesting that, that the way to get out of it was to show how irresponsible they were in the legal procedures.
Speaker 1: That's, yeah, you had to do, you had to do your homework to (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Well, I got--the teacher wanted to publish the paper, I can remember that (laughter) so, but, it was a little bit of an interesting--.  I enjoyed graduate school partly because it was a mixture of political consciousness and just plain research and I, I had to face the realization I'd have to do something like teach which I hadn't--I never really occurred to me I never had any career plans (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't not wanna be a teacher you just hadn't--
Speaker 2: No, I did--I--
Speaker 1: --thought (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I had development in intellectual plans.  No career plans (laughter).  All I know is I didn't wanna--I wanted to do things that dealt with public policy but not to do--to be an elected official or to do anything like that.  And, so, when I went to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] I was just interested primarily in doing research.  Until the Bakke case [Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, 1978] came along and I thought that I could contribute something.
Speaker 1: And this is like 1970 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Eight [1978].
Speaker 1: Eight [1978], how did we get that far, wait a minute, I thought (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's when the Bakke decision was decided.
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Story_ID: 296551
Speaker 1: We'll talk about some of the personalities and some of the interesting things going on at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], which is one of the most serious schools, you know, in the country and we were just discussing some of the other black students that were there.  You said that Dr. Jacob Caruthers [HistoryMaker Jacob H. Carruthers, Jr.] was not a student but someone--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he had finished a large part of his work but he was around and became a part the university involvement.  There was something in Chicago [Illinois] they called the Communiversity and people like Bob Rhodes [Robert N. Rhodes], who was a left-winged Marxist guy, used to be a major actor in that and it would bring together people from the--within the university and outside with others in the community for academic and black conscious activities and it was often fascinating exposure.  But in the university we had people like [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin in history, Chuck Long [Charles H. Long] in theology who had some fantastic ways of looking at the world beyond religion and theology and I think he helped me decide on my approach to my graduate thesis along with some uneducated people in Tennessee that I had met years earlier.  There were some people in psychology of note and you'd mentioned some students that were there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Dr. Bobby [E.] Wright--
Speaker 2: Dr. Bobby Wright--
Speaker 1: Right--
Speaker 2: --and others I don't--
Speaker 1: Anderson Thompson.
Speaker 2: Anderson Thompson, thank you.  [HistoryMaker] Charles Henry is now at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] that came--four blacks came each year after my for three years, Linda Williams is at, at Maryland [University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland] and both of them have done good work.  Dianne Pinderhughes at Illinois [University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] and she's done quite a bit of work, she's normally seen with the State of Urban--State of Black America.  Charles is just finishing one of is--he finished a good book, one of the two major books on Ralph Bunche but he's doing something out in reparations an unusual subject for him.  He also had headed the chair of Amnesty International for the U.S., who else was there in that period that you might know?  I mentioned Marguerite Barnett [Dr. Marguerite Ross Barnett] who was one of the first to do a good study of the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation, but also wrote on India.  So it was a, it was a good group for the time period.
Speaker 1: Dr. Conrad Wor [HistoryMaker Conrad Walter Worrill]--well, Conrad Worrill was--
Speaker 2: No, no, I--
Speaker 1: No, was he around then?
Speaker 2: I, I don't remember him--
Speaker 1: --he wasn't, okay, you can't remember I guess--
Speaker 2: --that doesn't mean (laughter) he didn't come through.  I--
Speaker 1: --or--
Speaker 2: I mentioned [HistoryMaker] Eddie Williams who had worked for the president as an advisor to the president and I think William Julius Wilson came at the end of that period.  But there were others who help to stick out, the Levis--Edward Levi [Edward Hirsch Levi] was president of the university and had a big impact over urban development, largely negative but helped to set the model for displacement that became national around university town so it also helped increase consciousness of protecting those neighborhoods on the part of the students and you had people like Saul Alinsky around the area dealing with university people.  We had the overthrow while I was there of the Chicago Machine, strike overthrow, the beginning of the decline of the Chicago Machine heavily influenced by Chicago [Illinois] actors and activist at least.  So it was a good time to--
Speaker 1: Right that's right.
Speaker 2: --to be there.
Speaker 1: So you were there until, what, 19--
Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972]--'71 [1971].  At present, I didn't get my degree until '74 [1974] but I was on campus to '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: From '71 [1971] to '74 [1974] you say?
Speaker 2: No from '68 [1968] to '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: From '68 [1968] to '71 [1971], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 296552
Speaker 1: And then I came to Washington [D.C.] at the Brookings Institution and now I'm about to take--and that experience is something that might get me in historical trouble, but I don't care because I believe it to be true, and it has to do with Watergate.  And I, I have complained about this since I haven't gotten anybody to act on it, but when I was at Brookings, you know, the plumbers or whoever it was, was supposed to have burglarized Watergate [Complex; Watergate Hotel, Washington, D.C.] and they say they didn't, well I believe they did.  My little boring story, but I'll--worth repeating since I was gonna--can't keep it from--I suffer saying it, is one day while I was at Brookings my, well, one day while I was at Brookings, let me start here, A friend of mine, who was a friend of McNamara's [Robert S. McNamara] daughter, the (unclear) said we should go to dinner and she came by and some others.  And we went to the Watergate for dinner but before we ate we went up to the Democratic offices, he's some other youth activist, I can't remember who was there with--I know that whoever we were supposed to see wasn't there.  We hung around for a while and we went down to dinner.  Now this was about the time the Watergate burglary occurred but I don't--I doubt it was the same day.  And I can remember we complained that, that, we were being listened to by the waiter, and which I've never done before, we actually complained to the management that they were eavesdropping, so, we ate our dinner we left.  Two--the next day or two, three or three days later my office was burglarized and things were just disheveled.  I went to the management of Brookings, the government section and said that "My office has been burglarized," and they said, "Well we can't find--what's missing?"  I said, "Nothing."  And I--and they said, "Well, what could have been--?"  I said, "There was nothing in there."  And they said, "Well, we'll look into it," and, "but we can't find any reason why your office would have been burglarized."  And so I can remember the next day or that evening I asked the guard, who was an immigrant from the islands, and he said he didn't--he would tell me later.  I never saw him again, I don't know whether he left, but he said he thought something and, and so I didn't think much of it 'cause I didn't know anything about Watergate at the time but I can remember being struck by how strange this was.  And then later on, a few months later, more than a few months later, well when we were watching the hearings I guess it was the next year I remembered that the days coincided well and so I have always believed that they, that they bur- that they burglarized Brookings, even though they say they didn't.  Now the question is why my office?  No reason except logistics, I mean physical, I--there was a person at Brookings as there were many who were subjects of, of military analysis and criticism by the [President Richard Milhous] Nixon administration and his graduate assistant, and I'm sorry again, I'm repressing the name, his office--they--you know, the graduate, the doctoral students had offices, well his office was directly below mine, except that his office was in the economic policy section and this guy did government policy and I was in the government policy section but curiously enough his assistants office happened to not be in the government policy section.  So it was--I assumed that they were looking for that and after they looked through my office stuff is all--this black stuff, decided this (laughter) must not be it but they didn't bother to put it back 'cause it was only, you know, yeah--.  Anyway, I don't know whether it's true, I do know that--I mean I know whether they were--what I told you is true, I don't know whether it has significance except that I am compelled to repeat it because I believe that, that, that, that did happen.
Story_ID: 296553
Speaker 1: How would you describe yourself in those days in terms of your political ideology (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Boring (laughter).
Speaker 1: --there were, there were a lot of people who were Marxists; some were--
Speaker 2: I was open-minded--
Speaker 1: --called themselves black nationalist--
Speaker 2: I was probably extremely intellectual at that point, I don't say that hardly to brag, but I was open to any ideas and I was very evalua- I was not an activist, you couldn't have gotten me to do a great deal of things except to go to a basic civil rights march.  But I wouldn't have joined any organi- simply because it was just more to analyze the world.  I can remember going to the [U.S.] Congress asking people what data they had on social welfare policy and being appalled at how little data they had.  That was sort of like my main thing, information and, and things like that.  So I wasn't much of an activist, I can re- I think I was opening up a little bit to international consciousness in the world.
Story_ID: 296554
Speaker 1: Now you, from what I've read, you were a French student in school as well right, you studied some French or you learned how to speak and write in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --French?
Speaker 2: Let me begin with the bad part (background noise) I'm sorry about this.  The bad part was I had a teach--French teacher as an (background noise) undergraduate [at Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: I remember the teacher telling me that--I took honors French which you could get in those days by getting a B, but I discovered something that should not have been known to any undergraduate.  That since it was hard to get into and supposed to be more difficult you couldn't get less than a B.  Hence I did nothing, because I didn't like languages, least of all French.  And I remember my teacher telling me that if she had another student like me she'd quit teaching (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --the only time I didn't do well, well it wasn't the only time but, wasn't the only two times I didn't do well in class, I just had no interest.  And it was later when I wanted to do stuff on political culture and voting differences that I thought that Haiti might be a place to do it and I had to learn French.  Also, Chicago [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] required that you, you learn French well--a language well.  And, and in order to pass this national test at a high level I took a French course to really study (laughter) and then arranged a joyous sort of trip to France and England with a school group and at--coincidentally I passed the test, I don't know how, before I went.  So I no longer was under any pressure and I was gonna spend the time in England, I got to England and hated it.  I hated it, I had a racial fight my first day and I couldn't eat the food, the food was inedible as far as I was concerned.  So I decided to go to Paris [France], but nobody--I had gotten disconnected from the other students and I went to Paris the dollar was devaluated shortly after I'd got back from the South of France and I was stuck there for a month 'cause it was a charter trip, it was one of those rare times when the charter trip was cancelled.  Didn't know anybody (laughter) had to learn French to survive or whatever and I'd gone to the South of France where I had a--the teacher had made arrangements for me to stay with somebody but I'd gotten the arrangements confused, the person wasn't there and so I went back to Paris and met some wonderful people, including two--a couple from Quebec [Canada] who got me interested in Quebec and my first publication was on the French separatist movement in Quebec.  Which I predicted, more or less, before it actually occurred.  And so that was a political experience as well and I can remember it being Loren- named Lorenzo that for the month that I was there the student hostel roommate that I first had was Italian, didn't speak English we had to--and he and his friends all pretended that I was a distant cousin and they lent me money until the end of my trip and then the dollar went back on value and I was able to pay them back.  But it was a forced learning situation partly motivated by political circumstances.  Then I went to Quebec, looked at the French-English separatist movement and the people that I met in Quebec had invited me and it turned out that everywhere I went I was treated so well I couldn't believe it.  I remember getting invited to calling up the--one of the parliamentary members in Quebec and he was a president, and he invited me to lunch, I said, "Wow, these are real nice people," (laughter).  And it turned out that the return address I was giving, unbeknownst to me because it was a farmhouse was the address of one of the--the richest man in Quebec (laughter).  So I--the name I was using, the house of this man was the--but it--they were unpretentious so I never knew, and I--so everywhere I went it was very successful and I wrote this paper and I sensed that the French-English problems in the school system that I was looking at were symbolic of others and when I argued--suggested that the separatist would win and they won and I remember that the paper got a considerable amount of attention because of that.
Story_ID: 296555
Speaker 1: So I got stuck in French and one thing led to another, I finally got back to Haiti when the--was a (unclear) because they wanted somebody who spoke French to lecture and I had been interested in it all along but I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About what year was this now, this was like--?
Speaker 1: This is '76 [1976].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And when I was in Quebec [Canada] in '74 [1974]--I'm sorry, '75 [1975] and '78 [1976].  I--different summers and I was actually a visiting professor there one spring so then another year maybe '74 [1974], 75 [1975], and '76 [1976] even though the visiting professor was just trips and wasn't staying and then when I came to the institute [Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.] at the very end of '77 [1977] and I think it was '78 [1978] when I went on some lecture in Haiti, talking about election systems and later returned to evaluate the election--I'm sorry to make recommendations on party structure and a series of lectures subsidized by USAID [United States Agency for International Development] and helping to organize the '90 [1990]--1990 election, that led to Aristide's [Jean-Bertrand Aristide] election and I say helping to organize I just talked about party organization and gave some advice to the election commission.  And I can remember arguing with the U.S. embassy over why they wouldn't give them the $3 million necessary for the election ballots and I think they were gonna give it to them any way but that tend to work out okay.  And then I returned with President Carter's [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] election monitoring team later that year in 1990 when Aristide was reelected.  I had been to Haiti to evaluate the educational system at a previous time and happened to be there just as Duvalier [Jean-Claude Duvalier] was about to be overthrown, a little exciting moment, got to run to the airport and what was supposed to be the last plane outta there so that was somewhat of a fun experience, especially getting out.  But I thought Haiti was a lovely and beautiful country and well worth saving if, if, from any disasters it might have had.
Speaker 2: So when did you learn about Haiti in terms of U.S. involvement with Haiti--
Speaker 1: As an undergraduate [at Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] I was interested in the cultural differences--I'm sorry, as a graduate student [at the University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] really and as I said I wanted to look at how that affected participation but the opportunity wasn't there because that was when Duvalier senior [Francois Duvalier] had just died.  And, oh, previous I forgot, I took a trip there again with a group of students and then turned out they all couldn't go so I had to be there by myself, got a--end up exposure and piqued my interest and therefore did some reading.  Every time I go anyplace, as many people do, I try to read as much about it as possible.  However I pay much more attention to the political history of the country and when I go somewhere.  So that was the case in Haiti and then one thing led to another they--because I was at the institute they wanted somebody to do education and when I was there Duvalier was overthrown I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is Baby, Baby Doc?
Speaker 1: Baby Doc, yes, I mean he wasn't overthrown the moment I was there, but a few weeks later.  And ironically the, the letter published calling for his overthrow was signed by a person whom I had picked to be the target for the distribution of U.S. aid for the education system over there.  And I can remember one of those rare moments in history I was awake at five for no particular reason, there was no fire or anything and I remember that because the radio went off at six and we never had any more information as to what was going on after that, but fortunately I was able to finish my project two days later before anybody came to the hotel and get out of dodge so to speak.  But I had a, a--I've never had any experience quite that dramatic though I, those few months ago when we were in Sierra Leone we did get barricaded in the embassy a couple of times so--little bit.  I think the link was one that I saw early as a graduate student or undergraduate that I pursue that the link of things like voting behavior and democracy and culture are so intertwined to understand one, cultural differences in Haiti it may be essential to fully understanding those in the United States among ethnic groups.  That's why I see the world in a very small frame of reference in that regard.  I don't look at those as dramatic departures one from the other.  And because most of-- I've had experience in Francophone countries I'm more likely to be invited to them or given money to go there to be able to do research there and then thus to see connections as well, although just a few months ago I end up in Sierra Leone because the state department [U.S. Department of State] apparently needed someone to go there to talk about elections and civil rights.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Sierra Leone's really a mess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, oh, you're not gonna get a disagreement from me--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --again it is a beautiful country, strike that, it is a country with a great deal (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah it was--
Speaker 1: --of potential.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but at one time it was considered one of the most stable countries (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well it's hardly now--
Story_ID: 296556
Speaker 1: I went there after leaving Senegal where I did lectures and it was well received--I mean I enjoyed it, on election procedures and on, on civil rights and I was supposed to go to Togo, another French speaking country, but they were so inconsiderate.  They had a coup before I came. I don't know why they didn't think that I was coming or what (laughter) the deal was.  So anyway I was convinced, and believe me I was resistant to going to Sierra Leone, probably because it meant preparing different lectures in English which I didn't feel like doing.  But when I, shortly after I got there, well I remember my hotel had about three hundred rooms and ten people so I knew that (laughter) things weren't going well and first day after I got there they told--I was giving talks in the embassy which was unusual.  They told--came running in and said every--all the foreigners, that's the way they described people who lived in country had to leave the embassy.  And then, so they, we, after an hour or two they sent us back to our homes and hotels.  Then the next day they come running in and said, "Everyone has to leave the embassy," and I'd come back.  And I don't know how one--this little story and we--and so they send me a separate car and we get about a mile-and-a half away and the driver realizes we can't go any further because the roads packed with Europeans trying to get out of town, this little demonstration was against the ministry of education that hadn't paid its teachers and therefore the students weren't getting anything.  But the U.S. thought we were somehow involved, well that day the police shot a student not far from the embassy so they thought the crowd was going to turn on the embassy largely because they pay very little attention to the community for they didn't know what the nature of the disturbance was and I never felt that they did and therefore didn't feel particularly threatened.  Anyway, so the second day we couldn't get very far and the guy--driver turns around and he's running over people's yards and he goes back to, ironically, next to the ministry of education.  He's at the top of the hill and I can remember because I think this is funny and I can make a movie out of this exaggerating it sort of like Indiana Jones' boat--by exaggerating the incident (laughter) but so he's at the top of the--yelling for the embassy to open the gates because we're coming in.  He's yelling, "Big apple, big apple, we're coming in."  And I said, (laughter) "Well, what is this big apple?"  He said, "It's code."  I said, "Do you think the people are that stupid?" (Laughter) So, we get in the embassy and it turns out I'm the only one in there, or at least I think and then it turns out there's a woman there--I forgot this part.  She had said the day before that she had been attacked by the mob and drug out of her car--threatened to drag her out of her car.  I had a certain degree of doubt about that, anyway, she was there though I didn't know it because I was sitting in the main foyer and then after a while they come in and say, "Would you like to make a co- phone call?"  I said, "What do you mean a last phone call?"--make a phone call.  So, then with the mention of a few names like, Ruth Davis [HistoryMaker Ruth A. Davis], they put me in this bulletproof room and so I'm sitting there for about two hours and then they come running in and say, say, we gotta--, "We're going to leave,"--I think they said breakout or something, and so they had this bulletproof car comes around and we go tearing out of the embassy and then of course we get stuck.  And the driver turns around and he's hitting cars and he's driving and then he's going up a one-way street on the side of a mountain to the ambassador's house and cars are coming like this and so this is the only time I'm scared (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --because I didn't believe they knew what they--was going on and, you know, so we get to the ambassador's house and everything fine.  Turns out it's a demonstration in the town that really isn't focused on the embassy at all.  And the kicker was the next day I met the head of the parliamentary civil rights committee, Hal Gray [HistoryMaker William H. Gray, III], he said, "Oh, if anybody asked them, they'd of told them."  But, anyway in my imaginary story or movie I will only stick with the parts that actually did occur plus exaggerations it could be pretty good, but in real life it was rather boring (laughter), except for the misunderstandings that occurred.
Speaker 2: Okay, now you--there are various trips on behalf of the state department [U.S. Department of State] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Lecture trips.
Speaker 2: Yeah (unclear).
Speaker 1: Most of my previous trips abroad is research related.  I have--well, I've done other things for state department, for the government.  Going to Madagascar and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, why did you go to Madagascar?
Speaker 1: Sim- that was similar lecture purposes, more interesting was to evaluate election systems as I did in Beijing [China]. And in Senegal as well, at a previous time, though not this last time when I--we did the lecture tours.  And that's sort of interesting 'cause you get to look at a whole country's system and to make recommendations usually through the U.S. embassy.  But very often in developing countries they're applied pretty well because they're--they can't afford a lot of studies to do these things.  Normally when I travel in Francophone--well I'm just doing research--so I've been doing research on minorities in France and on the party system in France for a couple of years and if all goes well I will be look--expanding that to look at the European Union [EU] and the parties in France this year.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Although traditionally it has a racial component this year it won't quite have a racial component.
Story_ID: 296557
Speaker 1: Tell us about Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]--now you started teaching in Howard in '76 [1976] was it '76 [1976] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I--'82 [1982].
Speaker 1: Eighty-two [1982], okay.
Speaker 2: After coming to the institute [Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.] for the study of educational policy I came to Howard.  I wanted to get back to teaching and there was no necessity of moving, my wife [Marsha Morris] has a job here she's an actuary or was at a company at the time that was pretty compelling--a pretty compelling place to stay.  So I didn't wanna leave town and Howard was convenient.  And, you know, plus political history, Ralph Bunche started the department and you know, if you think about it a lot of us who are in political science, African Americans do similar things, for most of his life here he taught what we would call black politics.  And was a major contributor to he 'American Dilemma' ['An American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy'] by Gunnar Myrdal and then got involved in international stuff to use a technical term.  And so that it was not--it was consistent with what I thought I was doing if I thought about what I was doing, and when I came here the idea was to be more involved in some of the things that black politicians do at the national level.  As their advisor, consultant I worked a little bit with some of the things that Robert Alders [ph.] was doing with Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] more than a little bit.  Did things like studies of things of political nature like the Million Man March on Washington [D.C.] mostly from an academic perspective, and, in--got to meet a lot of very interesting people that come around Howard because Howard has become a center for a kind of political consciousness in the academic community.  When I came here we were doing presidential politics as a sort of collective activity in terms of conferences with Marguerite Barnett [Dr. Marguerite Ross Barnett], she just left before I came, but the conferences were an ongoing process.  We did something called, One-Third of a Nation, which was probably the biggest academic conference for African Americans of diverse kinds in a long time.  And after a long hiatus a publication ['One-Third of a Nation: African American Perspectives,' eds. Ura Jea Oyemade and Lorenzo Morris] came out from that in 2000 [sic. 1997].  But the diversity, Howard is the largest academic institution that's African American.  Probably the largest in terms of budget, and other things in the world in the African American--African diaspora so you get to see a lot of people. You mentioned the historian that I just saw the other day, Sterling Stuckey [P. Sterling Stuckey] people who come through here.  I can remember--before he died, one day I opened the door and Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] was standing there and just came in. So you get the sense of Howard is as a kind of center for places, even though it doesn't always reach out, outside of its various political science this is Washington so you get that kind of contact.  I had never elected to be chair or wanted to be chair but you know how those things go, the evolution of the unwilling (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So you, your elevation to chair is recent--
Speaker 2: We don't call that elevation.
Speaker 1: Oh, it's not an elevation (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No, no, it's a descent (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So the reward for doing work is more work, that's what you were saying--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, or the reward for not paying attention to internal politics--
Speaker 1: (Laughter)--
Speaker 2: --it's (laughter) more work.  There is a goal at Howard, I think, to build more of that kind of research intellectual center to which I am committed even if I have not done all the things that I want to.  And so I, because I signed on to that goal I fit the role to some degree.  You know, everybody wants to build an intellectual community but most may not--all may not see it as a kind of collective activity.  So I think in some ways I should be suited at least in terms of orientation.  And, I think we're making progress, I've only been here a couple of years in that, in that particular capacity.  I think research has changed from higher education for me to much more of a kind of national participation.  I always wanted to do voting behavior more than I do it now.  I've done some things on voting behavior (background noise).
Story_ID: 296558
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about what, what was your first book and--?
Speaker 2: First book was done largely as a collection of work--research from graduate school [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] with a friend of mine [HistoryMaker] Charles Henry who's down at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California].  And it's called, 'The Chit'lin Controversy[: Race and Public Policy in America]', and as I've often noted to those who laugh about the title, it's the only book that I've had that's gone into several reprints.  It was cert- I certainly would not have picked the title now, but I picked it then because it was a little bit shocking and disturbing and because I thought it reflected the shockingness, shocking character reflected part of the issue.  It relates to a story by Bontemps--Arna Bontemps and Langston Hughes in a book called, 'Negro Folklore' ['The Book of Negro Folklore'] and in this book the black guy goes into a Washington, D.C. restaurant and I guess it's the late '50s [1950s] or early '60s [1960s] and he asked--it had just been desegregated, something people don't oft- often forget, that Washington was segregated.  And, and they're very nice, it's an elegant restaurant and they show them to a table and they--and so he get--they give him the menu and he asks, "Do you have any collard greens?"  And they say, "No."  Then he said, "Do you have any black-eyed-peas?"  And you know how the story goes, then finally he says, "Do you have any chit'lins?" and they say, "No."  And he gets up, folds the menu, gets up and says, "You folks just aren't ready for desegregation."  And why the story, because it's about the insignificance of what we've called physiological desegregation, of moving people and places that ignores the cultural components of choices and values.  And so it focuses heavily, though not exclusively, on education and argues that letting blacks in the white schools if it doesn't change the structure of school administration or selection in choices is insignificant.  And so we use this story like that, but we use the story because at the same time it's embarrassing quality, to some extent, 'The Chit'lin Controversy,' helps to bring attention to the fact that African Americans often did not want to recognize that cultural differences were significant, that if everybody had an equal chance of going to schools the testing issues would resolve themselves and people would come out on top which of course hasn't happened because there are cultural sig- significance factors in, in, in evaluation in system and merit.  Which we need, I think, to recognize, but also largely we picked the title because we just referred to it, the chit'lin book and by the time it had gotten to the publisher we had no name for it (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --was what we called it because that was the opening story and so we left it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But I think the value of the observations are significant today that differential systems of merit and reward and of judgment are, are not just equal among individuals because groups have effects on those things and those are things we call cultural.
Speaker 1: Okay, now that, that one was published in--
Speaker 2: Si- almost when I was still a student, it was '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I wasn't still a student but it had been written when--it was written when I was a student.
Story_ID: 296559
Speaker 1: What else, what are the others?
Speaker 2: 'Elusive Equality[: The Status of Black Americans in Higher Education, Lorenzo Morris]' was the first bigger book that dealt with inequalities in the higher--in policy and higher education and it was done here at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], published by Howard [University] Press.  And it looked at systemic problems and equity to--and access to higher education, finance and things like that.  It was inspired by the Bakke case [Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, 1978] and the Bakke case was being settled by the [U.S.] Supreme Court at the time the book was written.  So it wasn't finalized 'til the end of the book, but it was the idea again that brought me here, that I thought the black lawyers, frankly, had made a mistake and the white--liberal white lawyers and argue--and stipulating that Bakke [Allan Bakke] was qualified for higher education admission at the medical school level and that they simply wanted affirmative action for blacks.  I wi- always thought that they should have argued that the quality--qualifications themselves were subject to judgment on racial claims because the test and the instruments used may not have been open to equitable competition and that should have been judged.  Only recently have we gotten to the point of realizing that you can't simply mix the racial makeup of the schools even with affirmative action without some sort of addressing of the issues the--Grutter [Grutter v. Bollinger, 2003] and, the Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] cases, recently on affirmative action helped to confirm that point.  Other judgments need to be made and so, again that followed an, an implicit argument there except in my job at the time was simply to look at as much data as possible on where blacks were and were not in the educational system.  The next book in--'Equal Educational Opportunity[ Scoreboard: The Status of Black Americans in Higher Education, 1970-79,' Lorenzo Morris et al.], was a policy oriented summary of that book really and that came out after Bakke and what added was a look at black institutions--what was added, and I didn't look as much as black institutions subsequently as I had hoped because by this time, 1970, 1980, '79 [1979], both those books were done very quickly.  I came here from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in '70--at the very end of '77 [1977] and completed the book by '78 [1978] which is unusual, for me at least, and then the next book by '79 [1979], on the same subject.  It was to provide data, I was pleased that some of those things--we had an opening recited and arguments about higher education, legislation on the senate floor.  But other than that, I don't think any general population paid a great deal of attention to it.  Then I came here and began to turn--return more to my graduate school interest, elect- elector politics as we call it, voting participation and behavior.  The next book was an edited book on the Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] campaign, 'Social and Political Implications of the Jesse Jackson Campaign' ['The Social and Political Implications of the 1984 Jesse Jackson Campaign,' ed. Lorenzo Morris].  And it included compositions by others on various chapters particularly focused on the idea of organizational restructures and differences that may have, may not have increased participation under Jackson, ideas of ideology and attitudinal differences among Americans but from different perspectives, hence we had an anthropologist, an economist and others, a variety of spheres.  My focus was on the, what I call the decline of the party system.  Arguing that the American party system was undergoing major transformation, it was becoming more ideological.  I think history may be proving me right, that it was no longer the pragmatic party system that it once was, it could not be adopted as adaptive as it has been.  And the last book was a co-authored book ['One-Third of a Nation: African American Perspectives,' eds. Ura Jea Oyemade and Lorenzo Morris] on one-third of the nation growing out of a large conference and it has about four or five chapters on concepts of race and its significance, and that was like 2000 [sic. 1997] and the conference probably was at the--probably took ten years for the book to get out.  I remember one chapter that I did had been sta- started by a psychologist, Baton [ph.], who died unexpectedly and then so we got a young psychologist in--with business background to do--it was on the concepts of race and public policy really, Ed Stuett [ph.], and he died, and he was only in his thirties, unexpectedly, and then it fell to me to do it, that was the fastest chapter I've written in my life because I simply did not want a long interval.
Story_ID: 296560
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about, you know some of the major political events of I guess the last twenty-five years or so, which you've probably seen it and since you're a political scientist here, you're chairman of Howard's [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] political science department, maybe you can give me some--your, your take on, doesn't have to be long, just a--.  First thing is the Gary [Indiana] convention [National Black Political Convention], 1972; do you have any reflections on that?
Speaker 2: It was a wonderful opportunity to bring a diverse group of blacks with different perspectives together and it helped to emphasize both the needs for that and their powerlessness.  I'm struck by the, the sort of death knell to potential organizing that occurred and it occurred around bussing.  The inability to recognize that the so not- society does not respect group differences in politics so that when they wanted community control even the argument for it was considered offensive because it was in individualistic mobility in schools.  And that helped kindle it along with their saying something about international relations, meaning Israel at the time caused a great deal of negative reaction to what they said, they've mentioned it in Palestinian issues and it was again that that was not within the normal frame of activity for a black group.  And of course, the issue of gender and, and Shirley Chisholm running for ma- running for president, it wasn't whether or not blacks and gender issues fitted well together it was whether or not they were organized and re- dealt with in a meaningful way and the disorganization in this group helped to seal the difficulties so that we hadn't built enough linkages with the international community to talk about the Palestinian issues nor enough with gender issues to deal with them effectively so it showed powerlessness and it ended as it could not have--it could not have ended, ended otherwise in some sense.  It was confronting racism but it was also confronting disorganization, it was good because it showed those things, it was bad because we couldn't follow up in the weaknesses that it showed.
Speaker 1: Okay, another thing, another event would be the Bakke [Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, 1978] decis- the controversy--
Speaker 2: Seventy-eight [1978]--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, you--
Speaker 2: I thought--
Speaker 1: --you've written about that so--
Speaker 2: I thought it was a wonderful opportunity to show America, not only the needs of African Americans, but the needs of the nation.  To front--to confront the steps and the barriers to equality that we so often talk about and I thought that it could have been done by looking at the way we judge merit and I think that Bakke in the approval, limited approval of affirmative action was heading in that direction.  I think the wrong moves were made in some ways in defense of affirmative action.  By not insisting on a re- reevaluation of standards of merit and not simply accepting access for African Americans through special programs but demanding that those special programs recognize the inadequacy of the system.  I have a saying that sometimes bothers people but I used to say, and I would still say, except that it bothers people (laughter), that affirmative action was a program created for white Americans to help them understand their inability to judge merit and that it simply applied to African Americans.  I still think to some degree that should be the way it is viewed except that now too often we want to accept mobility in any form without control over the standards of mobility.  So Bakke was good because it recognized the value of a program, it was bad because it did not recognize the value of the decision making process and the people who were supposed to benefit from that program, minorities and African Americans.  I was amazed at how the reaction came and sometimes it was celebratory and I warned, warned, that it would lead to great difficulty and it did.  But I think at least on the good side of national interest.  People recognized that in the end you have to have the kinds of outcomes that Bakke wanted in terms of admissions and access.
Story_ID: 296561
Speaker 1: It's just a couple of years ago busloads of people came, you know, to [Washington] D.C to protest the president's [President George Walker Bush] position on affirmative action--
Speaker 2: Really the beginning of my recognition that this new--this, of the newer generation there may be a real wakening of political consciousness.  They didn't go to do anything but they went to be a part of something and a recognition that they hadn't been and I think that's a good sign.  I see good signs in the next coming years with our students, I see that each class is more conscious than the one before and more open to action and new ideas there are--there are no compelling movement now, but there's a recognition I think there's a recognition and an openness when the right structure and ideas are available that will lead to positive continued and meaningful responses of younger people.
Speaker 1: Now likewise the Million Man March, tenth anniversary, Million Man March and I think another one is being planned, we have over a million African American men and some women and children show up in Washington, D.C. back in October 1995, well, what do you--how do you analyze that now--
Speaker 2: Oh it was--
Speaker 1: --you know, ten years after?
Speaker 2: Because I got to do the only large scale evaluation of opinion and attitudes of participants I enjoyed it.  It was a big project, we had sixty employees and did it with a research group and I don't think we published the, the findings enough but it showed to me that that group of people were very much like the traditional, and one of my papers shows that.  They were very much like the traditional democratic leadership among blacks, most people, demographically and attitudinally they're very similar.  So this was really quite a mixed group but it was largely--represented fairly powerful African Americans.  But the thing interesting about it was why I was interested in going other than doing the research is because some people, even those I like, like Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] said, "Maybe we shouldn't go."  You know, maybe it wasn't worth going to and I think half of the faculty who showed up were inspired by the suggestion that they shouldn't go. [HistoryMaker] Alexis Herman, I think told the story of going to a hotel in advance of Clinton's arrival and a black guy coming up to her before the march and asking--do you know the story?  Asking, if she was going to the march, probably because she was a woman, and she said, "Oh, maybe."  She was fooling around, and she was interested and he says, "Well, I'm"--she says, "Are you going?" and he says, "Yes, I'm going and all the people are here are going, all the black guys who work in the hotel."  And so, two or three days later she arrives with President Clinton and she calls him over and introduces him to President Clinton and she says, "Tell him what you told me."  And he looks a bit hesitant and he says, "I wanna know, I'm going to the march and everybody here is going."  He said, "But don't tell anybody," (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So I thought it was kind of cute story but that--it was like a private moment of political consciousness where the subject as with the atonement didn't seem to make a lot of detailed sense to anybody it was the idea of coming together. And if I can tell one more personal story, I remember this older black woman who deals largely with international relations and she said to me, she was head of the Black Professionals in International Affairs, a group for which I was vice president, turn around, and she said that it moved her enormously and this was again coming together okay, because it was the first time she'd seen any public entity talk about people like her father with praise.  And that was a kind of social organization consciousness, it was needed, it didn't lead anywhere but if you look at mass movements as I have to some extent, rarely do they, mass movements, start with any clear meaningful political purpose.  They usually start over fairly trivial social events but among people who feel they have something in common that is so difficult to defy--to define that they need a charismatic leader to embody it.  We don't have the charismatic leader yet that embodies this kind of global awareness about unresolved issues but I think the audience is there.  What I call the charismatic condition is there.
Story_ID: 296562
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about the forming of the National Association of Black Political Scientists [National Conference of Black Political Scientists].
Speaker 2: Oh, it was like most of the groups of the period, the end of the '60s [1960s] and late '70s [1970s] and all these black people came together.  Political scientists were--were not proudly but clearly stand out as the most racist group of academics or among the most racist group of academics.  You know, there tended to be more blacks with Ph.D.s in political science--and the sciences proportionately is a percentage.  In engineering, for example, and in political science not because obviously political science was more difficult but because in some ways it was more resistant to admitting blacks and so the National Blacks--National Conference of Black Political Scientist was formed in 1970--actually 1971 [sic. 1969-1970].  And I became president in 1970--1981, 1981 or 1982, '81 [1981] to '82 [sic. 1982-1983], and it was around both the issues of consciousness, of foresting a new respect for ways in which blacks participate and vote, understanding how it works, understanding the issues that dominate the community.  Until that time political scientists were often writing about what we call race riots as psychopathic or what they would call elements of social disorganization not of meaningful political expression.  So, it made a contribution and it still does today because it looks at things in a fairly academic way but also with a meaning as sensitivity to the political issues that surround questions of way peo- ways people participate and how they make choices and so I'm a very old--still an active member in that organization.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And one of the things we're doing now is reviving the Washington Liaison Committee, which I am involved in.
Story_ID: 296563
Speaker 1: Okay now, of the political scientists that are out here today who are the ones that you admire the most?
Speaker 2: Well I admire everybody at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] (laughter).  But other than the people at Howard, I, I don't know I admire a lot of my friends.  I mentioned Dianne, Dianne Pinderhughes, Linda Williams and [HistoryMaker] Charles Henry, but I ad- I like the work of Michael [C.] Dawson, who I think has returned to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], Cathy Cohen who's there, Dawson was at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] but some--I may be confusing whether he's, he's left or not.  I--Mack [H.] Jones who was at Atlanta [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]--recently retired, was a symbol of the study of black politics.  Certainly Ron Walters [HistoryMaker Ronald Walters], but then he was at Howard and he's only physically left, we consider him spiritually still here.  And his work on--not on the [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L.] Jackson campaign alone but on African development issues as well.  Some extent I admire the work of people who are dead like--in political science--like Ma- like Ralph Bunche, people don't realize he was a competent and good political scientist.  Probably Marguerite Barnett's [Dr. Marguerite Ross Barnett] initiative and theory, Hanes Walton [Jr.], one of our first graduates who's at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], our first Ph.D. here, was--did a great deal.  I admire non-black political scientists, Ted Lloyd [ph.] one of my advisors at Chicago, always was a bit outside the, the normal stream of thought but was interesting and creative.  One of the foreign academics I admire that most recently passed was Claude Levi-Strauss, a French anthropologist who wrote about political and social issues.  So there are a lot of people I admire, I mean I'm hesitant 'cause I could just, without mental blockages think of a lot (laughter).
Story_ID: 296564
Speaker 1: Okay, we always ask this question; what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today.
Speaker 2: Well, I, I'm probably--they relate to the whole nation.  I think recognition that some of the people would call it progressive issues, that African Americans have uniformly, meaning in ninety percent levels, believed in but not have gotten to the nation, surface of the nation like meaningful healthcare programs, like meaningful social welfare policies, meaningful equity and educational opportunity would become part of a national agenda, that these things that are called progressive or on the left, would be recognized as, as the compelling issues of the nations, so that's one hope.  Another, of course is, for a greater level of, of equity in healthcare within the communities and equity in education.  Probably also to be able to share some of the joys of excesses in the African American community with the nations, somehow to define that history at those moments as not only as achievements of overcoming struggle but as simply good things.  Like the older woman said, "Celebrating the virtues of my father," on a national level and I'd like to see that, in this case my father [Henry Morris, Jr.] and mother [Annie Crouch Morris], or, I, I'd like to see this cut of recognition of shared history 'cause I think it would do us all good.  Would I like reparations if I thought it was a meaningful possibility, but I don't think it is in a nation that sees individual wealth and individualism as paramount?  I would like to see whether Gary can do it, the new Gary convention [National Black Political Convention] idea or something else, I would like to see blacks come together not so to, to articulate interest but to recognize that articulation would be something shared if well--if reasonably well received by the larger national community because those interest were to just group interest also address the recognition that is needed in this nation, that groups have interests and that those interests can form a better more realistic plural concept of nationhood.  I think I would also like on a smaller scale level to see--to stop what I have anticipated for a long time the displacement of blacks from the city they have called their home.  I think the indifference to that displace--displacement is really sad, even abominable.  I, I think it's consistent and ongoing in cities like Washington [D.C.] and elsewhere.
Speaker 1: Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, I lov- I like Chicago and think it's beautiful and I went back and it's still beautiful even more beautiful but I've noticed a certain degree of transformation that I think has gone the wrong way.  And I don't think you have to retain the poverty of a neighborhood to retain its people.  I think it's sincere commitment could have done something differently, if you look at the way the central cities of Europe, certainly places like Paris [France] are--have changed you'd see--you'd understand how the rich will move in and the poor will move out but you also see in places like Paris that they have structured ways in which the poor have reasonable access to the city and remain in many, in dispersed ways, across the city, at least not the rich (laughter).  And I think that we need to do something like that here, the indifference, often things that are not wanted in a society are things associated with African Americans not because African Americans have those characteristics but because this society associates it with them it labels things that way and so I think we need to recognize as African Americans that sometimes the protection of our best interest are, are the protections of the nation's best interest and when they are not that may be another matter though I'm not often sure they are.  I mean criminal justice for one, it's the abuses of racial problems in the criminal justice system are sad, the indifference to the regulation of it are even sadder and so I think it's a matter of weakness.  I understand how when all of us who consider ourselves removed from the ordinary pressures of the criminal justice system think well, it will only happen to someone else, but I don't think we understand the extent to which whether or not it happens to someone else the inability to act on it weakens our overall political position.  And so that, that's a problem, at the same time I had--I guess I had some tradition values as a teacher.  I've noticed the indifference to scholarship for scholarly purposes and the utilitarian approach, less at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] than at other institutions I'm sure, but nevertheless it bothers me, the idea that you go to get a job, especially when the jobs may not be there.  I remember one thing a teacher told me that I have perhaps exaggerated but I think it has a certain value and again I suffer criticism for saying it that--but the purpose of higher education is not to know how to get a job but to know what to do when you're unemployed.  To know how to spend your life, to re-direct your thinking, in other words education should be something that builds a life and I, and I'm concerned about that and I think when we, putting other's in my generation, went to school, it was about making a way not only in employment because I--some extent it was guaranteed but changing the world for civil rights, having a meaningful life and I think that you get the material benefits when those values are there.  That they're, they're, that, that, only stable material benefits follow from those values.  So I guess that's my traditional element.
Story_ID: 296565
Speaker 1: Now tell me when you look back at everything that you've done up to this point is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I think I would probably have been more active.  I left an interest in higher education because I thought the nation wasn't interested in paying attention to the policy issues.  I might have stayed there but then I left looking at voting behavior more intensely because I thought that people weren't paying attention to the issues for which voting was supposed to serve.  I never believed in voting as a value in itself so in either instances and all of those things I've done, I probably would have been more intense about the social value of them and applying my educational orientation to that social value than I have been.  I might have been less oriented towards small gains like stable employment and more interest towards long term studies. I probably wouldn't have cared what my job situation was like although I say that in hindsight, never having had any great material discomfort, who knows, I might feel differently had I taken the, the leap of faith.  Sometimes for example, in my operant career to do a major study would have put my job at risk, a major study would have perhaps been materially beneficial in the long run but in the short run (laughter) you know, to not have things coming out might have been a problem.  I would have not stopped my Portuguese training--I just stick in my mind, little things you do to go back to Brazil.  I went to Brazil and loved it but I suppose it's done my career well because if I'd gone back to Brazil again you might have seen the last of me (laughter) I would have enjoyed that.
Story_ID: 296566
Speaker 1: Now, likewise when you look back over everything you've done at this point what would you consider at this juncture in your life to be your legacy.
Speaker 2: A legacy, I don't know, I think that some of the things I will yet write (laughter).  I would rather hang my legacy on, I think that, friend of mine told me that he thought some ideas that I had about the way ideology and participation work would be--have some lingering influence whether in the Jackson book ['The Social and Political Implications of the 1984 Jesse Jackson Campaign,' Lorenzo Morris] or in things in 'One-Third of a Nation[: African American Perspectives,' eds. Ura Jea Oyemade and Lorenzo Morris], I hope that will but they aren't well articulated in--I have a paper "Ideology and Presidential Politics" ["The Emergence of Ideology in Presidential Politics," Lorenzo Morris] that talks about Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] that might be one of the ideas that would have an influence but it would be around the ways in which we organize for beliefs and values, maybe something to do with higher education but I would rather not hang my hat on that.
Story_ID: 296567
Speaker 1: Can you tell us something about your family now; we haven't asked you about your family?
Speaker 2: Didn't you just ask me about--oh my wife [Marsha Morris]?
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: Oh, my wife is the first black female actuary in the country; most people don't know what an actuary is.  There are about twenty some of them who are full fellows meaning in the Society of Actuaries.  She and I met at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  I won't say that she was enamored at me--of me at first encounter but I did, not to exaggerate I remember telling her the day we met that we would be married someday so there was no use trying to get away from me, though she did her best.
Story_ID: 296572
Speaker 1: Tell us about your family.  But do you--
Speaker 2: That's- I'm married, and my wife Marsha [Morris], to whom I've been married since 1981, is an actuary and she's from New Jersey, not far from my hometown, southern New Jersey however.  Her father [Dr. Walter Samuel McAfee] had a moment of late--belated fame because he is the physicist--he's a Ph.D. in physics, he did Project Diane [sic. Project Diana], which was a project that put the first launches to the moon.  And it was secret at the time, he worked on the military base [Fort Monmouth, Monmouth County, New Jersey] so he couldn't be recognized but they've since named the building after him in the [U.S.] Navy place in New Jersey, what's the name of that fort--well anyway, they've named the building [McAfee Center] after him, his name is McAfee.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which was unusual when he got his Ph.D. in '49 [1949] blacks were--could not get jobs very many places in physics.  Anyway, so she came from a family that was educationally focused and she went to Swarthmore [Swarthmore College, Swarthmore, Pennsylvania] and we met at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and we later married in Washington [D.C.], where we had lots of friends and some we regretted bringing to our reception (laughter)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --just joking.  And, she was helpful in doing the math--the statistical parts of my book, 'Elusive Equality[: The Status of Black Americans in Higher Education,' Lorenzo Morris], late at night when I was having problems with some of the numbers I would call her up and she would do that and seemed to be totally open to that and has always been helpful.  And we don't have any children, she has a sister who is an English professor in California and someone I like a great deal and her mother [Viola Winston McAfee] is still the organist at her church, so she's ninety-two.  And, one of those mother-in-laws that don't fit the prototype, I really adore her and she's very friendly and so, the in-law situation is very good.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did, did your parents [Henry Morris, Jr. and Annie Crouch Morris] and--get a chance to see you become a--what do they think about a career in political science, I mean--?
Speaker 2: Well, other than a real job, they're quite pleased, my mother is always proud of me and occasionally they see me on TV doing commentary on political things, last week I went there for Mother's Day. Don't ask me about the date, family, anyway one of the guest were late because he was listening to me on a radio station, a national radio station, I won't name it, so, they were pleased with that and when I was on the day show--'[The] Today Show,' ['Today'] (unclear) I was on it three times they-- a lot of them saw that, so they like that.  But mostly things that bring you back home they'd rather--my mother would rather have me home when my sister is there.  My brother doesn't live far away so he's always there when there's a family event.  My father and mother separated late in life so I had graduated from college before they separate, or when they separated.  And he remarried and moved to Detroit [Michigan] and I see him occasionally as well but never in the same (laughter) place with my mother, or rarely.  My brother's wedding in Detroit, they were together, so.
Story_ID: 296573
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything we haven't asked you that you think you need to address before we ask our final questions?
Speaker 2: The final question?  I, I don't know I think maybe I could say that I have volunteered for a lot of political groups to act as sort of a political analyst, advisor in a variety of ways in and around Washington [D.C.], and I expect to do that more or continue to do that sometime with my colleagues, like Ron Walters [HistoryMaker Ronald Walters].  And I've always tried to respond whenever progressive politians ask for information, research or advice.  Sometimes when they don't I'm--have a little activity called the Census Information Center [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] that tries to provide data to people who are interested in census information and its part of a network with some colleagues.  I, so, you know, basically a lot of little things to help organize, research of a politically significant--useful, significant is wrong word--useful nature.
Story_ID: 296574
Speaker 1: Our last question is similar to legacy but a little different. Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Probably as a, a thoughtful, reflective, scholar.  And as someone whose recommendations or ideas may have positively influenced some reform of political organizing or activities may have had a positive impact.  That would be mostly it.
Story_ID: 296575
Speaker 1: This picture is a picture of Dr. Donn Davis the head of the graduate program in the Department of Political Science [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.] taken in my office in the graduation celebration of one of our newly credentialed doctorates, Artemesia Stanberry in 2004, and I'm on the--next to her on the other side.
Speaker 2: This is a picture in which I'm looking at the tower of a traditional mosque in Rabat, Morocco, in 2004 I believe and the picture was taken by a colleague on a tour, an academic tour.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me speaking at a ceremony that I believe is the 2005 celebration of the fiftieth anniversary of Phi Beta Kappa at black colleges [HBCU], on Howard's [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] campus.
Speaker 2: I think this is a picture at a seminar and a conference from the 2004 celebration of Phi Beta Kappa and if in the last picture I said 2005, it should have been 2004.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is a picture of the graduation ceremony 2004 in my office.  It's a post-graduation ceremony celebration and I'm next to Artemesia Stanberry, a new Ph.D.
Speaker 2: This is a picture I believe in around 1992 or '3 [1993].  I'm next to Joe Harris [ph.] a historian who is on the left.  The person on the far left is a Howard administrator, but next to me is Joe Harris and on the other side is a prominent U.S. ambassador whose name I have temporarily repressed but he's one of the fairly well known one and on his, on the other side of him is Ron Walters [HistoryMaker Ronald Walters] then a professor at Howard University and chair of the department.
Speaker 1: This picture is taken in the private dining room--dining room of the United Nations [UN] of Kofi Annan and I think it was taken in 2004 as well, I'm sorry, October 2003.  And it was with Kofi Annan and between us is the head of [HistoryMaker] Howard Dodson, the head of the Schomburg--Schomburg Center [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York] in (unclear).
Speaker 2: This is a picture from March 2005 in Arlington [Virginia] or Crystal City, Virginia.  A reception I organized for the National Conference of Black Political Scientists, on the far left is Max--Mack [H.] Jones a political scientist from Atlanta [Georgia], a colleague Michael Frazier at Howard, next to him is a Ph.D. candidate, a student at Howard, Darlene Jackson [ph.], who is also a lawyer, next to her is Congressman [Elijah] Cummings who is a, by the way, a Howard alumnus and who was the co-host of the reception, and I'm on his other side.
Speaker 1: This is an induction--this picture is a picture of an induction ceremony and annual celebration of the Department of Political Science.  Seated on the far left in the background is Dr. Mae King, a colleague, I am standing next to her, next to me is one of the student awardees and--who was a minor in this department, next to him is Congress--former Congressman [HistoryMaker Reverend] Walter Fauntroy and next to him is one of our students who's currently finishing at Harvard University Law School [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in the law program. Brandon [ph.] is his name.
Speaker 2: This is a picture that I unearthed in the library basement of Founders [Founders Library, Howard University, Washington, D.C.] with the help of the librarian, of the fiftieth anniversary--for the fiftieth anniversary of Phi Beta Kappa of black colleges and it was taken in 1953 when Ral- when Ralph Bunche the former chairman of this department returned to give the opening address and Howard shares its fiftieth anniversary with Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee].  Currently two other institutions are involved and in the picture, among others are Ralph Bunche on the far right standing; in the center with his hands in a diamond shape is Mordecai Johnson the well-known president of Howard University.  On the far left, yeah, near the far left with his eyes apparently closed is Alain Locke the famous philosopher who is considered by many the intellectual father of the Harlem Renaissance.  Next to him, the woman in the back, taller woman towards the center is Merze Tate who taught here for many years in history but, surprisingly is the first black female--Ph.D. in political science; she got it from--at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in, I think the '50s [1950s], I'm not sure of the exact date.  Further towards the right as you face it is the very light complected man is Rayford Logan the well-known historian, back towards the left--there is Rayford Logan, the historian who wrote a number of things and just as I came here he invited me to contribute a chapter to his new book, but passed shortly after that.  And then there are a number of other prominent people whose I--names temporarily escape me or I can't fit the face with the name.
