Story_ID: 120357
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns, observing are Gloria Arrington and Doretha Martin.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Clyde Martin.  Common spelling, C-L-Y-D-E, M-A-R-T-I-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, you don't have a middle name or anything?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 28, 1936 in Bolivar County, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: All right, and sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm presently working with the Internal Affairs Division of the Cook County Sheriff's Department, Cook County, Illinois.
Speaker 1: All right, okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is December 10th, 2003.
Speaker 1: All right, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are 1900 South Michigan Avenue, Chicago, Illinois at The HistoryMakers.
Story_ID: 120358
Speaker 1: All right, now before we go into depth, there are five "People" magazine-ish type questions we always ask, and they just require a short answer.  The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Probably potato chips.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes, winter.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, probably green.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, I never--I was on vacation for eighteen years, fifty-two weeks a year, so I never thought about vacation and I was broke during those eighteen years so it wasn't important for me once I was employed to take a vacation.  So vacation doesn't mean anything to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there any place you'd like to go to relax?
Speaker 2: Probably driving along when I can smoke a cigar and chew that and spit it out the window, but other than that, I have none, relaxing is not important.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  My favorite phrase would be, I really can't say it but "Go to work".
Story_ID: 120359
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now sir, I'm going to ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family.  I'm going to start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name was Ora, O-R-A, and her maiden name was Bibbs, Ora, B-I-B-B-S, Martin, M-A-R-T-I-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't know what that is.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have any idea, you know?
Speaker 2: Somewhere in Carroll County, Mississippi, which is around Winona, Mississippi, as best as I can recollect in that area.
Speaker 1: Okay, well what do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace 'em?
Speaker 2: Well, I can only go back to her.  I knew my grandfather, on my mother's side, very little about him and I knew a couple of aunties and one uncle, a couple of uncles, basically, but other than that I don't know anything about them.
Speaker 1: Okay, did your grandfather or any of your uncles or aunts or your mother talk about the family history?
Speaker 2: Not to me, being a seventh child I guess I was too young and they had gotten too old, so, and this history thing was not like it is now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: People didn't want anybody to know the struggles that they had gone through.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you--but you do know they went through some struggles before?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, if you were black and in the state of Mississippi, you went through some struggles.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what did they do for a living?
Speaker 2: Farm.  We had a--some land that we owned in Bolivar County and we were farmers.  My uncle had a barbershop and I don't know what the rest of them did.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what--did you know your grandfather well, at all?
Speaker 2: Not really, no, no I didn't know him.  I just saw him, but I didn't know him well.
Speaker 1: Okay, did they have a chance to go to school there in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Me?
Speaker 1: No, them?
Speaker 2: Him?
Speaker 1: Them, your--
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother and them went.  I think they probably went to eighth or ninth grade or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so are there any stories in the family that they tell about life down there?  You said it was hard, I mean, was there?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know, not really, just keeping alive.
Speaker 1: Okay so--
Speaker 2: Get away from racism as best as you knew how, to just survive.
Story_ID: 120360
Speaker 1: Did they tell you anything about how to keep away from--stay out of trouble?
Speaker 2: You knew how to stay out of trouble.  You knew how to--you wouldn't be able to survive, it was an instinct that you would get, you know, like--like black people now are not together.  Then, I can recall where the farmers--in this area was a lot of black farmers and they owned parcels of land and every farmer would get their crops planted whether they liked one another or not and they would sing old gospel songs and that was an indication of communication.  So they would know--they would sing a certain song and they would know to meet by--in the woods at a certain place at night to discuss racism and how to defer it and get around it and these kind of things, and I remember that.  I remember going with my father to these meetings.  I didn't understand what was going on and what they were talking about but the song, these old black gospel songs came from this kind of thing.  That they would sing a certain song like "Precious Lord" wasn't popular then, it wasn't no "Precious Lord" but it was something like, I can't remember what they are but it was a song that they would sing and that meant meet so and so.  And back to the farmers.  No farmers' crops was left in the field.  Whether they liked one another or not, if you were slow getting your farm product in and ready for the market, they would help one another and they were together.  If they had not been together, they would not have survived and that's--that's why I get this drive in me to survive.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir, well thank you for that 'cause that's important to know 'cause those are good details.  Anything else about your mother's side of the family that you remember?
Speaker 2: Not really, not really, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, did she have a lot of sisters and brothers?
Speaker 2: I imagine five or six.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.  I can recall a couple of names but I'm not really sure.
Story_ID: 120361
Speaker 1: Okay, now let me ask you about your father's side of the family.  Can you give us his full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name was Lee, L-E-E, Martin, M-A-R-T-I-N.
Speaker 1: All right, and what was his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't have a clue.  I don't recall what his date of birth and you know my sister and I barely knew him.  I don't remember.  She would probably know.  I don't know what his date of birth was.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was he born in Bolivar County [Mississippi] or born--
Speaker 2: No he was born like down around Monticello, Mississippi, down in that area.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well what do you know about his side of the family?
Speaker 2: Very little, very little.  In fact, I don't know anything about his side of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you ever meet any of his--his parents or relatives?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he never talked about--
Speaker 2: No, he was a tough taskmaster.  A very good provider and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he never talked about how he grew up or anything or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, did he talk about how he got to Bolivar County instead of staying in Monticello?
Speaker 2: No, I can't even recall how he met my mother [Ora Bibbs Martin].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I know I'm the seventh child and I don't--I just can't remember that at all.
Speaker 1: So they didn't talk about how they met?
Speaker 2: No, they didn't talk to their children and that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was kind of a pretty standard practice in those days.  Adults didn't tell children a lot of things, right?
Speaker 2: I remember this though.  Every Sunday morning, we all had to eat breakfast together, that was a--that was the real deal and I knew that my father would not eat off of just a plain table, he would have to eat off of a white tablecloth and we all had to be down Sunday morning in spite of, but other than that, you could get away with not being there but Sunday morning what everybody would eat and we--I can remember we had steak and eggs and hot biscuits and rice.  I can recall that as a child.
Speaker 1: Yeah that's pretty good eating for breakfast, I guess.
Speaker 2: Well we weren't--I told you my father was a good provider.  He knew the deal.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, well tell us about your father.  What kind of personality did he have?  You said he was a hard taskmaster type, you know?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, he--he was tough.  Not necessarily, you knew if he said something he meant it.  If he said, "Don't do it", you knew not to do it.
Story_ID: 120362
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I remember one thing about my mother [Ora Bibbs Martin], she always told me, I don't know about my other brothers, that you never get a girl pregnant.  I can recall that and just before she died and I was getting in that area of liking girls and she always stressed that, very strongly.  I've been with my wife [Doretha Martin] almost fifty years.
Story_ID: 120363
Speaker 1: So your father [Lee Martin] was a farmer, basically?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, and was he sharecropping?
Speaker 2: No, we owned our own land.
Speaker 1: Okay, well that's interesting 'cause a lot of people didn't, so--
Speaker 2: We owned our own land, you know, and he rented some acreage, you know, and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and you said he went to about to eighth grade, you think?
Speaker 2: Something like that, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what about your mother [Ora Bibbs Martin].  What was she like and what did she do?
Speaker 2: Very mild-mannered.  She stressed education, you go to school, you know, and you didn't go to school until the crops were in then.  And then it eventually got better where you could go to school when school began and school ended, you didn't have to come out and go to the fields and this kind of thing.
Story_ID: 120364
Speaker 1: I can remember my mom [Ora Bibbs Martin] and dad [Lee Martin] had buried money in the ground 'cause they wouldn't let you put money in the banks.  Black people, or colored people, or niggers, weren't supposed to put money in the banks.  It's a real deal so they had to put it in the ground.  It might be some--it might be still buried there.  I'm going to go back and look.
Speaker 2: Hmm, okay, so what else?  These are pretty good memories, actually.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember the money would get wet and they would put it in the stove and dry it out and this kind of thing and as a small kid I can recall that.
Speaker 2: Did they bury the money in a jar or something?
Speaker 1: They would it in like cans and wrap it in Grit newspaper.  You don't know anything about the Grit newspaper?  That was the [Chicago] Tribune of the Mississippi Delta.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah I've seen Grit before.
Speaker 1: So you know--you have an idea of what I'm talking about?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's kind of a--
Speaker 1: It came out once a month or something.
Speaker 2: --a Southern newspaper.  I mean it's a paper that spanned the whole South, basically--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --called Grit, right.  Did you--did they ever get the Chicago Defender down there or any of the Northern papers?
Speaker 1: We used to get the Pittsburgh Courier, you used to get that paper, I can recall that, in my later years.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: In my teenage years, I remember reading some editions of that.
Story_ID: 120365
Speaker 1: What were you like when you were a little kid?  Did you take after your mother [Ora Bibbs] or father [Lee Martin]?
Speaker 2: Probably didn't take after anybody.  You know, I probably used to get a whoppin' every morning for what I was gonna do 'cause I was gonna do something.
Speaker 1: So you were a--active kid who got in trouble, huh?
Speaker 2: Umm, I don't think it was trouble.  I was just--I wanted to make stuff happen.  Like I was driving a tractor when I was seven, eight years old, planting the fields, this kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Seven or eight?   Okay, so you were--you were--had a lot of energy, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Probably.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you would get a spankin' for what you were gonna do?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they know I was gonna do something during that day.  Not a spanking, you'd get your butt whopped.
Speaker 1: This is just the start of day?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a new one.  Come on let me give it to you now, and you won't have to worry about it so you gonna do something.
Speaker 1: Well, how did that make you feel to start a day?
Speaker 2: It didn't make no difference.  I knew I had it behind me.
Speaker 1: I think that's one way of looking at it.
Speaker 2: You see, I could do whatever I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Hmm, okay.  So, what were your favorite things to do?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  We would go to the woods, go hunting, go fishing, these kind of things.  Visit somebody and stay away from home too long.  That was the big thing.  You stayed gone too long and didn't--and didn't check back in.
Speaker 1: So you'd get in trouble for--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --staying out too long, okay.
Speaker 2: Or you didn't let sun catch you away from home.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, you heard them talking about going piece a way.  You don't know what that is, do you?
Speaker 1: No, what's that?
Speaker 2: People go piece a way with you and you go piece a way with them.  So you'd be getting' home about nine o'clock at night.  And that was a fun game, like going to the circus or something.
Speaker 1: Well, just walking a peaceful way with somebody?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and they would walk a piece a way with you so you never would get home, kids, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, all right, so say we're going home together then, you'd walk a piece a way with me, then--
Speaker 2: Go piece a way with you.
Speaker 1: --but you'd never get there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so eventually you just go on home.  They go their way and you go your way.
Speaker 1: Okay, that way you can keep your conversation going?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Keep ahead of the fun.
Speaker 2: Playing up and down the road, and other kind of thing.
Story_ID: 120366
Speaker 1: Now what about school?  Did you like school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: I went to a rural school that was in a church and then I went to Cleveland, the public school system in Cleveland, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I think it--then it was H.M. Naylor [ph.] Grammar School and then I went onto Cleveland Colored Consolidated High School [Cleveland, Mississippi], whatever that means.  I never understood it, probably could never even spell it out.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you started off in a--
Speaker 2: In a rural church.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: White Star Missionary Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: My sister's smiling.  She didn't know I could recall all this.
Speaker 1: White Star Missionary Baptist Church.  And you were there for kindergarten or first grade or--
Speaker 2: First--I think we left there when we were about--about third or fourth grade, something like that.  I don't--I can't remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so you went there to, I guess about the fourth grade, then you went to Cleveland, Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was that a long way from where you lived?
Speaker 2: Five miles.
Speaker 1: So how would you get to school?
Speaker 2: I don't believe you're asking that.  We walked.  You're going to hear some stories.  I'm going to tell you something.  You ain't going to believe this but I'm going to tell you.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you all walked five miles?
Speaker 2: One way, and you walked bare feet 'cause you didn't want your shoes to get muddy and they don't want the kids to laugh at you and all that, you know.  Your mother would fix you a biscuit and a sausage so you would have--'cause there was no lunchroom for black folk.  So then went on through school and did all right and played football and all that.  I was a state official for basketball.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: Referee.
Speaker 1: Now that's later on, right?
Speaker 2: That's later on.
Speaker 1: That's later on, okay.  But when you were a--when you were a kid, see you walked five miles to school and you still had energy to play when you got there?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the five miles back home?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--so what time would you start your day off?
Speaker 2: Well you'd get up early, when the sun come up, or earlier, when it was still dark.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you didn't miss going to school.  The teacher whopped you if you were late and your momma whopped you when you got back home.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause people would know--there was no standing around, you're either in the field or in school or in the house.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how long did it take to get to school--going?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  You're on time.  I don't remember.  I can't remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just imagine walking in there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess a couple of hours at least?
Speaker 2: Nah, about a hour, hour and a half.
Speaker 1: Hour and a half.
Speaker 2: Something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So--
Speaker 2: And then we eventually got a car, I think, and then my brother would take me and--take us to school and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A 1936 Ford, I can remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay, born the same year as you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 120367
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: I had three sisters and three brothers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm the seventh child.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're the youngest of all?
Speaker 2: I'm the youngest.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, how'd you get along with your brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: They loved me, I think.  I think my sister that broke my bottle when I was a baby.  She break my Durkee bottle.  They used to put a nipple on that Durkee bottle.  She broke my bottle and stopped me from sucking it.
Story_ID: 120368
Speaker 1: So how many students were in your class in school?  How--about how many did you have?  How big was school?
Speaker 2: I imagine--when I was like sixth or seventh grade [H.M. Naylor Grammar School], it was like sixty or seventy started and then they would drop off, and drop off, you know, especially kids would come late 'cause they stayed on those different plantations, you know, and the white people wouldn't let them come to school until all the cotton was in.  So they would come late and they would leave early.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you have more than one classroom?
Speaker 2: Uh, when we got to Cleveland [Colored Consolidated High School in Mississippi], I think it was more than one.  I'm sure it was.  We moved--had a couple of different classrooms.  It was a pretty nice school system.
Speaker 1: Okay, the public school in Cleveland?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  Do you remember any of your teachers?
Speaker 2: I remember, yes, I remember quite a few of 'em.
Speaker 1: Yeah, what do you remember about 'em and do you remember the names?
Speaker 2: I remember they were tough and they stayed in contact with your parents.  And they whopped your butt and then your parents whopped you.  It wasn't like today where these kids do whatever they want to do.  That didn't happen.
Speaker 1: Did they send notes home with you?
Speaker 2: I don't--I don't, no they didn't send no notes.  I don't remember how they did it but they used to have teachers meeting maybe once a month or two weeks and my mom [Ora Bibbs] would go in and you knew if you had messed up, you were in big trouble.
Story_ID: 120369
Speaker 1: Now that part of Mississippi in those days, did most people have phones?
Speaker 2: Phones?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Telephones?
Speaker 2: Yeah, drums.  You beat the drums, everybody understood what you said, no, we didn't have any.
Speaker 1: Well I'm asking because this is for history, you know--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --so we gotta--
Speaker 2: No, there were no phones.
Speaker 1: --we gotta--gotta ask, you know.  So, okay, all right, 'cause--
Speaker 2: I can recall when a man came along and sold us electric pump.  You used to pump the water out the ground and we put that pump on and oh, man, you didn't have to pump the water to feed the hogs and the chickens and the cows and the mules.  Those were great things, they put that pump on there.  Now we were one of the first people in that rural area to have a pump, you know, and that was amazing.
Speaker 1: Did you all have a radio?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--I can remember listening to parts of Joe Louis' fights, you know.  As far as I can remember, we had a radio.  I can remember when we had a refrigerator.  I remember when the icebox leaving and we had a refrigerator and you couldn't go in that refrigerator unless you--you didn't go in there period.  If you did, you got your butt whopped.  But I can remember that.
Speaker 1: Hum, okay.
Speaker 2: Now this has to be late '30s [1930s], '39 [1939], '41 [1941], '42 [1942], we had a refrigerator back then.  Car, we had that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you all had--when you were a real little kid, you all had a refrigerator and a car?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Electric lights, I can remember.  I don't remember when the electric lights came but I was awfully small--I was awfully small when they came in but I know we had them.  Lights in every room.  I can--I can recall this.  I told you my daddy [Lee Martin] was a--he was a tough guy.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was fairly successful?
Speaker 2: I would say, yes, in that day and time, I would say, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 120370
Speaker 1: Now you were growing up during World War II [WWII].  I guess you were a little kid when World War II's going--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember my--my two brothers met in Japan in World War II.  I can remember them going off to war.  Sad day for us.  I remember when they came home, I can remember that.
Speaker 1: So they left separately and they actually met in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, in Japan.
Speaker 1: --Japan, all right.
Speaker 2: It was all in the paper that they met down--in the Grit or something.  But I can recall that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember one of my brothers came home and never did go back.  When his leave was up, he had stole the whole packages of photo books and he was writing a new photo every day and whenever it ran out, I can remember that.  And they finally--he finally went on back after my mother [Ora Bibbs Martin] talked to him.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he stayed A-W-O-L?
Speaker 2: A-W-O-L.
Speaker 1: A long time?
Speaker 2: I guess he stayed home a couple of months, then he went on back.  He ended up making Master Sergeant and all this.  I can remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can remember him buying my first bicycle.  I can remember this.  I had a bicycle.
Story_ID: 120371
Speaker 1: Now did you all go to church a lot?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we went to church back then on the first Sunday.  I was out--'cause preachers didn't have full churches, you know, and they would go a different church every Sunday and get their little money.  I can remember that.
Speaker 1: So sort of a circuit minister?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Like country circuit minister?
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, the church basically just stayed idle until he showed up on the first Sunday?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well you had Sunday school on Sunday mornings but the preacher wasn't there.  The preacher came in on the first Sundays.  Then you had school in the church during the school days because when we left, there was still children out there that had to go to school that weren't fortunate as we were that could go up to the public school in Cleveland.  See, Bolivar, Mississippi has--where our mailbox was had a public school but we didn't go there.  I guess my parents [Ora Bibbs Martin and Lee Martin] felt that it was a better school system in Cleveland [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so did you go to White Star Missionary Church or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --all right.  Is it Missionary Baptist or Missionary--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, Missionary Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: --Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 120372
Speaker 1: Well tell me about high school.  Now where did you go to high school?  That's right the Cleveland--
Speaker 2: Cleveland--
Speaker 1: --Consolidated--
Speaker 2: --Cleveland Colored Consolidated High School [Cleveland, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Okay, Cleveland Colored Consolidated High School and that was--was that next to the grade school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, was high school different from grade school in--
Speaker 2: Were you--one way I can say that that it wasn't different because intelligent people, all you have to do is listen to what the teacher going to say 'cause that's what your test is going to be on.  Your test is going to be on what they say.  So if you sit and listen, and you could do very well.  I made the honor roll and all that and I did all that.
Speaker 1: Okay, were there still people that could only go to school part-time then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was just some people coming in part-time.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you went all through--all the--and graduated.  You went on through all twelve grades?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In 19-when [President Dwight D.] Eisenhower desegregated the schools [1954], they sent us to Biloxi [Mississippi] to bring buses back and we were instructed to carry the buses to the white school.  We took them buses and brought them to the black schools in Bolivar County [Mississippi].  I led that campaign and the teachers and the principals were scared to use 'em.
Speaker 1: Now, that's later, right?  That's a little later?
Speaker 2: That's when I was a sophomore in high school.
Speaker 1: You were a sophomore in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well tell us about this.  Give us some more details about this.  Now you were a sophomore in high school, this is 1954?
Speaker 2: In 1954, '55 [1955], I might have been a junior.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: I might have been a junior.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: And what--
Speaker 2: And whenever Eisenhower desegregated the schools, they started to bring buses down, or give buses to the black schools, and so I went with an old station wagon to Biloxi, Mississippi but--there were seven of us in the station wagon and we brought six buses back and we took the buses to the different black schools.  They were automatically supposed to go to the black schools but the white schools said, "Give the niggers the raggedy buses."  We didn't do that.  I refused to do it.  And I--
Speaker 1: So, I'm--
Speaker 2: --I almost got sus--expelled but then they didn't bother me.  Then they was teaching us vocational agriculture.  I'm a junior now I can--I said listen, I don't know nothing about raising no cotton and corn, I'm going to Chicago [Illinois].  So I pulled a boycott.  We didn't leave school, we just stood out by the flagpole so they brought business in the school.  So we had shorthand and typing.  When I left high school, I could type sixty-five correct words a minute.  I put that program in place and I'm sure they've elevated now.  Our class was so bad that they wouldn't even put the high school picture up with the rest of the picture.  They missed that year.  One of the boy, the president of the class, makes the fuel to go to the moon.  He had a Ph.D. in physics from the University of Arizona [Tucson, Arizona].  So that class was something else.  They still haven't put the picture up.
Story_ID: 120373
Speaker 1: I just wanted to ask you to go back to that bus story again.
Speaker 2: Well, when Dwight Eisenhower, who was the president of the United States, the first Republican president in, I guess, forty years, he desegregated the schools and then they began to go across the South and try to make the playing field as level as possible.  They had a thing saying separate but equal.  So separate but equal meant, meant to me, that we go get these buses, that's what it meant to me as a person, a kid, that these buses are ours.  The principal told me of the school, his name was Dan Smith, God bless his soul, to take these buses to the white school.  Didn't do that.  We carried a bus to Mound Bayou, Mississippi.  They're all black town.  We carried a bus to Shaw, Mississippi.  We carried a bus to Rosedale [Mississippi].  Then we brought the rest of 'em to Cleveland [Mississippi] and they were scared to use those buses.  And then--then they started to use 'em because the white people didn't come to get 'em.  They knew if they came to get 'em and anybody protested, that they would be in trouble.  So they were just forgotten.  And then I started driving school bus and went to--
Speaker 1: While you were still in school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) High school, yes.
Speaker 1: High school, okay.
Speaker 2: High school kids drove buses and we made, I think--I think I made two hundred dollars a month.  That was a lot of money but I would leave home at four o'clock in the morning on my run 'cause I would make three trips and when I got to the school, there would be so many kids on the bus that the bus would just, sitting down, and I would make three runs.  When I got through, and I started my evening taking the kids home, it would be seven o'clock at night.  And I did that all the way through school and I was glad to see the kids able to get a ride to school then but that bus thing was something that I did that I often thought about and, and people said, "You're crazy."  You see, white folk think black people, you either militant or you're crazy.  Now, do you know where I fit in?  I was crazy.  So I played it.  I played the crazyism.
Speaker 1: All right that's--
Speaker 2: Now, and I remember a white guy--white bus driver ran me off the road with a bus and I shot up in his bus because I carried a .22 rifle with me.  So then I ran and hide.  I hid, so I know they're going to kill me now for shooting up in this bus but I'm prepared to die.  But I was smart enough to go to the sheriff's house and sit in his garage.  And he came home, his name was Will Earl Kent.  He came home, I'm sitting up in his garage and he jumped out and pulled his gun out.  He said, "We've been looking for you."  I said, "I know it."  I said, "Well can I tell you what happened before you kill me?"  He said, "Yes."  I told him.  He said, "I believe that 'cause you wouldn't be here if you hadn't had done that."  He said, "Do you know who I am?"  "Yes."  And he told me this, he says, "I got enough land to take a blackbird all day to fly across it, starting at sun up to sun down, he wouldn't fly across it."  He had a lot of land, didn't he?  He was awfully rich.  So he took me in the house and he told his maid or cook, said, "Make him a pallet on the back porch 'cause I'm going to ride with him tomorrow morning on his bus."  And he did.  And they were running out there and I always remember, he had two .45s on him.  He buckled them guns on and rode on the bus with me and I made my runs and they left me alone.  And the bus story is history.
Speaker 1: That's a remarkable story.  So, the sheriff just believes you, huh?
Speaker 2: He believed me.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I think going to his house, waiting on him to come home, was the turning point and I never had no problem with him.
Story_ID: 120374
Speaker 1: Okay, now the protest at the school [Cleveland Colored Consolidated High School, Cleveland, Mississippi], now that was with the principal.  You all had a dispute about what the curriculum was going to be about, right?
Speaker 2: Well, what they wanted us to go to Home Economics and go to FFA, Future Farmers of America, we ain't got ten acres of land.  What you gonna farm?  So, my idea was to bring some business courses in there.  I didn't know nothing about shorthand or typing but I knew it had to be something better.  And the people kind of followed me.  They kind of followed me, you know, 'cause they thought I was crazy.  I said, we just stood around the flagpole.  We didn't go out there and smoke and we didn't--we'd sing, you know, and then in about a month, they brought a lady in from Jackson College [Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi], her name was Exola Briggs [ph.], I never will forget her.  And she came in and the first semester she taught shorthand.  The second semester she taught typing.  Now, but the catch to that was, you had to maintain a seventy average.  You dropped below seventy, you went to Home Economics or to FFA, Future Farmers for the white folk.
Speaker 1: Okay, now tell me, were you a good student in school?
Speaker 2: I was on the honor roll.
Speaker 1: Okay, and who were some of your--the teachers that you remember then, now?
Speaker 2: Oh, we had one teacher named Pauline Holmes.  She was our senior sponsor.  She was a great teacher.  I think she's still alive.  I had a lady to teach us English, her name was Izola Thomason [ph.], Ms. Thomason.  I had another teacher named Ms. Thorpe and I remember these teachers, but they were teachers.  They could teach plus not only they were good teachers they knew your family.
Speaker 1: Was there any special teacher or mentor in the community for you?  Somebody that advised you?
Speaker 2: No, I'll get to that.  There are some people that I tried to set as role models but they-not then.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  You seem to be a progressive-thinking student, I mean, you know, your activities as a student are unusual.
Speaker 2: Well I was--we had a trial-wide and high-wide (unclear) there was something, I can't remember what they did but it was a state organization.  I was elected treasurer of that statewide office 'cause I wanted to handle money and they elected me into that thing on the first vote.  And it was some great days.  So I served that two years at that point and I had a lot of fun and--
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you play sports in high school?
Speaker 2: I played end.  I made the varsity team.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you played football.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your school would play the other black schools around--
Speaker 2: Yeah, in that area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We won the State Championship one time, I think it was my senior year.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what year did you graduate?
Speaker 2: It had to be '55 [1955], I think.  Fifty-five [1955], I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Fifty-six [1956]?  Fifty-five [1955]--'55 [1955] or '56 [1956] 'cause I came here in '56 [1956].  No, '55 [1955].  It had to be '55 [1955] 'cause I started to work with Jays [Potato Chips], December of '56 [1956].
Speaker 1: Okay, now how did you--
Speaker 2: December 27 [1956].
Story_ID: 120375
Speaker 1: Now how did you come to Chicago [Illinois]?  When you were on the verge of graduating from high school, were you thinking about going to college or anything?
Speaker 2: No, I--I couldn't even go, I didn't have any money.
Speaker 1: Well, you were an honor student and, you know, you would think that, you know, that would be a natural thing to do.
Speaker 2: Well, probably was but I said if I can get to Chicago, I said, Lord, if you get me out of Mississippi, I'll become rich and a millionaire and that was my goal.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how did you get out of Mississippi?
Speaker 2: A friend of mine paid my way.  He paid my way.  A boy named Leon Harper [ph.].  I haven't reimbursed him yet.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: So then I came to Chicago--
Speaker 1: What'd he buy you a train ticket or bus ticket or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he bought me a train ticket.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what did your parents [Ora Bibbs Martin and Lee Martin] think of you?
Speaker 2: Well, my parents were all dead then.
Speaker 1: Oh, I didn't know that.
Speaker 2: My dad [Lee Martin] was here but my mother [Ora Bibbs] had passed on.
Speaker 1: Okay, I didn't know that.  Your mother died when you were--when you were--
Speaker 2: Ninth grade--
Speaker 1: Ninth grade--
Speaker 2: --or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your father moved to--
Speaker 2: He moved to Chicago.  There was the divorce and separated, he came to Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they separated before she died?
Speaker 2: Yup, uh-hum.
Speaker 1: All right, and well, so when you were in high school, when you--
Speaker 2: Was I going to that story with my sister?
Speaker 1: Well I just wanted to know when you were--
Speaker 2: Well, we had a big--we had a problem in our family.  I may as well put this in here.  They're saying don't put it in 'cause it's too--it's really vulgar so I'll omit that.
Speaker 1: Well, I'll just ask--what I was trying to ask was, when your mother died and your father's in Chicago, were you basically home by yourself and you and your brothers and sisters or what?
Speaker 2: No, all my brothers and sisters was gone so people came and took me in.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A presiding elder in the Methodist Church, his name was Reverend Johnson.  His wife was named Elmira Johnson [ph.], had a daughter named Rosita.  They came and took me in.  And they made it clear to me, said, you can stay here, with us, until you finish school.  They said, the night that you graduate, don't come back.
Speaker 1: That's what they told you?
Speaker 2: That's what they did.  But the idea of the story, I went back and buried all three of 'em.  I took the money out of my account and paid for all three funerals but I feel good about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were good to me.
Speaker 1: All right.  So they were good to you but they said, after you graduate--
Speaker 2: You've got to hit the road Jack.  So I hit the road.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, you got a train ticket.  A friend bought you a train ticket to Chicago.  So did you come up and join your father in Chicago?
Speaker 2: No, I stayed with my oldest sister.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what part of Chicago did you--
Speaker 2: On the South Side, around 63rd and Maryland, in that area.
Speaker 1: In Woodlawn, yeah?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 120376
Speaker 1: And so you immediately started trying to find a job?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well my father [Lee Martin] had a grocery store [in Chicago, Illinois] so I worked there for a while and then this--this Irish kid was running that route, where the grocery store was located, and he said, "Why don't you come to Jays [Foods], we're looking for a good colored boy."  So I went over and I went over and I stayed in the man's office from seven o'clock that morning until the place closed 'cause they wouldn't talk to me.  They said, "We don't hire niggers".
Speaker 1: Well, did you get the wrong information from the Irish boy or what?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he couldn't tell me no more than that because they would have fired him.  So I just sit there and I sit there and I saw them eat their lunch and I was so hungry.  My stomach was--the lady threw half her sandwich in the wastebasket and she went to the washroom, I grabbed it.  I just sit there and finally the man said, "What can you do?"  I said, "I can chop and pick cotton."  He just fell out laughing.  I knew I had him.  I knew I had won that.  So then the next day he came to the store and said, "Can you start to work?"  I started to work on the 26th of December, in the snow.  Never knew what a potato chip was.  I've never seen it.  I didn't even know what snack foods were.
Speaker 1: So they didn't have those kind of foods in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: I think they had 'em but I just didn't--
Speaker 1: You didn't see 'em then?  Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm sure that they were there.  My sister probably had some but I didn't, you know, I wasn't fortunate enough to be able to buy any and that was the story with Jays.
Speaker 1: So what did they start you doing?
Speaker 2: I went right into sales.  They wanted me to quit.  So they took me to 47th and State, said there it is, go to work.  And I would always love the Jewish people because those old Jewish people, they knew what I didn't know what an invoice was or know what a sales ticket was, I didn't even know what a sales book looked like.  And they would go back and get their old receipts and show me and then we would count the bags, and this is four dozen nickel chips in this box and this is how you do it.  And they trained me.  Now I took a route from two hundred dollars a week when I left off, it was over ten thousand.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And every year they would take a route off of mine.  I changed the whole region from all white to all black and I couldn't even use the washroom when I went there.  I couldn't pull my truck in the garage till all the white guys had left but I said, I'm going to be the Jackie Robinson of the snack food world, and I did it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I remember--I remember once I sold a trailer load of potato chips--they weren't 53 footers, I think they were like 48 or 40 foot trailers--to Ernie Collins, we had a grocery store all night, at 70th--at 49th and St. Lawrence.
Speaker 1: These are Collins of the Collins--famous Collins brothers.
Speaker 2: Famous Collins brothers, Ernie Collins, God bless him.  Now, that was one of the guys that I tried to pattern myself after and when I sold this trailer load, I asked my best man to order this--this is what I need you to order for me.  He wouldn't order so I had to call production.  They brought a trailer out there.  He said, "If you are a fool enough nigger to want this, I'm going to bring it down 'cause we're going to get a chance to fire you."  The 4th of July was on a Monday.  My wife [Doretha Martin] and I, we took the three little girls down there and we stayed there from Friday night to Tuesday morning and everybody came through that store and bought a bag of potato chips.  I sold a whole trailer.  But that Friday they all came down from the main office 'cause they said, "Where you going to get your money from?"  I had the money he had paid me in a paper bag.  So I just dumped the money on the counter.  There your money is.  They'd never seen nothing like it.  They had never dreamed of this.
Story_ID: 120377
Speaker 1: Then, the guy's name was S.A. Mattila [ph.].  He said, what can I do for you, son?  I had been "boy" until I sold that trailer, now I'm "son".
Speaker 2: Now who is he?
Speaker 1: He was Executive Vice President of Jays.
Speaker 2: Okay, and how do you spell his name?
Speaker 1: I don't even know how to spell Mattila's name.
Speaker 2: Can you say it slowly so we can--might be able to--
Speaker 1: Mattila, M-A-T-T-I-L-A.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And his first--
Speaker 1: Silas [ph.], Silas Mattila.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And he put his arm around me.  He said--I said--I was sittin' on a Borden milk crate.  I couldn't put my chips on the inside of the truck, had to put 'em on the top of a canvas because--and then people would steal my stuff and it was rough but I made it.  So they sent me a new truck that Tuesday, a brand new Ford truck and my boss didn't know what to do so he gave the truck to a Polish guy.  And I got enough nerve, I said, "I'm going to call this man" and I called him.  And he said, "Where are you now?"  I told him where I was.  He said, go back to the branch.  And I went back to the branch and they went and got that boy and brought that truck out and put my stuff in it.  But before I got--before I get to that part of it, when--when they made me supervisor, assistant branch manager, I always carried kids with me but the kids had to bring their report cards and they would work with me after school 'cause my route was so big, I was making 75 and 80 stops a day and I was selling three or four truckloads of chips a day, nickel chips.  And I was working--when I first started, they had me on--they paid me $7.50 a week, everybody else was on 10 percent, 1 percent at the end of the year and a bonus form of payment.  I didn't say nothing.  I said nothing.  Wonder Bread saw me working, a guy from Wonder Bread.  He said, "Can you come and work for us?"  And he told me what the salary was and they would guarantee you a hundred and some dollars a week.  So I went in and told this Irish guy that had given me the job, I said, "I'm gonna give you a two week notice, I thank you for hiring me, but I'm going to work for Wonder Bread in two weeks."  And that Friday night, he didn't say nothin'.  My check jumped from the $7.50. They were paying me, in a brown envelope.  I think it was a hundred and fifty some dollars, take home.
Story_ID: 120378
Speaker 1: So you stayed with Jays [Foods] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Stayed with Jays.  Then I worked and worked and every year, they would take enough stops away from me to give another black guy a job, had to be black, I insisted on that, give another black guy a job.  And I worked and I worked and I went, found that boy that paid my way to Chicago [Illinois] (pause), gave him a job.  He ended up being king of sales for (gesture) (crying)--
Speaker 1: Take your time.
Speaker 2: Sometimes I think about all these shit they put me through.  So I found him and I gave him a job and he went (gesture) skyrocket.  In the meantime I was playing the politics of a con man, moving along and in 1967 the same Silas Mattila [ph.] came to me.  I was at 47th Street at the little Greek store and he was not going to fire me and he came in and touched me on the shoulders and I said, oh, I knew his feet.  I said, oh shit, I've got these two kids with me.  And he said, "When you're finished son, can I see you?"  And I said, oh my god.  I'm making big money now, helping a lot of people.  And so I went on out to--he always bought convertible Eldorados and he always wore two guns 'cause he was nothing but a gangster and he said, "Follow me back to the branch and bring the kids with you."  And I said, oh shit, I lost my job.  I get a new truck every year now and you name it, I got it.  Well, if I wanted somebody get a job, they got the job.  So, went back to the plant and these, guy named C.J. Collier and Bruno Grund, they opened the door.  Then I learned later that when he bought a new car, he would come by and let them hear that horn 'cause he was only gonna blow his horn one time.  And he blew the horn and I'm right behind him with the two kids on the truck; I'm right behind this Eldorado.  Oh, man, they fainted.  They hit the floor.  So he got out and got 'em up and says, "Come on in."  I parked my truck.  He says, "What do you want these kids to do?"  I said, "I'll take the empty boxes off" 'cause you got a nickel per box then 'cause it would cost them fifteen cent to make a box so they'd bring 'em back and use them seven, eight times, many more time than that.  So they made a ton of money on returned boxes.  So, I went in the office and we had a sales room and a office where the girls sat.  So he closed the door and he spin a chair around and sit back.  He said, "I've got a job for you."  I said, "I've got a job."  I said, "I got a job."  He says, "I want you to be assistant branch manager."  I said, "I don't re- ." I'm sure I didn't ask him what the description of the job was.  I didn't use those terms but it was in essence, what will I have to do?  He said, "I want every route just like yours."  I said, "Who will be my boss?"  He said, "All three of you will be working together and I'm the boss." I, "Suppose I fail?"  He said, "You're fired.  If you don't take this job, you quit."  The little Irish guy kicked me on the foot, he said, "Take the damn job."  So I took the job and boy I went to work.  We had two routes in the Loop.  When I left there we had ten and I worked day and night and I built it from--when I took over, the division was running two hundred thousand dollars a week.  When I left it was over ten million.  And I worked and I worked and I worked more.  And then the old guy that gave me the job, he got sick.  He loved that sauce, he loved to drink but he was all right with me.  And I had gone somewhere and I came back in the office and he was sitting at his desk with his head down crying, I said, "What's wrong, man?  Your wife die or something or kids die?  He said, "No, they fired me."  I said, "Fired you?"  So I picked up the phone off his desk and I called Mattila.  I said, "Why'd you fire this man.  I'm on my way out to see you."  I went out there and I asked the guy, "How much more time do you need to work to get your house paid for and your car paid for?"  He said, "If I can work another eighteen months, I'll be straight."  I said, "Okay."  I went out there and I walked in Mattila's office and I said, "If you fire him, I'm leaving."  He told me, "You're a damn foolish ass nigger."  I said, "If you fire him, I'm leaving too."  I took my keys and threw them on his desk.  He picked up the phone and called the payroll and said, "Reinstate Clarence Collier."  I said, "You're not doing the work, I'm doing the work."  And then it went on and went on and then Collier died and Bruno Grund got sick and they moved me into regional manager.
Speaker 1: Now this is 1973, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's about 1973 now.
Speaker 1: Seventy-three [1973], right.
Story_ID: 120379
Speaker 1: So this has been a--this has been a climb from '56 [1956] to '73 [1973] now?  Now you're regional manager, okay.
Speaker 2: And then the same boy that paid my way to Chicago [Illinois]--'cause you always had an option to pick your system.  And the man asked me and said, "Well, how would you feel, he said, what's going to happen if I put two black guys over this branch."  I said, "Nothing's gonna happen."  He said, "How would you feel like if I bring Leon in?"  I said, fine.  I said I don't have a problem with it.  He said, can you work with him?  Is he controllable?  I said, yes.  He said, well let's have him here in the morning and let's interview him.  So we had Leon in.  He didn't know what was going on and in the interview we're sitting there.  I said, "Leon, what would you like to be?  A rich Uncle Tom or a poor militant?"  And my boss's face just fell on down.  And Leon scratched his head, he said, what is--he was trying to figure out what I'm doing now.  And he says, "Well I would like to be a rich Uncle Tom."  I said, as far as I'm concerned, you got the job.  The boss got up and walked out.  He said, you're a damn fool.  He said, I've never seen no interview like that in my life.  And that was that.  And the story going on and I worked and worked and worked.  And then I got hooked up with the Daley family and--
Speaker 1: Now, why did you ask him that question now?  That's an interesting question.  I mean, was that really what he'd have to be?
Speaker 2: Yeah, if you want to survive.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If you're militant, you're not going to go anywhere.  That's why I'm--well now I'm old and I can give this interview but you wouldn't have got this from me when I was working.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there's no place in the middle there?  You're either militant or Uncle Tom?
Speaker 2: It's a militant or Uncle Tom.
Speaker 1: So you can't be in the middle in the interview?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You're not going to be successful.  [HM] John Stroger, good man, professional Uncle Tom, that's why he can help so many people.
Speaker 1: And by Uncle Tom, you mean somebody that does what?
Speaker 2: People that can get stuff done for you that's on the inside.  It's better to be on the inside to piss out than to be on the outside trying to piss in, and you've got to understand this.
Story_ID: 120380
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now we were talking about what an Uncle Tom is and what an Uncle Tom does.
Speaker 2: An Uncle Tom to me is a guy that make things happen and he's able to do that because he's inside.  If you're not inside, you're not going to do that.  That doesn't fit for a white guy, it has to be a black guy's title and a lot of guys don't ever want to live with that, I live with it.  I know what I had to do and I did it and you can't beat the system.  They will destroy America and everything else before they--you think you're gonna take it, it's not going to happen.  So if you can get in there, and that's why I was reluctant to do the interview or to talk to anybody because once you start to talk to people, then you lose your strength.  They don't trust you any longer.  Well I don't care now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now there are people that are on the inside that, you know, the name Uncle Tom is a derisive kind of name that people use--they use it with scorn and not with--but are there people that are on the inside that don't do anything for the community?
Speaker 2: Yes, oh yes.  They don't do nothing.  They forget the community.  I betcha I've given out twenty-five thousand jobs, good paying jobs, not McDonald's jobs and it's almost fifty years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I would never have been able to do that without having a very strong wife [Doretha Martin] for fifty years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She's been there every step of the way.
Speaker 1: Now how did you and your wife meet?
Speaker 2: We met in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my oldest brother was married to an older sister so I picked up and brought her along and did her a favor.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm sure she appreciates it.
Speaker 2: I thought she did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 120381
Speaker 1: Now let me go back to--another thing I did that--that's gonna--you're gonna probably like this.  Once I got in management to see the power at Jays [Foods], every year I would bring in six black kids to run vacation routes.  They were going to college at one of them black schools.  And they would make six or seven thousand dollars a year to pay their tuition.
Speaker 2: Umm.  Well that's gotta be a wonderful gift for those--those kids, you know.
Speaker 1: And I did that till I left.  And they knew to come back every year and some would come back during the Christmas holidays.  A guy wanna take up during the Christmas holiday, I've got a good guy can make this run for me.
Speaker 2: Now, how come a guy like Clarence Thomas doesn't learn how to do this kind of thing or is he doing that, you think?
Speaker 1: Well he's not concerned about people.  You see I believe there is a God.  I believe in Jesus Christ.  I don't like black preachers 'cause I think they're thugs and pimps.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Do you think that--but I'm just trying to distinguish between these-the Uncle Toms that you described that are doing something for people and those who are the kind that--
Speaker 1: Those are sambos and you don't all get sambo mixed up with Uncle Tom.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So, they're two--
Speaker 1: Two different.  Read the story about it.  There are a lot of sambos.  You see, Clarence Thomas is a sambo.  There's a big difference.
Speaker 2: Well tell us the difference.  What's the difference?
Speaker 1: Well a sambo is just going to sell you out from what he can get for himself, perhaps his family, and Uncle Tom is a guy that's providing for the whole community which is out grabbing people, taking 'em with them, that's how I define it.  If it was my definition, that would be how I defined it.
Story_ID: 120382
Speaker 1: Now you ha- you served on a--several boards and those were the result of your friendship with Rich Daley [Richard M. Daley] now?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Now how did you become friends with Rich Daley?
Speaker 2: I don't recall, I just know we ended up being friends.
Speaker 1: Where did you first meet him?
Speaker 2: I--he was having a picnic when he was a State Senator and I took potato chips to the picnic and just left.  And they found me.  They'll find you when they want to find you.  Now I can call him now and he will respond.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they called you and they wanted to try to get you involved in the campaign?
Speaker 2: No, they didn't call me but I would call and get different things done and stuff was--just started falling in place.  I don't want to go into that too much.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: I'm going to leave that joint alone.
Speaker 1: Okay, but a relationship develops where he can call you and you can call him?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right and that relationship resulted in your appointment to some boards, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He appointed--he didn't--he didn't ask me if I wanted to serve.  He just said, this is it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is where you go.
Story_ID: 120383
Speaker 1: So then when Borden's bought Jays [Borden Inc. in 1986] and I came back to--'cause he called me down, and says you're going to sit on this board and they did all the stuff and all that, the credence and--
Speaker 2: So Borden's bought Jays--
Speaker 1: Right, and messed it up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so I came back and called them to inform them that I had been appointed to the chairman of the Urban Renewal Board.  I don't want you to be blindsided and know that one of your regional managers was here.  The guys, well I'm gonna have to ask Borden's.  I said, "You don't have to ask Borden nothing.  You weren't listening."  I said, I'm informing you.  I said, you don't want to take [Richard M.] Daley on.  So that was the end of that.  Then the Borden's people were good to me, they were good to me and then a black lady, executive vice president was named Judy Barker, and she kind of put her arms around me, and it was like I had a way of winning people over.  They felt sorry--I think they felt sorry for me.
Speaker 2: Now what do you mean by that?  Why do they--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) I got nothing.  If my wife [Doretha Thomas] and I were to just--kept everything for us, we would have been on a boat cruise forever but whatever we may be, I do it, it was open to everybody.
Speaker 2: Okay, so they saw you as kind of a poor guy who--I mean, I don't know.  What did they--
Speaker 1: I don't know that.  I never discussed it with them I just--I don't know what they think about me.  A lot of people ask me how did I meet the mayor?  I said, I think you ought to ask the mayor, maybe he can recall, I certainly don't.
Speaker 2: So you think that some people feel that they're superior in terms of social status--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and so forth to you because of your economic--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --condition and that sort of thing?  Okay.
Speaker 1: But my wife tells me that, and my sister tells me, that when I got sick and they operated on me in Mercy Hospital here, that they had to shut the hospital down, so many people came.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: They thought I was going to die.  They thought they had to break their plate 'cause they couldn't eat no longer.  But that was a good feeling over that.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So you served on the Urban Renewal Board as chairman.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: All right and then you said the city consolidated the--
Speaker 1: Both boards.
Speaker 2: Okay, the Community Development--
Speaker 1: Exactly, and then I served as Chairman of the Community Development Commission until I got sick with cancer and I couldn't handle that pressure.  It was just too much.  And now I'm just kind of moving along slowly.  In fact, I'm the oldest city commissioner of the Community Development Commission.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you've been on it now about--over ten years, I guess?
Speaker 1: Well, I guess I've been--however long Daley's been mayor.
Speaker 2: Yeah, since about '91 [1991], I believe.
Story_ID: 120384
Speaker 1: Now you're currently--you currently work for the Cook County Sheriff's Department--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and you started with the Sheriff's Department in '78 [1978]?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: So this is in addition to all the work you were doing?  You were working for the Sheriff's Department too?
Speaker 2: At night, yes.
Speaker 1: Now how did that happen?
Speaker 2: I told you, when I left Mississippi, you missed that, it went over your head, that if I got to Chicago [Illinois] I would become rich.  I didn't make the richness but at least I got--able to work.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--but how did you get with the Sheriff's Department?  What (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, they robbed me at Jays [Foods] and shot at me, I needed to carry my weapon, so I went and applied for the Sheriff's office and I was able to carry a weapon, legally.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They tried to kill me a couple of times.
Speaker 1: People just--hoodlums out on the street trying to rob you?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They shot at me twice.  We never caught anybody so then I needed to.
Speaker 1: Now did you have large sums of money on you--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --when they were shooting at you or--
Speaker 2: Nuh-uh.
Speaker 1: --what was the--what were the circumstances?
Speaker 2: I think they was trying to rob me.  They didn't know I didn't have any money.  They know I probably was accessible to money.
Speaker 1: So this is just street crime unrelated to you being with Jays or not?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: They didn't know who they were shooting at, in other words?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Both times I was going in Jays in the morning.  They were shooting at me.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was initially for self-defense that you applied for the Sheriff's Department?
Speaker 2: Sheriff's Department, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and now this is before you even knew Rich Daley, right?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: All right, so, okay.  So what did you do at the Sheriff's Department?
Speaker 2: Well I started off as an inspector and then the Sheriff Department had a part-time thing where you worked weekends and holidays for them.  I did that.  Then when O'Grady came in, there was no part-time.  I was coming to the end of my career with Jays so I went full-time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're currently an inspector?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: With the Sheriff's Department and--
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: --now what do you inspect?
Speaker 2: Well we--anybody get a county paycheck, we can mess with 'em from the Forest Preserve, to sheriff, police, Cook County hospitals, anybody working Cook County.  County jail, Department, which is Department of Corrections, can do it all.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you have a supervisor that assigns you different--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --okay, projects to inspect and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --programs.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so for instance you might inspect a jail or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, like you know that strip where they caught the people sleeping at Provident [Hospital]?  We've been watching that very closely.  If the human clock says, if it's three o'clock in the morning, you might go to sleep.  That's divine intervention that your body is going to be down.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you said there was a sort of a--when you inspect jails, it wasn't completely--I mean you're kind of limited as to what you can do, right?
Speaker 2: That's on the jail.  The rest of the place you can slip up on people but you can't get into that compound 'cause somebody has to let you in.  They even--if you drive in, they open your car and check your car and they search you, there's no weapons and all that.  So by then everybody knows you're there.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: 'Cause they got radios.
Speaker 1: So even an inspector working for the county doesn't get into a county jail without going through--
Speaker 2: You just can't walk in.
Speaker 1: So you can't catch anybody--
Speaker 2: Not really but you can--you can make sure that they are doing what they're supposed to do as far as you can see.
Speaker 1: At least on that day?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have any interesting stories from--in your inspections?
Speaker 2: Not really, not really.  Most of those people are seasoned people.  I worked the first watch which is midnight.  I worked from ten to six and mostly seasoned people that, you know.
Speaker 1: Did you ever discover anything that was really bad that you had to report?
Speaker 2: No, you just caught people sleeping once in a while and you just write 'em up.  You give 'em the first two times, you pass 'em the second time, the third time you write 'em up.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how long does that kind of a work take?  I mean, it's like a--it's full-time now, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you go--I go to different places.  I worked last night.  I worked--I started at 9:30 and I worked till 5:30 this morning.
Story_ID: 120385
Speaker 1: Now you say you don't--you're not involved in church or anything like that, right?  You don't believe that the preachers are really on the up and up?
Speaker 2: They're sambos.  Now, Wilbur [Nathan] Daniel--you asked me about my role models.  I had the utmost respect for W.N. Daniel, who's passed and Ernie [Ernest] Collins, president and owner of Seaway Bank and those two guys that I had the utmost respect for.  And before they died, I was trying to get 'em together and both of them died on me.  So that was one goal I had that I could not pull it off.  But they were fantastic men, one did destruction and the other one (unclear) if I could have gotten together, but those are hard working men.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what did you think about the Harold Washington campaign when Harold ran for mayor?  How did you--how did you act in that situation?
Speaker 2: I'm going to pass on that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, okay.  I'll just leave it alone.
Story_ID: 120386
Speaker 1: When I ran for alderman, in the 17th Ward [Chicago, Illinois] and lost, I ran for Water Reclamation, I lost.  So I'm through with politics now.
Speaker 2: Okay.  When did you run for alderman?
Speaker 1: Eighty-three [1983].
Speaker 2: Okay, that's when the time that Streeter--
Speaker 1: Yup, right.
Speaker 2: --was a--Allan Streeter became the alderman, right?  And was that after he was--you ran against him when he--right after that appointment by Byrne?
Speaker 1: Right, Jane Byrne, right.
Speaker 2: Okay, right.  And Water Reclamation district now that's--now what do people actually do on that job?  I mean that's a job that--
Speaker 1: Well, that's an exciting thing.  A lot of people don't know anything about water reclamation.  They keep water pure for basically the United States.  All this stuff is connected in together.  If you read the other day, they just--they're on their last eight miles of the deep tunnel and they've come a 109 miles under here, under Cook County and that's a hell of a project to keep all our water pure and safe.  And I wanted to get in there and maybe I didn't--maybe I wouldn't have got it.  Maybe I'm not the politician that I think because I'm earnest.  And maybe that wasn't for me.  I know now it's not for me.  So I just want to die and forget it.
Story_ID: 120387
Speaker 1: Sir, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well, if--let's start with the school system.  If every school, and it should, they must have their own autonomy.  They must.  And that principal, whoever they may be, "must" be responsible for the education of those children, for their diets in the school, for the teachers that he hired and that the teachers are able to teach.  As long as it is set up the way it is now, you're getting an unfinished product 'cause they hold nobody accountable.  If that man can't run that school or that woman can't run that school, find somebody that can run it.  A teacher must be a manager and when you get your educational system straightened out, society will straighten out.  Kids gotta learn to go to school.  They don't wanna go.  If you can't put a program in place to educate these kids, we're lost.  I believe that my heart, I told my wife [Doretha Martin] and sister this, that I could take the worst high school in Chicago [Illinois] and two years it would be the best.
Speaker 1: How would you do it?
Speaker 2: First thing, you've got to take control.  You have to have the Joe Clark syndrome.  You saw that picture.
Speaker 1: You're talking about the teacher in Brooklyn [sic, New Jersey]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in New York who--
Speaker 2: Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] or somewhere.
Speaker 1: --carried a baseball bat with.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think you have to have that kind of mentality.  I'm not saying the baseball bat was right but the teachers--see, I can't be your friend and work with you.  I'm not your friend.  We've got a goal, let's sit and your achievement--just everybody doing their part.  And I believe that once you straighten the school system out, get rid of all these preachers, you're off and running for the black community.  You name one that has done something other than W.N.
Speaker 1: Other than, I'm sorry, W--
Speaker 2: Name one that's built some housing for people.  I'm not saying he was perfect but he was--he would have been a guy that they could set themselves after.
Speaker 1: Who is--
Speaker 2: I highly believe that.
Speaker 1: Who is this?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: W.N. Daniel from Antioch Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  In Englewood, right?
Speaker 2: In Englewood.  You know what he did over there?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, people watching this tape are not going to know.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: He built a--he built quite a bit of housing--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --around the church.  I know that, right.
Speaker 2: I'm not saying the man was perfect.  Nobody's perfect but I'm saying that he should have put us--a role model for everybody to try to follow.
Story_ID: 120388
Speaker 1: Being from Bolivar County, Mississippi, did you ever go back down there during the Civil Rights Movement at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Or did you have any kind of relationship with--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they were doing voter registration and all that stuff-
Speaker 2: I didn't go back.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: You know, I ain't no fool, now.  I've escaped one time, I wasn't going to go back twice.
Speaker 1: Do you go back now at all?
Speaker 2: Once in a while but not too often.
Story_ID: 120389
Speaker 1: Sir, when you look back at all the things that you've done so far, I mean, what do you have plans to do in the future?  I mean, what do you--what are you going to do next?
Speaker 2: Just retire.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Spend some time with my grandkids.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have--do you ever think about what your legacy is or what do you think your legacy is at this point?
Speaker 2: I never thought about it.  I'm hesitant even with this interview.  I don't think people can learn anything from what I did.  I think people have to decide in their minds what they're going to do.
Speaker 1: Okay, and is there anything that you would do differently if you had to do it again?
Speaker 2: I would go to school.  I would continue my education, probably get a master's degree in Business Administration.  That's the part that I missed.  I don't think I would have been any smarter but at least I would have had the credentials 'cause there are a lot of people with PhDs, it's crazy, unemployed.
Speaker 1: And, finally, is there anything we missed that we need to talk about that you want to tell us?
Speaker 2: No, just my wife [Doretha Martin] and my kids, I've been fortunate to have a good wife.
Speaker 1: How many kids do you have?
Speaker 2: Five, three girls and two boys.
Speaker 1: Did your father [Lee Martin] get a chance to see you become successful in business?
Speaker 2: No, only my oldest sister.  If I--you call it success, I don't think success is the right syllable that I would like to use.  I would like to say, she saw me work awfully hard.  And if people think in America today, as I speak, that if you think you're going to make it working an eight hour job, forget it.  People always said, don't take the office home with you.  That's the biggest lie in the world.  If you don't take it home, you get your best thoughts when you're laying in bed at night, you get up and jot 'em down.  So, eight hours don't do it.  I'm going to write a book, I think, and tell the real deal.
Speaker 1: Okay, and lastly, this is similar to legacy but a little bit different, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Don't remember me.  Just forget--I told my wife, just cremate me and throw the ashes away.  Forget, it's over, it's a done deal.
Speaker 1: Do you really mean that?
Speaker 2: Yes I do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes I do.
Speaker 1: All right, well thank you sir.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.
Story_ID: 120390
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  --when we start the camera, okay, now we're rolling, go ahead.
Speaker 2: This photo was taken at a--at our annual bonus dinner at Jays Potato Chips.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  What year?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Or what decade or what range of years?
Speaker 2: I would say, that had to be in the mid '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, perfect.  Next photo.
Speaker 2: Somebody's been cutting this.  I'm not going to ask you about it (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: I was at some dinner.  I don't know, early '80s [1980s].  You see, I've got a full head of hair.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Yes sir.  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That was one of my photos at Jays Potato Chips, when I was going on the route.  That had to be '50 [1950] something, '58 [1958], '59 [1959].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's a recent photo.  I would say late '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: You said you got sick.  You were sick at the time?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That was when I was attending church.  You can see cancer and the chemo had pulled my hair out.  It was in the '90s [1990s] somewhere.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And there was another church function in the--in the late '90s [1990s].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is the--Si Mattila, the guy in the center and that was the guy on the left is Bruno Grund, just G-R-U-N-D and that's me on the right.  We were at a bonus dinner.  That had to be '74 [1974], '75 [1975], something like that.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's when I was receiving my twenty-five or thirty year award presented by Si Mattila.  Oh, by the way, I never missed a day from work.
Speaker 1: Umm-umm.
Speaker 2: Never was late.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: My sister--that's when I was a baby (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's what your sister said.
Speaker 2: I've got a grandboy, looks just like that, three years old.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: I was working in the yard or something.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  No, that's in the house--
Speaker 2: A Christmas tree.
Speaker 1: A Christmas tree, yes.  The date's on here too.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  September '73 [1973].  September '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  The next picture's just made to send to-the olders the brothers that was in the Army.
Speaker 2: That's my oldest sister to the right, that's me in the center and my other sister, the mean one.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  The mean one.  What are your sisters' names?
Speaker 2: Gloria Arrington on the right and Vivian Taylor on the left.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  And when--let's see.  I'm trying to figure out from how old you looked.  What year do you think this would have been?
Speaker 2: Forty-three [1943], '44 [1944].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, fair enough.  Next.
Speaker 2: That's when I was attending church.  I'm on my way in or on my way out, one of 'em.  That'll be '79 [1979], not '79 [1979], well that's about '75 [1975].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  There's a date on there.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, July--I think '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: And that's Herbert Marceau in that picture with me.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  July '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Seventy-two [1972], okay.
Speaker 2: Is that Reverend Daniel's church?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I never was a member of Daniel's church.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: I can't see who this is?  That's me, at a function.  I was probably really good looking there.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  What year were you good looking?
Speaker 2: Then, I don't know.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Seventy [1970] something.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: How come I had made a fool out of myself?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right, not every day.  All right, go ahead.
Speaker 2: I don't recall when this was made.  I was young, I guess.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  It would have been in the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Yeah, it looks like the '60s [1960s] or '61 [1961], '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: Something like that.
Speaker 2: You can tell those ties and the lapel, skinny ties.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.  What about this one?
Speaker 2: That's when Richard [M.] Daley was State's Attorney.  I was having an affair and he was speaking at it.  It had to be in '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  What was the affair?
Speaker 2: I was there on a fundraiser.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And they--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  At the Condesa Del Mar.
Speaker 2: Condesa Del Mar.  He was--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  He was speaker for that night.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, great next.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: I don't recall that one.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  That one's in '64' [1964].
Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964], my wife says.
