Story_ID: 252198
Speaker 1: This is me probably at my fourth birthday party around 1947 in front of my grandmother's home in Cherry Hill, Baltimore, Maryland.  And the picture was most likely taken by my dad [Percy McClaine, Jr.], an amateur photographer.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Hi.  This is me.  I'm probably in my late twenties, early thirties.  This is at my aunt's house after I returned from my first trip to California at the height of me being rebellious.  And it's probably a afternoon lunch with all of her friends and my friends who were all surrogate relatives.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is my mom [Ruth Oliver] and dad, so I would think it's the early '50s [1950s].  Again, looking at the architecture I think it's in Cherry Hill in Baltimore, Maryland, which during the '50s [1950s] was a first black planned residential--planned community.
Speaker 2: This is me after a ballet recital.  I'm probably eight or nine there, so that would make it early '50s [1950s], '50 [1950], '51 [1951].  Doing whatever.  I was such a klutz, so they always took pictures of me like--looking like I could do whatever the class had been for the twenty years I was taken and never got anything out of.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: And I can see it's my grandmother's back yard in Cherry Hill again.
Speaker 1: This is my mom and she's at the wheel of the first convertible car she and my dad got.  I have no idea of the year and I can't tell by the car, but it's gotta be late '40s [1940s] or early '50s [1950s] 'cause he died when I was twelve.  So he died in '55 [1955].  So it's somewhere between I would say '48 [1948] and '55 [1955].
Speaker 2: This is my grandmother Lillie Thurston.  She's an albino.  She is my maternal grandmother and the person, I have no idea.  This is a crab feast in my paternal grandmother's backyard, and again I would say this is late '40s [1940s] or early '50s [1950s] just looking at the hairstyles, clothing.
Speaker 1: This is a--just a reference shot for you.  I don't have much of my family history.  So my maiden name is McClaine.  This is my father's gra--gravestone and his mother, my grandmother, Beulah [McClaine].  To the left is my great-grandmother and great-grandfather, Susan [McKim] and Samuel McKim.  And this is a family plot in Baltimore, Maryland.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: This is probably 1997-ish, me in a cemetery [Montparnasse Cemetery] in Paris [France] at the grave of Man Ray, one of my favorite photographers.  The thing that I like most is his headstone which says, unconcerned but not indifferent.  And so I am toasting him with a glass of champagne because he opened up the world of photography for me.
Speaker 2: I'll date this around 1995.  I was fortunate enough to meet one of my heroes.  To the right is Congresswoman Shirley Chisholm and to the left is Midge Costanza, who was [President James Earl] Jimmy Carter [Jr.]'s chief of staff and she knew that Shirley Chisholm was a hero.  So when she came to San Diego [California], Midge arranged for me to have dinner with her.  One of the most memorable nights of my life.
Speaker 1: Another icon for me, Gloria Steinem.  The women's movement from the early '70s [1970s] shaped a lot of what I'm about and she, to me, was one of the icons of that movement.  And I had the opportunity, again through Midge, to meet her when she was in San Diego making a speech and we had dinner and tea, and all those good things and talked about how shitty the world is for women (laughter).  I wanna see what you make that caption.
Speaker 2: Just a publicity shot of me for my business that I owned in San Diego and--around 1992, TheaterGoers [International, San Diego, California], and so that's just a publicity shot that I used.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: In the mid '90s [1990s] I was named one of the most influential women in San Diego and that's the publicity shot that was used in the article and all of the photos that accompanied the press around it.  And probably one of my most recent pictures I think.
Speaker 1: I would date this, I look to be about five or six, so I will date this 1949.  This is me on my bicycle probably that I got for Christmas standing with my best friend Tommy McCoy [ph.] in front of my grandmother's house, again in Cherry Hill.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: My church in San Diego captured, wanting to capture memories of its members.  So this is a picture of my mom and me that was probably taken in 1992 to '95 [1995].  I'm an only child, so I'm her only child and she is a widow and at that point we started living together where we hadn't ever in my life.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION): (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Are you still living together?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Because I'm an only child, I was spoiled rotten and my birthday is a national holiday.  So this is--and my grandmother would throw me birthday parties every year.  So this is me, all of the neighborhood kids.  I would say I'm probably, what, somewhere between four and seven, I can't tell.  I'm in the second row, second from the left or was it the third row.  Not counting that little kid, yes.
Speaker 2: I was born when my dad was away at Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii].  When he came back, he used his veterans' benefit to purchase a taxi cab.  So that's my dad in the cab with his friend and in the back is my mom.  And I ca--I will say '45-ish [1945], 1945-ish, but I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is 1961, I went to a Jewish all-girls high school in Baltimore, Maryland.  It's the oldest all-girls high school in the United States, Western Senior High [Western High School, Baltimore, Maryland].  I was in the second class of African American girls to integrate that high school.  Western Senior High, I'm not sure whether I said that or not.
Speaker 1: I am total a woman who has been shaped by my and influenced by my grandmothers.  This is my grandmother Beulah McClaine.  I'm probably about eight, 1951, standing there.  And this is a woman who taught me to be myself, as you can see by this pose and by her.  I am so fond of this picture because I believe I still have a connection to both my grandmothers.  So I wanted them included in this.
Story_ID: 252199
Speaker 1: My name is Loretta Henry and I'm gonna be doing the interview, and Scott Stearns is going to be doin' our camera work.  And could you please, for the record, state your full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: It's [HistoryMaker] Darlene Lorraine McKinnon.  D-A-R-L-E-N-E, L-O-R-R-A-I-N-E, M-C-K-I-N-N-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.  And your date of birth and where you were born?
Speaker 2: July 28th, 1943.  Baltimore, Maryland.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Today's date is?
Speaker 2: April 1st, 2005.  Friday, April 1st, 2005.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.  And the location of this interview, the address?
Speaker 2: 455 Market Street, San Francisco, California.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm deputy district director of the [U.S.] Small Business Administration's San Francisco district office.
Story_ID: 252200
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you some questions and they may sound a little silly, but just please bear with us.  Could you tell us what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: Lobster.
Speaker 1: And why?
Speaker 2: I was born and raised in Baltimore [Maryland] so I love seafood.  I love the sweet succulent taste of lobster.  I just like it.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.  Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Probably spring into summer.  The flowers are out, it's beautiful.  The air is sweet.  It's not too humid yet.  It's just a beautiful time of the year to me.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.  Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.  I know you travel a lot, where's your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Italy.
Speaker 1: Could you tell us why?
Speaker 2: A couple of reasons.  It's a beautiful country.  I particularly like the way the Italians interact with African Americans.  I think that they're still very grateful that we helped to liberate them during the war [World War II, WWII].  It's easy to navigate.  It's a beautiful country.  I love the church bells that ring on the hour.  I love the churches.  Each section is different.  I think that Venice [Italy] is the most romantic place in the whole wide world.  I've seen nothing like it ever before.  There's no experience like standing at the Vatican [Vatican City].  It's just a wonderful place where we're so welcomed.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.  Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes I do.  It's, aim high.
Speaker 1: Do you want to explain further?
Speaker 2: Two things.  It's--it's--this is almost surreal.  My paternal grandmother [Beulah McClaine] had a lot of influence on raising me.  And the one thing that she wanted me to do was go to college, to be the first to graduate, and she never let me settle for less than the best that I could do.  And she would always say to me, aim high, aim higher, go higher.  And it's very interesting when I had the opportunity to meet Shirley Chisholm years ago, I had bought a book by a photographer who photographed black women in all walks of life.  And in my job I run into many famous black women so I carry this book with me and ask them to autograph it.  And I asked Shirley Chisholm to autograph her picture and when I got home, it said, aim high.  And so I thought it was like my grandmother talking to me again, two heroes coming together with the same phrase.  So that's why.
Story_ID: 252201
Speaker 1: Could you please tell me about your mother, what was her name, where she born, where did she grow up?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Ruth Estella Thurston McClaine, my maiden name, Oliver.  She remarried after my father [Percy McClaine, Jr.] died.  She grew up in Baltimore, Maryland, went to [Frederick] Douglass High School [Baltimore, Maryland].  She and my dad grew up across the street from one another.  So both sides of my family are friends, even though they weren't the same family for a long time.  After my dad died when I was twelve, my mother started working as a legal secretary and soon thereafter remarried, married my stepfather Joseph Oliver.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.  How would you describe her?
Speaker 2: My mother is introverted, a dependent personality that is afraid of any new experience, any new anything, and over the years I've come to understand that and I've come to know her.  But a very loving, warm individual.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she ever tell you any stories about when she was growing up, when she was a young girl or young woman?
Speaker 2: I have deduced some things from little things that she said.  I always wondered why once my father died and my mother and I moved to ourselves, my life changed dramatically and I was like a fixture, I was not a child, I was not a daughter, she was not a mother.  And soon thereafter she became alcoholic.  Over the years I've come to appreciate that my mother grew up in her parents' [Lillie Thurston and James Thurston] house, immediately left that, got married, moved into my father's house with my grandmother [Beulah McClaine].  He died, we moved on our own.  She had never had to make a decision in her life.  She always depended upon other people.  She--so I think that's really where her--this personality comes from.  And you couple that with the fact that her mother was an albino married to a black man in a period when she could very easily have been mistaken for a white woman.  So I think my grandmother spent the better part of her life in the house afraid to go out because people would laugh at her, point at them or whatever.  And I think that spilled over to her children.
Story_ID: 252202
Speaker 1: Could you tell me something about your father, what was his name, where was he born, where he grew up?
Speaker 2: My dad's name is Percy--was Percy Otto McClaine, Jr.  He was born in Ivy, Virginia.  He grew up in Baltimore, Maryland.  He and my mother [Ruth Oliver] grew up across the street from each other, went to the same high school [Frederick Douglass High School, Baltimore, Maryland].  My sense is shortly after high school in his early twenties he went into the [U.S.] military.  He went to Hawaii.  I know that because he was an amateur photographer and looking back through some of his negatives, lots of them were Hawaii and--and exciting places.  So one of the first places I wanted to go to was Hawaii.  When he left the [U.S.] Army and came back home, he and a friend bought a couple of taxi cabs started their own taxi cab company.  When I was eleven, we fou--well he found out--we found out that he suffered from epilepsy and about three years--three weeks later he had an epileptic attack at the wheel of a car and was killed.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's so tragic.  I'm sorry to hear that.  You mentioned that your father was in Hawaii during the war [WWII, WWII], did he have any stories to tell about his Army life?
Speaker 2: No, in fact I have pieced that together.  There're--there are couple things my dad shared with me that I see I've carried through my life.  His love of music.  I grew up being exposed to all kinds of music.  So into jazz very early on, the big band sound, Billy Eckstine, all of those people.  And I remember as a child helping him to develop photographs in the basement.  So it's three things.  And the third thing is I share his love of cars.  I mean, every picture I've seen that my dad has taken has been cars.  And from the day I had my first job, the first thing I bought was cars.  You know, he loved cars.  So no he didn't share stories, but you know, I've pieced that together.
Speaker 1: Okay.  He didn't--did he tell you anything about his childhood, any stories when he was growing up?
Speaker 2: No, but I know he was a spoiled brat and my grandmother's [Beulah McClaine] favorite child.  She had a girl as well who literally stepped in to assist with parenting me after my dad died.  So he was a mamma's boy.  I learned mostly from the women in my family.  I think my dad loved nightclubs, and they were young, they were young.  You know, he must've been in his early thirties when he died.  So all I remember mostly about my parents were their getting dressed to the nines and going out in one of the cars or having people over for a crab feast or a lawn party.
Speaker 1: It sounds good.  Did--has--have you been able to trace your ancestry?  Do you have a family tree?
Speaker 2: I don't.  I mean, I know it back about two or three generations, but on my father's side, one of my cousins has--was doing it for years.  I've lost touch with them over the last fifteen years, but I think they went back to my great-great-grandparents.  You saw the McKims [Susan McKim and Samuel McKim], so their parents.  Luckily that side of the family still lives in Ivy, Virginia where all of them grew up.  It's near Charlottesville [Virginia].  And the same church that all of my relatives went to is still standing.  And whenever we have family reunions, and we haven't had one in a while, we always ended with a church service at that church.  So I'm proud that that part of the family still owns the land that many of my peers have built their retirement homes to go back to it and have resisted, you know, all of the persuasive efforts of developers to buy it from under them.
Story_ID: 252203
Speaker 1: Could you tell me about your grandparents on your mother's [Ruth Oliver] side?
Speaker 2: I was fortunate enough to know my great-grandmother and my grandmother.  My grandmother was an albino and I don't know the circumstances of that.  She died within a month of my great-grandmother, and neither one of them knew the other one was sick.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me their names?
Speaker 2: My grandmother's name Lillie Thurston, Lillie Swan Thurston.  And my great-grandmother's name was Ruth Swan.  So my mother is named after my great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm sorry I didn't mean to disturb--
Speaker 2: That's all right.
Speaker 1: --go on with your story about your great-grandmother, what you can tell us about 'em?
Speaker 2: Both my great-grandmother and my grandmother were very loving and warm people.  And I--I think that they're the ones who really instilled a very spiritual si--that side in me, a belief that prayer is powerful, that you have to believe in yourself.  You have to believe in others, that you have an obligation to do for others, to put good back in the universe.  I remember my great-grandmother caring for the handicapped child of her daughter who died in childbirth.  His name was Ellsworth [ph.].  And she cared for him until the day she died and he was maybe twenty-two and that meant total care, refusing to put in a nursing home.  So my family grew up in multigenerational households.  And I think given my early life that was a blessing and one of the things that saved me.  My grandmother, the thing I remember the most of course, is that she was an excellent cook.  I loved her cooking.  But I also love the stories she would tell me about--I think she wanted to make me not like her.  She wanted to make me not afraid to go out, not afraid to face things in life.  And I am so grateful for that because probably my experience with her that was the strongest was just before the Civil Rights Movement.  So I had that as a backdrop and when we talk about my other grandmother [Beulah McClaine] you'll see how the two sides come together.  But she was a caretaker, she took care of everyone.  She wanted everyone to be happy.  She wanted no one to suffer and she felt it's all about obligations to make sure that we do whatever we can.  And I have shortened that into a phrase that I use in my work where I say, "Do no harm."  If you can't help, don't hel--don't harm it, the situation.
Story_ID: 252204
Speaker 1: Could you tell me about your grandparents on your father's [Percy McClaine, Jr.] side?
Speaker 2: I--I'm lucky there too, because I knew both my great-grandmother and my grandmother.  My great-grandmother probably died when I was five or six.  So what I remember about her is sitting and knitting with me and teaching me how to pick good fruit and how to feel it and smell it.  My great-grandmother--my grandmother, Beulah McClaine, is probably the strongest woman I've ever met in my life and probably the woman who had the most influence on me.  My grandmother cleaned other people's houses for a living.  But yet and still, and she was a widow.  But yet and still, she owned her own home in the late 1940s.  She taught me to cook, to sew, to upholster, to make lace, to embroider, to read, to write, to become politically involved.  She was the head of the black Democratic Party where we lived, so I grew up with political debates.  I remember the Jet magazine coming into our household and her sitting me down to talk to me about Emmett Till and the picture of his being hung in the South.  And a little while later, a month later, coming back and relating to me the song that Billie Holiday sang that was called 'Strange Fruit,' and how that related back to Emmett Till.  My grandmother never let me forget my history, my past.  She made it a point to take me back to Ivy, Virginia where her family grew up.  She took me to--we would always go and understand history.  Growing up on the East Coast you have the advantage of walking in the path of history.  So we went to Jamestown [Virginia], we went to the Gettysburg [National] Cemetery [Gettysburg, Pennsylvania], we went to the Liberty Bell [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And she always framed a context for me, look at what is around you, this is what's happening, things are possible.  And she never let me forget that people gave up their lives so that we could be free, so that we could vote, so I could have an education.  And I always remember her telling me, all I want you to do is get an education so you can have your independence.
Story_ID: 252205
Speaker 1: Could you tell me your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh my.  There's so many.  The first one, I don't know what the earl--I remember my birthday parties because they threw parties every year.  I remember my maternal grandfather [James Thurston] making root beer for me and planting grapes in the backyard.  And that's probably the earliest because I can date that house.  Probably making root beer with my grandfather and listening to the fights on the radio.  It was, I believe, the time of Joe Louis and Rocky Marciano and he was very much into fights.  He was also a carpenter, a man who made furniture.  So he would be working at the furniture, we'd be listening at the fights and just talking, you know, just talking.
Story_ID: 252206
Speaker 1: Could you tell us something about your birthday parties?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My grandmother, both sides of my family are very social, they love parties.  Because they knew each other, they got together.  Because my grandmother, my paternal grandmother [Beulah McClaine] was in so many organizations politically, the head of the PTA [Parent Teacher Association], the head of the--a trustee with the church, she involved the community in a lot of what we did.  I think one, it was because I was an only child and two because they just liked good parties.  But they were always parties with themes, and Easter egg hunts on the lawn, and my birthday party and one time it would be a Hawaiian theme or, you know, cowboys and Indians [Native Americans] or things like that.  I love crab feast in the summer.  I don't like to eat crabs, but I always associated with a lot of people coming together, having a good time, enjoying each other.  That was the time when they would sit around and tell stories and laugh, and play music.  So my birthday parties are one part of the bigger memory of very social events with that--with my family.
Speaker 1: Okay, fine.  So could you describe what your family's life was like, your daily life?
Speaker 2: Growing up?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: There--there are two phases to it.  Up until the time I was twelve and the time my dad [Percy McClaine Jr.] died, and then after that.  Up until the time I was twelve, my mother [Ruth Oliver], my father and I lived with my patern--paternal grandmother in an all-black community in Baltimore [Maryland] that's called Cherry Hill.  The schools were there, it was a typical planned community, everything in one place.  So I went to school every day.  I either did the Girl Scouts [of the United States of America] or some kind of community activity after school or went to the library, and I had dancing lessons, piano lessons, all of those things.  I frequently accompanied my grandmother if she had a church meeting or some other kind of meeting.  I participated in the cooking.  It was all--I can remember always standing beside her cooking a dish, learning fresh nutmeg is better than nutmeg out of a jar or whatever.  I remember my parents would usually come home around dinner time.  We'd sit around the dinner table.  There would be conversations about everything, you know, and anything.  Actually at that time, I think it was a good time in America I think.  The world was at peace.  Vietnam [War] had not yet happened.  Civil Rights [Movement] had not yet happened.  So it was a lot of sharing, a lot of music, a lot of food, a lot of conversation.  Eventually, the conversation started turning towards what was happening in the South.  The Ku Klux Klan [KKK], the lynchings or discussions of whatever came into the household through Life or Ebony or Jet or one of those magazines or the African-- [Baltimore] Afro-American newspaper [Afro-American Newspapers].  So that was pretty much it.  Sundays were church and then some kind of family outing, amusement park, beach or whatever.  Saturdays I had my chores to do so I could earn my quarter to go to the movies.  And that's, that's pretty much a damning homework, homework, how could I forget that, immediately after dinner and dishes.  It was sitting down going over the homework, completing the homework.  And this feeds back into try harder, aim higher.  My grandmother, who was the one who normally sat with me with the homework, she always challenged me to paint a picture for people, to--to look at different aspects to explore.  And this was at a very young age.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: But that's something that's carried forward.  So that's pre-twelve.
Story_ID: 252207
Speaker 1: After my father [Percy McClaine Jr.] died, I think because my grandmother [Beulah McClaine] was such a domineering and strong personality, I think the next day after my dad's funeral my mother [Ruth Oliver] packed me up and we moved from this community in Cherry Hill to Baltimore [Maryland], to an apart--from a house to apartment in Baltimore.  And it was just an earth shattering thing for me, yet I would catch the bus, I was in my last year of junior high school.  I would catch the bus back to that community, a hour ride each way.  And that's when I realized that my mother was ill-equipped to have me and she had no idea what to do with me.  And here I was a small child who was used to having the whole universe revolve around me and have everything.  And that's when I started--I realized later on drawing up those survival skills that my grandmother instilled in me.  Looking in the closets, seeing what food was there and making a meal out of whatever you had.  Going to school during that period I transitioned from junior high school to high school.  And everybody in my family for as far back as I have known went to Frederick Douglass High School [Baltimore, Maryland], which was an all-black high school in Baltimore.  A year after the school was desegregated, something I guess my grandmother whispered to me, aim higher, go for the best.  And I knew I had two choices between Western High School [Baltimore, Maryland] which was an all-girls high school in west Baltimore and Eastern [High School, Baltimore, Maryland] an all-girls high school in east Baltimore.  I went with Western because it was the oldest in the country.  It was small and it was close.
Story_ID: 252208
Speaker 1: Could you tell us a little bit, I--you--you mentioned Cherry Hill [Baltimore, Maryland] and Baltimore [Maryland].  They sound like very different communities, could you describe Cherry Hill for us?
Speaker 2: Cherry Hill is a suburb [sic. neighborhood] of Baltimore.  It's a community, I am trying to get my--my directions right.  If you were to go to Baltimore now you'll see an area that's called the Inner Harbor [Baltimore, Maryland] and Camden Yards [Baltimore, Maryland], it's south of that.  So my guess is it was an undeveloped area at the time.  These developers developed this community.  It was a contained community, a mix-use community, apartments, houses, church, shopping center and it's still thriving today.  I haven't seen it in about fifteen years, but still going on, still some of the same elements that I remember.
Speaker 1: Was it a mixed community or was it all black?
Speaker 2: It was all black as far as I can remember.  I mean all of my neighbors were black, everyone in school was black, so it was all black.  And probably something very unique for the time I would think.  There is a reporter named Duane--[HistoryMaker] DeWayne Wickham who wrote a book and I think it's called 'Forest Park' [sic. 'Woodholme: A Black Man's Story of Growing Up Alone'].  And he wrote about growing up in Cherry Hill.  And I--in reading the book--and he grew up to be a very famous news reporter, Associated Press and all that.  Reading the book I realized that we grew up in two very different Cherry Hills.  That I had all the advantages and he grew up on the other side of the tracks.  But what's important is I don't think either of us knew at the time there was another side of the tracks.  It was a community in every sense of the word.  We came together as a community even though it was fairly large.  So I found that very interesting about a decade ago when I read his book.
Speaker 1: And when you--when you moved to Baltimore, could you describe Baltimore for us, what was it like at that time?
Speaker 2: A metropolitan city.  We moved into the heart of--of--of the Baltimore community, the--right around the downtown, but above it.  It was a major stop on the Chitlin' Circuit.  So it had nightclubs, it had reviews coming through.  Baltimore has a lot of culture, Peabody Conservatory of Music [Peabody Institute; Peabody Institute of The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland], art galleries, theater.  It had the Arena Players which was a black theater company.  It has a wealth of neighborhoods.  It's like a little New York [New York].  There's a Polish neighborhood, an Italian neighborhood, the Jewish community.  So it was a melding [sic. melting] pot.  Initially it was a shock moving from one community to the other, but in doing so, one I think it helped me to test my mettle, two it broadened my perspective of the world.  Interacting with other cultures, coming out of my safe little shell, just exploring the town, continuing what my grandmother [Beulah McClaine] really instilled in me.  Walk around, look, see, go inside the door, see what's there.  So it was very vibrant.  African Americans were doing well.  It has always been a town that has been good to and for African Americans.  Cab Calloway came out of Baltimore, of course Ella Fitzgerald was there for a time, Billie Holiday, [HistoryMaker] Parren [J.] Mitchell [III].  So Baltimore has always thrived or African Americans have always thrived in Baltimore.
Story_ID: 252209
Speaker 1: Are there any sights or sound or smells, when you come in contact with them it takes you back to your childhood?
Speaker 2: Oysters, crabs, because summertime in Baltimore [Maryland] is crab time.  That's one of the strongest--you celebrate spring on May Day in Baltimore, May the first.  And there's a flower mart and all the downtown is up and there are farmers markets and things, and it continues to this day.  So when I see tulips and irises I think about that period of time in Baltimore.  When I'm someplace cold when it's snowing, like Chicago [Illinois], and it cuts through to the bone and my nose is frozen, I think about winters in Baltimore (laughter), because of the change of the seasons were very extreme.  So many sights and sounds, yes.
Story_ID: 252210
Speaker 1: I wanna talk a little bit about your elementary school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Could you tell us the name, some of your teachers, how you felt about what elementary school was like?
Speaker 2: Well I've always loved school.  My elementary school was Carter G. Woodson Elementary School [Dr. Carter G. Woodson Elementary/Middle School] in Cherry Hill [Baltimore, Maryland].  I have one teacher that I loved immensely, her name was Miss Chisholm [ph.], I don't remember her first name, but I remember being in junior high school and hearing--and she was a young woman, that she had died of cancer.  And that's the first time I really ever heard of cancer.  But I loved the way she would take us on field trips and help us to explore and to find our own individuality.  My second teacher, and I'm not sure whether he was sixth grade or junior high school, his name was Mr. Mitchell [ph.].  And Mr. Mitchell was in love with the arts and literature and music, and he was a history teacher.  And whatever he took, he--whatever era we were discussing, he would bring in all of the elements around that era.  This is the music that was played.  These are the people who were doing things.  This is what was going on.  So painting that full picture, I--I've always been dazzled by storytellers and the fact that he knew all of this and shared all of this, and took the time.  And he was a strong disciplinarian too.  I mean, I--I remember him very much.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What kind of student were you?  Did you get in trouble?  Were you a--
Speaker 2: I was--
Speaker 1: --serious?
Speaker 2: I was a very serious--I--I love reading, I love studying, so I think I was a good student.  That doesn't necessarily always translate to good grades.  Anything that was reading and writing and drawing and painting I excelled in.  I hated anything mathematical.  Never got in trouble in school.  But I was a talent--talentless person, so despite the singing lessons, the piano lessons, the dance lessons, I couldn't do anything.  I remember my teachers telling me in music class, just move your mouth (laughter), you know, don't make a sound (laughter) and I was very typical of that.  So a little social butterfly, but loved school, loved my schoolmates.  It was just an idyllic time.
Story_ID: 252211
Speaker 1: Did you and your family attend church?
Speaker 2: Yes we did.
Speaker 1: What were your experiences?
Speaker 2: My experiences were wonderful.  Again a community, Reverend [Edgar] Ward was our minister for most of our time at the [Cherry Hill Community] Presbyterian Church [Baltimore, Maryland] which we attended as a family in Cherry Hill [Baltimore, Maryland].  And he's the standard by which I judge all other ministers.  You know, when you're a child your--your attention span tends to wander in church and especially if you're telling me John 12:3 says, blah, blah, blah, I couldn't relate, I can't even do it as an adult.  He was one who really took the scriptures and talked about it in terms of the world in which we live and what was going on.  I remember him and I remember his wife, and I remember that prior to my dad's [Percy McClaine, Jr.] dying, he got another church and another minister came in that I didn't relate to as well.  Don't even remember his name.  The last thing I remember about that church was my father's funeral.  But we also went to other churches in the community.  It was a part of showing support, having exposure.  My next door neighbors were Catholic.  So we'd go to church with them from time to time and invite them to our church, Baptist Church.  So, but our home church was the Presbyterian Church there.
Story_ID: 252212
Speaker 1: Did you go to a junior high school or did you go straight to senior high school [Western High School, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: I went to a junior high school.  I don't remember the name.  It was in Cherry Hill [Baltimore, Maryland].  And I just remember walking to and from--catching the bus from in town back there to go to junior high school.  And I think it's almost a lost period for me in my life, trying to understand the death of my father [Percy McClaine, Jr.], the loss of contact with the strong grandmother [Beulah McClaine].  Coming into contact with a mother [Ruth Oliver] who knew nothing, I didn't know, she didn't know me and then soon after that, the alcoholism happened.  So I felt a little lost.  You know, it's not a period, I think because the memories aren't very fond that I have a lot of memories of--other than the traveling back and forth.
Story_ID: 252213
Speaker 1: Then you went to senior high school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you--could you tell us the name of the school or describe it for us?
Speaker 2: It was Western Senior High School [Western High School] in Baltimore, Maryland which is the oldest all-girls high school in the nation.  It was predominantly Jewish.  I was in the second class of blacks to integrate that high school.  Our average cla--my graduation class size was sixty, so it was very intimate.  It was more like a college prep school or a finishing school.  Heavy on arts and lit--heavy on arts, literature, history, other languages, but one of the things that I enjoyed the most, it was located that time in downtown Baltimore [Maryland], is that when we dealt with anything with the humanities, the Egyptians and the opening of King Tut's [Tutankhamun] tomb, we would go to the gallery, Walters Art Gallery [sic. The Walters Art Museum, Baltimore, Maryland] and have lessons about that.  So it was a lot of gallery experiences, a lot of concert experiences.  Very--it was a mixed emotional thing for me.  Because there were a handful of black women, we forged a bond, but I also came to understand and appreciate the Jewish religion.  I really didn't feel the discrimination that must've been there at the time.  I felt more often than not, less fortunate than some other Jewish girls' fathers were doctors and whatever, and some of the black girls as well.  But I think that, that was the best education I could possibly have and I realized when I went to college [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] I was more advanced than most people.  I certainly think it was the beginning of my opening up to look at people different from me and to understand that there can be a commonality, even though you don't look, speak or do whatever like I do.  So it was a very rich time for me.  I spent a lot of time in the library because the studying was really hard.  Baltimore has a library that's second only to the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.].  It's called the Enoch Pratt [Free] Library [Baltimore, Maryland].  So all of the research, all the everything.  I think that books, which have always been a part of my life, became a tool for escaping the alcoholism that was surrounding me and my family.  Books and then later film.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers who influenced you then?
Speaker 2: I remember Mr. Hayes [ph.], he was a history teacher.  And I remember that I wrote my graduation thesis on the Third Reich.  And (laughter) I--it, you know, I'm such a book fiend and I didn't know what to write on the experience and I--I--I just find that I never connected the dots that I'm going to a Jewish all-girls high school writing about the Third Reich.  But I'm wanting to understand [Adolf] Hitler and what was happening.  You know, newspapers in those times didn't give you the in-depth coverage that they do now.  And so I really didn't understand how this happened.  And so when the book 'The Third Reich' ['The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich: A History of Nazi Germany', William L. Shirer] came out, I read it.  It was eye opening, it coincided with me having to write this paper.  So that's--that's the teacher who influenced me.
Story_ID: 252214
Speaker 1: Could you describe your friends in high school [Western High School, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did you do with them?
Speaker 2: We all, you know, we were young women.  We all had dreams.  I have several friends, especially among the--I have several friends that fit different categories.  I had a friend named Tamara Dobson who later went on to become a Hanes model and then an actress in the black exploitation films.  She was Cleopatra Jones.  And she's the one woman that I often say knew from the time she was in high school and we went through college--parts of college together, what's she's going to be and never got swayed from that.  She kept her eye on the prize.  Tamara and my other best friend, Muffy [ph.], Joan Watson [ph.], the three of us, I think, bonded because we didn't have fathers.  Our fathers were dead.  So we were different than most people who had a mother and father in that school.  I had a friend who was Jewish, her name was Rebecca Ladew and she had cerebral palsy.  And because people couldn't understand her, most people didn't take time with her.  And a lot of people would say to me, "Why do you spend all that time with her, it takes an hour to hear her."  And I knew that she felt outside of the system and I felt outside of the system, and I identified with that.  And it's very interesting, we're fast forwarding now forty years.  I'm sitting in this office one day talking to one of my staff members and he goes, oh I went to Baltimore [Maryland] and I went to the Ladew [Topiary] Gardens [Baltimore, Maryland].  And so I had a girlfriend whose name was Becky Ladew.  And he said, well I betcha it's the same people and I said there're probably lots of Ladews.  And so I hit the Internet and we look it up and I realize that her family was one of the oldest families in Baltimore, one of the richest one of the this, that and the other.  And when the--there's a--an Internet that connects you back to high school.  So she kept crossing my mind and I wrote and said what are you doing, how are you, do you remember me.  And she said remember you, do you remember me.  And she has developed all--worked with various--she went through high school, she went through college, she's totally independent, and she has developed all these technology tools to help people with cerebral palsy to communicate using the Internet and technology.  And it's just a wonderful thing.  So those are some of my friends in high school.
Speaker 1: Oh my, to me this is exciting.  What did you--how did you guys spend your time when you weren't studying?
Speaker 2: It started in junior high school when I used to have to travel back and forth from Cherry Hill [Baltimore, Maryland] to Baltimore.  My mother [Ruth Oliver] was working as a secretary in a real estate office.  And her way--sh--she--my mother did give me one gift, my mother taught me to type.  I think she initially taught me to type so I could help her to get the work out after school.  But over time, that typing came to--when she got deeper and deeper into alcohol, I used that to support myself through high school with typing other people's term papers, through college [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] typing other people's ta--papers.  But when my mother didn't want me to type, there was a first run foreign film movie theater house up a block or two from where she worked.  And I would go there and spend the day.  And it was the greatest form of escapism.  I saw the world.  I saw the world.  Between the books and films, I knew there was a different world, a different life out there.  So a lot of time was spent either reading, writing poetry, going to the movies, occasionally I spent a lot of time during the last couple of years of high school at my friend Muffy's house because they became the family I didn't have at home, and I enjoyed them.  They embraced me.  I think they--they knew what was going on in my life.
Story_ID: 252215
Speaker 1: When you were in high school [Western High School, Baltimore, Maryland], did you wha--what were your dreams and your aspirations?
Speaker 2: I wanted to be a writer.  I wanted to, I thought, work with a newspaper or a publishing company.  And it's real interesting, my high school counselor said something to me like, oh you'll only be able to work on the [Baltimore] Afro-American [Afro-American Newspapers], there aren't black people and certainly not women working on newspapers.  So it took that confusion into college and for the first two years I couldn't figure out wha--what I wanted to be.  So I took the easiest route, I thought, I took a business course because I could type, what else.  And by that point we were living, my mother [Ruth Oliver], my stepfather [Joseph Oliver] and I with my maternal grandmother [Lillie Thurston] and grandfather [James Thurston].  During that period, my grandfather got sick with tuberculosis.  I think we all moved in to help with his care and save expenses.  Certainly it was another saving factor for me being surrounded by a larger circle of people who loved me.  It was very painful watching him die a long slow death over years.  But it was a very safe haven for me at the time.  So it was either library, studying, school, my friend's house or home helping my grandmother to take care of my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.  After you graduated from high school, you wanted to be a writer, right?
Speaker 2: I thought, yes.
Speaker 1: Was there a high school newsletter, did you work on it?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah (laughter).  I worked on the high school newsletter, I worked on the college paper.  I served a couple--I did a lot of editing, copying, writing then a story, moving up the ranks.  I don't even remember the position I held.  And then the yearbook and all those committees in--in high school and then the college newspaper at Morgan State [College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland].
Story_ID: 252216
Speaker 1: You wanted to tell us something else about some activities in high school [Western High School, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: More what I did around that.  One of the people I neglected to mention in terms of being an influence as strong as my grandmother's [Beulah McClaine] in my life, during this very difficult period, was my father's [Percy McClaine, Jr.] sister, my aunt, Emily Cox [ph.].  During a period when I lived in Cherry Hill [Baltimore, Maryland], my aunt and I shared a bedroom and that's the person that shared the most stories with me.  She was a WAC [Women's Army Corps] in the [U.S.] Army and she was stationed in France.  So I heard a lot about her driving trucks in the war [World War II, WWII], what France was like.  And so when we moved in town, luckily the place my mother [Ruth Oliver] moved to was within blocks of my aunt.  So I would spend a lot of time at my aunt's house.  It was a continuation of the early years, music, art, history, stories.  And her--she has become my role model because we share a lot of similarities.  Both are childless, been divorced twice, self-sufficient women, raised by the strong woman, her mother, my grandmother.  So my aunt played a very strong role in my life and I believe stepped in my mother's role as a gift back to her brother once my father died and continues to do.  She's eighty-four years old now and still lives in Baltimore [Maryland].  Still is fiercely independent and living on her own.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You mentioned she was a WAC in the Army--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --did she have any stories to tell?
Speaker 2: Her stories were mostly about discrimination that she faced.  Very few black women chose that course.  She chose it because the Army or the Women's Army Corps gave you certain benefits when you got out, I think employment and/or education.  And she saw it as an opportunity to see the world and more importantly to get away from my domineering grandmother who adored her brother more than she.  So she never felt like she was loved either.  So her stories were about discrimination, about what it was like to drive trucks.  The impact of seeing people who had been wounded on the field.  Realizing that it didn't matter what side you were on at certain points, someone suffering was suffering and that was your role.  Talking about how different European cuisine and lifestyle was from us, and just stories over the years.  It--it was just--she made me--the first place I ever wanted to go in my life was Paris [France] because I spent my whole life hearing about France and the countryside and the wonderful people who gave her shelter when she needed it, tires blowing out on the road, her needing to be in before dark.  Yes, so lots of stories, lots of stories good and bad.
Speaker 1: She sounds like a wonderful, wonderful lady.
Speaker 2: Yes she is.
Story_ID: 252217
Speaker 1: After you left this--your high school [Western High School, Baltimore, Maryland], your all-girls high school, you went to Morgan State [College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] which (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And discovered boys (laughter), hallelujah.  Education what's that? They're boys and they're different from me.  So my year and a half, while I tried to study hard, I was really distracted.  I mean, I rarely had dates in high school, if it was, it was my best friend's older brother who was the big man on campus.  So when we hit Morgan--high school because we were associated with him and he was with the "it" crowd, we were automatically just swept into the fraternity parties, the activities, you know, and things like that.  So I was greatly distracted by that.  And he was a lover of jazz, the music continuing again.  And it was during the era of Miles Davis and we were in Baltimore [Maryland], so we would drive to Washington, D.C. to the after-hour clubs, specifically one called the Cellar Door [Washington, D.C.] and listened to jazz until wee hours of the morning.  I mean, saw Miles Davis there.  So I discovered boys.  But I worked my way through high school--a--through college even though I had a scholarship.  And there're a couple of memories.  First memory is the first job I got.  I was in college, probably my freshman year, realized the scholarship was not going to support me.  Mother [Ruth Oliver] still more deeper into alcoholism.  And I went out and got a job.  I got a job using typing as a ward clerk in the hospital.  I remember coming back to campus the day I got the job, walking through the shopping center that led to the college and everyone standing there looking in the window at the televisions.  So I'm standing there looking at the televisions too.  It was November 22nd the day John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was shot.  So that's one memory, first job, that happening.  Another memory was I'm in my sophomore year there and all the boys are disappearing.  All the guys from the fraternities, part of them disappeared because they were two years ahead of me, my girlfriend's brother's age.  The other part is because they were all being drafted into the [Vietnam] War.  And it was like someone yelled fire on that campus.  The men just disappeared.  And I remember years later going back to Morgan, I did not graduate from there.  I dropped out of the college and decided to work full time because I was making money I couldn't take home any longer on and on.  But I went back to Morgan for some reason that was associated with my class.  And I remember walking into the gym and every wall of that gymnasium was covered with pictures of Morgan State men who had been--who had died in Vietnam.  It was just so impactful.  The other memory before that happened was the bus rides for civil rights.  It started, you know, I did a couple while I was at Morgan.  I don't know how I manipulated that, job, school and the same thing.  But every black person at that time on campus, at least on the East Coast was drawn to doing whatever they could down South.  In Baltimore, it was a combination of the support from the Jewish community in terms of dollars, having strong black leaders like the Mitchells in Baltimore.  And--and you--you just went.  The other memory associated with college was going to Washington, D.C., standing on the [National] Mall [Washington, D.C.] and seeing [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] deliver I Have a Dream and not knowing it was the historic moment it was.  I know it was a very emotional moment for me and I mean he's a dot at that point, we're way back there.  Because I'd never seen a black man, you know, you'd seen interviews and TV snippets, but to experience the crescendo that he would build to--how he would take you and envelope you into this--this picture of what he was saying and doing.  It was just a magical moment.  You know, even before I knew the historic significance of that moment.
Story_ID: 252218
Speaker 1: What were you studying at Morgan State [College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], writing?
Speaker 2: No, I wanted to and I took that literature and all of that as a secondary.  I went into a business curriculum.  Because that coll--that college--that high school counselor [at Western High School, Baltimore, Maryland].  I mean she made sense.  I knew of no black writers, I knew of none.  I mean I knew of James Baldwin, but no one writing on a newspaper.  I hadn't yet discovered the photographer whose writer, the author--
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks?
Speaker 2: Gordon Parks.  Hadn't yet discovered that part of, you know, him or anything.  So there was no role model out there for me, no one to say you could do that.  So I had to survive.  So I looked to my aunt [Emily Cox (ph.)].  My aunt worked, you know.  And I decided I would survive.  I can make my life better for myself.  I knew I had to get out of my home environment.  I just couldn't take that.
Speaker 1: So you got a job?
Speaker 2: I got--I continued with the job at the hospital.  Used that job, went to work as a legal secretary.  The whole time went to school at night taking courses, still do, I'm a proponent of life-long learning.  Went back to school after I moved to California after my divorce, got my degree so I could--in business management so that I could move up my career ladder because I felt I needed the credentials even though I had the experience.
Speaker 1: All right, so how long were you a legal secretary?
Speaker 2: Maybe two or three years.  I don't know which come--came first.  I think I first left the hospital and worked for the Jewish community center.  And yet again partoo--would partake in Jewish activities because I understood the religion of this, that and the other.  I went from that to being a legal secretary because I remember my boss recommended me to--for this job for a higher raise.  And somewhere during that period, I decided this isn't cuttin' it (laughter).  You know, I don't wanna--I don't wanna type all my life so I--I really started being more aggressive and taking classes and deciding I wanted to go back to school.  But then I got a job at [The] Johns Hopkins Hospital [Baltimore, Maryland].  Again trying to get more money to support myself.  Johns Hopkins had just built the John F. Kennedy Center for Mentally Retarded and Physically Handicapped Children [sic. John F. Kennedy Institute for the Habilitation of the Mentally and Physically Handicapped Child; Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, Maryland].  And I became the secretary to the director of pediatrics and the director of psychiatry.  The director of pediatrics, Dr. Goodman [ph.], was a pioneer in using computers to help autistic children to express themselves and learn.  Course I learned this in hindsight.  And they had revolutionized this machine, it was called the talking typewriter.  And I assisted her in doing that.  And somewhere along the line I remember she left and for a period while they were looking for someone else to come in to replace her because the kids on the ward who had used that bonded with me.  I started just playing with the typewriter trying to figure out--it was really a computer, but it was the size of this room, trying to figure out how to work with them, how they learned, just because I was interested.  You know, I had no longer had her there.  That was a very impactful experience in my life.  One, it reminded be a little bit of Ellsworth [ph.], I guess he would have been my great cousin that my great-great-grandmother took care of.  Two, I realize, you know, these kids are lost somewhere and you aren't reaching 'em.  You can't reach through to them, yet one kid, Donny Luff [ph.], would show up every day and say Darlene L. McKinnon [HistoryMaker Darlene Lorraine McKinnon], reading my name tag and the orderlies would tell me on the weekend he would just wait outside my door saying my name, yet that's the only communication we had.  I mean I would talk to him like he could understand.  But that was a very, that made a really deep impression on me.
Story_ID: 252219
Speaker 1: So I met my first husband, who was a singer, and I'm sorry it was at this point I decided to leave home.  I had already left college [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], but I hadn't left home.  And you know, quite frankly I think I married him to escape.  I mean, I sure loved the glamour and all of that.  It turned out to be that he was schizophrenic, it was an abusive relationship; it didn't start off that way.  A year or so into marriage he got a job in California in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] singing in a black club there.  He was a very good singer and no I'm not giving his name and I moved to California.  I left [The] Johns Hopkins [Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland], moved to California with him where he had a nervous breakdown.  And here I am away from family, home, alone with this guy with nowhere to go.  And so I did what I knew best, I got a job.  I got a job typing.  I worked for the Los Angeles Council of Churches [Los Angeles, California] which was a group of ministers who did community organizing.  And one of them, Chester Wright [ph.], said to me, "You're too young to go through this, you're not saving this guy, you know, you gotta save yourself."  And he says, "I have a friend who runs the VA [Veterans Administration] hospital psychiatric department in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  He was primarily dealing with Vietnam vets returning, but he's excellent and I think I can get him to see you."  Dr. Mavret [ph.] saved my life.  He--he taught me to walk away from that situation, that I was a person in my own right.  He helped me to discover some of the demons that were guiding me towards making wrong choices, the resentment I had about abandonment by my mother [Ruth Oliver].  I think that he and my grandmothers [Lillie Thurston and Beulah McClaine] talking in the back of my head lead me into the period of my life that I think really formed me in California.  I got involved in the anti-war ethic, the free clinic, drug abuse prevention, the Gray Panthers with Maggie Kuhn, the United Farm Workers of California [United Farm Workers of America (UFW)] with Cesar Chavez, even though I didn't work with him, the [Los Angeles] Council of Churches [Los Angeles, California] and all of the work that they did in the inner city community.  It was a time of flourish, exploration, doing good.  It really, really freed me and helped me to know myself, but I credit a lot of that with therapy and always with the friends who surrounded me.
Story_ID: 252220
Speaker 1: And just as I was feeling like I'm me, you know, I can do this, I don't need anyone, my Aunt Emily [Cox (ph.)] calls me and says "Your grandmother's had a stroke."  Grandma Beulah [McClaine].  And I decided this is the woman who shaped my whole life, I was not gonna go home for a funeral, I was gonna go home and spend whatever time I could with her.  And my aunt said "She's doing really bad so you need to come home right away, they're not sure how well, you know, it's gonna go."  So I went into the hospital and they were saying she's not eating, she's dehydrated, she's delirious.  So I just sat beside her bed and talked to her and told her all of the things that I thanked her for and shared with the memories I had (crying).  And the next morning, she's sitting up drinking water, asking for this, that and any other, saying I can't believe you were here.  The whole time I was in California, you know, I was writing cards, letters, sending gifts, doing things like that.  Typical of the strong woman she was, you know, they were pronouncing her dead when I arrived.  Ten years later she's still dictating, you know, we have to take care of her in the hospital.  So I came back to Baltimore [Maryland], knew immediately that I had--that Thomas Wolfe was right, you can't go home again.  California opened up so many worlds to me, but I wanted to be there for my grandmother who was there for me, for both of 'em in fact.
Story_ID: 252221
Speaker 1: So I stayed there [Baltimore, Maryland] maybe eight to ten years and during that time, I started working for the Rouse Company.  The Rouse Company is a major East Coast real estate developer who pioneered planned communities, who was known for building shopping centers and later became known for building waterfront properties like the Inner Harbor [Baltimore, Maryland].  The Rouse Company taught me what it means to enjoy your work, to be in an environment where the atmosphere is collegial.  Everyone has something to contribute, that a part of the employer's contribution is the environment in which you work, giving you the tools surrounding you with art more than beauty, all of that.  It was a really momentous thing.  And I think I brought that Rouse Company experience to what I do as a manager.  But his headquarters was in Columbia, Maryland which was one of the first communities he built.  I will always remember coming, there was a bridge from the shopping center across to our headquarters building and I worked for the development director there who was a Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut] [The] Wharton [School, The University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] graduate.  I remember walking from the shopping center back to my office with shopping bags and this older ma--man saying "Let me carry it for you."  And it's like "Who are you, what do you do here?" anyway.  It took me a while to realize Jim Rouse [James W. Rouse] was carrying my bags.  But that's the kind of person he was that was kind of the environment was and he's at the top of his game.  He's one of the most respected people now for--he's sort of [President James Earl] Jimmy Carter [Jr.]--ish before he died.  What he did was use all of his money to bring back the inner cities, to rehabilitate dwellings so that the poor--in every one of his communities he made sure to include low-income housing and you couldn't tell it from any other level of housing.  So the Rouse Company was very impactful.  I had left the husband but I had not divorced him, but I neither had I gone back to him.  So at the Rouse Company working with my boss, who was a lawyer, I started learning how to analyze businesses because, you know, he was explaining things to me.  One of the things he said was get a divorce (laughter) because you need to free yourself from this, there are complications or ramifications of doing this, which I did and wrote my own divorce with his help on and on.  But--and I've forgotten my point now.  But his name--his name was Mark Bischoff [ph.].  And Mark Bischoff's job was to go around the United States and look for new communities for the Rouse Company to locate or build in.  And so I would do the research for him, finding out who the political leaders were, what the issues were on and on.  And as a result of doing that and because of Rouse Company, they were putting a lot of mom and pop stores into their shopping centers.  They were part of the communities giving them an opportunity to grow.  And I realized that these businesses didn't understand business.  So part of my job I morphed into was helping to develop seminars to teach 'em how to price themselves and retail sales and marketing and whatever.
Story_ID: 252222
Speaker 1: The real estate market crashed.  [President James Earl] Jimmy Carter [Jr.] comes into office as president.  I got this divorce.  My boss [Mark Bischoff (ph.)] leaves the Rouse Company and I'm not sure what to do.  You know, the market's crashing, are they gonna keep me.  Again I'm one of the few black people here on and on.  And the SBA [U.S. Small Business Administration] came to me because I was referring people to a lot of their classes, interacting with them and said we'd like for you to come to work with us doing what you're doing.  So that's how I got into SBA.  About that year or the next year, my grandmother [Beulah McClaine] died.  I used the SBA to move back to California.  I applied for every job of course that opened up under a democratic administration doing what I was doing, teaching, counseling, putting together workshops in every city in California, got all of 'em.  By that time, I was living with my second husband and said to him, wh--before living together, he was a New Yorker.  One of our vacations I insisted that he come to California, meet my friends, see the lifestyle 'cause I'm wanting to leave.  We made a pact, whoever got a job first, we would move back.  Being a man, he thought he'd be the one, it was me.  So it's like where do you wanna live.  So we picked San Diego [California].  The week we were about to move after--or the month I was going around telling my family goodbye and you know, doing all the things you do when you're moving.  My stepfather [Joseph Oliver] dies.  And I had very little interaction with my mother [Ruth Oliver] and stepfather, I just couldn't deal with the alcoholism and had shared this with Clem [ph.], who became my husband.  And he turned to me and said, "You're an only child, you can't move three thousand miles away and leave your mother."  And I went, "I don't know the woman, she's never been my mother, I can't do this."  And he says, "I'm here, we'll do it together, but you need to do this.  We'll put her someplace, we'll get her dried out, we'll take her with us because I don't want the guilt and we can do it together," which we did.  Maybe two years into San Diego that marriage broke up primarily because my husband who worked with bankers, [Manufacturers] Hanover Trust [Company, New York, New York], one of the biggest bankers in New York [New York], a big New Yorker with a degree in social work who was renowned as a packager in Baltimore [Maryland], couldn't find work in San Diego.  Too dark, too black, San Diego very conservative, lily white in the '80s [1980s], had no idea.  Had no idea, I thought it was excuses, he was enjoying the California lifestyle on and on.  Lots of marriage therapy, lots of counseling.  The marriage is crumbling, I see it happening.  Because therapy had helped me once before I go back in therapy to resolve my own issues because marriage counseling isn't working and worked to the point that I--in order to survive I had--I could not continue in the marriage.  So my mother by then had dried out.  She and my husband had bonded, I'm beginning to know her a little bit, but still all this baggage of history.  Anyway, I decided to get a divorce.  So I tell my husband, you know, this is not gonna work out.  I'm gonna take a vacation for two or three months--two or three weeks, literally I left San Diego and drove up here, and when I get back I'd like for you to be gone.  Take anything you want, it's a wonderful marriage, a wonderful man, it wasn't working.  And so I came up here and when I came back he was gone.  He kept coming back a little bit, back and forth, and it's like you can't do this, I just need to cut this off.  And I look back sometimes with some regrets because there're very few people given my history, my temperament, and my everything that I mesh with, we were a perfect mesh.  But the pref--pressure on him that spilled over to me and the people we became just was not one in which either of us could thrive.  So, I threw myself 100 percent into my career after the divorce.  I went back to college, got my degree.
Story_ID: 252223
Speaker 1: What school?
Speaker 2: University of Redlands [San Diego Campus, San Diego, California].  It sort of is like the University of Phoenix [Tempe, Arizona].  They had extensions all over so they had one in San Diego [California] you could do weekend college, that kind of thing.  I was already in San Diego, for whatever reason, at the top of my game and my career.  I just did things that they hadn't done, all men, ex-bankers and engineers, so it wasn't hard.  The women's business movement was starting off.  I was already connected in the women's movement.  Drawing upon those relationships, we just did out of the box things, conferences, brought in successful women as trainers and speakers.  Got a lot of women to offer workshops, successful women business owners to others.  Started dealing with the issues that impacted women, brought it to them.  Because it's the SBA [U.S. Small Business Administration] government all-men, they think women know nothing.  No one was looking at what I was doing in these workshops, so you know, it was like you gotta know the whole world more than your business.  It became my own little personal platform.  But then I started writing curriculums and understanding that people didn't know how to connect the dots in their businesses.  And that was the missing ingredient I felt to success, that they didn't understand that the marketing dollar over here impacts how much product you can buy and what you sell it for and you need to blueprint what you're doing, not for a loan, but to understand the business.
Story_ID: 252224
Speaker 1: During the process of going through school [University of Redlands San Diego Campus, San Diego, California], putting that together, working with these women on various committees and various organizations doing volunteer work, I met a woman, a New York [New York] woman who lived in San Diego [California] who became very good friends with us and we share the love of the theater, something my aunt [Emily Cox (ph.)] took me to a lot.  She grew up in New York.  She said I belong to a wonderful organization it's called TheaterGoers [International, San Diego, California].  If you like plays you might really enjoy this group.  Always good seats, discounted prices, whatever and arrange your performances.  So I joined it, started going to the theater.  It gave me a social life afterwards.  Started bringing my mother [Ruth Oliver] along.  Three years into it the woman who owned the business decided that she wanted to adopt a child from Romania or somewhere, and she was going to sell the business.  This friend came to me and said, she's thinking about selling it, I'm thinking about buying it.  I'm coming to you for your SBA [U.S. Small Business Administration] advice.  I said well, you know, I've seen the business, I think it's a very lucrative deal.  I don't think that you can run it by yourself, it's so labor intensive and maintain your full-time job.  She was a CFO for an air ambulance service.  She needed a partner, if not for the money, then to share the duties.  And she comes back to me a week later and said, would you be my partner.  So we bought the business.  We completely turned it around.  We doubled the fee, lost half the membership because we wanted to cater to people like us who were--who really enjoyed the theater.  We packaged the theater performance and we did everything from performance art to Broadway road shows throughout California, New York and London [England].  Christmastime, Ashland Theater [Ashland, Oregon]--Shakespearean festival in the summer and we would package that with a gourmet meal at a restaurant before meeting with the cast afterwards.  And we had play reading groups and it was just a wonderful business and we--we're really developing it to franchise it.  And along that time [President William Jefferson] Bill Clinton got elected president.  And he said, you know, we need more women, we need more minorities in positions of running district offices in the agency.  And he used a program that the, I think the IR--IRS [Internal Revenue Service] founded, it's called a development program to develop executives from within to run an agency--
Story_ID: 252225
Speaker 1: You had mentioned that you owned this wonderful business called TheaterGoers [International, San Diego, California]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I'd just like to know some more about exactly what the purpose is and what you did?
Speaker 2: TheaterGoers was a membership organization for people who loved the arts and by that I mean you pay the membership fee each year to belong to it.  And we would publish a monthly newsletter that would advise the members of the performances that they could subscribe to whether it's a Broadway play in Los Angeles [California], a performance art piece, [W.S.] Gilbert and [Arthur] Sullivan.  We covered the whole gamut.  They would select the performances they wanted, pay for 'em in advance.  We'd get the tickets.  We package it with a meal at different restaurants around town wherever the town might be.  And we always arrange for a meeting with the cast or the director afterwards.  We did social events once a quarter.  One of my favorite is when 'Cinema Paradiso' a movie was out.  There was a gentleman in San Diego [California], who had retired from the mov--a movie studio in Los Angeles, had bought up a theater that was being destroyed's seating and had it in his backyard with a movie screen.  So we rented his--his backyard to show 'Cinema Paradiso,' it's an Italian film so we couldn't get any of the actors there, but Esther Williams came to speak about life in Hollywood because it was a friend of his.  We paired it an Italian dinner before.  The opera was playing outdoors.  And so those were typical events.  We tried to--we knew when we belonged to TheaterGoers we were the customer we were looking for.  So we tried to appeal to and structure it for people like us.  Women, who didn't have a lot of time, wanting a social life, didn't want to be involved in date matching and all of that, men and women, but it was heavily women.  And then we just kept taking it, aim high to the next level, pushing the envelope.  Eventually, we became the hostess for the San Diego Theater Critics [Circle] Tony [Awards; The Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] party, which mean we'd walk around serve the drinks, sit 'em down whatever.  But what that meant was, anytime they wrote an article about a theater performance be sure to check out TheaterGoers a group that takes people to the theater.  So it--it was great.
Speaker 1: It sounds like a lot of work though?
Speaker 2: Two people could handle it and if we had--if I had the computer knowledge then that I had now or if we had the programs then we had now, it'd be even easier.  If--in fact it was a home-based business, so at that time you couldn't have credit cards.  We had--had to pay a fortune.  But we were smart enough to do in that business what I do in my job.  And that was involve the people who were members into the business.  So the members helped us select the plays that we went to.  We had mailing parties once a month where they helped to fold and mail the announcements, the brochures that went out.  They had play reading groups.  We couldn't host all the events, so we'd--we'd give them a free ticket to the performance to host the events.  So the members owned the organization; that kept the quality up.  Constant feedback on are you being served, you know, are they getting their money's worth.  So yeah, it's a lot of work, but when people believe in something they want to contribute to it.  And you always want people to own something that they're touching because they give more, deeper, aim higher with you.
Story_ID: 252226
Speaker 1: After you did that you came to San Francisco [California]?
Speaker 2: I did because [President William Jefferson] Bill Clinton became president, he opened up the federal agency, especially SBA [U.S. Small Business Administration] which had been a lily-white male organization at the top for a long, long time.  And I applied to a program that was called the District Directors Candidate Program [District Director Candidate Development Program], looking inward to see if there were people that they could develop who could run their own district office.  And I applied just to see what it was like because I wanted to be prepared the second time it came around knowing what the experience was.  Out of like fifty people they selected five.  I was one of the five.  I had a choice between running my own office or running--being a deputy in a super office, which San Francisco, L.A. [Los Angeles, California], New York [New York] are.  The guy who ran the San Francisco office is one I'd worked with on many projects.  About the time I went into that program, he left to take another job and his deputy became director of this office.  I was at a meeting in headquarters for all the district directors during the training cycle and his deputy who at one point was my peer, we used to sit in retreats going, "Excuse me what about small business person, I understand regulation, FF duh duh duh, what about the guy that has to put bread on his table?"  So we already knew we were in sync.  He said, "Let me take you to dinner tonight, you know, you're here," blah, blah, blah.  He sat down there and he said, "You know, we belong together.  I don't care which of us runs this office, we're the only two people in the country who really understand what this is about."  And so I went around the country, I had to work in different offices.  I went to Arkansas because it was Clinton's hometown, they wanted me there, Atlanta [Georgia], L.A.  Wherever I went, each month you'd have to go back in headquarters and they would assess, you know, where you are and all of that.  Every time I came back, they said somebody sure wants you, you know, he's working it on one side.  I'm not sure that's what I want, I wanna be my own person, run my own office.  But I talked to a district director that I respected that had no connection with any of this.  And I mean, I'm in this dilemma.  I don't know whether to hold out and run my office knowing that what's up is Detroit [Michigan] and all these other places and I don't wanna leave California or go and work for Mark [Quinn], who I know can be a pain in the ass because the guy is a walking calculator.  I mean, he just sits there and calculates numbers in his head.  And he said "What about the biggest office in the country don't you get? What about it being the number one district office out of seventy don't you get?"  "Absolutely nothin', I get it."  It turned out to be the second best move in my life with the Rouse Company being the first.  My whole career opened up.  This man just helped me to flourish career wise.  I was already good and better than most at what I did.  But, you know, we started just sitting down dreaming and like if you had your ideal world, what would you do.  And what we started doing--remember I'll take you back to an earlier statement.  When I was teaching courses in San Diego I realized that business owners didn't know how to connect the dots.  Government has no money, it's your tax dollars, you get nothin' to do--you know, move the whole world with.  And so he said "Wouldn't it be great if we, like, put all the resources together, help people who work to really build their businesses?"  We do a high volume of lending here.  And I said "Wouldn't it be great if we trained them instead of like having our retired volunteers teach 'em?" that's what the government uses 'cause they're free.  Even though there is a wealth of experience there, having the experts teach them.
Story_ID: 252227
Speaker 1: So I started forming partnerships with the private sector.  I got Microsoft to build the training room here for me.  HP [Hewlett-Packard] to fill it with computers.  Silicon Valley is a part of my territory.  I felt that businesses, if they were to succeed, don't have time to do double bookkeeping entry, they had to use technology it could make them compete with anybody.  So, I got the tech giants to help us to teach businesses, getting it from the horse's mouth.  Our lenders, because every bank in the United States is here.  For--formed themselves into a nonprofit association because they're very competitive and that association helped to fund a lot of what I wanted, videoconferencing so I could videoconference in speakers from all over.  And so after building this training room and you know, having success in training businesses on and on, Cisco came to me, Cisco Systems who was a partner teaching businesses how to build their own website about now seven or eight years ago.  They dropped the ball and the new people came back and said, oh we just wanna pick up on our partnership or whatever.  And I said, there's nothin' to pick up, I'm over you.  You know, you made promises, you didn't keep it.  The guy disappeared, you don't get a second chance back in my door.  You don't ruin my good reputation.  So the woman who later became my friend said she went to her boss and said we better get up to San Francisco [California] from Silicon Valley 'cause there is one pissed-off woman up there.  You know, so they came and I had the attitude and the armor it's like, you know, show me.  So we're out at lunch and they go, well what's your dream, what's the next step for you.  And I said the next step would be to build a center that centers all around business with everything they will ever need in one place so they don't have to like run all over town tryin' to find where to get a permit, where to get counseling, how do I get the money, show me how to put together a loan package, blah, blah, blah.  So Cisco became my partner in building the [SBA Cisco Systems San Jose] Entrepreneur Center [San Jose, California] in Silicon Valley which is a one-stop shop and you'll have the video of it, that contains lenders, counselors, consultants, a state of the art training room, a Cisco Internet development center that teaches businesses how to build online components to their business, satellite locations for all the ethnic chambers of commerce so that we can take our counseling and training to immigrant businesses in their native languages.  People talk about the digital divide, it's lack of access and information.  And no one wants to cross that cultural divide.  And that's, you know, I talked to you earlier about growing up, the neighborhoods of Baltimore [Maryland], really understanding that there weren't differences between people and there're really aren't.  You just have to connect with people.  So all of these organizations moved in, shared the dream.  So like this is gonna be the best in the nation, nothing, you know, everything is donated in that center, all the furniture, the carpeting, the computers, everything.  Not one government dime was spent in it.  Every corporation donated it.  It's five years old.  They've tried to build models in Orlando [Florida] and all of that.  The difference is most people view it as moving a lot of services into one place.  You have to have a vision, a passion.  You have to own it.  You gotta see it, feel it, taste it.  It has to be an extension of what you're about.  That's not--that's the missing element.  They don't understand you put out in the universe, it comes back, it makes you stronger, you keep pushing.  So, that's what brought me to San Francisco.
Speaker 2: Could you tell us what your title is?
Speaker 1: Deputy district director.
Speaker 2: Okay, thank you.  And how long have you been doing this now?
Speaker 1: I've been with SBA [U.S. Small Business Administration] for over twenty years.  I've been up here for ten years.  I was in San Diego for somewhere between eleven and thirteen years, and Baltimore for about a year-and-a-half to two years it took me to get back to California.  I mean really that was the best thing that happened, the SBA, I could use it to move back here.
Speaker 2: It sounds like you like your job?
Speaker 1: I love my job.  I know that I'm delivering quality products and services and we're known for it.  We have partnerships with all the nonprofits.  We give over our space, our facilities to them so that they can share it with their clients.  They don't have to try to chase dollars.  They get state of the art equipment.  They get all of the latest books and reference materials on the market, to use the conference room, the videoconferencing facility.  So it's a community of services.  And I'm very fortunate that most of these people, because they are nonprofits are called to it because it's a mission.  They have a calling for it.  So we all have ownership.  We know we're making a difference.  Many of my partners touch low-income, immigrant communities or people, so it's even more important that you bring 'em the service in a way that they can use it, that you do no harm.  And--and if necessary, you teach bus--them that maybe business isn't from them--for them rather, but they walk away with a skill understanding how to manage money, how to write a letter, how to communicate, how to dress.  'Cause, you know, we do it all from A to Z.
Story_ID: 252228
Speaker 1: I know there're other things that you do, that kind of are extensions of this, you serve on different com--commissions--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --and boards, could you tell us about some of the other things you're doing?
Speaker 2: Well I think that we're the sum total of our life experiences and when I first moved to Los Angeles [California] I was involved in so many community activities.  I try to give back to kids.  I think part of it is because I wish I'd had role models to tell me what my options were.  I mean my grandmother [Beulah McClaine] and my family were, but I think we need to be out there so that people can hear your story.  I came from nothing, I can do it, you can do it too.  You gotta work hard, you gotta believe in your faith--in yourself.  So I work with UC Berkeley's [University of California, Berkeley] Haas School of Business [Berkeley, California] for a long time with young kids from the inner city helping them to develop business plans and Berkeley would give 'em a scholarship.  One of my favorite stories is about the first time I did it.  There was a young man there running a clothing store for teenagers in Oakland [California].  And he was raised by a single mom.  He had all of the influences coming against him, gangs, dope, all of that.  He resisted all of that because he believed in himself and just went out and did it.  He wasn't making a ton of money, he was a kid doing it.  But he went--he wanted to go to college, he wanted to take it to the next level.  And so, you know, we judge a contest, we judge the kids.  There were three or four, and I remember like maybe a year later walking down the street here in San Francisco [California], and by the way he came in in dreadlocks, his mom was talking about him, how great he was.  And this well-groomed young man walks up to me on the street and says "I remember you, I've gotta give you a kiss."  And I wen--I'm goin' "Who are you?" (laughter), you know.  And it turned out to be this kid.  He got a scholarship to Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York].  Because one of the things I told him is, if you wanna assimilate you gotta clean up your act, sometimes you can't be you.  When you get in the door, you can be anybody you want, but you gotta get in that door and never give up.  Always aim high, never give up.  And he was thanking me for the advice.  Who knew he heard it.  But that was the first time that I really realized I had a story to tell and I should really tell it to people just as I tell business owners that they can--they can make it, you know, in their business if they work hard enough.  I've worked with Girls Inc.  I was on the board of The Bishop's School in La Jolla [California], I think it's the number one private school and I think primarily because they wanted diversity.  I did not stay there long, I just didn't feel a connection.  I've worked with a number of women's programs.  I love working with Positive Resources [Positive Resource Center, San Francisco, California] here in the city, it's an organization.  Now that not so many people are dying from AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], many who were sick who left their jobs, their positions got settlements from their insurance companies because they were expected to die before the cocktail and the medications come along, are now healthy, they're re-entering society.  So we help to teach them about entrepreneurship.  That might be an option for them because here they are, they've got a second chance at life, anything's possible.  So I love working with that group.  I love working with the communities of Bayview-Hunters Point [San Francisco, California] where the really low-income people are.  And one of the things that my director says and I bought into, he said it to me the day I came here in fact is the people who know about our services can find their way to us.  We need to take 'em to the people who need it to the most.  And I love this guy because he would go anywhere, do anything.  His father was workin' in the IRS [Internal Revenue Service].  He is the first person that I ever met that celebrates being a civil servant, the keeper of the public trust.  Nothing is good enough.  It is our job to make the world better.  This is a guy who every Thursday night, no matter where he is in the world, flies back to San Francisco 'cause he has a route delivering meals.  Every Sunday, not just on Thanksgiving, is serving at Glide [Memorial Church, San Francisco, California], serving meals at Glide Church.  He has really taken me to a different level understanding really what it means to put it back in the universe, same as Mark Quinn.  And one of things--other things he said that has made an indelible impression was, it's so easy to write a check, but when you give of yourself, your time, your talent, that means something.  So he's elevated my game a lot.  It's been a good marriage and I've elevated his too in many ways.  And we work very well together and because we share that common vision, we've been able to move mountains.
Story_ID: 252229
Speaker 1: What about your heroines?  There any women you admire?
Speaker 2: So many.  Shirley Chisholm being one of the first.  I think she got my attention.  I was so deep in the women's movement and the ERA [Equal Rights Amendment] when she ran for president and said "I wanna make a difference.  I wanna be the first black woman.  I wanna be the first black to run for president.  I wanna be the one who made the difference."  My grandmothers [Beulah McClaine and Lillie Thurston] are my heroes, both of them, probably my first heroines rather.  My aunt [Emily Cox (ph.)] and my mother [Ruth Oliver], the mother and I'd like to like finish that story because all you've heard up to this point was I couldn't live with the alcoholism, she came into my family.  I think it was a gift from God because over the past ten years after my divorce, it's been a little bit longer than that, it's probably fifteen, I've gotten to know my mother.  And I've gotten to--to really understand some of the things that made her the way she was, moving from one home to the other, always having a caretaker.  But I have never had--I think my mother has decided that she's gonna make up for all the history we've had, and I've decided to let go of it because this woman has no other choice in life.  Why should I make her last years miserable?  So I've spent, after my divorce, a lot of time exposing my mother to other cultures, to the things I enjoy, taking her around, talking to her, sharing things with her, doing things with her.  Showing her it's possible, go for it, the world is--is better.  I thank God that I--He gave me an opportunity to get to know her because it would've been a horrible thing to go to my grave or let her go to her grave with the hate and animosity I felt for so many years.  So in many ways she's a heroine because that--giving me that typing I typed my way to survival.  Sending me to be babysat by that foreign cinema theater opened me up to other worlds.  Looking at her and how she lived her life told me I didn't wanna go down that road.  I mean, there is so much in so many ways she is given me over time, but there is nothing more powerful then knowing that you've got someone in your corner 100 percent no matter what you do.  And being able to look at them and say thank you and I love you, and having all of those years of rotten stuff just cleansed from your body.  And so she's now on dialysis and it's something recent, and I wanna make sure that she transitions her life easy, you know, knowing she's loved with no cares.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's wonderful.  I--you told me you have a book, what's its name--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --and you like to have them sign it.  Can you tell us how many people who've had sign your book?
Speaker 2: Oh, quite a few.  Because I've done so many women's conferences I've--Mae Jemison, the first black astronaut into space.  Jackie Joyner-Kersee.  Oprah [Winfrey] has been in and out of my life and I've yet to get her.  She was in Baltimore [Maryland] the whole time but I didn't have the book at the time.  Shirley Chisholm, [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee, I met her after a performance when I was in New York [New York].  They're not many.  I can't remember 'em all--and if you need me to I'll email you the name of the book because every black woman should see this beautiful photography of women from all walks of life.  I mean the pictures in there are so powerful of [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou and Rosa Parks' picture is just gorgeous, just beautiful.  I mean, they're captured in their environment, the personality comes through, it's all black and white.  So those are the ones I remember.
Story_ID: 252230
Speaker 1: Talking about pictures, you also have another hero that has to do with photography, could you tell us about--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --two--two of them have to do with your photography?
Speaker 2: There're a couple things.  One--one of my earliest memories developing film in the basement with my dad [Percy McClaine, Jr.].  Around the time of my divorce, going back to school, searching out what I was gonna do, how I was gonna fill my time, TheaterGoers [International, San Diego, California], all of that.  A friend who was in a weight management class of mine, another person in pain, we bonded, said I think I'm gonna take a photography course.  I said well, you know, that's something I've always been interested in.  So we started taking photography courses and I've always lived in museums.  San Diego [California] has a wonderful Museum of Photographic Art[s].  Anyway, in the course of taking these courses and learning about some of the great masters, I landed upon Man Ray who's an American photographer who lived during the '20s [1920s].  And I love his photography because before there were things to manipulate, photog--digital cameras, programs, filters, different lenses, this guy got incredible images that were surreal just by--through a natural process of printing, developing and filming.  And many of his images are legendary.  So I liked that sort of different outside of the box weirdness, also like [Pablo] Picasso just to give you a frame of reference.  So on one of my trips to Paris [France], one of the things I wanted to do was seek out his grave.  And my first trip I went to Pere Lachaise [Cemetery, Paris, France], the most famous cemetery there actually looking for Josephine Baker who later I found out is buried in Monaco, but that's a whole 'nother story.  And I assumed he would be there, and he wasn't.  So I went back, did some research and realized he was in the church near Notre Dame [de Paris, Paris, France]--I mean the cemetery [Montparnasse Cemetery, Paris, France] near Notre Dame.  And then in Paris you can picnic in cemeteries.  People often do.  So I picked up a bottle of wine, some cheese and I hung out at his gravesite drinking champagne and toasting him because I'm really very deep into photography and experimenting in, it gave me a life and I liked his life.  So that was my thank you to Man Ray.  I love his tombstone.  It says, "Unconcerned but not indifferent."  And he was just a free renaissance spirit maybe reminiscent of that good time in my life in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] in the '60s [1960s].  So I very much liked him.
Speaker 1: Okay, and there's something else you like to do, you don't have a lot of money, you said to do it, but you love cars?
Speaker 2: I love cars and I love to travel.  I've always loved cars.  I don't know when I didn't love cars.  I was probably--my dad loved cars.  Always had a new car, every time I turned around a new car and I was always the first one in it.  And he taught me--one of the things he did teach me, I was only twelve but I could drive when I was twelve.  And I had pretty much figured it out for myself, but there was lots of like open land where we lived, so I would drive around.  When I dropped out of the college [Morgan State College; Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland], the first thing I bought was a '57 [1957] Chevy [Chevrolet] and that's who's in the '60s [1960s] with the wings and all of that, loved it.  Moved to California, bought a [Ford] Thunderbird, the old kind where the top goes in back and then it's like, naw I want a Morgan.  Morgan is a British car.  It's a--and I bought the rarest model, 2+2 drophead coupe.  Course I didn't have enough money so the car that I bought was a lemon, so every other month it would either stop on the freeway or it was in the shop or--and I was workin' two jobs to pay for it.  So yes I love cars, I love driving.  I will drive across country.  I've done it many times, especially when I lived in L.A. because it's--it's a very relaxing pursuit for me.  I mean, nowadays it's traveling.  I get to do--see the world, photograph the world and I enjoy that.  So still enjoy driving, I just don't get to do as much of it.  Still and probably always will be a car fanatic.  Glad I got over the sports car phase primarily because it was gettin' too hard to get in and out of 'em (laughter).  So yes, I love cars.  I love photography.
Story_ID: 252231
Speaker 1: We talked a little bit about politics, how do you feel about politics?
Speaker 2: Today or in general?
Speaker 1: In general.  What do you worry about?
Speaker 2: I worry about the world.  I mean I've had only a couple of periods of hope in terms of people leading this country.  In terms of reading history I wish I had lived during the time of Eleanor Roosevelt.  I wish I had been around during the time of [President] John Quincy Adams.  I think there were some really good heroes.  I think I identified with [President John Fitzgerald] Kennedy, as everyone does.  I came of age in that era and it was glamorous.  I don't know in hindsight with the Bay of Pigs, with [Robert] McNamara's book ['In Retrospect: The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam,' Robert S. McNamara] about Vietnam [War], how I feel about it.  I think we're more divided than ever.  I think that instead of a low--lower class, a middle class and, you know, a higher class with the haves and have-nots, I certainly feel that this [Iraq] War we're in is ridiculous.  It is governed by greed, by people not accepting the differences in others and a grudge of the president [President George Walker Bush] against his father [President George Herbert Walker Bush].  I adored [President William Jefferson] Bill Clinton as the president.  I thought it was miraculous the way he balanced the budget, brought the country back and I just cannot tolerate how in five years we've lost the respect of the whole world, we have the worst deficit ever, we're being lied to.  Every service for everybody who needs it in the United States who is a citizen, who lives in this country, has been cut off, eradicated and people don't even know it.  I hate the fact that this country was built on freedom and the separation of church and state.  Those were the ideals it was built on.  What is rueing--ruling this country now is partisan politics, the far right and religion, women are using their rights--losing their rights to control their bodies.  We're sending people off to war, babies and when they come back they have no services, they have no benefits, and oh by the way while you're over there getting us more oil, we wanna cut your paycheck to hundred dollars a month.  I'm seeing women in the supermarket shopping with food stamps knowing that their husbands are in the [U.S.] military.  You wanna know how I feel about politics (laughter).
Story_ID: 252232
Speaker 1: We were talking about your views on the political situation (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were a little upset about some of the--
Speaker 2: Well I'm upset a lot.  I'm up--I'm upset about the politicians we elect.  I'm more upset about the people who elect them.  You know, I grew up realizing that people gave their lives so that we could vote.  The ability to vote should not be taken lightly.  Number one, show up at the polls.  Number two, research the issues and know who you're voting for and what they stand for.  Don't buy the spin of the marketing companies.  Know your country.  Know that you have a stake in this.  And for God's sakes stop people who want to take the ideals that this country were built upon away from everyone.  You know, I don't like you because you're gay, so we're not for that party.  You should not have an abortion.  I'm sorry, I don't want you legislating my morality.  So yes I do feel strongly about it, but as I said, I grew up in a house where we discussed politics.  I know when we didn't vote.  I--I know when we suffered from the lack of having a voice.  And it doesn't matter whether your black, gay, Latino, whatever, everybody has a right but you gotta know and use that vote.  'Cause otherwise, you wind up with someone who could destroy this planet.
Story_ID: 252233
Speaker 1: Are--you work for the [U.S.] Small Business Administration [SBA]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you're doing lots of wonderful things now.  How did--what do you see their continuing role in the future?
Speaker 2: I think the SBA is morphing itself into a financing agency whereas it used to deal with management and technical assistance, and I'm not sure that that's all bad.  I mean part--may--maybe I have a problem with the how and the level, and maybe it means it's time for me to move on.  But they're contracting out a lot and that's fine, but contract it out to the best, aim higher.  Financing, they're taking away the incentives for lenders, for banks, because we act sort of like a student loan, we guarantee a loan that's made to a business.  We're taking away the--we used to pay the fees to make it cheaper for you, the business owner.  That's taking it awa--that's been completely wiped out.  So that means, let me just follow this thread, that means lenders who don't get the fees, will only get our guarantee are less likely to take the risks that they would with the money.  Owning, running and starting a business is a risky venture, all the reason why you need to know how to connect the dots.  But it's gonna be just like home ownership, everything else in this era of credit scoring.  You know, you have to hit the numbers.  You no longer interact with a person to say this is my dream, a computer looks at it and says, oops the score is six hundred, can't make it.  That's where the world is moving.  It's not SBA's fault, it's not all the government's fault.  We're caught up in technology and progress and all of that.  It's the wrong time, it's hitting the wrong people, just like social security reform will hit the wrong people, and everything else.  The healthcare issues will come to hit the wrong people.  Because the rich can afford to buy anything they want, it's the people who can't who will suffer.  So it will go across government lines.  Veterans will return.  They'll have no benefits.  It's when they go across government.  And so I hope we enjoy, you know, the gas and the oil and all the stuff that we've made that's exchanged for the loss of the right to worship who we want to worship.  You know, I hope we enjoy that, because that's what happened in 2005.  We've given all that away because we were too lazy to research the issues, too scared about people who were different from us, too bought into all the hype about politics, gay marriage, the religious right.  It's wrong.  People need to do the homework.
Story_ID: 252234
Speaker 1: Is there anything else you'd like to add, something that we didn't cover yet?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I think I've covered pretty much all of it.  You've got the world according to [HistoryMaker] Darlene [Lorraine McKinnon] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: Drink good wine, life's too short to drink cheap wine (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's a good thing to add.  Okay, how do you fe--feel about the way you've lived your life and what's important to you?
Speaker 2: I think the person I've become is important to me.  I think I've done a pretty good job considering all of the challenges I face.  I do think I'm the sum total of my experiences.  I do take it back to thank God I had the people in my life surrounding me, laying that foundation that I drew upon even when I didn't.  I've come to learn the value of not just family, but friends.  Many of my friendships have been golden to me and saved me more than family because they've been facing their own issues.  I think that almost anyone can do almost anything if they're willing to work hard enough at it.  You don't know what's around the next corner.  You don't know what happens when you turn the page in that book.  I think a certain amount of your life is scripted and then it's about the choices you've made.  I've been fortunate enough, I think, to make some smart choices.  I kinda feel that this is a passage time in my life as I--and I'm gonna segue into another thing.  I'm excited about what that might be, I don't have any idea.  But life is for the living.  We should take advantage of every moment we have and we should expose ourselves to all that we can.
Story_ID: 252235
Speaker 1: You're a very young woman, you've had many--
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: --you're good genes, so you have many, many years to come.  What would you like to do in the future, do you have any plans?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm think--one of the things I enjoyed the most was TheaterGoers [International, San Diego, California].  So I'm thinking about taking that model and doing some things that I've been doing.  I've taken a lot of photography workshops at different parts of the world and the business woman in me has sat back and said, um too bad I didn't do this, that or the other, or you could do it at this level and track this person.  So I think I might play with that for a while.  I might do some consulting.  Not a lot, I want some free time to enjoy just being me.  I'm anticipating that if I'm lucky, my mother [Ruth Oliver] has another four years to live.  I'm concerned about having a plan in place for the grieving transition period because we've been together long now, and more than mother and daughter, we're two old ladies growing old together sharin' the same interests.  So that's, you know, I'm constantly tryin' to find what that magic pill will be that will help me through it because I know it won't be easy.  I also wanna continue to contribute, so I'll be looking for some volunteer activities and all of this will probably be away from small business and what I've been doing.  Probably something with kids, young women, something along that ey--line.
Story_ID: 252236
Speaker 1: When you think back over your life, is there anything you would have done differently?  I mean, do you have any regrets?
Speaker 2: I have lots of regrets, but I think at the time I was dealing with the information I had and with the tools I had.  I mean certainly I would've--I would've enjoyed the time when we were family more.  I probably would not have been so hateful about my mother [Ruth Oliver], her alcoholism and not being there and wish I had understood that better.  I don't know if I would've changed my decision to drop out of [Morgan State] College [Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] because I don't think I was profiting it--from it at the time.  And I think the later experience [at University of Redlands San Diego Campus, San Diego, California], once I knew what I was doing, was a much richer experience.  But I--I can't have regrets.  I mean, one of my philosophies is don't look back at things you can't change, but I think I did the best I could with what I had to work with.  And sometimes I didn't have a hell of a lot to work with, only mother's wit or my grandmothers' [Beulah McCaine and Lillie Thurston] wit if you will, intuition.  And I do a lot on intuition and gut feeling.  The business person side of me will map it all out, but in the end I go with the feels right, somethin' tells me this is what I should go--be doing or the way I should go.
Story_ID: 252237
Speaker 1: Do you have any hopes or concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: Oh (laughter) how much time do you have.  The thing that terrifies me and one of the reasons why I think what you're doing is so important, are the images and the role models that are out there.  The rap singers with the bling-bling and the cars and the hats, and the puff daddies with the over-the-top lifestyles, the athletes, all of this, this is not real world.  African American youth need to see people like us, people who are in the same frame and know there--there's no magic bullet.  I--I don't understand, and maybe it's a generational thing, I don't understand the clout.  I know it's all about money of the entertainment industry and the hold it has on kids.  And one thing that's very interesting, early in this interview I quoted an author, Thomas Wolfe, who said you can never go home again.  Thomas Wolfe [sic. Tom Wolfe], who is a best-selling author, Vanities of the Bonfire ['The Bonfire of the Vanities'], just wrote a book called Charlotte, Oh Charlotte, 'I Am Charlotte [Simmons].'  'I Am Charlotte' profiles rich white kids in a pretend Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] if you will back east.  The thing that I found amazing in reading this book is how much these--Thomas Wolfe is a seventy-year-old patrician in New York [New York], upper crust society.  How much the characters in this book were influenced by the ghetto, black Americans, rap songs, rap dress, rap singing, because this is the influence that is in this Ivy League college.  Two, I was further astounded by the fact that this seventy-year-old white man from New York, upper society, got it right.  Had the rap--rap rhythms down, the dress, the this, how you react in this situation.  It's scary that this element of our African American society is penetrating the greater society.  You know, many people will say, oh you know, it's a generational thing you don't get it, you're outta step with the times.  It was afros in your day, this is our thing.  I don't think so.  I think it's doing more harm than good.  I am terrified about where that's gonna go in a world where all of our rights have been--all of the benefits, all of the support mechanisms have been taken away.  Education isn't valued.  They're worried about the baby boomers and everybody using up social security.  Well they don't have to worry about it because they're robbing the education system.  These people are gonna turn into dope addicts and muggers, and they aren't gonna make it to social security.  I mean, all of the influences, the pac--the stars, the planets are align--aligning themselves.  So I'm very fearful about what happens to the people in our culture who can't buy what they need.  And it's more of them than others.  There aren't many Bill Cosbys and Oprah Winfreys.  There're a lot of [HistoryMaker] Darlene [Lorraine] McKinnons and people less fortunate than me.  That terrifies me, it really does.
Story_ID: 252238
Speaker 1: What are your thoughts about blacks in business, you work with the SBA [U.S. Small Business Administration], how do you think you cou--could help them or what should black people do more in business?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know what black people in business should do more of, but black people who spend a dollar should spend it more with black businesses.  I mean if you look at communities who succeed in this country, who succeed in the world, look at the Asian community, it's all about helping each other to get ahead.  We made all the strides in civil rights and we reaped none of the rewards.  I feel a lot of other cultures have come in, we were too busy looking for reparations, being angry, and have taken the model of civil rights without the anger, without the whatever and have profited from it.  But I won't say it's the crab in the barrel syndrome, but we really need to support each other as consumers.  I think African American businesses, if there is no discrimination because you're an African American business face the same problems as any other business person.  They're guided by a dream, a need for independence.  They need to know how to connect the dots and you--to know how to make it, they need to assimilate into a larger society, their industries and all of that, and that's true of every business.  But I wanna put the onus on us, the consumer to support our own.
Story_ID: 252239
Speaker 1: When you look back at your life, what stands out the most?
Speaker 2: Whoa.  That's tough.  There's so many.  I think [Western] High School [Baltimore, Maryland].  I think there's no one thing--at--at each period of my life, you know, looking back high school was very important, the Rouse Company, that whole environment that helped to shape me as a manager and to make me able to run an office of seventy people comes from there.  My grandmothers [Beulah McClaine and Lillie Thurston], it's always about them, thank God for them.
Story_ID: 252240
Speaker 1: What values do you consider important?
Speaker 2: I think that the way the universe works is what you put into it, good or bad, is coming back to you many fold, good or bad.  So I think it's important, negativity is the easiest thing to do.  I think it's important to spread good, whether it's a kind word or whatever.  So many people in my life that I haven't even had a chance to mention in this interview have made it possible for me to sit here today because they turned around and gave me a hand.  I think I live my life in a way where I try to do that and that's my way of giving back to them.  So I think the value of helping others is very important.  I think the value of having a balance in your life is really important.  A balance between spirituality, whatever that means to you, health, good health.  Being engaged in something that you enjoy doing, work, hobbies, play, and having relationships.  I think that is the balance that makes life good for people whether you have money or not, whether you're lame or not, whether you're black or not, whether you're male or female.  That's what life has taught me.
Story_ID: 252241
Speaker 1: Do you think history is important?
Speaker 2: I think it's very important.  What's the saying, those that don't understand (unclear) are doomed to repeat it.  Certainly I have been sitting here talking about my history and the impact it's had on my life.  I think we only have to look around us, look at the impact we're still feeling from the Holocaust.  Listen to the statement I made, this country was built on separation of church and state and freedom.  The freedom for people to be themselves.  We're forgetting that, you know.  History is so important, personal history and global history.  And more than that, more than just our history.  I mean we're fighting in the Middle East.  Anybody who knows their history knows that these wars have been going on for hundreds of years, this is life there.  Why would you go over there?  You know, I mean history is so important on so many levels, it really is.
Story_ID: 252242
Speaker 1: Do you have a message or a lesson for young people, maybe who haven't even been born yet?
Speaker 2: To believe in themselves, to expose themselves to everything they can and never say no to anything they haven't tried unless it's gonna in some way harm them.  It's a big world out here.  Anything is possible, you only know if you go for it.  Sip deeply from life and enjoy it.  You just don't know when it begins and ends, you know.  Enjoy every day and try to make it nice for someone else along the way if you can.
Story_ID: 252243
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered, what do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: I mean--something that I believe people already say and that is, you always know where I stand.  I am very frank, honest, I put it out there the way I see it, you can take it or leave it.  You don't have to guess what I mean or second guess.  I'm very comfortable with who I am, and so I no longer have a need to be someone other than me.  So I think people will say that.  I think a lot of people, probably not collectively, will realize that in some way I've tried to help them.  I've often said, I'm glad that I won't be alive at my own funeral because I'm gonna see people lookin' at each other across the aisle goin' where'd she know that person from.  Because I have such a rainbow of friends from all walk--walks of life, all kinds of people and life's interesting because of it.
Story_ID: 252244
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Whoa.  You don't make it easy, do you?  I don't know.  You know I really haven't thought through that.  I think in one way it will be this private part--private public partnership I've built for businesses and leaving the standard of it being one of excellence what you take, at least it won't leave northern California.  You know, I know these corporations will keep it going forever.  I think--I don't know.  Oh I've nev--I'm not often stumped, I don't know.  I hope it will be something not even related to business and that.  Maybe a photograph that captures a moment in time that wouldn't otherwise been captured, you know.  I don't see myself being a [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou or you know, Rosa Parks, but I think we all make, you know, we're heroes to someone.  I'd like to be there for another Darlene to know it.  But I don't know exactly what the legacy, what it'll look like, what it'll feel like.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Well thank you.  I'm--again I'm so honored to have been chosen.  I still don't get it, but I'm proud that I am one and maybe this--this message will get to someone and that will be my legacy.
