Story_ID: 604444
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Neculai Burghelea.  Sir could you please state your full name and spell for us, please?
Speaker 2: Hilton Austin Melvin Ming spelled H-I-L-T-O-N, Austin, A-U-S-T-I-N, M-E-L-V-I-N, best last, M-I-N-G [HistoryMaker H. Melvin Ming].
Speaker 1: Now is there a story behind the name Ming, I know when most people hear Ming they think Ming the Merciless, they think of someone in China or something, but.
Speaker 2: That, that name has been kind of interesting as it's been associated with, with me, I recall being in China standing at an airline counter with a Chinese gentleman and myself.  And the agent gave the other guy my passport 'cause his name was Ming and gave me his passport 'cause it was something like Smith.  Always asked, what's, what's, what's the, what's the story behind the name.  Our family claims and I've never proved, been able to prove this, I may have done some, my dad [Calvin Ming, Sr.] has asked for some research about the name.  And the research says it came from some German medieval line and was modified in many ways, and it ended up being Ming but it was close to Monk or--but that's what, that's what dad's history says.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The family lore goes like this, which I, kind of interesting, born in Bermuda, years and years ago there were two brothers that were brought to Bermuda, and they were shipwrights.  And they would do the ship carpentry and, and stuff of that skill, and they were brought there by the family though, did most of the sea trading.  And these two brothers settled in a particular parish, St. George's [St. George's Parish, Bermuda] and they married and had family, one in particular. And through that line my father's family came, well when the slaves were freed, and they were freed ten years before they were freed here.  The family did not give any of the slaves their name, and the family's name was Trimingham.  And if you go to Bermuda there's a, there used to be, it isn't now, there's a store right on Front Street which is the Trimingham store [Trimingham Brothers].  And that's, was owned by a family that were the commercial traders of, of the islands.  One of several but of, a small set of families.  So the Triminghams, when they freed their slaves, they, they divided the name.  And there are Trims, there are Mings and there are Hams, and these two brothers that worked for them as shipwrights they got the Ming name.  And through all of my growing up Mings all came from a particular geography, there were only two places where you ever saw the Mings.  Now my father was born in one of those two places, but a small island, he married Mother [Hester Bean Ming] who was from a different part.  And so he sort of broke out of his enclave (laughter) and so wherever I go people say, "How did you get this name?" That's the lore behind the name.  Not Chinese, expected to be in fact when I came to New York [New York] years ago, the Chinese press ran this, "Ming comes to New York to be CFO of WNET 13 [WNET-TV]."  There was some disappointment obviously, but it's been, it's been a good opener.
Speaker 1: Are, are you--to your knowledge are you any relation to the civil rights lawyer Bob Ming [William Robert Ming] down in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: To my knowledge, no, but during my life journey, I've been asked about Bob Ming in Chicago and there are a similar lawyer of note in Jamaica that has a name Ming.  But I've never been able to find the connection.  Now that I'm a little older maybe I'll have some time to go and pursue, pursue some of that family history of lore.  Unusual name and it always sparks a question.
Speaker 1: Yeah the Trimingham story sounds most plausible and the most believable I guess to me.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But you know just off the top.
Speaker 2: Sure, you know and, and in other countries it was how does slaves get names, they took the names of, of their owners for the most part.  They didn't know any other name, and if you had a good owner probably it was a good name, like Jefferson or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --or Washington or (laughter)--
Speaker 1: You know all the George Washingtons--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --after slavery.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: A lot there's so many black Washingtons in the United States (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: They all wanna be--
Speaker 2: Just--
Speaker 1: --be named George Washington.
Speaker 2: And what I like about, even though it, it's not provable, it's probably lore, how many immigrants came in from Europe and they got to the, they got to Ellis Island [New York, New York] or someplace and one would ask them, "What's your name?"  And language issues, they'd look up and they see something and they'd say they try to read what was there.  Or how many spellings got changed because folks didn't know the language and they just had a, you had to have a label on you so you, you took a name, so.
Speaker 1: Yeah look at the public schools now (laughter).
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh.
Story_ID: 604445
Speaker 1: Okay now sir what, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Pembroke, Bermuda [Pembroke Parish, Bermuda] on August 22, 1944.  Bermuda is a small island that's it six hundred miles off the coast of Cape Hatteras [Hatteras, North Carolina] due east, a lonely island, I guess twelve hundred miles from the nearest Caribbean island.
Speaker 1: It's not really in the Caribbean; it's out in the Atlantic [Atlantic Ocean] from--
Speaker 2: Correct and there's the confusion around that, it claims to be one of the oldest colonies in the Western Hemisphere.
Speaker 1: Now from what I understand it, correct me if I'm wrong, but it's, it's off of Florida and Georgia I guess it would be close, closer to is that--
Speaker 2: No, more, more north (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) North near--
Speaker 2: North Car--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: North Carolina there's both the Cape Hatteras just go--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --due east from that, Cape Hatteras probably east most point south. Just go straight out east from that point, and, and there, there's this little blip.  Some, some years ago I wanted to always fly there, just wanted to experience what might be like to, to go to it on a ship.  So my wife [Diana Darrell Ming] and me we took a cruise from New York [New York] to Bermuda, and I got up real early day before the sun came up.  Just to witness what it might be like to approach an island out in the middle of the sea, and it was quite a, I found it quite an ex- experience.  It's all this ocean and this is one little spot how they know this where it is you know GPS [global positioning system] all the rest of it.  But what was unusual was a place to be discovered or shipwrecked and then colonized then becoming a stopping point for some from Europe to Jamestown, Virginia.  And the history is that it's that rich it's that deep and to be active in the, the, the Civil War here and the Spanish American War.  And I guess the War of Independence gun--they claim--gou- gun powder that was stored in, in the forts in Bermuda was shipped to the, the U.S.  This little itty bitty place and on the map it's even hard to see, but.
Speaker 1: Is that was, it was like, it's been a British colony for, for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It as a Bri- it was a supposedly discovered by the Spanish, Juan De Bermudez, but it was colonized by the British.  And part of the, the British empire it became a, there was a, a naval presence so where ships would fuel or refuel or take on supplies.  So that in large part formed the traditions in some of the choices.  So, being a British subject a British citizen, I remember growing up as a, as a child if you wanted a higher education, the preference was you go to, to a, a British system and the American system sort of inferior (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh it's when you talk to New Yorkers especially from the Ca- Caribbean especially at a certain time of, in history, it seems like they're probably right you know about that British system being superior.
Speaker 2: It's, part of it probably is colonial in tone, so it didn't have to be factually right, but if you weren't gonna return and work there, credentials that were recognized by the British system put you in better shape for employment.  Because they would be, the significant employer was the government for the most part.
Speaker 1: Okay, now today Bermuda is--Bermuda independent now is it, is it part of a common- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, Bermuda is still the oldest colony.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There have been talks in my lifetime, last forty years about independence, particularly when many of the other Caribbean nations were going independent.  The population about sixty thousand I'm told sixty, sixty-five, majority are 80 percent of African descent.  So there's been talk about the independence and even though the majority of the, the voting people are of African descent, it's just not up until now voted to be independent of the, the British system. I, I imagine it's gonna happen.  I'm not an expert, I left there at a young age, and I've been here, but it is fascinating to watch--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the national development and, and the directions that it seems to take.
Story_ID: 604446
Speaker 1: Before we get into depth, we always ask--oh, I'm sorry.  What is today's date; we do this for, for the purpose of history (laughter).
Speaker 2: What is today? Today is February 6 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Six, yeah.
Speaker 2: Two thousand eight [2008].
Speaker 1: Where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at One Lincoln Plaza which is directly across the street from Lincoln Center [Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts, New York, New York]; and at a place that is a building that is shared by ASCAP [The American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers] and Sesame Workshop.
Speaker 1: Okay as, ASCAP is the music licensing organization (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah there are two dominant music--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --licensing organization ASCAP is one BMI [Broadcast Music Inc.] is the other. This is the organization that protects those copyright holders of, of, of music world, worldwide.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Of course Sesame Workshop which is a place that looks out for the children of- the interest of children worldwide, so.
Story_ID: 604447
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --that management compels me to ask of everyone, they only require short answers.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: First one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Do I have a favorite food? As I think it through, yeah, probably my wife's [Diana Darrell Ming] cassava or farina pie at Christmastime.
Speaker 1: That's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Or Sunday morning cod fish and potato with, with bananas and avocados.
Speaker 1: Now those Ber- Bermudian dishes, or?
Speaker 2: I grew up with them and I just can't get those taste out of palate.
Speaker 1: Okay now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue. Royalty (laughter)? I don't know it's just, just appealing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ocean.
Speaker 1: You have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yeah spring.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Okay, and last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah a favorite phrase, I adopted it from a, a good influer- influencer in my life.  The gentleman said, "Now what you are speaks so loudly that I can't hear a word you say."
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's quite a statement.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that's, it's been quite an influence.
Speaker 1: And what, what, can you, can you kind of give us what did they think, what do you think he meant by that or?
Speaker 2: I know what he meant by it, I was in college [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and I was wanting to, I was supposed to do something for him.  I was afterschool working in a music teach- instruction program, and my heart wasn't in it, and the kids were difficult at this particular time.  And I was behaving like I really didn't want to do it, didn't wanna be there but I needed the money.  So we talked a little bit and he said, "You know you, you, you don't hide very well what you are.  And sometimes if you'll just be honest with yourself you can spend less energy trying to pretend to do or to like or to go where, where you really don't wanna go.  So just be true to yourself, because what you are will be revealed, what you say will just not, not align."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's a simple principle, but it's, it's been important.
Story_ID: 604448
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family, and your father's [Calvin Ming, Sr.] side, but we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, Hester Florence Gertrude Bean married Ming [Hester Bean Ming].  Hester, H-E-S-T-E-R, Florence, F-L-O-R-E-N-C-E, Gertrude, G-E-R-T-R-U-D-E, last name married, M-I-N-G.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now what, what was her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Bean.
Speaker 1: Bean, okay, B-E-A-N.
Speaker 2: Hester Bean, yes.
Speaker 1: B-E-A-N, okay.  Now what, what is her date of birth a place of birth?
Speaker 2: Bermuda, January 31, 1924.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about your mother's side of the family, how far back can you trace the ancestors first of all?
Speaker 2: Personally I just go to my mother's parents, but mother would occasionally speak as she got older about her grandparents.  That's, that's as far back as I can go, but my mother is the youngest of three girls, she had two older sisters, Hilda, I forget her middle name, Hilda Bean and Ruth Bean.  There were three girls, Hilda, Ruth and Hester, and they were the daughters of Earnest Curtis Bean [Earnest Bean] and Helen Bean, her maiden name was Mallory [ph.].
Story_ID: 604449
Speaker 1: Now at, at a young age, I re- I remember going to live with my grandparents and the, the, the family was my mom [Hester Bean Ming] and my dad [Calvin Ming, Sr.] and me living with our grandparents--my grandparents, Helen [Helen Bean] and Earnest Bean.  And these were just wonderful people, the church family, the extended family, the neighborhood they called my grandmother Ma Bean.  And they called my grandfather Pa Bean you know or Beanie or something like that.  And those, those two people had great influence on my life.
Speaker 2: What did they do for a living what, what did the Beans do?
Speaker 1: My grandmother was a domestic when she, when I remember her working. I was a teenager, but or I guess, young teen when I was conscious of what they did.  But I'm told I re- that when I was very, very young there was an entrepreneur who had a store, like a convenience store back then.  And my grandmother was the, she ran the store, she was the store clerk for, for the owner.  My grandfather, he, he's quite a guy, let's see, he at the earliest I--my understanding was he worked at the British naval yard at the dockyard [Royal Naval Dockyard] it's called in Bermuda.  And he had a series of different jobs but the way you, you worked then you had to be a, what's it an apprentice, then a journeyman then you get, get a skill.  So I don't know what particular skills he acquired, what I do know is he worked, I remember him working the engine room of the local ferry boat.  The engine room of the Elbow Beach Hotel [Elbow Beach Bermuda Resort and Spa, Paget Parish, Bermuda]. Those were jobs that he had, but what he liked to do, he was a bandleader, he had an orchestra.  This is before he became a Salvationist as he says, so it was always music in the family and that his musicianship became a way of, of living for him.
Speaker 2: Now wha- what did he play?
Speaker 1: He played everything, stringed, winds, banjo, viola just quite, quite a talent.  So he, he, he did the band thing at night and as he got older, his, he had his own business.  And, he's a proud man and he decided that he didn't wanna work for other people, so he became--and his business was doing repair of musical instruments for the whole island of Bermuda.  So I recall as a very young child, a little boy, six, seven, eight, my grandfather would take me with him on Saturdays to work on instruments in people's homes, pianos for the most part.  And I remember the little guy. Grandfather would string a piano or a string would be broken and he would push the string through the action as they, they call it.  And he tell me grab the string and it was always fun to be with him, because he never talked much and they tell me I look like him.  But he, but he was just very diligent and very skilled, always not having enough money, but he, he just gave it away, if, if he had it.  And he had a workshop where people would bring him any musical instrument, brass; trumpets, saxophones, violins, and he would fix them.  That's how he made his, his living, but I remember his, his spirit he, just didn't think that it was good for him to have to get up and have to go to work to work for somebody else.  So if, he would go hungry rather than (laughter) take a job (laughter).
Story_ID: 604450
Speaker 1: Is there any particular, I guess Ber- Bermudian style of music? 'Cause I'd never, I never thought about it until now.
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't think so, I think it's, it's a meld of many different styles.  People expect it to be Caribbean but Bermudians didn't, in my generation didn't see calypso as necessarily an identifier with our culture there.  The brass brand, band tradition because of the Navy [Royal Navy] and the, the, the military forces and The Salvation Army has a band that's a brass band.  And that, that's part of that colonial tradition.  Good, good mix of, of music like in, in our setting, we were taught to appreciate the classics as well as the popular.  My father [Calvin Ming, Sr.] liked--I remember the Victrola and, and I remember the early Al Jolson style of music.  Just very varied and depending on the influences of, of people in our world, so there was the, the British and later there were the Americans tend to be lighter, more swing.  Grandfather's in the hotels so that the orchestra, those orchestras played, much like here, whatever people wanted them to play.  So for it's a holiday time, they paid, play Handel's [George Frideric Handel] 'Messiah' if it, some, some chorus, some section of it.  And if it were New Year's Eve they'd play what Guy Lombardo has made famous, just a comfort with different styles.  I think that's why I learned from my, my, my [maternal] grandparents [Helen Bean and Earnest Bean].  My grandfather made us, he used to make me read, 'cause I lived with him, me and my two brothers [Calvin Ming, Jr. and Carlton Ming].  So he had this big thick encyclopedia of, of music it's about composers.  And I remember for years he would make me read from that as part of my reading exercise, I hated it, but he, he, he accomplished, later I figured out, two things, one was he got me to practice reading, public reading. The other was he got to expose me to the world's great composers, like Brahms [Johannes Brahms], Beethoven [Ludwig van Beethoven] people like that.  I had to read about it as a, as a little kid, and this big, big book heavy as it could be (laughter).
Story_ID: 604451
Speaker 1: Are the relatives on your mother's [Hester Bean Ming] side basically people who lived in town, they, they really they weren't--
Speaker 2: I recall my, my mother, her sisters [Hilda Bean and Ruth Bean] at a very age for me; they immigrated to the United States.  One ended up in Virginia and the other in Montclair, New Jersey, so my immediate, only my mother siblings, my two aunts, (pronunciation) aunts, they lived in the U.S.  So there was always a connection with the United States, and my growing up, the states as we referred to it was the land of opportunity.  Everybody drove a big car, lived in a big house, the streets were paved with gold I guess. Just optimism and opportunity.  Now my grandmother [Helen Bean] who's the oldest of, of five or six I believe, one of her siblings lived in the United States as, as well.  But the, the others lived in Bermuda, so there was a regular and ongoing connection with, with family.  But the, the community that I remember being closest to was the church family.  This, these were not blood relatives, but these were people in our own community, you know we walked to church.  Church was a very important part of our life.  The children that I went to church with, I went to school with, all the--our schools, didn't know at the time they were segregated.  There were black schools and white schools most of the population was black, so when, I didn't see a white teacher until I was in college [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  But I didn't know that, that wasn't (laughter) I didn't think that was a big deal.
Story_ID: 604452
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your father's side of the family and then we try to get into growing up more.  But can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Calvin, C-A-L-V-I-N, Roosevelt, R-O-O-S-E-V-E-L-T, Ming [Calvin Ming, Sr.]. Birth date, January 13, 1924.
Speaker 1: Let's--I take, I take it he was, his middle name came from Teddy Roosevelt [President Theodore Roosevelt, Jr.], I guess? I had to have been influenced by that, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, I, imagine, I don't recall him ever telling me, but it, it, I think it was.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, and, and what do you know about his side of the family?
Speaker 2: My father was the youngest of three boys in his family, his mother, Ivy Darrell Ming [Ivy Ming] and his father, Henry Ming.  Now his father and his mother, they all were born and lived in this particular section of, of Bermuda where the Mings, the St. George's Mings lived [St. George's Parish, Bermuda].  I remember my dad's dad. A very, very quiet guy, he worked at the, I remember he working at the hospital.  He was a painter and, in fact my dad, his trade or his skill was painting as well.  My dad did other things. He, he claims that he, he dropped out of school, he got a third grade education, but he, he wanted to do more.  So he, he just read, he could read everything that he got his hands on, and he ended up working in the transportation department of the, of the prison system in Bermuda, from where he retired.  Didn't have formal education himself, but I think in many ways made up for it by just reading whatever books, periodicals he could get his hands on.  And during my middle years, he, he, he was a taxi driver, which is a common, I guess business there, so he owned his own cab.  And he worked his own cab, and one of the marks or the badges of distinction of a cab driver is you have to be knowledgeable.  It's like our barbers, you know you go to the barbershop, the barber knows everything, well cab drivers (laughter) also.  And the way he I guess plied that trade was just be knowledgeable about events and history, and be able to converse on anything--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and then that's what he did, so.
Story_ID: 604453
Speaker 1: So we, we were discussing your father's [Calvin Ming, Sr.] taxi business (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --when he was driv- he had his own cab?
Speaker 2: Had his own cab, I remember before he had the cab he was--worked construction, painting, for the most part, painter by trade.  He was so not my [maternal] grandfather [Earnest Bean], my grandfather was a, I, I remember him as a reserved sort of a stately proud bearing and my, my dad lighter not as serious, vulgar at times.  But what they had in common that, this pride thing, they just seemed to resolve it, they would be happier more at peace if they worked for themselves.  So that's what they did.
Speaker 1: Yeah, were either one of them Garveyites at one time, or did they--?
Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge, my dad, no, my grandfather would probably have leanings but because of his strong religious con- conviction wouldn't be a, wouldn't closely identify with the movement.  But because of the national pride, I'm sure would be sympathetic, yeah.
Story_ID: 604454
Speaker 1: Is your [maternal] grandfather [Earnest Bean] the one that started the family off in The Salvation Army?
Speaker 2: Yes, my recollection of the family history is grandfather was, had his bands in the, at the ho- local hotels.  It, you know different nights you play at different hotel, and somehow his father who was religious had some concerns about the lifestyles of his boys.  And, and my grandfather was one of four boys, and they were all very musical.  And--ended up through the religious Christian conversion process. And, and grandfather made a decision that he would not continue his music profession in a way that was ungodly.  And instead would dedicate his talent to sp- a more spiritual good and somehow he became a convert of The Salvation Army.  And that was sometime or he became the bandmaster so at his death he was recognized as one of the bandmasters, and that's a British tradition.
Speaker 1: Now was The Salvation run in a colonial model, I mean in terms of had a, was there a white minister, a black congregation is that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in the island, and now in Bermuda most of the churches had affiliations beyond the island, so The Salvation Army was a part of the Canadian territory.  So the leadership came out from Canada, and I guess the world church as they would defined it was in England where the church started with William Booth.  And it was the U.S. territory and Canadian territory and there are others.  But what was always curious was they didn't, didn't become a part of the U.S. territory, it was part of the Canadian territory.  Keeping the British ties, I, I suppose, but grandfather became active and grandmother [Helen Bean] was a member, all their three daughters were Salvationist.  So I and my two brothers [Calvin Ming, Jr. and Carlton Ming], we grew up in, on our grandparents' home, with mom [Hester Bean Ming] and dad [Calvin Ming, Sr.], so we became Salvationist.  Dad was not a Salvationist, he was, he was the outlier, I, he now is 'cause he's older now.  But (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did he, did he was, was he religious at all in those days?
Speaker 2: Not really, not, I don't recall him--
Speaker 1: So you called him an outlier (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I called him outlier I, they had other names for him I'm sure.  But he was always supportive of the--us. You know when you're young and you don't wanna go to church and dad doesn't go to church so you try to get dad to say it's okay for you now to go? Didn't work with each of us. "What did your mother say?" And, "Do what your mother said." So he was always supportive.  But in that community, we, I in particular and my brothers, all of us we got to do things, same people but it really as I have later learned it sort of formed and shaped much of what I do.  So we started, you lived in church, so you went to church, had to go back to Sunday school.  Sunday school was more of a teaching kind of an environment, so the people I went to school with on Monday through Friday, I went to church with on Sunday.  And we were in, in schools together on Sunday, the rigor of classroom learning with homework and all those kinds of things, we had the same kind of discipline expectations at Sunday school.  I remember just growing up with, with groups of, of children.
Story_ID: 604455
Speaker 1: So you were in the same--what was the name of your neighborhood in--was there a name for it?
Speaker 2: Smith's Hill it's--
Speaker 1: In Hamilton [Bermuda], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah just, just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Smith's Hill.
Speaker 2: --you're right on the outside of the cit- the city limits, Smith's Hill is where we, we grew up, or I grew up.  Went to the Central School [Victor Scott Primary School, Pembroke, Bermuda] and that was the feeder local school for my area.  The first school I remember was a one room school and the teacher was Mrs. Seaton, Miss Seaton, she wasn't married, come to find out later, S-E-A-T-O-N.  And man Miss Seaton taught you, you know A-B-Cs, one, two threes and all that reading, writing.  But I remember she had a little ruler that would (gesture) go across your hands if you (laughter) you misbehaved or if you didn't pay attention or something like that, that was.  But there was this expectation that do you, you would do things well and do things right.  And the kids that I started with Miss Seaton's with went to Central School with, went to Berkeley [Berkeley Institute, Pembroke, Bermuda] with, went to church with.  And that was, that was my world, and the expectation was you did the best that you were capable of doing, and no excuses (laughter).  That's I remember from my, my, my grandparents [Helen Bean and Earnest Bean], dom- and my mother [Hester Bean Ming], just dominant (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now--
Story_ID: 604456
Speaker 1: Before we leave here, I guess the ancestor--I mean the, the family history (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --something I wanna know, is, is, were there any stories passed down I guess through your family or, or told even in school or church of the history of, of black people in Bermuda. You know, the, the slave trade or any of the, is that, was that important to your growing up?
Speaker 2: I don't recall history or stories that were our stories that were shared or passed down, I don't, I don't have any recollection of that.  It was only when I became an adult living in the U.S. that, that became odd that there was not more stories about how we got there.  What our roles where, where we worked, just was not talked about.  The, the, the storytelling didn't go beyond, sort of the grandparents' generation.  So my [maternal] grandfather [Earnest Bean] would talk about his father, I don't recall any communication whatsoever about his father's father what that, that meant.  I don't whether he didn't live long or, I don't know.
Speaker 1: You know I guess slavery ended in Bermuda by 1830 I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's like ten years before yeah here it was 1840, 1850 something like that.
Speaker 1: Eighteen sixty (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixty [1860]?
Speaker 1: --three [sic. 1865] is when it finally ended, yeah, but--
Speaker 2: Wa- was, it Wilberforce and the movement and, and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, William Wilberforce, right. So that would've been 1830s or '40s [1840s]--
Speaker 2: Something like that, yeah.  But there and, and I don't recall it was, it was a death, it was avoid, our history in school was about the British colonial conquest or colonization.  The sun never set on the British empire, I remember the history book I re- I recall was a text by Williamson [ph.] talking about the British going around the Cape of Good Hope.  And Magellan [Ferdinand Magellan] and going around--I don't recall any shared knowledge about how the people got there, it was assumed that we were obviously slaves.  But what it meant.
Speaker 1: So no biographies of the figures that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nope.
Speaker 1: --any, any black figures in Bermudian history--
Speaker 2: I, I don't--
Speaker 1: --did anything to--
Speaker 2: As a child growing up, I recall nothing that was shared notable figures, people that way back when in the freedom of, there's no Frederick Douglass or just a, a voice of there should be other ways.  I'm su- there may have been, but, I, I don't recall that.  Now I do recall later years, people that have, people of color, black people many of them immigrants who came to Bermuda either through marriage or through some professional association teaching or otherwise.  Who became a voice for change and who caused people to be more conscious of the, it doesn't have to be this way, it could other ways.  And there are a, a few names in that regard but there was no, maybe I'm rheumatic in this.  But, seems like there could have been an oral tradition of something saying here's where we are, here's, here's what happened.  But I don't, I don't, I don't recall that being a, a part of our exposure or the family sharing or no.
Speaker 1: I often wondered, I think I've ever heard a story about a Bermudian slave leader or you know somebody putting up a revolt or something like that.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Or even establishing a--
Speaker 2: Not to my, my knowledge no, no figures of that kind of stature.  Now--
Speaker 1: There's probably somebody we just obscure (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh I'm sure there is, but who, who wrote the books how, how you do it.
Story_ID: 604457
Speaker 1: One of the things that Ber- Bermudians take pride in is that there is a certain level of skill, craftsmanship, journeymanship that seem to just be pervasive there is so. Like poverty was, was never a, a big issue.  For example, I, I didn't realize that we were poor, (laughter) 'cause you always seem to have, there was always food, shelter, think along the system you, you always dressed a, a certain way.  You couldn't tell poor from not poor by how peopled dressed 'cause it, it just a tradition of how you dress.  And you mentioned some other islands that's a common, that's a pretty common fact amongst us.  So bad conditions that would cause for uprisings I don't, I don't, I don't know of that it just doesn't ring like it was true.  I mean 'cause people were could, lived pretty well, good standard of living.  There seem to be a little less pressures for social change.  Now I remember as a, a young, very young person, I guess in the '50s [1950s], there was an election this comes to mind.  And the franchise where it worked if you owned land you got a vote, and if you were an adult you got a vote.  So remember the majority of the people were black and, but it meant that to get the, the legislature to reflect a certain image or power, most white people got two votes, and black people got one vote.  And it was in the '50s [1950s] that this became no one man, no vote.
Speaker 2: 'Cause the, what we're saying that the white people owned the land, right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: For the most part, the white people owned, owned the land and, and the, the franchise was determined such a way that depend on how much you owned, you got so many votes and.  You know I think classic in the way of, of governing but it wasn't until the '50s [1950s] that it became a real issue.  Now or every adult what's eighteen or twenty-one, or whatever the age was, I think it was twenty-one--and do away with land based franchising.  It's a, this very recent to me what was recurring about some of the fiber of the, the culture was this pride, not being sensitive to only certain people couldn't do certain things, 'cause our teachers were us. The only white person I ever interacted with regularly was the ministers.  But our schools, the principals, the school board or the merchants, the, the plumber, the carpenter.  I mean, they, they were all, they were all my, I, I can identify with those, with those people.
Story_ID: 604458
Speaker 1: Now what were the--we always ask this question, what are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Sunday morning, national tradition, if you didn't smell cod fish being boiled with potato, there was something wrong with that house.  The smell of bacon being simmered down with the onion and, and some of the other stuff that they would cook up.  And then later years, some form of bread, cornmeal bread or some homemade bread.  But man was, it was just obviously even now, to wake up to the smell of cod fish being prepared for Sunday morning breakfast was a wonderful tradition.  Then the, the spring walking and the smell of the cherries or the fruit just blossoming in, in the spring.
Speaker 1: Now, now do you have four seasons in Bermuda?
Speaker 2: I think, I think those who know would probably say yes. But I recall the winter being from like October through February, you know it's mostly rainy, windy.  Because it's a tropical island, very damp, so no snow or nothing like that.  But man that wind, come off the ocean and, and that dampness would feel like it just cut right through you.  I remember getting in the, in the bed and the sheets are feel like ice (laughter).  But summer just hot, dry, quite a dependency on, on rain 'cause that's how water was caught and--.  But those are, those, those are the pleasant sounds, frogs at night you got to bed, get dark these little chirpy frogs will announce that it's getting dark.  And moonlight, stars on, on a clear night, full moon, so bright it's, it's like day.  I remember as a kid the moonlight, well moon, full moon night walking around.  I mean it's almost as clear as day and it so, so, so bright. Good memories.
Story_ID: 604459
Speaker 1: Now what about the, I read about the way the houses are painted and stuff.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: I never seen it myself, but could you describe what Bermuda looks like to people?
Speaker 2: Yes. Very bright, very pastel like the, the native architecture building construction.  The island, the native rock is, native is not probably the best term, but it's a coral stone.  So I remember growing up, there were craftsmen who would cut stone out as blocks out of the earth.  And those blocks became the material that you built houses with.
Speaker 1: And so the coral actually was, was used as a brick?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  And there are, there are hills with whole side of a hill has been cut out because that's where it was good coral stone.  And you cut the coral out then you make different size brick, it was bigger than brick, it was more like building block, con- concrete block.  And walls tend to be anywhere from eight to fourteen inches thick, and coral is porous so, you have to coat it so that it will retain water.  If, if it's a tank or prevent water from getting in if it's the outside wall, but they tend to hold moisture, so it gets very damp.  And the roofs have to be a special design 'cause it had to withstand gale forced winds.  So that there's a, a style of building your roof where that same coral would be cut into slates, maybe an inch to two inches thick.  And they would layer them on top of the roof and the roof would be whitewashed with lime and the water would be caught on the roof.  And then trapped in a tank at the bottom of the, under the house, so the whole construction was such that it could withstand the elements of, of really heat and storm.  And the roof would be a water catch and you could, that's how you survived.  So in later years, they had--when I was a boy they would put a, a metal tank on top of the roof.  And put the water, pump it up in the water and then that's how we got running water 'cause I'm old enough to remember outhouses and no running water in the bathroom.  But the, the because of the salt from the oceans you have to do regular maintenance and like every year or two year, you have to make sure the roof is, is washed.  'Cause otherwise it will form mildew and, and the mildew will contaminate the water and it's not, doesn't taste good, and--so there's a, there's a, there's quite an industry of how do, how do you maintain a, a property.  But the, the style is to use bright color to, to sort of distinguish your house so the, the light greens and the pinks and the, the oranges the--.  And people take, take pride in, in, in doing it. Really a beautiful place, I just have great memories about.  Even working as a teenager you know, in the summertime, painting and standing back, you know that's a good job.
Story_ID: 604460
Speaker 1: Now how would you describe yourself as a, as a kid, as a, as a young kid, what were you like and what did you like?
Speaker 2: Young kid, shy, lacking in self-confidence, not quite sure about my place in the world, easily hurt emotionally.  Found it difficult to open myself and engage beyond the, the family circles, family community.  But thriving because of the nurturing nature of my, my community.  Always, older people in particular who found ways to encourage, to speak to my heart, even though I was a little kid with glasses, people ca- I remember being teased.  Called egghead because you know the shape of my, my head and not being sure whether or not I should not be offended by being teased.  And just not really excited about excelling, just go along with it 'cause it was safer that way.
Speaker 1: Were you a good student, and did you excel in school, did you try to back off from it?
Speaker 2: No, the label of being sort of nerdy and egghead stuff and then a system where--my wife [Diana Darrell Ming] and I we were talking about this.  Where, a system where to pass in school, the passing grade was 50 [percent], and man, talking about culture shock of just a rude awakening.  When I came to the U.S., and I get to the university [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and you know to pass you gotta be like 70--I think it was, 70 or 75 [percent] something like that.  Whoa and coming from a system where long as, if you pass, you know you; you just go onto the next thing.  So I her, there, I remember math came easy, I liked it, then I hated languages, and if I didn't like it, I just didn't do it.  I remember conversation with my, my mother [Hester Bean Ming] you know the report card and she was chastising me because my report card was not very good.  And I said, "Well I did my best," and she looked at me, so grabbed my face you know she said, "Now did you really do your best?"  And I'm, tears coming down my face 'cause I'm now being chastised and she said, "If this is your best, then I accept it," and that's all she said.  And the tears coming down my face, 'cause was dear, right, mom was, was precious, and I knew in my heart of hearts that that was not my best work.  I really didn't work at it, and she never pushed it you know, but that look said all right if this is the best you can do, I will not scold you further.  And that's one of those life's lesson, I was about twelve, thirteen years old, something like that.  And I said she'll never, ever look at me like that way again.  And then I, I begin to be a little more serious, I'm older now, I'm a little bit more serious about, about school in particular.
Story_ID: 604461
Speaker 1: You've got brothers, right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: How many do you have and where do you fall in?
Speaker 2: I'm the firstborn, I have two brothers, Calvin Roosevelt, Jr. [Calvin Ming, Jr.]; he's three years younger than I am.  And my younger brother Carlton Ming, I can't remember his las- his middle name.  Carlton Randolph Ming, C.R. Ming, right, he's the youngest of, of my brothers.  My second brother lives in Bermuda and my third brother lives in Maine. But I was the, the firstborn.  And the firstborn in our tradition tends to be the one that is expected to be responsible so the chores had to be done; you had to make sure they were done.  I remember my second brother when he, went to the same schools that I went through, he'd be coming home rather angry because he was being compared to me.  I wasn't such a great student you know starting out but once I got it, I got to the full scholarship to high school [Berkeley Institute, Pembroke, Bermuda], 'cause you didn't have to go to high school.  It was not mandatory.
Speaker 1: Okay so in that, in that system if you--
Speaker 2: Age thirteen you could (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) finish grade school you could just--
Speaker 2: That was it, that was it, right, but, my, my second brother he, he I'm, I remember him being upset 'cause he, he was being compared to me.  Well by the time the third one came along, there was still some of that, but I was the firstborn.  So there were, it was an expectation that I would represent the family well, that I would not bring shame on our family name.  It was just, it was expected.
Story_ID: 604462
Speaker 1: Now when you were, now, now you're a COO now?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: But in those days, did you participate at all, or were you asked to participate in your, your father's [Calvin Ming, Sr.] business or your [maternal] grandfather's [Earnest Bean] business or did you observe what they did to keep their books or keep their--?
Speaker 2: No, their, their businesses were small; well cab driving, when dad had a cab, when I was very young he was a painter.  So it wasn't, he wasn't an entrepreneur then.  My grandfather I only remember him working for himself, but there was, it wasn't, I didn't think of it as business, you know that's what he did.  And the closest thing, in reflection that would suggest it was a business was my grandmother [Helen Bean] arguing with him, chastising him because he wasn't charging people enough money (laughter).  But there's no such thing as books, so I didn't, and my tradition didn't prepare me for this world of business.  My earliest exposure was my mother [Hester Bean Ming] who worked as a clerk and my mother was the first high school graduate in the family that I know of.  Good student and very--just, just valued education. So mother, she worked for a, a realtor, a, a person who immigrated to Bermuda.  Who formed a real estate company [Myer M. Malloy Real Estate Agency] and he hired my mother and she became his office manager.  And in many ways his right hand, and I remember mom working for this gentleman and he was getting up in age and my mother ran the, ran that business.  My mother called me one day and said, "I'm not feeling well, come to my office."  And I was twelve or thirteen in that that range and I came to the office and mother said, "Now I'm not feeling well. I have to go to the hospital.  These are the names of people that will come into pay their rent and what I want you to do is take the money, count the money.  Give them a receipt and then put all the money in this envelope here and, and just do that for me." And I said, "Okay."  And mom got up and went, went to that, went to the hospital, so that was my first exposure to what I would consider a business.
Story_ID: 604463
Speaker 1: Your first exposure to business was helping your, your mother manage Mr. Myer Malloy's real estate business.
Speaker 2: It was Myer M. Malloy Real Estate business [Myer M. Malloy Real Estate Agency], and that day that mom, it was a Saturday I believe had me come in take the receipts and give, give the receipts and take the money.  That was my first exposure to what I now see as, as business, actually doing a transaction.  Didn't mean much at the time, but then my mother became more involved in what was at the time a big project for Mr. Malloy.  Rather than just selling individual homes, he bought a track of land and parceled it and made it available to what he described as the common people.  And my mother's role was to actually be the developer for this, this development's called Hillview Estates [ph.].  In fact today that's where the family homestead is. And what happened there was Mr. Malloy found a way where working people, working families could actually owned property and this development he commissioned a local builder to build.  And local mechanics and artisans to do what they do, plumbing, carpentry, masonry, whatever, and my mother sort of kept the books and commissioned the, the work and did the construction schedules.  And, and put people in touch with the mortgage lending, and she really got into how to make this thing work. Of course she bought one of the properties.  That's where the homestead is as I said.  And I'd never seen her so engaged about meaningful work it was, it was, it was wonderful and she just loved it.  And I think that influenced my view of business, there were some other options here, you just didn't have to work for somebody, or you could actually do something at, at something else.  And that development was the first in Bermuda where land ownership and homeownership was made available to, to common people.  And my mother who was influential in getting people that didn't ordinarily think about home ownership to consider it.  And in fact the area where we lived, where we were not homeowners, if there are--I can think of the Merrimans [ph.] the Mannings [ph.] and other people who similarly went and bought in that development.  So the Smith's Hill community some of them moved to Hillview now, but the difference was they owned their own homes.  They took great pride in them as they did before; people that were renters were now owners, and all the pride that comes with that.  And that again, my exposure to all of that help influence my view of, of business and how you could actually do things and make a little bit of money.  And actually feel good about it, you don't have to feel like a rogue you know, a, a thief 'cause you're making money.  In fact you can actually create value and do good and earn at the same time.
Speaker 1: So you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Years later--
Speaker 1: Okay go ahead.
Speaker 2: Years later Mr. Malloy passed away and I remember his house; his house was right on Harbour Road overlooking the harbour [Hamilton Inner Harbour].  And across the street was a boat dock, and the boat dock was built in the shape of a, in the shape of a boat and concrete.  It looked like a bow over a boat; it's just, just beautiful.  And he passed away, and his children were in the, the U.S. and my mom just, she just knew that she could get the business and run the business.  But it didn't work out that way, his wife in particular would not sell it to, to Hester [Hester Bean Ming] and that was a crushing blow to, to mom.  And after that she had a, she went to work for the new owner, didn't work out too well, and she left there then went to work for the U.S.--for the Bermuda government.  And she became the matron of prisons, very small prison; she only had like twelve inmates at one point in time.  But she became the, the female warden of the female prison system; she did that until she retired.  But I recall the, the pain, the, the hurt that was hers when she could not own that business.  Now there may have been other reasons there may have been, maybe she couldn't raise the capital.  Maybe she couldn't get you know, could be any number of reasons, I don't know the facts around that, and I don't remember that.  What I remember was the, the sense of disappointment that here was an opportunity I know I'm equipped, I can do this.
Speaker 1: It was productive work that benefitted the community (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, and she was so engaged to, she was doing good by helping people and, and creating value for people--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: --but she just couldn't do it.
Story_ID: 604464
Speaker 1: You said, throughout your, you, you've made some good, well you made at least two visits to the U.S., right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: To see the sisters of your mother [Hester Bean Ming], right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, yeah coming to the U.S. was a highpoint in, in, in my early life; the U.S. was seen as the land of opportunity.  We referred to it in the islands as the states.  And everybody lived well there was, everybody had a big car and a nice house and--so it was quite an event even for someone from the states to visit Bermuda or for somebody in Bermuda to come to the states.  So because I had two aunts here, there was an occasional trip abroad.  Now whenever people came from the U.S. back to Bermuda, as a child you always expect them to bring you something.  You would treasure it, 'cause they're coming from the states and everybody's rich in the states.  And whenever you came to the states you came back, you would strut something that either clothing or some trinket or something you got this in the sta- then you were special.  I just member, member growing in that, that kind of environment.  I was nine years old and we did our first, my recollection, family trip to the U.S.  Mom and dad [Calvin Ming, Sr.] and some, I ran across a picture of us taken when and we came here.  Mom and dad, Mel [HistoryMaker H. Melvin Ming], Cal [Calvin Ming, Jr.] and Carlton [Carlton Ming], the three boys, and we came to my aunt in Montclair, New Jersey.  And we were here for maybe three weeks and I got to see Coney Island [New York, New York] and, and New York City [New York, New York] and, we as, we drove from Montclair to Norfolk, Virginia.  And as a, I'm nine years old, I remember, man those buildings are big and there was a park down the street from, from where my Aunt Ruth [Ruth Bean] lived.  It was, it was a Elmwood Park [New Jersey]--part of the school.   But seem like it was the biggest park I ever saw (laughter).
Speaker 1: What was the top, the tallest building in Hamilton [Bermuda]?
Speaker 2: Oh my. Well maybe a, maybe a four story building, the office my mother worked in was six stories, the buildings weren't very high in, in, then. It was no need to.
Speaker 1: So you came to New York City.
Speaker 2: Oh it was amazing, now the, it was a cathedral which is on a hill, but that was in, nobody lived in the cathedral.  Although there was a hou- there was a house of Parliament on a hill, it was a big building, but the bustle and, and just, just the noise and the smells that's New York.  I remember concluding something exciting about it, but I remember in college [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] saying you know I'd never work in New York.  You have to be crazy to work in New York, and I was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] at the time but.  Somebody reminded me of that, my (laughter) after I came to work in New York.  But there was just, it was the, those, that, those early trips, they were just opening the mind to, to possibilities, not, not knowing it.  There was something there, there was something about activity, there was something about big buildings and, and it's just limitless in terms of, of dreams.  And you go back to a place like Bermuda where the pace was so-so and you know, if it rained, okay.  If it didn't rain it's still okay, I mean if it didn't, didn't make a difference.  And I remember this as a child, those kinds of impressions that you know there's something there.  I don't know whether it's right for me or not, but there's, there's something there.
Story_ID: 604465
Speaker 1: Where did you go to high, to high school what was the name, name of your high school?  'Cause you sent to Central School [Victor Scott Primary School, Pembroke, Bermuda] at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Central School was the--
Speaker 1: --elementary school.
Speaker 2: --elementary school and I went to. Berkeley Institute [Pembroke, Bermuda], B-E-R-K-E-L-E-Y, some people say (pronunciation) Berkeley.  But that was a private school at the time, you had to pay tuition and I was the recipient of a scholarship, the M.A. Gibbons Scholarship [ph.].  And that's where I went to high school and did- I didn't finish there.
Story_ID: 604466
Speaker 1: I guess the year before the final year [at Berkeley Institute, Pembroke Bermuda], my--that's the day that I came home one Thursday afternoon and the family's there and, there's a family counsel and my mother [Hester Bean Ming] said to me, "You're going to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  There you will finish high school and you'll go to college, and you're gonna go to Aunt Ida."  Now there were no colleges in Bermuda when I at the time, and the ambition of a young boy like me was usually to get your moped, get your own bicycle.  Now here maybe get your car, there was get your moped.  And see and if you were sixteen you could get your license and you can get your own transportation, then man you're, you're, you're free as a bird.  And that was sort of the, that was the horizon getting a, a bike, and
Speaker 2: So did they send you out be, before you got your moped?
Speaker 1: My mother wisely said that, "You need an education and here's, here's where you gonna go."  And I was excited 'cause I'm going to Philadelphia, so I never owned my own moped, my own bike.  I went to Philadelphia instead, I was sixteen years old, and I was met at the Phil- Philadelphia airport.  Went to live with Aunt Ida, Ida Pitts [ph.] and Uncle Ed, Edwin, Edward Pitts [ph.], and these (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now these your father's relatives?
Speaker 1: No these, these--Aunt Ida was a--excuse me, I'm gonna sneeze--a cousin of my [maternal] grandmother [Helen Bean], and when you're in, in the islands, it's who do you know in the states?  And, who can watch over you 'cause you're only sixteen years old.  So I came to the states and was, it was in January, January '62 [1962], and I had to do one year of high school.  'Cause to get into college here I didn't have any history, so I had to do courses like American history.  And I went to Temple University High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and completed my necessary requirements.  And that was a, boy was that an experience, I'm sixteen years old, I'm in a class in Temple Prep they called it at the time, this is Temple High School.  With, now I know what it was, then I didn't know, veterans, and these were veterans who were on the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], who had returned from then Southeast Asia doing whatever it was.  And these guys for the most part, they were serious about getting whatever they, they were doing.  And I'm this kid in there with all of these--and man that was, that was an eye opener, because these people worked at school.  And I was you know you get 50 percent and you're okay, you passed, no you had, a 70 or 75 [percent] and to get an A man you had to get like 96 [percent] (laughter) on a test.  I never heard of such a thing, I'm in this environment and didn't have good study habits, didn't know really how to study and struggling to compete.  And being reminded, I had a counselor old guy he said, "Why, why don't you try this, American history.  Make little note cards of, of important dates that you have to remember and write them on the note card.  Last thing before you go to bed, recite them, memorize them, and first thing in the morning, get up and that's the first thing you see."  And man, I tried that and it started to work and then he said, "Wherever you write a date, don't just remember the date, remember or know a pertinent fact that will remind you of the date."  And that's, how I learned, learned to study, and it took me a little time, but I got, I got to it and then it.  Man it, then I start getting good grades, I start feeling good and a nerd glasses and all that good stuff.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 604467
Speaker 1: Went to college, didn't know what I wanted to do, family said, "You ought to be a doctor," 'cause we didn't have any doctors in the family.  My second year of biology I said, "This you know, this is just impossible and chemistry, oh no."  And an advisor said, "Why don't you, why don't you take an accounting course?" And I took the accounting course, and it made sense.  It was easy you know, you solve the problem there was an answer, and I took another accounting course.  And that same advisor said, "Well why, why don't you just get an accounting degree?" and I said, "Okay," didn't know.  And I had an economics professor, Dr. Richie [ph.] who took a, sort of took a little interest in me and he says he--I remember him saying to me one day in Economics 101.  He asked a question. I was sitting in front and I wasn't paying attention, and he asked a questions and nobody had the answer.  So he said, "Mr. Ming [HistoryMaker H. Melvin Ming], what's the answer," and I said something, something stupid I guess.  And he said, "I never thought that I'd hear any, something so false come out of your mouth, I mean that's the stupidest thing I've heard."  Now, I'm in front, there's two hundred kinds in this amphitheater, I'm embarrassed and, and I said to myself, he'll never get that chance again.  I went to him after class and he said, "Pay attention, you have a good mind, won't you just do some work?"  And thank you very much and I had him for two other courses, he became one of my advi- one of my people that serve as a recommendation for me when I was applying for, for work.  But it was one of those moments again that sort of changed my life, and there's a old white guy who saw that I should be doing something more than what I was doing.  And that was really a, a help, so I went on and got my accounting degree. I mean in a, in a class at Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] I guess it was Speak- Speakman School of Business [sic. School of Business Administration; Richard J. Fox School of Business and Management, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  The accounting, it must've been three thousand people in the, in the school, but there were only maybe two, 250 of accounting majors.  And I remember tutoring people the professor said to one guy, "Why don't you ask him to show you how this, this works?"  So I started tutoring people in class because of the professor's suggestion. No pay, just helping to help them out. Man that was so helpful.  'Cause as I was sort of teaching them you know, I was getting it (laughter).
Story_ID: 604468
Speaker 1: They said, "You'll never get a job in accounting."  This is 1967; "You'll never get a job in accounting" (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is when you graduated in '67 [1967]?
Speaker 1: This when I graduated from Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and this was like '66 [1966] school year and I said, "I, I didn't know," I went, the people came on campus.  I took some interviews, I don't know what I'm gonna do, I'm not a, I'm not a resident, I can't work here, I got to go back to Bermuda.  So I went back to Bermuda I think it was summer of '66 [1966] and, and inquired about getting work as an accountant.  And I ended up at a, an accounting firm and the person that I interviewed with said, "Well, it would be helpful if you got some experience.  There's this, we have a correspondent firm in, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and you should go talk to them, and the, the firm was Lybrand, Ross Brothers and Montgomery [PricewaterhouseCoopers]," it was along name back then, okay.  And, and he looks it up in his directory he said, "The person you wanna see is the personnel part, whose name is Philip Taylor [ph.]."  So I went, made an appointment went to see Philip Taylor and he was courteous and gave me the interview.  Then when it came time to, to apply for real work, I interviewed with Coopers [Cooper Brothers] and with Arthur Andersen [Arthur Andersen LLP] and Price- Price Waterhouse.  And I got three offers all right and the guys who told me I'd never get a job, they didn't get any offers (laughter). In the Arthur Andersen letter they wrote me and said there are two people being considered from Temple, and it was me and another guy.  And they suggested just that we got together.  Well when I went into, to Coopers, 'cause I knew the campus interviews when I went in, I ended up talking to Phil Taylor again.  And he said, I deiced I'll go to work with Coopers and Lybrand, Ross Brothers and Montgomery.  And so that's how I got a job there. Now problem, I don't--I'm not a citizen, and I don't have work permits.  So I had to go through all of that and they agreed that they would sponsor me, but I had to leave and go to Bermuda to reenter.  'Cause you needed a number to immigrant to the United States, that's the way it worked then.  My mother [Hester Bean Ming]--I was in Bermuda for three weeks, no call from the U.S. immigration, 'cause you couldn't go until they called you.  My mother got on the phone, called people she knew and she didn't stop until she had a conversation with the, the American ambassador, whoever the, the head person was.  And in two days, I had an, an interview with the people there and in a week later I was back in Philadelphia and started work.  My mother was the one that just pushed, and pushed and pushed, and pushed and got me the interview there and got me the number so that I could get my visa and came back and that's how I got my green card.
Story_ID: 604469
Speaker 1: Got my green card, came back, went to work at Lybrand, Ross Brothers and Montgomery [PricewaterhouseCoopers], started in like August or something like that, that part of the year.  Christmas week, I got my draft notice, and--
Speaker 2: So the British had draft or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No my draft was for the U.S., once you, well only one of the agreements if you are a, you have a green card, then you have to agree to serve.  And six months into my work life here I got my, I got it, got the notice, went in 401 North Broad Street in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], the induction station.  I guess, it--this was now March of '68 [1968] and in I go U.S. Army on a train to Fort Bragg, North Carolina for basic training.  And you talk about culture shock I'm in there with draftees, the train, I don't know where it started by I know that in Philadelphia there was a (laughter) many people that got on.  Then in Baltimore [Maryland] they picked up some more and all the way down, and then we got to Fort Bragg, and man we could hustle out of this thing and I'm in the U.S. Army.  Hair cut and all 1968, my mother [Hester Bean Ming], once I got through basic training, she wrote the base commander and said, "I didn't educate my son to go to war."  And I didn't know it at the time but here's mom just being mom, and he responded, the base commander responded at Fort Bragg.  And I ended up going to; the next training for me was Fort Ord, California.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so I was at Fort Ord--
Speaker 2: That's a noncommissioned off-
Speaker 1: Well they were trying to get me to go (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Officers training--
Speaker 1: No but see, I just, this is just advanced training.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the, the, the first sergeant when we finished the whole unit was shipped to Germany, except there were five us I believe, and we were all aliens.  And the first sergeant, I remember him lining us up he said, "You got two choices.  One is you can go to, you can go to OCS [Officer Candidate School]," 'cause we were college graduates, he said, "or you can pull KP [kitchen police]."  And said, "I'm not, all right what does it mean to go to OCS?" He said, "Extend your commission for another year or so to do that," he said, "or maybe you can go to Airborne [U.S. Army Airborne School]."  So all of us we signed up and we to become airborne, jump school in Fort Benning, Georgia, and off we go.  And Larry [Larry Crowe] man, I, I tell you talking about growing up, I, I'll I can talk about that for a while, but it was there that I really found me in term- in terms of confidence.  Then all of my--that encouragement as a child it sort of took root, jump school, I'm, I remember one day I'm in a--they teaching you how to jump out of an airplane.  And how to fall backwards and I'm in this sawdust pit, when you grab this thing and the guy pulls you, you have to let go and you fall.  You're falling backwards 'cause if you falling at night, you can't look where you're going, right, so.  And I, I'm falling and I look to him and I fell and I twisted my ankle.  And the, the drill sergeant came in and this guy kicked me in my behind he said, "That's what's wrong with you college guys you just won't do as you're told.  You know everything--do as you're told and I, it'll save your life," you know.  I'm all little embarrassed little got up, got to think about that, these guys and they couldn't, they were not literate to me (laughter) they, their language was terrible, (makes sound).  But they knew their job, and if you just did what they told you to do as they were training you, you'd be okay.
Story_ID: 604470
Speaker 1: I say I grew up there because I, I, act- I came to a, a, a realization that just because you don't sound as polished as I sound or just because you're, you're this or that doesn't mean I can't learn from you.  And maybe I ought to just respect you for your knowledge, and that, that same drill sergeant, Sergeant Hodges [ph.] was his name.  He made me the platoon sergeant in training and, and I always had some leadership role.  A lot of my boy scouting and all of that is--I was a natural leader according to him. That guy who, his language was awful.  I wouldn't take him home because his, every other word was a, you know an expletive and, but man there was a, just a knowledge.  And a caring about me that I couldn't show, and he sort of pushed me, he pushed me in front of the platoon [in the U.S. Army].  He pushed me, he made me, me do kinds of things, and he did it you know not, it was really out of caring and, and, and love (laughter).  And that has worked. That, that lesson man meant it, when I went back to the workforce, I learned how to--now I'm just an aspiring CPA [certified public accountant] and I'm getting most difficult clients, I'm the only person of my skin tone in the firm [Lybrand, Ross Brothers and Montgomery; PricewaterhouseCoopers], in that particular office.  People look at me, how did you get here, is this some affirmative action thing, and I'd go out to, to--I remember being sent to do an audit in Long, in Long Island [New York] of Sweetheart paper cup company [Sweetheart Cup Company].  And I show up and this guy by the name of Ming [HistoryMaker H. Melvin Ming] and it's one of those, "Oh we're expecting somebody, some Chinese guy." No it's me.  And my workspace became the corner of the table that on the other corner that had their coffee supplies.  And I was there for two days doing an audit, an inventory of, of this manufacturing.  So it wasn't, I wasn't the most, the most welcomed guy.  But in the accounting department, there was, I had to work with these people, I had to find ways to let them do, let me do my job.  And my sawdust pit example, respectful for what they know, don't know more than they know, they know their job better than you do.  And that helped me do my job and learn how to work with people to make them better and do what I do.  And that, those kinds of lessons sort of got me to what I now do.
Story_ID: 604471
Speaker 1: I remember going to taking the CPA [certified public accountant] exam and it's a tough exam. Three, three and half days and, and all that.  And not many people pass it and 80 percent people fail it and, you can't get promoted to work unless you pass it. So took it, did miserably.  How you, I said, "How do people pass this exam?" They said, "Well most people take some regular instruction and they call them coaching courses.  Or you do it in, in a university setting."  So I to, took a coaching course.  Man, this is work. I had to go to my job during the day, had to go home at night and practice the exam and.  Because the exam doesn't measure what you know, the exam is a, it's sort of, it's a rite of passage, it's who you let into the system or not, it nothing to do with accounting (laughter).  But you have to learn how to take it. And I did that, took the exam, passed the exam, got a call from the managing partner of, of the firm [Lybrand, Ross Brothers and Montgomery; PricewaterhouseCoopers].  "Mel [HistoryMaker H. Melvin Ming] we're so pleased so proud and you passed the exam."  All right, so now I'm working with other people 'cause we had, I was a, a member of a new organization called the black accountants association in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], National Association of Black Accountants.
Speaker 2: Yeah now when was that formed, you had was it, it was new right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was already formed but we were just get, sort of getting starting, this was about '72 [1972] in that timeframe, '72 [1972], '73 [1973].  And I was doing pretty good at work, making some progress, but I remember meeting with black kids the profession from all the different firms talking about how hard it was to pass the exam.  "What should we do?" "Well we should go to the state board of examiners and ask them why this, why they discriminate" (laughter).  So I said, "Okay." I set it up, called this the people in Harrisburg [Pennsylvania] and went to Philadelphia and go up and ask for a meeting.  I go up there, it's just me, go up and I, and I meet with them, we're pretty curious as to why is there so difficult for people of color to pass the exam and, you know how does it work?  And they took me to the process of how it works, you know they don't know who you are, there's a number sign and all that kind of good stuff.  So I was able to come back and say here's how the process works, and I'm satisfied that you know there's not a picture with a big, next to the person that assigns a number.  So you know let's not get hung up on that, but I was able to build a relationship with a, a guy who administered the, the process in Pennsylvania.  And that just was helpful in me representing to other people you know what, I don't care what it is, why don't you go and prepare and you, you do it.  Now I was the seventh black CPA in the State of Pennsylvania, this was 1973.  There are only six people that got there before me, and there's a story with every one of them and there was only two before me that actually got there by working with a major CPA firm.  And it was just, it's just one of those things, so I became the president of the National Association of Black Accountants in Philadelphia, it was wonderful.
Story_ID: 604472
Speaker 1: Okay we were talking about you becoming the president of the National Association of Black Accountants.
Speaker 2: I was the president of the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] chapter--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --of the National Association of Black Accountants, it was a good time.  There was quite a bit of interest in getting more black people in the, into the profession.  The firm that I was working for Lybrand and Ross Brothers and Montgomery [Lybrand, Ross Brothers and Montgomery] at the time, it's now PricewaterhouseCoopers.
Speaker 1: Yeah it became Coopers Lybrand [Coopers and Lybrand] then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was Coopers Lybrand and--
Speaker 1: And now it's Price--
Speaker 2: PricewaterhouseCoopers.
Speaker 1: PricewaterhouseCoopers.
Speaker 2: Very supportive, but what it did it gave me another venue to practice, learn, grow as a leader.  And what I've learned is that as we grow, the more you get to do those kinds of things, the better it, it is for you in places where you don't even know you have to go.  So the fact that I was dealing with personal challenges of people who wanted a professional growth in a non-work setting, help me in my work setting.  In my leadership. Just assessment of skills, evaluating people, those kinds of things, the knowledge was transferrable.  So I became a better supervisor at Coopers because I was also dealing with people who I didn't have to, didn't have to stuff for.  But gave me an opportunity to see more of how they worked, and what the challenges were for them in their firms.  Therefore, I could relate to what it meant in our firm.
Story_ID: 604473
Speaker 1: So I went to work for Coopers [Lybrand, Ross Brothers and Montgomery; PricewaterhouseCoopers] in I guess it was '68 [1968] yeah, two years after my U.S. [military] service time, came back to Coopers in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  Was, was kind of lonely. Not many people like me there, but I don't know Larry [Larry Crowe] you may have experienced some of the something like this where you go to places, and I'm the only person.  So if there are other people that looks like me (laughter) they look out for me (laughter) so the janitorial staff, the, the clerks, the secretaries, whatever they would say this guy Ming [HistoryMaker H. Melvin Ming] is not Chinese.  You know he could be my brother and, and so people would be deliberate and to try to assist me or help me in ways.  So I remember being an audit--doing an audit large insurance company and, and the supervisor that I was working under said to me one day, "Why is that everybody knows you around here?  And, and that," this is a major insurance company, "that you can get to see the CFO and everybody else has to make an appointment?"  Well I didn't tell them what the, what the real deal was, but the person that worked for him related to me (laughter) and made sure I got in (laughter).  Or you, you're, I'm, I'm doing a, a, an audit and the payroll clerk happens to be a little a lowly clerk could who never seen an auditor like, like me.  And who would go sort an extra step to be over assistance to me, help, help me in some way, this is all part of it.  People took great pride in the fact that I was there, they never seen anybody like me there before, and that's people of color for the most part.  But there were other people, I remember when I got married, I had a client in Philadelphia who heard that I got married and said to me, this is an old Jewish guy.  He ran one of the biggest laundry chains in, in the country, a national firm, and said, "I heard you got married [to Diana Darrell Ming], what do you need?"  I said, "Well hey, we just got married, and I need furniture," and he said, "Come see me," and he, I went in his office, he wrote on the back of his business card an address and a, a name.  And he said, "Go see this guy and tell him what you need." And I went to, I did as he said (laughter) and I got furniture at very favorable prices.  Because this guy just cared a little bit about this little struggling auditor.  That same man (laughter) when I had my first child born [Calvin Ming] said, "Don't--aren't you tired of driving that little Volkswagen?  Go see such and such a guy who, and tell him you need a, a car," or whatever, so I bought a car.  But his introduction made sure that I got a car, a got an, an Oldsmobile (laughter) you know a Cutlass [Oldsmobile Cutlass] whatever it was at, it on terms and rates I didn't know people could get.  So there, there have been other people this, he happens to be an old Jewish guy, and then there's, there's just people along the way who, who saw something in me that they respected, like or whatever.  And, and would do whatever they could to sort of help me in some way, and what I learned from that is I have an obligation to do similar, you know.  If I can help somebody, do it.
Story_ID: 604474
Speaker 1: Now have you, have you observed--have, have you come in contact with people who didn't do that, who just for some reason just don't make those connections.  Don't get in those circles and don't get stuff decoded for them, and--?
Speaker 2: Oh people?
Speaker 1: Yeah I mean just peop- people in the course of doing business, seem like business works smoother when you can do that kind of, when you can make those connections.
Speaker 2: I have, I have personally experienced, what I think is the best of humanity in terms of, of relationships and aiding people to be better and do more.  And I also experienced those who choose not to live that way.
Speaker 1: So people have blocked you?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah, I worked for a gentleman who was the head of the second largest office of the firm [Coopers and Lybrand; PricewaterhouseCoopers] and because of circumstances, he could, he had to be rotated out of that job.  So he had to leave the, from the second largest office in the firm to come to work at a small office.  And I believe it was really--he, emotionally he didn't, he didn't, didn't like it--then he showed up there and from being the managing partner of that, that office, he had to now actually do some work.  And one of the people that worked for him was me and I believe that this particular gentleman, just had great difficulty seeing me as his neighbor.  I believe that he had great difficulty accepting me as either an equal or just being deserving of being in the office next to him.  And it was a very difficult time, and I can tell you five stories like this, but this particular guy, and a particular client that we were, that I was assigned to and he was the partner in charge, I was the manager.  And I did the work.  We had a meeting with a particular audit committee and at the audit committee; it's the partner and me.  Meeting with the client and the audit committee, and there was a question asked at this particular audit committee.  And the partner who does the talking, he spoke and the comp- the CFO of the, of the client looked at me and said, "No, that's not right.  Would you tell, tell the committee what, what the facts are," and I did it.  And I tried to do it in a very respectful way and that was the end of it, okay.  I got back to my office was called by this guy to his office. He's my boss now on this.  And when his secretary came over to, to get me she said, "You know I don't know what happened but you know he, he did an evaluation of you and he roasted you, it was absolutely terrible.  He said you ought to be fired all that stuff, and he asked to, for that evaluation and he tore it up.  And he's not writing a new one, so he wants to see you."  And I walked in this guy's office and he said, "I appreciate what you did today, you could've embarrassed me and you did, you did not do that.  And I just appreciate the way you handled it and this client has very high regard for you, and that was evident there.  And thank you very much," and left, I left his office that was it.  And I said wow, this, this a new day.  This guy was still cold, still distant, I got, got my work done but the fact the client valued me.  You know he got, he, he got sick and he retired and whatever, and then a few years later I sort of left the firm.  I got a call from his house saying he wanted to see me (laughter) and I went to see this guy, and he said, "I understand you're leaving the firm," and yeah.  He said, "I just wanna wish you well. What you gonna do?" And I told him what I was planning on doing.  He said, "You'll be great at that, you have, you have such a strong people skill that I discounted your technical abilities."  And he said, "You'll be a fine- you'll be fine you know you, you, you'll do great and, great," and that's the last time I, I saw that particular gentleman.
Story_ID: 604475
Speaker 1: Now I tell you that, and it's a reminder to me, there are people that want you to be successful.  There are some that don't give hoot about (laughter) whether you are or not, and there are some who will actually make it so that you cannot be successful.  My experience has been whenever--not so much now, but when I was first in the management rolls, I mean every white person that came to work for me, they, they behave as if they assume that, I was there as an ornament or something.  I didn't know my job and they tell, tell me what my job is (laughter).  I mean you'll work it through.  But I found it most fruitful not to focus on what they expect of me, but to focus more on what I expect of me and what I want of me.  'Cause if I let you sort of influence too greatly my, my choices, my direction, I mean I'm essentially handing you my life.  And I've learned a long time ago I don't live my life by your agenda. And life is pretty good.  So now I'm at the stage where you know I don't do things I don't wanna do (laughter).  But it took; it took some, some work getting there.  Part of the work was dealing with rejection, dealing with people that just don't see you as a person that they imagine would be in the office next door to them.   And that's the most difficult thing, you, you, you get through it.  I've taken teams in, I've taken a team to go in and negotiate bank deals, I mean major money and there, there're three of us.  And I'm the CFO and there's a comptroller and there's a financial adviser, all the conversations goes to this guy.  And finally the guy wakes up and he says, "Why you asking me, you gotta ask him" (laughter).  Gotten used to it, wish it were different, wish that my son [Calvin Ming] and my grandson [Cameron Ming] wouldn't have to face it, but they will.  And I think most people have to face but it's easier to be labeled with because of, of your darker skin.  But it's good not to let that be the definer, you know.
Story_ID: 604476
Speaker 1: Now, do you find that in the, in the world of accounting that good people skills are, are harder to find?  Or I mean I just wonder you know when you I think the stereotypical view of an accountant or some auditor is somebody (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Cold eyeshade yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, austere kind of guy.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: A kind of a loner type that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that handles you know--
Speaker 2: The, the see the, the, the stereotype and the, really the realities of they don't, they don't align you know.  People think to, to be an effective accountant you gotta be a wiz at numbers and that's it.  It, it's, it's a lot more than that now.  If you wanna be a bookkeeper, just be a wiz at numbers, you really wanna be a certified public accountant, a good CFO type, you need a lot more skill.  And the skill that you need is about relationships as it relates to people and relationships as, as it relates to numbers.  When a CPA [certified public accountant] looks at a column of numbers, he's looking to see what does this, what's the story here, what does it tell?  What are the dependencies that relate to those numbers, what might that instruct us to--direction you go.  So you look at nothing in isolation what does it mean, and the people that have the best really business skills is its part historian and part profit.  You're, you're projecting where you, where you wanna go, and if you mastered those kinds of skills, then you, you can do pretty well.  So it's about leadership as it relates to people and resource allocation as it relates to dollars.  So if you're, you figure out how to do those kinds of things really well, you can, you can, you can, you can go far in, in the business of professional accounting.  I know, there a few people in the like the pioneers of the, the black CPA firms you've gotta get you talking to some of those guys.  But, it wasn't their technical knowledge that created their firms and made them successful.  It's a combination of that as a given but also the ability to tell a story, have people see the potential for the resources.  As they get applied and what you have to do today to get the kinds of returns and growth that you want.  And that's, that's what, that's what that profession really is, most people don't know that, they think it's just about adding up numbers and hey.  This fairly presents that, no it's, how do you create value, how do you get more value?  What are the options will you, will you not invest 'cause you, 'cause the nature of your business is such that if you put a whole lot more investments it's not going any place.  So when is the right time to sort of switch direction on, on to leave where you're going, it's a, it's a, it's a wonderful profession.  And you have to, you know you gotta, you gotta know your numbers, you gotta do that and you gotta, you can hate taxes all you please, but you gotta know what, what the impact of taxation is on, on investment, or, or operations or those kinds of things. But it's about the relationships of those kinds of things.  The dependencies where, where they go, so that's what the profession is.  If you got good people skills, and I think if you gi- you're, you're driven and determined, but fair, I mean I'll recommend this profession highly.  Hard work, you, you crazy and all that stuff but you can actually see how what you do will influence an outcome.  Today, tomorrow, down, down the, the road, so I've enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 604477
Speaker 1: How long did you work for Coopers [Coopers and Lybrand; PricewaterhouseCoopers]?
Speaker 2: I was, I--excluding my two years of [U.S.] military service, I was with them for twelve years, ten years actual job experience.  Got hired went to work for them in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], was transferred from the Philadelphia office to the Washington, D.C. office in 1977.  The purpose of the transfer, there're two of us that were transferred, myself and another guy.  We went there to help build the practice there in Washington, D.C., Washington was, was becoming a, a good business center and an international center.  And people of color were taking on more positions in, in Washington. In fact I got to know the com- the comptroller of the, the city back in Washington.  But the nature of the business in Washington was domes- drastically different, dramatically different.  I went from having like thirteen to fourteen clients in Philadelphia; insurance companies, hospitals, manufacturing kinds of clients to mostly non-for-profits and hospitals and, and government agencies in Washington, D.C.  I mean it was, it was crazy, and I did it for about three years.
Story_ID: 604478
Speaker 1: Went through some--I now got a family and two children [Calvin Ming and Jerilynne Ming] and--
Speaker 2: Well, well tell us now I meeting your, your wife, now when did you meet her and--
Speaker 1: Oh wow, that's, that's a, (laughter) that's a story.  When I was about seven or eight years old, my grandmother [Helen Bean] would send me with my mother's [Hester Bean Ming] permission to do some vacationing of a different part of the island with my grandfather's [Earnest Bean] cousin.  And they lived more on a farming type area, and ain't much, the farms are, but they grew vegetables and stuff.  And it was a way of getting me out of the city to the country.  Now while I was there with a so called cousin, the next property, my wife's family did the same thing with her.  They sent this little girl to spend summers with that family for the summer right?  So as children, you know eight and five, six every summer for years we would interact, okay.  Now we're teenagers fourteen, fifteen something like that and you know I'm getting older, she looks a little bit different.  My mother was a, the Girl Scout leader, and my, this young lady, Diana [Diana Darrell Ming], was one of her Girls Scouts, and girl, you called them Girl Guides at the time.  And she's a little cuter then and I started to notice a little bit right? So she, she you should let her tell the story its great the way she tells it, embellishes it.  So now I am sixteen years old, I'm being sent to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I remember saying to her, "Hey, I'm, I'm going to the states to go to school.  You should come and wish me well, see, see me off."  'Cause that was traditional in the islands, somebody goes away, everybody goes to the airport, right (laughter).  She didn't come, so I said that was it, now later that year, unbeknownst to me she was sent by her family to Jamaica to college, okay?  She was there for seven years, I'm in Philadelphia and I'm finishing school and all that, and during that whole time, I may have seen her two or three times in that seven year span.  But my father [Calvin Ming, Sr.] would always tell her about me and always tell me about her. Okay, lots of time.  My brother is getting married, I'm his best man, I fly in from Philadelphia to the wedding, she delivered her grandmother to the wedding, the Ming first wedding, and she leaves.  And when she dropped off her grandmother, she said she'd just take a look to see who's the wedding party, and my father saw her and said, "You know Mel's [HistoryMaker H. Melvin Ming] in the wedding party."  So she went home changed her clothes and came back to the wedding reception, and she came through the line, now she's a woman.  Looks a little different than I remember her. She's finished college, she's a school teacher and all, all this stuff.  And so it, I'm only there for a day and try to get a date, right, so I try to go over to visit her.  Her grandmother opens the door; it's eleven o'clock at night, no respectable young man comes at to this house at this hour of the night (laughter).  Didn't work, but we made contact then and then I would come to, every chance I got, I would come to visit her.  And she tells the story that she would put me on the plane to come back to Philadelphia, and she wouldn't respond to my phone calls.  So I would get on a plane and come back to Bermuda, you know I'm single it's just, just me.  And one day her, the kids in her class says, "Miss Darrell, your boyfriend's on the wall," (laughter) and she comes out, it's me.  I was so committed to getting my CPA [certified public accountant] certificate and being a successful professional, and I used to tell people ah, this, this marriage stuff I haven't seen that many of them that work that well.  I don't know, I don't know if it's for me, but man this woman got my attention and I just had to have her (laughter).  Thirty-six years later, she's my best friend, she's a, she's enjoying being a grandmother and I, I love her more now than I did then (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's quite a story; you know going all the way back to childhood.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we, we she, she says that her grandmother told her when we had an interest in each other said, "That's the best thing that his mother ever did" (laughter).  So I got her grandmother's endorsement and my grandmother said to me about her, said, "Mel if you don't mean her any good, leave her.  Don't play with her heart," and my grandmother, she's seen some girlfriends you know, she never even acknowledge that, there were some.  But with, with Diana, she said you know, "Don't play with her," so there was wisdom there, and it's just been wonderful.
Story_ID: 604479
Speaker 1: She's [Ming's wife, Diana Darrell Ming] been a supporter, she's believed in me, I mean she's seen me when I've been hurting, particularly in a business setting.  She's been with me at places where I, I've been overlooked, people will expect me to be sort of 'cause I'm a black tie at a black tie event, they think I'm, I'm part of the, the waiter service.  She's, she's been through all of that, and she's seen and she's been encouraging, I mean she, she knew I'd passed the exam long before I believe I passed the exam [to become a certified public accountant] (laughter).  It's, it's one of the most, most critical, must haves I think to achieve some measures of success.  People up close that really believe in you, even when you have those moments of doubt.  Like, I when we transferred when I went to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to, to Washington [D.C.], I came home and said, "Okay hon', I've been asked to go to Washington what do you say," she said, "Let's go." Went.  I'm in Washington, said, "Hon' I got the option to go to New York [New York], what do you think?" "Let's go." Always been supportive.  When we went to Philadelphia to Washington, I went to work, she took care of home, we got two kids [Calvin Ming and Jerilynne Ming].  And she was always, she was a homemaker, those, those years, I never had to worry about what was happening.  I was free to just work, man, work, work and then I can't pay her for that, you know, it's really one of those, one of those things that it just freed me to go and be and develop a career.  And work at it, and she took care of the kids, and she did a great job too.
Speaker 2: Okay now, now when did you all get married?
Speaker 1: Got married in August 26, 1972.
Story_ID: 604480
Speaker 1: I don't know if I should go back and pick this up now, but I--there's some things about Temple [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] we didn't discuss--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) way back when, but just, we were saying off cam- camera that Bill Cosby was at Temple (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah I don't, I don't know Bill--
Speaker 1: --hold, holding court in the cafeteria.
Speaker 2: Don't know Bill but I remember when I entered Temp U, Temple University, there was the student meeting place, place called Mitten Hall, and there's this guy who just sort of been recognized as this stand up comedian, Bill Cosby.  But I remember going into Mitten Hall and you'd see a lot of people over in one corner and there'd be Bill Cosby in a white sweater with a T on, on it holding court and, and doing it.  And you'd see him walking up and down the street, and he never finished, may gotten an honorary degree after.  But our, our paths crossed, and there were some intersection there and what Bill did for Temple just, just the name getting it out there, people didn't know about the school.  Learned about it, so for years, people would say, "You went to Temple? Oh yeah, Bill Cosby's school" (laughter).  So he was quite an ambassador.  But I was, I was, I saw him develop and grow, in fact he would put on, they would have like homecoming week.  And Bill would be featured upstairs in Mitten Hall, he had the cafeteria downstairs he had upstairs, as well.
Speaker 1: Okay. I thou- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Good years.
Story_ID: 604481
Speaker 1: I thought I'd go back and cover that and, and when, when you were in college [Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], were you involved in te- black sororities at the, I mean in, in fraternities and all that stuff (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 1: Did they have that kind--
Speaker 2: No, I, I never, I did not, now there was an occasional interest in the Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] or the Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] or whatever.  But and I was in business school [School of Business Administration; Richard J. Fox School of Business and Management, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] you know and I had to work and go to school and my tradition was not one that valued those kinds of relationships and engagements.  So I, I was, I told myself I was too busy and just, just didn't do it.  Now subsequently, seeing the power of those social organizations, and the good that they do, in my daughter's [Jerilynne Ming] experience, for example, she went to the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia].  I wou- I, I, if I could've done it over, I would've done it a little bit differently, connected with that.  But they weren't big in the business schools 'cause there weren't many, there were not a whole lot of black guys, no girls to my recollection in business school in nine--1964 to '66 [1966], '67 [1967] in that range, not that I know of.
Story_ID: 604482
Speaker 1: Well, let, let me pick up now, now when you left Coop- Coopers Lybrand [Coopers and Lybrand; PricewaterhouseCoopers], you went to work for, well when you went to D.C. first--
Speaker 2: All right here's what happened (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and then--
Speaker 2: I was transferred by Coopers to Washington, D.C. went there a couple of years; my life changed and took different interest.  Wasn't enjoying work, decided with my wife's [Diana Darrell Ming] consent I was gonna do something different.  So I went to--there was a client I had, it was East of the River Health Associates [sic. East of the River Health Clinic, Washington, D.C.].  And it was an HMO [health maintenance organization] it was formed in Southeast Washington, and I went to be the CFO of the group.  It was a client, I knew there were struggles, but I also, it was an opportunity to give back a little bit.  It's our people in that part of the city, and man this was tough, I was the CFO but I had to do everything.  Payroll, purchasing, I was, I was the chief bookkeeper, met some staff.  But make sure the facility worked, that the clients got served and that their finances were being taken care of.  Government grant, so it's, it, it's it was, I never realized you had to work so hard (laughter) for so little (laughter) reward.  You know I was going broke in, in the, so I got a call one day from a guy said look there's a, there's a, the National Urban Coalition, Carl Holman [M. Carl Holman] was he president, they, they, they can use some, they need a CFO.  So I went over there and I was there for a couple of years. Seem like I started there, and I think President Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] had taken, become president.  And in one day there was a budget adjustment where almost, their funding was eliminated, and it was tough.  'Cause they were trying to raise money to do research about the problems of the urban communities and Mr. Holman was quite a visionary.  I mean he, he's quite a scholar, a Lincoln University [Jefferson City, Missouri] graduate, quite a guy, and that was really giving back there.  So, it was, it was a, that was a challenging time for me.
Story_ID: 604483
Speaker 1: I was there and I got a call from another person--
Speaker 2: Are we rolling? All right, okay. We're ready.
Speaker 1: --who said, "National Public Radio is, they're without a CFO and they're, they're about to go bankrupt, go talk to them."  So I went over and I, I met with them and they hired me to be the CFO of NPR.  And I was part of the Coopers and Lybrand [PricewaterhouseCoopers] connection just referral and I went over and met them and--
Speaker 2: Now be- before we get there I just wanna go back a little bit to National--
Speaker 1: Urban Coalition (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) Urban Coalition [National Urban Coalition] now you had tell me off camera about how it got, got sort of whacked by the, it's funding was cut off by (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) During that time, they had significant--my best recollection significant contracts from the HEW Department of Health and--
Speaker 2: Health, Education and Welfare [U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare].
Speaker 1: --and Welfare at the time, it used to be--
Speaker 2: I think it's changed now.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, HHS or something like that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Health and Human Services [U.S. Department of Health and Human Services].
Speaker 1: Right, exactly.  But they received funds to actually build capacity in urban communities, be it education or I think economic empowerment.  And this is years ago so this from memory, but there was important mission and Mr. Holman [M. Carl Holman] is quite a visionary, quite an academic, and there was a rigor to what, what they did.  But the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] administration came in and decided that they were no long, longer gonna fund such programs.  And in one day at the stroke of a pen, the funding environment just changed drastically and, and just, it just meant that the programs had to be curtailed.  It was difficult (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, when, when we were off camera too you were talking about Carl Holman being the scholar of the group and [HistoryMaker] Eddie Williams being involved.
Speaker 1: Oh Miss, Miss, Miss--
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Height.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Ramona Edelin. Other people.
Speaker 1: The, the, those, those names Ramona Edelin, Carl Holman, Eddie Williams, Dorothy Height, Larry Dosett [ph.], of Detroit [Michigan], there were.  The coalition became, it was a coalition and it became, I think, part of the academic center for the, the research necessary to support the kinds of program initiatives that ought to take place at our kinds of communities, that was their, their body of work.  There was a place called the Urban Institute they had, had fellows but that was funded, government grants also with--they didn't focus on the black community's needs, the Urban Coalition did.  And that was its, its value and that's, that's its roots. And an important organization, and there were some major businesses that valued I think the academic research that went into solutions that would work in these kinds of communities.  And it, it was, but it was a tough time, you see many a bad organization many of the, the other socially serviced organization lose their funding because of a political ideology. And it was, it was tough.
Story_ID: 604484
Speaker 1: Now National Public Radio during the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] administration now, did, now you came, did you come, come in right after the budget for National Public Radio was, was cut by--I think the staff was cut by 80 percent in the, in the early '80s [1980s] shortly after--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --President Reagan came in.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure of the timing, but I may have been one, one of the people that cut the staff (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was hired as CFO, what had happened was when was that, I have to get the, the years kind of straight.
Speaker 1: It's '80 [1980] you came in, in '81 [1981].
Speaker 2: Eighty-one [1981] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eighty-three [1983] I'm sorry, '83 [1983].
Speaker 2: Okay in, in that timeframe.  What happened they that's, when Public Radio as a public radio service of the, the U.S. did experience some, some funding cuts because the Reagan administration cut the funding for public broadcasting [Corporation for Public Broadcasting].  So I had to deal with that.  But they had serious operating challenges where they were spending a whole lot money than they, they had available.  And there were some other business practices that were problematic.  And there was a president and the president resigned, it was not there, and there was an interim transition team that was brought in to manage National Public Radio.  And there was a guy by the name of Ron Bornstein [Ronald Bornstein] out of University of, of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin Extension] I think it was.  Who was the interim president and there was a gentleman on loan from Westinghouse his name was George Miles [HistoryMaker George L. Miles, Jr.] who was on loan from Westinghouse radio and Westinghouse Broadcasting [Westinghouse Broadcasting Company].  And he was the interim CFO. Well George was, was gonna leave NPR. He's, he'd done his duty.  And he hired me there, recommended me for hire and went off, and he then became the chief operating officer of WNET 13 [WNET-TV] here in New York City [New York, New York].  And I was at, at NPR and the challenge there is the hardest, most difficult work I've done in my, my life.  Great product, great service, highly valued, really no organization like it, but the quest for great content was not balanced by good business practice.  Now you can have great content and good mission, but if you don't have any money you know you, you can't continue your content development, obviously.  And I was brought in to do, handle the business side and were big arguments about why they couldn't spend certain things.  And why it had to be this way, and had to reporting to me personnel systems, money and facilities, those kinds of things.  It was hard because the creative side didn't want to hear from the other side, and what we were able to do, I working with people like Bob Siegel [Robert Siegel] who's there.  They came to a place and the president, the new president came in, Doug Bennet [Douglas J. Bennet], and we had to work real hard at getting some common rules of the road where we could fix this thing.
Story_ID: 604485
Speaker 1: Now it took, it took like a year, but I remember the day we broke the budget, and we, we made decisions about some of the cuts.  Most of the cuts had been made, I think by there, but we had to get some money and, I would say like two weeks and had to negotiate with the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, a, a bailout package.  And the GAO [Government Accountability Office] was, was there to do audits and, and it was, it was a difficult time.  But man we focused on how to continue great content and how to do it within the parameters of what was available.  I remember getting the check; seven point something million dollars, which was a loan from Corporation for Public Broadcasting.  Which was a transition funding, and then putting in place the, the budgets that meant that we had to go back to the system.  And the system had a vote to increase their dues so we could off this debt.  And I remember they scheduled in Crystal City [Arlington, Virginia] it was the nat- the national, the annual radio conference that NPR [National Public Radio] puts on.  That this year, that particular year was in Crystal City, and they scheduled a seven a.m. budget presentation about the NPR budget.  And Doug Bennet [Douglas J. Bennet] opened and gave it to me to present what the budget was, and I presented that budget it was seven o'clock in the morning.  They were shocked, it was standing room only (laughter), presented what the budget was for the year.  And part of the revenue assumptions was that, we were gonna have to increase station dues and assessments dues by some number.  And all the changes that they were gonna have to pay for 'cause it was really a membership organization.  And we got to the end of the presentation, "Any questions?" One minor question, and that was it.  And that day NPR got fixed, the system said you know that's a pretty good plan, let's go with it.  And I remember sometime later, I got a call to come to work in New York [New York] and the person that hired me here said, "Anybody that can present to the out of eighteen hundred NPR outlets, and could get them to vote for a budget increase, and have them actually pay it can work for me," (laughter), "in New York City" (laughter).  But that was, that was, it was hard work, it was tough, it was most re- one of the most rewarding things I personally got to do.  It's taking the, the skill of business applications, accounting and helping the creative side of the company come up with parameters in which it can work.  While we fixed the budget side of the, of, of NPR, and I think NPR to me is, is still the best thing on the air.  And every time I turn it on, I personally take pride in the fact that I know it's on the air today because of some work that I did (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah it seem to not moves, I remember during the crisis most of the personality stayed on Sue- Susan Stamberg (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sue Stamberg, yeah.
Speaker 2: --and Bob Edwards--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --people like that.
Speaker 1: Bob Edwards I, I recon- recall fondly the, the Bob Edwards interviews with, Red Barber, for, for example, right?  And I remember going by his office one day, the guy would start work at three o'clock in the morning to be on the air at six, five a.m., six a.m.  And he, he would tell me about this guy Red, Red Barber and he talk about him.  And just the respect for those two guys shared and some of the, the light conversation how he would say, "The chrysanthemum flower."  But the depth of knowledge they had, and, and some of the zest for life, and I take some pride in the fact that you know I picked some things so that Bob Edwards can do what Bob Edwards can do during those, those days.  I remember called by Susan Stamberg to the studio one day, she said, "Somebody--they tell me that I should talk to you 'cause the air is terrible in here" (laughter).  "Well okay we, we'll see what we can do about it." And, but I got to know her.  And, and, and I had arguments with other people about why they couldn't just hire anybody.  Or why they couldn't be on the ph- keep a line open to the Kremlin to get a two minute piece.  Have the line open for six hours because they're trying to get the, the perfect sound, you know things like, like that.  But, but we, we worked through it and, and made it, made it work and man I'm, that's one of the highpoints in my work life, in my life.  In that I know I contributed to something that is of, what I think, and people agree that it's a high value.  And, and left it better than I found it.
Story_ID: 604486
Speaker 1: So did you go from; see you were at National Public Radio--
Speaker 2: I was there and then what happened next was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) for a year, right?
Speaker 2: --the chairman, the chairman of the, the chairman of the audit committee at, at NPR the finance committee was a guy by the name of Ward Chamberlain [Ward Chamberlin, Jr.].  And he--somehow I ended up being recommended by he and George Miles [HistoryMaker George L. Miles, Jr.] for the CFO position in WNET, New York [WNET-TV, New York, New York].  Now I knew nothing about media until I got to NPR, I thought media was you know switch, on and off switch, that's all I knew.  But to see how, how they did what they did and the impact of engineering and technical services and creative talent all make- making product, my exposure to that was at NPR.  Then I came to New York [New York] similar circumstance in that the company was not doing well, this has been my whole professional career.  Things that are not working, they hire me and try to figure out how to make, make them work better.  So come to New York, I said I'd never work in New York; they were 57th Street and 9th Avenues [Columbus Avenue].  I'm living, for temporarily I was, I was living in the city, man it was fun walking to work (laughter).  Now my two children [Calvin Ming and Jerilynne Ming] are, they're in middle school, we, we found a house out in New Jersey, so for ten years I commuted from a town called Randolph, New Jersey into center city Manhattan [New York], through the Lincoln Tunnel.  Yeah, and I tell you boy (laughter) that was a killer, but had a great place to work, WNET 13.  And that was a time when there were again budget cuts and PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] funding challenge and all that stuff.  Had to figure out how to really make it work, they had a magazine, The Dial magazine it was losing money and they would figure out which way to go, and came in started working with, with some people and came up with a plan, started working the plan.  And in two years that one was on the right, right direction, so got to see new product coming into, in the, into that place.  The 'Nature' franchise expanded, the 'American Masters' began, 'Great Performances' took bege- got bolder.  'Heritage Civilization of Jews' [sic. 'Heritage: Civilization and the Jews'] with Abba Eban, that, that series got funded; Bill Miles who did black soldier- did some of his (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) William Miles, right?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: 'I Remember Harlem,' I remember that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--that guy. He did some other stuff and I, 'cause of budgets and those kinds of resource allocation opportunities, I, I could help but could influence sort of where the creative agenda went.  I get no credits that, that's not what I, I do, its, it was not my aspiration.  But it was to make sure that we could put up the best creativity that, that we could do.  And form good relationships with Jack Venzer [ph.] and George Page and, and people that actually did the content.  And I celebrate; we got to a point where you know I wasn't just a numbers guy.  I, I became viewed as a partner in helping them do what get done.  I remember one day I, I agreed and reassigned the production manager for 'Great Performances.'  And, and was summoned to Mr. Venzer's office to explain why I would dare do such a thing, and we talked about it.  You know what you do what you do really well, I'll do what know I, I do, and I promise you, if I'm messing it up, tell me and I'll change it.
Speaker 1: What sounds like, I mean, you know those of us at home when a, when we, when we see public TV or public radio in trouble or some, or any other non-for-profit that we love, we often wish that we could do something you know.  I mean some of us who don't have capacity to do anything about it (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --especially wish we could.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you're in a position to, to I guess love the content and then actually be, be able to do something about it.
Speaker 2: This has been rewarding and it's giving and it's coming up with solutions to make those public services that are good better.  Meeting with people who don't have means and say well I mean you can't you know you can't send twenty-five dollars.  You, you can write a letter to, to Newt Gingrich, you can, you can remind him that now there's, there're few things that are public.  That are high, that are of high value to us as a community, the public school, the public library the public broadcaster and they, the list can go on.  But so we have to have a voice to make sure that, the, the legislators and the people of influence be company on legislature, they know it.  Then there are people inside like I was who can apply our business knowledge and try to make these non-businesses operate on good business principles.
Story_ID: 604487
Speaker 1: Now you went from WNET [WNET-TV, New York, New York] to K--W--
Speaker 2: WQED [WQED Multimedia] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) WQED Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Here's what happened there, I was, been at WNET for ten years, change in leadership, new president came in.  The exe- the executive vice president became the president of WQED, offered me a job to go to Pittsburgh.  That was in some difficulty and you know the theme is, I, I fix things.  The reason, a few people told me I was crazy, I shouldn't go, go out to Pittsburgh; I should stay in, in New York City [New York, New York].  But ten years, time for a change, I didn't feel appreciated or valued with the new administration at, at 13.  They wanted different people and all right fine go ahead, but also the Pittsburgh opportunity presented one where the enterprise was the city magazine, the Pittsburgh Magazine, was owned by WQED communications.  It had two TV stations, and it had a radio station so the opportunity for me was to now get up close and see how the management of multiple media could be done in a way where they, it all could, could grow.  You got main channel, second channel, two TV channels, you got radio, cla- all classic, the--you know Pittsburgh Symphony [Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra], Pittsburgh orchestra, chorale society [Pittsburgh Concert Chorale] a, a staple in that community about the arts a voice, or a broadcast voice.  And the magazine. Now I knew about the Philadelphia Magazine, I knew about Chicago magazine but in Pittsburgh the magazine, the city magazine was owned by the PBS broadcasting [Public Broadcasting Service].  So ad [advertising] revenues to drive it and, not just the PBS, not a PBS program guide, it's, here's what's happening in our town.  And that was fascinating, so we had three businesses, the radio business, the TV businesses and the print businesses. And for two years, as the chief operating officer, I was the point of integration of those things.  And making sure that the resources that were allocated could grow them, and also that what you did on one could fuel the growth in the others.  So if the, if we were producing a show, could you promote it in the magazine, could you get it promoted on, on the, on the radio?  And for me that was an emersion in multiple media in the broadcast landscape and that sort of got me ready for the next thing that that I got to do.  In each thing you sort of open another vista, another set of horizons, another, a view into what could be.
Story_ID: 604488
Speaker 1: After being there [WQED Multimedia, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] for two years I missed New York [New York] so, got the opportunity to come back to New York, by being the CFO of the Museum of Television and Radio [Paley Center for Media].  And this was an organization started by Bill Paley [William S. Paley] at CBS and some thought it was gonna be the, Bill Paley of CBS archive.  And I was hired was there for just, just a couple of years.  But at a time when they wanted to create the magazine, the, a Museum of Television and Radio experience on the West Coast.  So there are two museums one in New York and one on the West Coast, and the business model was to have you, whatever you can see in New York, you can see in, in California.  And I was responsible for getting it running in the way that it, it you couldn't tell the difference if you were a visitor, a patron.  You didn't know the difference between viewing something in California or viewing something in New York City.  That exposed me to this, what's now become how you get stuff digitized and how you get it instant recall.  So the people go in if you wanna watch 'I Love Lucy' or for some particular ep- episode, how do you access it?  Get it up, experience it and say great. So the then president, he's now passed, but he, he, he defined the museum as a place that is a museum.  Because if you want art it's there, if you want construction, it's there.  If you want children's, it's there. He says what we have is the video expressions of the moving images of what other museums actually have and in physical artifacts.  So I mean pretty powerful set notions. Being challenged now, because now with Google [Google Inc.] and places like that what do you do with it?  But for me it was a great how do you run an enterprise, its public facing that's the next sort of iteration of the public library in video.
Story_ID: 604489
Speaker 1: So I was there [Museum of Television and Radio; Paley Center for Media] one night and left early, and I was walking down the street and I bumped into a guy by the name of Gary Knell.  Gary was the general counsel at WNET 13 [WNET-TV, New York, New York] when I was a CFO.  He said, "Hey I'm at Children's Television Workshop and we don't have a CFO and you ought to come talk to us."  He tried to get me to come talk to them before I went out to Pittsburgh [WQED Multimedia, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], but I said no and went Pittsburgh.  So talked them and took a few months whatever, but I ended up being the CFO of Children's Television Workshop, now called Sesame Workshop.
Speaker 2: Why did they change the name?
Speaker 1: Well in the hallways it goes like this, the Internet was now beginning to boom, and we were looking to get a URL with 'Sesame Street.'  And some enterprising person had bought the URLs sesame and it was a bakery, and so who do we have our treasured legacy property, 'Sesame Street.'  And we're having some difficulty branding it in a way that could protect it.  So you got used to saying, "Where do you work?" "CTW." "What's Children's Television Workshop?" "Oh we're the, we're the creators and the producers of 'Sesame Street.'"  Why not just put the two together, it's a workshop and it's really 'Sesame' is the main driver, and that's how the name change came about.  Now obviously since that time we've sort of bought every alphabet or anything with sesame in it so that if you wanna, you, you wanna go create a, a, a website for the letter A you can't.  You got to us 'cause we got the letter A through the letter Z (laughter), part of the branding of what Sesame does.
Story_ID: 604490
Speaker 1: This has been another set of challenges, but great, and it happened at a time when I became a grandparent, so I'm a, I'm the favorite grandfather on my son's [Calvin Ming] block, because of my Sesame [Sesame Workshop] connections.  But here the challenge was how do you take multiple businesses and get them to align around one set of business principles.  We were a publishing business, we were, we're production business, we are a merchandising business.  We were an Internet destination business, and then you got to do all the administrative stuff to, to run it.  So we came in and I came in and with the new president and we came up with a set of strategies that would make us 'Sesame' focused.  And if it, and if these other things were not contributing, net contributions, there were some, long as they were contributing more than they were costing and they could work with mission, we would do it.  And so we, we got out of the magazine business because, we couldn't make money in, in that one, we collapsed our CD-ROM production business where we created our own games and made them. Because again that's a tough industry and that business is gone away, we got in time.  They had started a second broadcast other than PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] nationally with Nickelodeon, MTV Networks [Viacom Media Networks], Sesame Workshop joint venture called Noggin we sort of started that with MTV.  Since then we sold our interest in that and created another one with Comcast [Comcast Corporation] call Sprout [Universal Kids].  So my job is to again allocate resources pushed them where getting the maximum im- impact in reaching our kids.  What's happened, beyond that is we've become global; I mean we are doing twenty 'Sesame Street' productions outside of the U.S.  And they're not the U.S. show, we're not taking the U.S. show and just dumping it in different languages and, and--
Speaker 2: So they're actually being produced in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They're being produced in South Africa, in Mexico in Indonesia, in Bangladesh, in Germany and there're twenty of them.  In, in Brazil and then we get more request than we get, in Egypt, there're twenty of them going on at any one point in time.  And what we're doing is about good 60 percent of our effort is outside of the U.S., and I'm, I was here when that really took off.  So I, I'm enjoying that as well.
Story_ID: 604491
Speaker 1: Now I remember the early days of 'Sesame Street' when the Muppets basically dominated the, and the cartoons of the letters and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: It, it was on, I know on, the early days 'Sesame Street' would be on most of the broadcast day on some public TV stations.
Speaker 2: The beauty of 'Sesame' was when it was created; the, the, the genius was the founders Joan Ganz Cooney and Lloyd [Lloyd Morrisett], how do you take what was the commercial space and use it for instruction, and how do kids learn and we're still learning a lot about that how, how this stuff works.  But the commercial jingle kids would, they don't know the commercial but they remember the jingles, that's what they observed.  So how do you take that and actually create alphabet lessons and number lessons and shape lessons and those kinds of things?  That's what they did and you know almost forty years later, it's still working.  Now you're correct at the time, there were only two daily children's television shows being broadcast daily.  There have been some have come and gone, but every day there was 'Mister Rogers' ['Mister Rogers' Neighborhood'] first and 'Sesame Street' second.  And what the PBS system [Public Broadcasting Service] would do, they'd run it in the morning, and they'd run it in the afternoon.  Now they, little different now, they are fifty preschool properties now, and there are competing networks, you know Disney [Disney Channel], Nickelodeon, FOX [FOX TV], Universal [Universal Television], all, all that stuff.  But yet 'Sesame' is, is the one that has sort of defined the academic level at which you'd expect preschool media to, to, to deliver on.  The reason we get asked to go overseas is many places we go they don't have their own preschool media for kids.  And often 'Sesame's' the first show or media property that's being asked to do those, those kinds of things.
Story_ID: 604492
Speaker 1: Tell you a story that, that I used often, 'cause as chief operating officer I, I would, all the operation report to me.  Content, distribution, internet, merchandising, business, what else, that's, that's about it, research, education research.  My wife [Diana Darrell Ming], with our children, I remember us living in, in the Washington, D.C. area. She was li- she was very deliberate with what she let the children watch.  'Cause our family tradition is you know all t- a lot of TV's not good for you. You should be reading.  And I have difficulty to this day watching a lot of TV, I feel guilty because again you know the guilt of my, my upbringing.  But our children they can only watch what their mother, who was home with them all the time, let them watch.  And our kids, I remember there was a, a summer the only TV they got was 'Sesame Street' and the Watergate hearings.  Little, little kids, our daughter [Jerilynne Ming] she's a lawyer to this day because the images that grabbed her really stuck with her was the process of, of argument as you see the Watergate hearings.  And the, and the, this thing about words, so our daughter goes to the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia], as an English major, finishes there.  I begged her to say but she wouldn't, law school at the University of Pittsburgh [University of Pittsburgh School of Law, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], only thing she ever wanted to do as a young child, said, "I wanna be a judge."  And then as she got older she learned to be a judge you have to know something about the law.  So she said, "Okay, then I, I'll have to be a lawyer." The only thing she ever wanted.  And we believe that's because she saw Barbara Jordan doing what Barbara Jordan did.  And then she was older, she wrote to Barbara Jordan. Barbara Jordan responded and, and a couple times, and it was just this, wow.  The power of words and processes that represent and advocate and argue and she's now a, she's staff attorney with Wilmer Cutler-- Wilmer Hale [Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale and Dorr LLP]. Which is one of the biggest law firms in the world, and it's, we believe it's a direct result of the images that turned her on.  What I like about what I- my work is it's about that. How do you create images that will inspire, that will motivate?  That will be the pictures one's head that's really word based.  What I liked about Sesame [Sesame Workshop] is we don't believe that all pictures all the time is, is, is the way for a child to be reared or be exposed.  But we do know that we learn from pictures (laughter) your mind files pictures, even the words that in your head are pictures (laughter).  And if you don't get the appropriate images in the mind, then self-expression is gonna be retarded.  And we've got a generation--generations that are being raised to believe that it's okay for you to tell my story, no.  You need to have the tools to tell your own story, because no one can tell your story like you can tell your story.  And the reason our work works around the world, is that's what we believe and that's what we try to create.  So the children can actually see that they can have, they can master the use of words to tell their own stories, paint their own pictures whatever.
Story_ID: 604493
Speaker 1: That's what I was wondering, I don't know, is there, you find cultural challenges around the world trying to do 'Sesame Street' show in another country that may have a different cultural (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --standard or different mores about how to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --approach different things?
Speaker 2: Yes and the way we, we, we deal with them, what we have learned having done almost thirty of these, what we call co-productions.  The worst thing we can do is take an American show and then just subtitle it with the local language and say go do it, doesn't work.  There are, that, that's only worked where people wanna be American, and there are very few places in the last twenty years with that's what the, (laughter) that's what the deal is.  Our approach is, we begin with engaging people that are good advocates or representatives of the education objectives of a community.  So we were asked by SABC way back when to sell them 'Sesame Street,' and the organization [Sesame Workshop], I was not here, nothing to do with it. The organization said no, and for eight years these requests were made and we did not sell the 'Sesame Street' shows to South Africa, apartheid and part of the boycott--
Speaker 1: SABC, South African Broadcasting company (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) South African Broadcasting Corporation.  After the change there, we were approached and we considered doing a 'Sesame Street' production in South Africa.  And there is one it's called 'Takalani Sesame,' and the approach we used there is the way we do it in where we're asked.  Who are the local voices that can represent what of the needs of children and how media can address those needs?  So we have our researchers here, we dispatched them to go and find people that we ought to have a conversation with about how we can make content that works for the local child.  A broadcaster who will broadcast it, local funding that will support it, and if not local funding, international funding that will support it.  And then we go in country and select a producer, and hire writers and actually try to create the content right there.  We become teachers at first and then advisors the local producers that we hire to go in and make the shows.  And the consequence is the South African show is South African, they don't just have American characters they have their own characters.  But their curriculum is one that they valued, they wanted AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] in the curriculum, and we said no. 'Cause we didn't know how to teach AIDS or prevention whatever.  They said, "Our children are being stigmatized in school and their learning is being retarded because people try not to associate with them.  Because they are victims of, of AIDS," parents died all that.  And we ended up working with them created a special Muppet called Kami which on this show models behavior that if children copied they'd be safe.  So washing of hands you know and that kind of stuff, but also you can play with Kami just because she's HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] positive, doesn't mean you'll, if you play with her, you will get the disease.  And we've got now the research coming back corroborating and validating that this has been important in moving how children see these diseases.  Now it took me a visit there to see why this was such a important thing.  You walk up to the, in Johannesburg [South Africa], the department of education, on one side of the wall they have painted on their educational objectives.  Eradication of poverty, nation building, language commonalty things like that, and on the left hand side of it they've got their AIDS policy.  And I asked, "Why is that," and they said, "We have lost, and we are losing more professionals in the nursing and teaching than any other group.  And as we are losing teachers, it's impacting children in the classroom, so we can't be silent on this."  And my point is they helped us to figure out how to, on a preschooler show, treat the subject how to deal with it.  We got criticism here, but over there, it's, it's, it's, it works.  So there are local needs and there are more AIDS and there are practices and we aim to let that be curriculum based as we included in the show.  As long as it doesn't violate what we believe are universal and good values, and we use our subjective measures here.  We didn't tend not to teach religion obviously politics and segment divisions like that we tend not.  Because for a child it's important they learn how to work together, how not to work together.  And what can we agree on? There's such universal values as honesty, the value of education, sharing, basic skills, ABCs, one, two three. Gender, it's important for girls to learn as well as boys to learn.
Story_ID: 604494
Speaker 1: Now, do you have any--is 'Sesame Street' running in any of the Islamic countries?
Speaker 2: Another very successful collaboration is in Egypt where there's a producer in Egypt who, if we never show up and we do, it's an authentic 'Sesame Street' show.  And again there are some things that you never see alcohol or, or, sponsorship or tobacco or firearms and those kinds of things.  And there are guidelines, but there are universal values and, it, it works there, so we're Palestine ['Shara'a Simsim'], we're in Jordan ['Hikayat Simsim'], and we're in Egypt ['Alam Simsim'].  We're about, we were in Kuwait, and we're being asked to go back to Kuwait, we have personnel whose full-time job is to try to get 'Sesame Street' local production in the Gulf states and, and Saudi Arabia and those, those countries.  There have been, I'm told I haven't witnessed it, occasional arguments about values curriculum.  We prefer not to get in long protracted arguments around that because children around the world needs skills.  They need the abilities to reason, and to think, they need to see themselves in a positive light, and if we can let 'Sesame Street' be the place that does that, then we will prof- provide a good service.   We're not on Al Jazeera kids [Al Jazeera Children's Channel; JeemTV], even though we're told we should be, because Al Jazeera has tended to be partisan in its, in its, its point of view.  We are in MBC Middle East Broadcasting Corporation [sic. Middle East Broadcasting Center] which is a satellite so we're, we're available, and we're just launching in March 'Sesame Street' Indonesia.  Indonesia is the largest Muslim country outside of the Middle East.
Speaker 1: That's true, okay.
Story_ID: 604495
Speaker 1: What, what's the big, biggest challenge of I guess working for Sesame Workshop so far?
Speaker 2: Biggest challenge is impact as we would desire it to be, there are 700 million children under nine that have access to television, broadcast media.  We reach 70 million. There are, there are not all cultures, not all societies, not all countries, believe and, therefore, enact guidelines.  Rules, laws, best practices that would cause media, educational media to be present for their kids.  Two countries in the world the child doesn't have to be in school until they're age seven, Indonesia and Brazil, this is from the UN [United Nations], UNICEF [United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund].  And when I heard that, I immediately connected as to why it's possible for roving gangs to exist in a place like Brazil.  They have these kids gangs just, just poverty (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right and little kids in gangs, yeah.
Speaker 2: Doesn't be in school.  So in Brazil the haves have their school system, they have nots, they don't have to go to school.  Indonesia, the hotbed of unrest, again. So we are now in Indonesia and we are in Brazil.  And we are the only, to my knowledge, now there's some cartoons and some other stuff there.  But the only education based media that's available for kids on a recurring basis, and that's what we do.  So our challenges, all these kids in the world could they benefit from a 'Sesame Street' type of a media property in a, in a program.  And how do we reach them, we get, we, we have to say no more for than we can yes 'cause just can't afford to do it.  And we're a not-for-profit we depend on grants and, and our merchandising fuels our, our work, so that those are challenges.  Now in the U.S., every season there's a new curriculum in 'Sesame,' it's ABCs, one, two three, but it's not the same show forever.  Actually go at, okay what'll kids need now?  And in the U.S., even though kids are younger, the power of words, literacy, particular in the urban and disadvantaged communities, the need is great now as it's ever been.  Black boys in particular are not being reached, and not being encouraged to stay in school.  In fact, not just black boys, boys period think that you yet ask most guys how long it's gonna take to gr- graduate college?  Most of them don't believe that you can do in four years.  And you go back in your own circle and you, you ask, most guys, takes longer four years to graduate college.  Girls they're in and out of college in four years for the most part, guys, four, no, six, seven, you know, crazy.  So there, there's, there's a need here to again remind and to inspire the value of words, their impact on life.  Their, their ability to become tools for self-expression. Too many of our young children don't like school.  School's not meeting their needs, and a place like Sesame, we're hoping to give them options to learn, even though you know school's a drag.  So we're, were pleased in what we've done with the 'Sesame Street' age group, but how about older kids, how about six to nine?  The, the biggest deficits in our education system are at the second grade level.  And if a kid is behind at second grade in reading, he'll be further behind if not corrected by the fourth grade.  In fourth grade, is when dropouts begin, that's when kids really get turned off (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, I've heard that's the, that's the crisis.
Speaker 2: That's the crisis.
Speaker 1: Especially for black males.
Story_ID: 604496
Speaker 1: What's the, I guess the fut- the future prospects of 'Sesame Street' right, right now, I mean what, what are the big things on the horizon?
Speaker 2: International expansion, reaching those 700 million kids with a 'Sesame' type experience, challenges in the U.S. to find the pockets of need of those targeted groups that we believe, we Sesame [Sesame Workshop], we those who are knowledgeable about it.  How you'd use those pictures to inspire, motivate. It--that, that's what's on our immediate agenda, in fact Sesame's been around forty years.  We wanna be around another forty, we're actually going through the thinking of what will it take to do that even now.  As I've traveled the world with Sesame in South Africa, Russia, Israel, the number one request I get from our partners and producers is that they want resources to do a local show where the children see themselves and are taught value set and life skills that are good for them as whole people.  And then they almost always say, "We don't want an American show, we don't a Russian show or South African show. We want a show that is global, it's international in flavor.  Where our children see themselves in that show and their place in the world," and that's what we're trying, we're aiming to do.  And when I first that I was, I was kind of challenged by it, but for a Russian to say, "We don't want a Russian show, what we want is a show where our children see themselves as Russians.  But also see their place in the world and what their contributions can be," this is pretty powerful.  The Israeli producer said to me one of her challenges is that, that you know in Israel you can be secular or religious.  And, and there is, there are really schisms that go on and fights that go on between the two.  But she says a lot of the things that have made us as a culture strong, some of the stories that, maybe there, there religious but they're about life's lessons.  Sampson and Delilah, the Daniel in the lions' den, she said some of our children are not getting that.  And I wish there was some way for me to use those kinds of stories that define values that we want our children to have.  This is, this is in Jerusalem okay (laughter)?  There's a search for what makes American, American, what makes South African, South African.  But there's also a sub story, one of those values that will equip our children to live in a world that is so beyond them, that they can be comfortable with their place in it.  We're doing a, we're launching next month in Northern Ireland there are really ninety thousand kids in Northern Ireland.  But those kids of, they learn early that if you, you're Catholic or you're Protestant, and if you're you know you can't--we're actually doing a 'Sesame Street' and it's called 'Sesame Tree' which will launch on the 17th of February.  And it's being viewed as a tolerance, respect, understanding curriculum where those children might find ways to go beyond what other generations have not been able to do.  So we're optimistic, we hope, we hope it works.
Story_ID: 604497
Speaker 1: Now what are your future goals, and you, is this gonna be your last job or you looking--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well my next birthday I, I will be sixty- what, sixty-four. I, my commitment to me once I started work was if I'm enjoying it, if I, if I'm contributing, and if it's of some value I'll, I'll keep doing it.  Now I got two grandkids [Carina Ming and Cameron Ming], one's grandson and I'm yearning to be able pick up my grandson from school.  Do some homework with him, take him fishing (laughter). So, I, I am hoping over the next year or so just, just to do something different.  Now I do other things, I've very active in my church setting, I'm on public boards, I've just been named to part of The HistoryMakers family now.  So I wanna do work with that. And there's some, some causes, there's some things that I think that are very important and I would like to make them work better.  If I had more money, you know I'd give them some money.  But I don't have a lot of money, but I do have an appreciation for value, values, and opportunity.  And that's what I; I wanna connect so that The HistoryMakers project, for example.  How many of our children know that they can be a CPA? Where, where do they learn that there's such a things as a certified public accountant?  You know they can, they, they see themselves being in, a broadcasters or producers necessarily,  but do they know that some guy in the boiler room like me (laughter) who provides the fuel for the people to go make the pictures?  And if I say they got no fuel, there are not pictures (laughter), there are opportunities and we don't have to, we don't all, we cannot all be out in front.  And we cannot all make all the money in the world, but life's been pretty good to me.  And it's taking what skills I have, my ability to influence, to lead, to make fair judgments and take some risk and, and go do it.  So I would like to, as I continue to work, now I'm working on who else can I share with?  And one what other causes can I help so that their content can inspire.
Story_ID: 604498
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything that you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you do differently now, if you could?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter). What I, what I would do differently and I've challenged myself with this one.  Now I, I believe that my DNA, my, my, my construction, my makeup is such that making money was never a big, big goal of mine.  I always wanted to make enough and you know, but I didn't see myself riding around in my own jet.  You know as a--never using public transportation I just, that's just not the image I have of me.  Now if I were doing some things differently, I would have gone more in areas where I knew least about, about the, the ability to impact on a large scale.  I mean go one step further, see I think me as a, a black guy, my introduction to business was I told you my mother [Hester Bean Ming] taking the receipts.  And a guy with a nice house on, on the right next the ocean that was, that was my measure of monetary success.  I didn't know there was so much money in the wor- (laughter) in the world.  I didn't--had no idea all right and now to see how this thing called the hedge fund industry, managing other people's money is, is taking on the dimensions that, that it has. If I were, would've done something different that's where I would've gone.  How you can actually make other people rich and do some good while you're doing it all right.  'Cause, for example, we take every dollar that we are able to reserve; we give it to people to do something with it.  Because the more we raise that way, the less dependent we are on people that give.  So we've got a portfolio that we employ people to manage so that we can do our work, I would've been one of those people (laughter).  You know what they get paid for the most part, yeah this is, this is the world of business.  People that manage other people's money, hedge funds, the going rates of, of payments nowadays they get 2 percent of whatever the portfolio is.  And they get 20 percent of the gain, now you think about that (laughter), if I knew then what I know now; I think I, I'd be over there.
Story_ID: 604499
Speaker 1: Likewise when you look back at everything you've done to this point what would you consider to be your legacy today?
Speaker 2: I look at National Public Radio [NPR], WNET [WNET-TV, New York, New York], Children's Television Workshop [Sesame Workshop], and I believe the archives of those organizations will show that Mel Ming [HistoryMaker H. Melvin Ming] brought a desired balance of business and mission together in a way where the organizations continue to thrive and just the best at doing what they set out to do.  There's no hypocrisy in how those organizations accomplish what they do, I wish I can say that.  That's the legacy I would like to, to leave.  By hypocrisy I mean do they say they're about kids but they're really about making money?  Do they say they're about being a, an accessible public broadcaster, when they're really about how many Emmys [Emmy Awards] they get?  And, and that's what I would like to be, be known for contributing, being a conscious and one say- sense that's sort of a negative.  But also being a positive guide, a, a prod, a leader to doing what we set out to do. And I, I tell all people here at Sesame I, I want us to always behave in ways that we expect children to behave.  'Cause I think if we do not that's gonna show up in our content, I can't expect pro- two producers to do a piece about how to get along and they are just at each other's throat.  Eventually that's gonna show up in the content, and I think businesses, and my business in particular, if it can, if we can get the hypocrisy out of it, we could be more impactful and be better.
Speaker 1: That, that's important, that sounds like a--
Speaker 2: It's wonderful.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I wanna see more, more different people making 'Sesame Street's' around the world, it's gotten to be, people come to work to place to work like this 'cause they see it as being that maybe it's, they make, they make television. Yeah, we make television, but we make television for kids, where we want those kids to see themselves.  And I think it helps to have those kids' sensibilities reflected in the production process.
Story_ID: 604500
Speaker 1: Now, is the--'Sesame Street,' I know, from its inception has always been a place where black peop- people could, at least on the air--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --see themselves--
Speaker 2: First to have interracial--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --people on, in, in the cast, first you have Hispanics on the street, always done that. And the reason that came to be, when you look at the early 'Sesame Street,' the people that conceived and made it, they put a high value on making sure the voices from those communities were heard in the creation of the content.  Now, you go, you go twenty years into it, it becomes just people--some people will see working for Sesame [Sesame Workshop] no different than working for Nickelodeon.  All right it's about making media and about getting broadcast up. Now we see it differently and to the extent that we let the people that could work at Nickelodeon work here, we do ourselves a disservice, and I'm one of the voices that are, are reminding us.  People said to me, "If you have a total black staff, would you?" The answer is no, because that's not what a black child is exposed to, it's multiple voices.  But to have no black staff, that's not, that's not good either.
Story_ID: 604501
Speaker 1: One ke- question we always ask is this, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: My hope is that skin color will become a factor in deliberation, interaction much like shoe color is, no more, no less.  Here's what I mean, here's what I mean. I can look at your shoes, and you say you got on brown shoes; oh you got on brown shoes, that's the end of it.  I don't make anything more out of it than you have brown shoes that are casual, something like that. I don't define you because your shoes are brown, okay?  However, this is my view, the darker one's skin complexion, the more definition in a negative way results.  And it defines interactions amongst people. I've had people, white people tell me who at first are kind of cold to me become very warm with me.  And you ask what's the difference, "Well you're not like those, you know, you're not--," so whatever the image of that is in the, in their mind they're permitted just skin color so the, they label me to the point where if I didn't have a continued relationship with them, I would, I'd be invisible.  My desires for our young people in particular is that they find ways and we find ways of having them not being so invisible.  Where they are accepted because they have on brown shoes today, not because they wear brown they are inferior or this or that or the other.  It's just it is, it is crippling individuals, it is retarding the, the full realization of us as a society.  It is debilitating for the nation, it's just, it's just so much negative cost to not being able to come to a point where you can treat people with the option of them being real whole people.  I'd hoped when I was the president of the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] chapter of the National Association of Black Accountants, that all the initiatives about getting more black kids in, in, in the profession, you know be a temporary thing.  The profession is still trying to do this, and don't care whether you're talking about the National Bar Association or the, the, the, the, the health associations.  There's still this, not so sure you guys belong here kind of stuff, and the consequence is we are not, we're not growing as individuals and more so as a, as a nation.  You know this is, I, I would hope my grandson doesn't have to be victimized or be negatively impacted because of presumptions or some because he's, he's a little, he's a little dark child.  Now the other thing is see, (laughter) I got two grandkids, they're kind of fair you know.  So I know they will get opportunity that a darker child will not get, and that's not right.  I happen to be the dark one in, in my family, the rest of them are lighter.  And it's just been a fascinating and dynamic, some get opportunities, others do not.
Speaker 1: You've got like two children? Is it two? Yeah.
Speaker 2: Two, a boy [Calvin Ming] and a girl [Jerilynne Ming].
Speaker 1: And how many grandchildren?
Speaker 2: Two, a boy and a girl.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Little Carina [Carina Ming] and little Cameron [Cameron Ming].
Story_ID: 604502
Speaker 1: Now is there anything I have not asked you before I ask my last question that you think we need to cover, you know?
Speaker 2: No, we're, we're fine, the, the--we've talked about places I've been what I've done, the, the one other thing that I, if, if you were to ask me and you haven't, but why have I been able to feel so good about what, what, what I've done or contributed.  My response would be a nurturing environment in my youth that, even when I doubt it as I got older, there have been sort of the foundational pillars put in place that said if someone else can do it, you can do it.  And you can do this well, you can be successful, and I, I think it's, it's the influence of people in my life that cared.  You know grandparents [Helen Bean and Earnest Bean], parents [Hester Bean Ming and Calvin Ming, Sr.], so that when, when I've been rejected, ah, it hurts a little bit but you know.  The, the community my rich segregated community said, "Hey what you doing down there," (laughter)?  "You, you ain't supposed to be down there, get up, come on." And to me that's been the thing.  There's I've been accused of being a little arrogant, you know 'cause I'm quiet for the most part.  I don't see it that way, there's a, there's a belief that is, there is a resolve that is strong and I'm not gone let you (laughter) sort of push me whichever way you want to push me.  And never had had to be loud about it, but it came from that nurturing, I believe in you, you can, whatever you put your mind to do, just give it your best shot, make sure it's your best shot, then it's okay.
Story_ID: 604503
Speaker 1: Well the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Sir how would like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: An honest individual who, even through his mistakes, has owned the mistakes and, therefore, used that to own the opportunity and the, and the what comes next.  A person who valued and treasured making things better: himself and others.  That's all I want.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much; it's been a rich interview (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thank you, thank you.
