Story_ID: 159341
Speaker 1: My name is Tom Jefferson.  I'm with The HistoryMakers.  I'm the interviewer and Scott Stearns is our videographer.  Please state your name, including your middle name, and spell it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Patric Gregory McCoy, P-A-T-R-I-C, G-R-E-G-O-R-Y, M-C-C-O-Y.
Speaker 1: Your date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born December 20th, 1946.  I was born in Chicago [Illinois] on 63rd [Street] and Champlain [Avenue].
Speaker 1: And can you give us today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is November 7th, 2008.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: This interview is in my living room at 4346 South Lake Park, Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: And what's your occupation?
Speaker 2: I have happily retired after two years, two years of retirement from the United States Environmental Protection Agency.  I worked there for about thirty years, yeah.
Story_ID: 159342
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you something--we call People magazine questions--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --just to get us started.  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Food--ooh, favorite food, oh, gosh, that's hard, 'cause I like, I like to eat (laughter).  Favorite, between fish and fruit.  It's generic, yeah--pistachio gelato, sweet potato pie.  You know what?  It's, it's very similar to ask me about what my favorite art piece and really, it's hard to come up with one.  It's always a set of things that I look at and say, these are my favorites.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: The favorite time of year is late spring and summer.  I find that to be the time when I can actually be outside again--that I find.  I try to stay--be outside at all times, but I do like that period when you can really be outside.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Orange (laughter), no questions, or it's just the color.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I like to travel overseas.  I would love to go back to the island of Zanzibar.  That's what I've been talking about recently.  And I'd also like to go to Cape Verde Islands on the other side of the continent of Africa.  I enjoyed being on the island with Haiti.  That was a very, very good experience.  And I like being in Mexico.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: A favorite--the things I think about when I'm admonishing young people, I always say, stop trying--just do.
Story_ID: 159343
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you a little bit about your family background.  What was your mother's name?
Speaker 2: My mother's name, Jeannetta Dixon.  That was her maiden name, Jeannetta Dixon--Jeannetta McCoy Wheatley, presently.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you spell her name?
Speaker 2: Jeannetta, J-E-A-N-N-E-T-T-A and Wheatley, W-H-E-A-T-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Do you know where she was born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Kansas City, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Is that where she grew up?
Speaker 2: Yes.  She grew up--she lived there up until the early '40s [1940s].  And she came here to get her, to bring her sister, her younger sister, back, back to Kansas City.  Neither one of them ever went back (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you know who her, her sisters and brothers were and their names?
Speaker 2: Yes.  She had three brothers and two sisters.  There were six of them altogether.  George [ph.] was the oldest; and Percy [ph.]; and, oh, my goodness, the one, her favorite who I never met, I'll have to think of that; and her sisters, Jessie [ph.] and Josephine [ph.].
Story_ID: 159344
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother [Jeannetta McCoy Wheatley]?  What kind of personality did she have?
Speaker 2: My mother  is a very, very energetic self-reliant person.  That's, that's what I see--a hardworking person all, all of her life, and very, very concerned about her children.  She's always been, uh-hum, that's, that's how I see it.
Speaker 1: What kind of work did she do?
Speaker 2: She has worked--oh, my, she's done a number of things.  She was a seamstress getting out of school.  That was her, her trade during the end of the [Great] Depression period, you know, war period.  She came to Chicago [Illinois], worked--I think, in the treasury department or something like that for--during the war [World War II, WWII], and then, with my--met my father [Thomas Mercer McCoy].  And she worked in this drugstore on 63rd [Street] and Champlain [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].  We lived above the drugstore, (unclear) Drugs, and she became the drugstore lady basically for the neighborhood.  But she worked in the dress shop 'cause she's always been very attuned to fashion and style, and so forth.  She dresses, even at eighty-five years old, she dresses very immaculate and very stylish.  Her son did not get that quality (laughter), but she--and then, she worked in the bank, University National Bank, for a number of years.  We worked basically up until about two or three years ago.
Speaker 1: Is that the one in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They--she was such a hard worker that they kept her, even when she was well past age for retirement, you know.
Speaker 1: Do you know what year she was born and her birth date?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was born May 28th, 1923.
Story_ID: 159345
Speaker 1: Do you recall her [McCoy's mother, Jeannetta McCoy Wheatley] telling you any stories about her side of the family or about--
Speaker 2: Yes, most of the stories--and my mother  is a very good storyteller.  And most of the stories that she would tell us was about growing up in the [Great] Depression in Kansas City [Missouri], and about how she and her brother, and for some reason, I don't know what is blocking my brain--I cannot remember his name, 'cause that was her favorite brother, and how their exploits of trying to make ends meet and, and go and find things and get things to keep the family alive while--during the depression in, in Kansas City.  But she would tell us these fabulous stories--just amazing stories (laughter).  So, I do have--but I don't have much about her family, of going past her mother.  And she had very--she didn't give up much information about her father, other than he had remarried, had another family, and he had come from Jefferson City [Missouri].  My mother's mother, Jesse [ph.], had come from Marshall, Missouri to Kansas City and, and that's about it, and very little about their relatives--very little.
Speaker 1: What was her mother's name?
Speaker 2: Jesse, Jesse, and then she had her--my mother's sister was also named Jesse.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And her father's name?
Speaker 2: His name was Percy, Percy Dixon [ph.].
Story_ID: 159346
Speaker 1: Let's go a little bit on your father's side of the family.  What was his name and when was he born and where?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Thomas Mercer McCoy, Thomas, T-H-O-M-A-S, Mercer, M-E-R-C-E-R, M-C-C-O-Y.  And he was born in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and there's a dispute on the date.  There were August 12th or the 13th, depending on who you ask (laughter), and it was 1917.
Speaker 1: And that's where he grew up, in Milwaukee?
Speaker 2: No, oh, no, no.  My grandmother was in Milwaukee pregnant.  And that's how she was--I think, visiting somebody, and that's how he was born at (laughter).  But, no, she--the family, the McCoy family was here in Chicago [Illinois] on 4015 South Indiana [Avenue].  That was the home and became actually the, the place where the business, my grand-uncle's business, but it was the home, was 4015 South Indiana, yeah, South Indiana.  And so, my father's world was between Chicago and Detroit, Michigan 'cause my grandmother had spent a lot of time going back and forth to Detroit.
Story_ID: 159347
Speaker 1: Now, what do you know about his [McCoy's father, Thomas Mercer McCoy] background in terms of growing up here in Chicago [Illinois] or his occupation?
Speaker 2: My father had a sort of a troubled life because--now I have to go into a lot stuff now.  He was born into this family, the McCoy family, and my grandfather, Leander [ph.], he was kind of a dandy.  He really was enamored by the beauty of my grandmother.  He liked her and he really didn't want her to have any children.  And so, when she got pregnant, there was a lot of big confusion.  And I think that might be why she went to Milwaukee [Wisconsin] and have the baby, but she tended to do a lot of moving around.  I've--from the photographs in the family album that I have, it appears that during that period of 1917 to 1924, she'd done a lot of travelling, and back and forth, Chicago, Detroit [Michigan], Los Angeles [California], all in Texas, and so forth.  I would get the impression that my father was left with his, his family in Chicago 'cause he tends to be seen in pictures in Detroit and Chicago, but not in these other places.  My father was sort of like the darling of the family 'cause out of the--my grandfather's family with all the boys, he was the only grandchild.  You know, you know, that they, they never, any offspring or so forth, so he would have been the focus of attention.  And, but I think because his mother--my grandmother--was kind of gallivanting around, I think that he didn't have a very pleasant, warm sort of life.  He also was--had the malady that I, I've kind of picked up, too, which is narcolepsy.  He had a sleeping disorder, and that would give him the impression that people, before they knew about it, would think that you would be lazy or, or inattentive, and so forth--brilliant man--just a, just absolutely a Renaissance man.  But there's--it appears from the history that it was not the most pleasant time.  And my grandmother then remarried.  And he spent the latter part of his youth in Detroit and Inkster, Michigan with a step-father, Ernest Swinton [ph.].
Story_ID: 159348
Speaker 1: --And [McCoy's father, Thomas Mercer McCoy] graduated from Cass Tech [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan], which was the--one of the premier high schools in Detroit [Michigan], and graduated with honors in the art field.  He was an accomplished--I've seen the things that he was doing in the latter part of the [Great] Depression in the late '30s [1930s], the work that he was doing in high school was just phenomenal.  I've got pieces here.  And what happened is--and like I say, he graduated with honors from Cass Tech, artistic awards, and so forth.  And, apparently, he either applied or somehow was given a scholarship.  This is in the midst of the depression--a scholarship to the Pittsburgh Institute of Art [The Art Institute of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], a full four-year scholarship, which I know probably was a total of $214 dollars, you know (laughter).  Shows you what inflation has done.  But he'd gotten this, and I know that he must have been on, on cloud nine with that.  And I've got the letter showing that he had received that, that scholarship.  And then, he got a letter about less than a month later saying that they were going to have to take it back because he was black.  And I did not find out about this until 1995.  I always wondered why my father was kind of bitter in his life, and he always seemed to--I knew he was narcoleptic in that--he was seriously narcoleptic.  He'd fall asleep talking to you or, or fall asleep standing up, and so forth.  And that was well before they knew about narcolepsy, so it was always like something is wrong with him, but he was brilliant, perhaps a brilliant man.  But he--when I found out that this scholarship that would have been really the entree to what he wanted to do, was to be an artist.  I know that--that, that being taken back from him, just because it was his race, must have made him extremely bitter.  And he kind of took it out on us in growing up.  My mother [Jeannetta McCoy Wheatley] never understood why he was so extremely jealous and just seemed not to do the--he was always a provider.  I mean, he went to work and everything like that, but he had sort of psychological disturbances, and since that things that seem to be going so well in their relationship just never, never was allowed to, to come to fruition. So, he ended up most of his life just working as a laborer, but he would paint, he would do photography, he did furniture design, architectural design.  He was a jack of all trades.  He was really--and a scholar, he would read.  I remember--I have an older brother, Michael [ph.], and a younger brother, but my older brother and I--we were just a year apart.  And Michael was also mechanical and electronically interested, and my father would always take us and do all those kind of things.  I was not interested in that kind of stuff.  The things dealing with philosophy and science and art, and so forth--my father would be very encouraging of me, with me, on those things, so he had just a wealth of talents.  But really not, I think, fully realized, and that--I didn't learn until 1995 that, that experience of having that scholarship taken back in the midst of the depression--when that would have really just made your way, that, that would have been coloring his whole life.
Speaker 2: Now, you said that your grandmother remarried.  Did, did your father have any other brothers and sisters?
Speaker 1: No, he was an only child. In fact, he was the only child out of this huge family.  He's the only grandson out of this huge family.
Story_ID: 159349
Speaker 1: Can you go back and you, past your, to your grandmother and grandfather [Leander McCoy]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, the--my father's [Thomas Mercer McCoy] side of the family, both on my grandmother and my grandfather's side, I, I have a lot of information, contrary to, on my mother's [Jeannetta McCoy Wheatley]  side of the family--I wish I knew more about my mother's side.  My grandmother [Jesse] Dixon [ph.] and my great-grandmother, my grandmother's mother--we lived together.  We would go, during the summer, up to Inkster, Michigan.  That's when they, they lived up there all through the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s], and we would go every summer.  My mother would send us away to get out of the city to go, you know, remember that kind of concept.  You, you--the city children, you'd send them away down South, but we would go to Michigan.  And so, I grew up with my great-grandmother.  She died when I was twelve so I knew her.  And she would tell me about her experiences growing up in Texas.  She was--grew up in Austin, Texas.  And then going through my grandmother and my great-grandmother's photographs, I see pictures of her mother, grandmother Hester [ph.].  And so, she would have been born--the--my great-great-grandmother would have been born in slavery.  And my great-grandmother was very, very fair, but her mother was very dark.  So, and so, I just--it's, it's just amazing when I see that.  It's like, we--well, there's something going on up there.  Something, what happened in the 1860s (laughter) 'cause all of my great-grandmother's children, except for one, was very fair.  In fact, two of them passed for white.  They moved to Michigan.  They first were passing for white in Detroit [Michigan], and then they moved over to Windsor [Ontario, Canada], and lived in Windsor as Caucasians.  My grandmother, who's also very fair, would absolutely be--just abhorred the concept.  She was just--she'd never liked to be considered white.  She was just, just actually infuriated by that.  Whenever anybody mentioned that--in fact, during the riots here in Chicago [Illinois], she was here in 1919.  They had to drag her off the porch in--to 4015 [4015 South Indiana Avenue] because it looked, you know, for the people that there was a white woman living amongst these black people.  And then, they thought that, that would just attract even worse attention 'cause the riots went all the way up into that area.  But she, she had to be drug off the porch 'cause she just never thought of herself as white.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Clida Mae, Clida Mae Vance [ph.], later McCoy, and then Swinton.
Speaker 1: And her mother's name was--
Speaker 2: Janie, Janie Vance [ph.] from Austin, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then, it was your great-grandmother Hester?
Speaker 1: Was Hester, and I don't remember her first name.  It doesn't--'cause it just says grandmother Hester.  And that's--I want to find out more about that now.
Story_ID: 159350
Speaker 1: But on my grandfather's side, Leander [ph.], Leander McCoy, and he had--he was the oldest.  He was a son of Anderson Jacques McCoy, Sr. [ph.], and he had, he had two, two brothers and two sisters--Will, no, no, three brothers then two--Anderson, Jr., Lloyd [ph.], and Wilbur [ph.], and Irene [ph.], and Irma [ph.].
Speaker 2: Where were they--where did they grow up?
Speaker 1: All of them, except for Irma, were born in New Orleans [Louisiana].  The family is from the area--one of the parishes, Thibodaux, [Lafourche] Parish, Louisiana.  That's where my great-grandfather's father was from.  And he was, and I don't know his name, but he was the deputy sheriff during the Reconstruction period in, of Louisiana during the Reconstruction.  And he had--I think he had six children.  And the family from, at that point, is where it starts to split, and there's branches that go--end up in New York.  There's part that goes into Florida, and so forth, but that's, that, that part of the family started in, in Louisiana.  But Leander was my grandfather.  Anderson, Jr. eventually moved to Texas and was in Tyler, Texas.  Wilbur was here in Chicago [Illinois] and became an attorney here in Chicago.  Irene [McCoy Gaines] married a Gaines, and she was very big in Republican politics here in Chicago, and became a county commissioner or something like that.  And Marjorie [ph.]--in fact there was another one--I forgot about her.  Marjorie opened a beauty school here in Chicago, but she died very young.  And Irma was the baby of the family.  She was the only one--I think that was born here in Chicago.
Speaker 2: And you were talking about the one that was a county commissioner.  Do you know what year that was?
Speaker 1: That would have been in the 1950s, in the 1950s.  I have it in, in the--yeah.  She was big in Republican politics here in the city.  It was in the '50s [1950s], yeah, in that time, that time period.  And then, '50s [1950s], and she died--I think, '64 [1964].  So, it might have been, might, late '50s [1950s] or early '60s [1960s] because she, she passed right when I was in high school [at Englewood Technical Prep Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 159351
Speaker 1: Do you know the migration patterns of your--
Speaker 2: Well, they came--my great-grandfather, Anderson Jacques McCoy, Sr. [ph.] came up in 1911.  He left New Orleans [Louisiana] and came here.  So, that's when the family moved--brought all of them--the family here.  And so, they, they were here in Chicago [Illinois] on the South Side from that point on.
Speaker 1: Do you know what brought him here?
Speaker 2: That, I don't know.  I think it would been more getting away from all the craziness of, of the South.  It's that his son, his first son, my grandfather, Leander Munford McCoy [ph.], and his brother's first son, who became an attorney, big attorney here; Fleetwood Munford McCoy [ph.] were, as I understand it, named for their grand-uncle, Munford McCoy who, during the Reconstruction period, was lynched in Louisiana.  And there's, there's some--I've looked on the Internet, and I've seen the atrocities in Louisiana during the 1860s, and so forth, that Munford McCoy is, is identified where a crowd of white citizens came and, and terrorized him because he had applied for the forty acres, you know, the land.  And then, he supposedly has fled [sic], but then my family told me about the lynching, that he actually was lynched.  I didn't--haven't seen that in the history, in the, on the Internet yet.  I'm trying to find it, but I, when I see both branches of the family memorializing this, this name--I'm, I kinda think that he actually was, was lynched.
Story_ID: 159352
Speaker 1: Tell us about your earliest childhood memories.
Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memories--they would be on 63rd Street [Chicago, Illinois].  We had a two-room apartment, so 63rd and Champlain [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois], and we thought we were rich.  We thought we were living a very amazing life because my father [Thomas Mercer McCoy] had designed all of the furniture in the house.  We had--he had built a hi-fi from scratch.  We had--it was sort of like a Jetsons apartment, you know, that things would be converted, and so forth.  We had artwork always that I--my earliest memories is always with paintings and easels and photography.  And so, I was always surrounded by art and books, and so forth.  And my mother [Jeannetta McCoy Wheatley] would take us everywhere--all the museums and to the parks and riding bikes.  Our house, even though it was the smallest place in the neighborhood--everybody congregated there.  And we'd have the parties, and I never thought of us as being dirt poor, but that's what we were (laughter).  It was like we lived the life--we thought we were rich.  We, we had--there was no want that I can recall in that experience--is that I was encouraged to do all kinds of things in the artistic field.  I would--I had early on developed an ability to draw and to paint, and so forth, 'cause that's what I saw.  My father did it, and I did it, too.  And I went through high--I mean, through grammar school, Aldridge School [Ira F. Aldridge Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].  I wanted to be an artist.  Then I wanted to be a farmer, and I wanted to be an astronomer, and so forth, but the art sort of was always a theme that was there.  I loved to draw and to sketch and to doodle and so forth.  But I also loved to read, and that was encouraged in our house 'cause both my mother and my father read voraciously.  We had tons of books in the house.  I remember reading the encyclopedia from "A" to "Z", and then I would read--we used to get the World Book [Encyclopedia], and so, each year, I would read the whole World Book--all the events happening in the world.  I--it's amazing to think of it now that I wouldn't even think of picking one of those things up (laughter), but I would do that.  I was kind of an egghead.  But, and one of the things I remember that's so different from today is that I didn't know how to ride a bike as a child.  I was one of the last people--I didn't, I didn't really learn how to ride a bicycle until I was kind of an early teen.  And now, I'm still riding a bike and everybody has stopped (laughter), and I am still, but, yeah, I was one of the last ones to ride the bike.  And now, I'm fascinated with it.
Story_ID: 159353
Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned that there was a lot of art in your house.  Did your father [Thomas Mercer McCoy] continue to pursue his art, or was this his art and art he collected?
Speaker 2: He did paint--people would commission him to do painting and he would--he painted, he had painted us.  In fact, we had portraits of ourselves and the family.  I've got one where he did my brother and I [sic] and my mother [Jeannetta McCoy Wheatley] in the midst of this atomic sort of nucleus.  It was a very kind of interesting piece.  My mother still has the piece.  So, he did continue to paint and, surprisingly, I think--you're making me think about--that there was a gallery, black-owned gallery on 63rd [Street] and St. Lawrence [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].  And he did have a show there.  There was also an art movement, sort of an art colony when he and my mother broke up.  He moved over to 61st [Street] and Dorchester [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].  And over in that area was a sort of an artist colony at that time period.  And a lot of the, the--well, it would be sort of avant-garde, the beatnik period people, and he would paint there, in addition to his regular job.  He would have--he'd always have paintings going.  His, his art work was always surreal.  I have one painting of his in my bedroom from 1941 that is a surreal piece.  He, he was always doing some work, but frustrated because it wasn't being received very well.  And there wasn't really a lot of outlets for African American artists at that time.  I didn't realize that.  I just thought he was the greatest person in the world and since being an artist that, that my father painted.  And he had pictures of us in the house, and so forth.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of the black-owned gallery on 63rd?
Speaker 2: I think it was Gale's (ph.).  And one of the artists that I've met since that was over in that area, Al Tyler [Alfred Jackson Tyler]--he told me, he remembered it.  And I think that's what--and my mother--she, she told me that the woman's name was Gale.  It's right there at 63rd, it's right off the corner at 63rd and St. Lawrence.
Story_ID: 159354
Speaker 1: Give us the names of your siblings and their birth order and dates.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Michael McCoy is the, is my oldest brother.  He was born in 1945 in October 30th.  And then I have a younger brother by my mother's [Jeannetta McCoy Wheatley] second marriage, Anthony Wayne Gasaway (ph.), and he is, he was born in 1959, February 5th.  So, there was just the three, just the three of us.  And, surprisingly, even though I had wanted all through my pre-high school period, to be an artist, I was the only one that didn't become an artist (laughter).  My older brother, who had never expressed much interest in art, has done painting and photography, and so forth, and then stopped.  And my younger brother, who truly did not show any interest in the, in the arts--all the way up into the early forties, his early forties now--all of a sudden, he's become a metal sculptor, and stainless steel is doing just phenomenal work.  So, that environment was very conducive for the creation of artists.  I--mine is being expressed as an art collector now.  I did do some photography for (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: And where do they live today?
Speaker 2: My older brother is in San Francisco [California].  And my younger brother is in Wautoma, Wisconsin, central part of the state.  And he works as a welder but he--then he does the stainless steel welding of art pieces now as his main passion.
Speaker 1: Do you know have any of his pieces in your collection?
Speaker 2: Oh, I've got tons of--yeah, they're all around here (laughter), they're all around.  That's one right there (laughter).  I buy them, too.  I do not ask him to give me anything 'cause I, I see the quality of his work.  And the same with my older brother--I buy pieces from him when he, when he was doing work.
Story_ID: 159355
Speaker 1: What street did you say you grew up on?
Speaker 2: On 63rd Street [Street, Chicago, Illinois].  We lived right off the corner.  The "L" [elevated train] went right past our window--I mean, I'm sure that was the first sound that I ever heard in my life was the "L" going past 'cause it went past in back in the '40s [1940s].  They would just go past and roar.  I'd get to a point where I didn't hear it anymore, you know.  We lived twelve years right next to the "L".
Speaker 1: Can you describe your neighborhood, your block?
Speaker 2: It was a community, a real strong community.  Everybody knew everybody on the block.  It was, it was a village.  And, you know, my mother [Jeannetta McCoy Wheatley] was a--she was a pretty strict disciplinarian, and she could instill the, the fear of God in you, but very loving.  And so, when she told us that we could not walk across the street, we could not cross the street--we was little kids.  So, our world was that block where you could go all the way around the block, but never cross the street, and that was our world.  And I remember things, like the poultry store, where you go to get the live chickens, and so forth, or you get them and they would wring the necks of them right there at 63rd and Champlain [Avenue].  Everybody knew all of the vendors.  And on Halloween, we would, we knew everybody on the block, so you--the kids would, we were able to go by ourselves 'cause there was, there was no fear 'cause everybody knew everybody, you know, it was.  And I think about it today, and I think what--how much children miss from not being raised in a community where all of the adults looked after them, and, and to a point that you could give them one night where they could just run crazy, you know.  And nobody was going to hurt them, you know, 'cause Halloween was a really, really, really special time for us when we could run the street with our--in our costumes and unescorted, you know.  So, now it was a, it was a wonderful experience in that, that neighborhood.  I, I can look back on it now and, and really feel very blessed.  And I grew up in, even though it's a big city, but I grew up in, what was a village.  But every, everybody knew that was Mrs. McCoy's child, you know, and that you couldn't, you couldn't do things.  I was away and not expect to be chastised by any, any adult, so it just kept us in order.
Story_ID: 159356
Speaker 1: Who were some of your friends in your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh.  My best friend in life is Kenneth Hester (ph.).  I met him on the very first day of kindergarten.  I was, I was--always I loved school.  I--my older brother, who went to Austin Oliver Sexton High--I mean, Grammar School [Austin Oliver Sexton Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], my older brother hated school.  And he's just a year older than me, so when he was having to go to kindergarten, he was crying and screaming and hollering as we would walk up the street to, to Sexton Elementary School.  And I was crying because I saw, at four years old, I saw this school.  And I said, oh, I want to be there, and I would have to come home, and he had to stay.  So, we were crying for opposite purposes (laughter).  And so, I couldn't wait to get to kindergarten.  So, I got there early, and the first big-headed little boy that came up in there was Kenneth, and he sat down next to me and we started stringing beads together.  And we've been friends ever since, and I'm sixty-two years old.  And he just called me, too--he's in Phoenix, Arizona, he just called me the other day.  And it's amazing--we've never fought.  We've never had any arguments.  We've, we're just--in fact, it's, it's characteristic of all of the friends that I met during that time period at, in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois].  We're, we're very close, we're very close and, you know, I hate to see young people today when they don't have those--that level of friendship in their life.  They don't understand it or experience it, so I feel blessed.
Story_ID: 159357
Speaker 1: Now, the name of your elementary school was Sexton?
Speaker 2: Sexton, Austin Oliver Sexton [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I loved school (laughter).
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers there that influenced you during that time?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah--many, many of them.  The kindergarten teacher, first grade teacher, Mrs. Childs (ph.) was the first kindergarten, and Williams (ph.) was my first grade teacher. But the one that I think had a great effect on me in what I'm doing today was Mae Banks (ph.).  She was my fifth grade teacher, and she saw--and I didn't even realize it then--that I had an artistic bent.  And she was--I think, once had been, or was an artist, or wanted to be an artist herself.  And she saw that I was very sharp on all of the subject matter--mathematics and language skills, social science, so she just told me, you already know how to do all this.  Here, you just draw.  So I was--she would have me doing this stuff.  And found out just about six, seven months ago, one of the new members to our organization, who knew Mae Banks, said that Mae Banks had work that I had done in fifth grade, and that this woman had actually acquired it.  She had it, and then before she knew who I was, got rid of it, but it was just like within the sixth-month period that's like this, almost fifty something years interval,  And I could have seen some of this stuff that I had done (laughter) back in the early '50s [1950s].  But she had an influence on me because she really--one recognized that I had an artistic talent, but also she knew I, in all the other subject areas, was way ahead of the other, other students.  And so, she didn't have me spend any time sitting there being bored which I think I would have been.  And so, she kept me really interested 'cause I would go back and read all of the other subject matter, materials, myself and get it.
Speaker 1: So, you were a pretty good student?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was really good.
Speaker 1: Straight A's?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah (laughter).
Story_ID: 159358
Speaker 1: --When I got out of high school, I was the valedictorian from Englewood [Technical Prep Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I, I enjoyed, I've always enjoyed intellectual pursuit.  In fact, that's how I got off on the other track.  I went into high school--I was going to be an artist, I was going to be an artist.  And that was the sort of a turbulent period in our lives when we were being sent to Michigan to live with my grandmother.  And so, I started my first year in high school in Detroit [Michigan].  And first, I was kind of like that teenage rebellion period, but then I was so fascinated by the subject matters that were being presented to me, especially in the sciences.  I was just blown away.  I was the--our teacher did pull me aside and had me doing art work, and I used to go all around Detroit on a bicycle and would paint.  But the sciences was just blowing me away.  I was just fascinated with physical science and all of the subject, the experiments, and so forth--they were just captivating me.  And I would read, read, read, read about science.  So, then, after that first year in Detroit, we moved back to Chicago [Illinois].  And I had to go for two weeks to Dunbar [Vocational] High School [Chicago, Illinois] 'cause my brother went--he was more vocationally oriented and he--my mother [Jeannetta McCoy Wheatley] wanted him to go to Dunbar.  And she wanted us to be in the same school.  I went there--I hated it.  I mean, absolutely hated that school 'cause it was not, you know, was not academically oriented.  It was a vocational school.  And I had to take a shop class and a drafting class, like, I want to learn about chemistry and biology, and so forth.  So, I complained enough that she switched me over to Englewood High School, which was the school for our neighborhood--not considered one of the better schools in the city at the time, but once I got there, I loved it.  I mean, I had--there was, and close to one of the best experiences in my life was being at Englewood High School.  I really, really appreciated that.  I developed, as a scientist, and as an intellectually curious person.  I, I developed there.  That's where I just took off, and even became more socially, 'cause I had been kind of an egghead.  And that period in Detroit had kind of made me withdrawn.  And I came out and became very social and, and very--kind of aggressive in a sense of aggressive intellectually, challenging, argumentative, so forth, which became skills and, and traits that I used later in life.
Story_ID: 159359
Speaker 1: So, you said you were kind of an egghead during your school years?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, definitely, definitely.  I--and, and had this, the same phenomena that I didn't realize until later--I had developed narcolepsy, too.  And so, I would fall asleep in classes, like advanced algebra and so forth.  But I knew that stuff backwards and forwards, and so it was a big joke that I would be asleep.  They would nudge me 'cause the teacher would be asking a question.  I'd wake up, look at the board--bam!  Give them that (laughter) (unclear).  And they're, they're like what--how did he do that, you know?  But it was, it was a good experience.  I really, I really enjoyed that.
Speaker 1: Were you a mischievous child or a rambunctious--
Speaker 2: No, no, no way.  Like I said, my mother [Jeannetta McCoy Wheatley] instilled the fear of God very, very early to the point that we never, ever really stepped out of line.  And she was very loving, but you knew you were going to get it.  And so, it, it--I like the concept that--and she was very trusting of us.  She would depend on us to do things, and she allowed us to be independent, but there was real clear parameters that you knew you did not, you did not go beyond.  It's like we could, we could move throughout the neighborhood after we learned how to cross the street.  We could stay out and at a certain time, you had to be home, but prior to that, you could move around.  And then, when my father [Thomas Mercer McCoy] and mother broke up, we had to take care of the house, and she entrusted us with that and she would say, do not let anybody in, and that was the edict from God.  So, when aunts and uncles would come by, we would not let them in because she said don't let no one in (laughter).  And they would always joke about that--you got your children trained 'cause they would--my aunt would come by and we would not let her in.  Mother said, don't let no one.
Speaker 1: And you went--
Speaker 2: And so, I wasn't rambunctious.
Story_ID: 159360
Speaker 1: -You went to [Austin Oliver] Sexton Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois], and Dunbar [Vocational High School] and Englewood [Technical Prep Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], and the school in Detroit [Michigan].  Where did you go to junior high school?
Speaker 2: I went to, for one year, Fellrath Junior High School in Inkster, Michigan.  It's a suburb of Detroit [Michigan].  That's where we used to go for the summer, and then one, one year, we had to stay the whole year.  That was an experience, too, that was a good experience in that being a small town and I coming from Chicago [Illinois], you know, I had this aura of being the big city person and you had to fight and all that other stuff.  But I quickly developed a lot of friends there and kind of learned to appreciate that lifestyle, too, so I kind of feel blessed that I've had both the big city and the small, small community experience where we lived.  We had chickens and, and, you know, ducks and geese and turkeys, and learned about growing crops and so forth from--in that environment because it was really the suburbs then.  You know, it was kind of like the country even though now, it would be considered just a regular suburb of Detroit.  But I, I spent a year there at Fellrath and was an excellent student there.
Story_ID: 159361
Speaker 1: What was the black population at Inkster [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Inkster was--well, that was what Inkster was--is that Ford [Motor Company] developed--had this suburb developed for the--his black employees--Inkster, to keep them out of Dearborn [Michigan], which was for the white employees (laughter).  Inkster sat next to, to Dearborn, Michigan, and the major plants and headquarters were in Dearborn.  So, he didn't want blacks in there so he had--he put Inkster in there.  And I didn't think about until much, much later.  The name, like Inkster--what is that about?  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Probably somebody he knew.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right (laughter).
Story_ID: 159362
Speaker 1: Did your family attend church?
Speaker 2: My grandmother, great-grandmother, they were, they were serious about the Methodist Church.  My great-grandmother was here with St. Mark's [St. Mark United Methodist Church, Chicago, Illinois].  She was--I think, kind of like a founding member, and even when she was in, in Michigan, she maintained her, her membership there.  So, we grew up in that, the Methodist Church, but neither my mother [Jeannetta McCoy Wheatley] or father [Thomas Mercer McCoy] were--my mother went, went to Woodlawn A.M.E. [Church, Chicago, Illinois] for a number of years.  But then, they, they weren't very strong in that in the sense of, especially not in trying to indoctrinate us into it.  She--they were both, were pretty free thinkers and say, you, you make up your own mind what you want to do--how you want to see the world.  But we did grow up in the Methodist Church.
Story_ID: 159363
Speaker 1: Do you remember any events going on in the world that kind of influenced you during the time in junior high school and high school?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  I remember Sputnik (laughter), I remember Sputnik.  That was real in 1957.  We were outside looking up in the sky to see if we could see it.  And the Olympics, during that time period--oh, yeah, during, but Sputnik was definitely a transitional event 'cause things changed after that.  The whole educational system sort of--the focus in schools and so forth changed prior to, before and after.  I remember--oh, the drills that was, that like an air raid drills, the nuclear war drills, where we have to hide underneath the--oh, that was so crazy.
Speaker 1: You didn't have an air raid bunker, did you?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, we didn't, but we had to, like hiding under a desk is going to keep you from being annihilated, nuclear bond like, but I remember going through that routine.
Speaker 1: This--did the Sputnik experience, did that pique your interest in the sciences?
Speaker 2: Yes, it did.  I--like I said, I always wanted to be a million different things, but one was of them was an astronomer.  I used to read so much about this stuff, and then, so astronomy and going to the planets, and so forth was always something I, I was excited about.  And it did, it did help in furthering--I think I was already geeked by the sciences at that time.  And like I said, then my father [Thomas Mercer McCoy] was always encouraging me to read more and more.  He would always push some books on me, so most of the stuff that people read in high school, I read well before that, and a lot of science fiction, lots of science fiction.
Story_ID: 159364
Speaker 1: Were there any particular teachers in high school that influenced you?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  There was Mr. Howard (ph.), some art teacher, my English teachers because I hated English.  They were very instrumental because they, they kept me from, they kept me on track.  Mr. Black (ph.) was teaching trigonometry, and Mrs. Kolmar (ph.), who's a chemistry teacher, because she was so bad in teaching chemistry, that I went and studied it all my myself.  And I, I attribute her for me becoming a chemist because she forced me to go on and learned it myself.  And I was way ahead, I was--I had, I had gone through the whole book way before we had even gotten into the class, and was going into a whole another, whole another level of chemistry by the time I was taking the subject.  And she was, you know, 'cause I went back--oh, I didn't tell you--I went back and taught at Englewood [Technical Prep Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], and I taught chemistry.  And that was a part of it because I knew I had been so poorly taught by this woman, though she kind of recognized my talent, but she didn't mess with me.  She let me go and she gave me the "A's" and all that other stuff, but she--it wasn't due to anything she was teaching.  I'd gotten it all on my own.
Story_ID: 159365
Speaker 1: How did you spend your time?  Were, were you--what kind of activities were you involved in [at Englewood Technical Prep Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh.  I was interested in school politics.  I was on the swimming team.  And the National Honor Society 'cause that was, you know, the whole bit.  And we had a sort of a cadre of people, and we would have these just unending discussions about world events and so forth.  Yeah, and we'd walk home, and just be talking about everything.  It was, it was intellectually stimulating at Englewood [Technical Prep Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].  I really, really enjoyed it.  Now, I was also very curious.  I explored--the old Englewood was a castle.  I don't know if you knew about that, that the old building was one of the older schools in the city.  It was ninety years old when we were there.  And was very--it was a school that a lot of luminaries had come out of that.  It was a very important school.  I wish I had been made aware of more of the artists that had come through.  I might have stayed in the art field if I had known that people like [HM] Richard Hunt and Al Tyler [Alfred Jackson Tyler] and Charles [Wilbert] White, and so forth.  Nobody told us that when we were there, but they had come through Englewood--[HM] Geraldine McCullough, and so forth.  So, I was focusing on the sciences by the time I was in Englewood, but that might have had an impact if I'd known that these famous artists had been, had come through those, those same doors.  I knew we had this guy that was the--one of the first African American astronauts that come through there.  That, that ticked, ticked my interest--piqued, but curious.  I explored that whole school 'cause it was, it was a castle.  It had four or five floors and the turrets and so forth.  It, I was able to get the keys and explore all these places that students weren't supposed to go (laughter).
Story_ID: 159366
Speaker 1: I also, during that time period [at Englewood Technical Prep Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], had gotten a job and--I think, in my sophomore year working for a political committee to change the laws in Illinois.  I was doing this sort of mailroom kind of stuff for them--a political action group to change the constitutional--the something.  And that had me go downtown after work, after school.  And that was an eye opener 'cause I did, like I said, my mother [Jeannetta McCoy Wheatley] was very--she allowed us to be very independent.  And so, I would go down to work and it allowed a fourteen-year-old to explore the city by myself and because I was a mailroom, I would be delivering all the literature to all these different places.  And I would meet senators, and so forth, as I was delivering this stuff.  It opened me up to what the city was, 'cause, you know, you grow up in Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois] and you tend to be in that village.  And you move in that circle because everything was on 63rd Street that you really didn't need to go anywhere else.  All the entertainment and everything was right there, but having this job took me into the downtown.  And then, I started to see it, and I'm glad I saw it because what it looks like now is totally different.  And I got to see the city, the 1960s Chicago [Illinois]--what, what it was like and can use it, use that view as a benchmark for what it is now, and how it's grown and changed over the, those decades.  In fact, back in the '80s [1980s], I picked up a camera and then, I started photographing the downtown Chicago and the people in the city, and so forth.  And I've got thousands and thousands of images, and that in the places that I would go to were the places that I learned about when I was being this delivery person in the 1960s because I really did get to see the city as a young man.
Speaker 2: Do you remember the name of the pact?
Speaker 1: They would (unclear) the committee to something about the courts.  It was the--the court system in Illinois was changed.  Now, it was in 1962, '63 [1963], and then they had another constitutional convention in the '80s [1980s] I think, or something like that.  But this was the first time when they changed the constitution in regards to the court.
Story_ID: 159367
Speaker 1: You were saying when we were doing, when we were doing the tape change about another teacher that might have influenced you?
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.  At Englewood [Technical Prep Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], I became, like I said, very, very social, and a very strong advocate for the school.  I went to the football games and all that stuff.  I was really rah-rah-rah for Englewood, purple and white, the eagles, and so forth.  But the physics teacher--both of them--Mr. Atkins (ph.), and another one that came behind it--they did take me under their wing.  And they sent me to a lot of different programs that were taking place in the city [Chicago, Illinois] for advanced students.  And the biology teacher also--they would push you out there to these other programs, and make, make you come in contact with students from other schools to see what your competition was, and so forth, and then go to lectures that were being held at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and at the, at the museum, The Field Museum [Chicago, Illinois], and so forth.  And one of the lectures I remember was very interesting about the evolution of the atoms from thermonuclear fusion in, in the midst of the stars.  And I was sitting there, filming there, and I remember, listen to this, and I was actually understanding what this guy was talking about--how the different elements came about.  And this is in high school.  When I--and, and you asked the question about going to college--I, even though I was the valedictorian, I had not really thought about college.  We were not the richest people--I was living with my mother [Jeannetta McCoy Wheatley].  So, college was certainly an economic hurdle.  I said, well, how am I going to pay for that?  I never really had thought about it.  I knew I was trying to be the best student in high school, get the best grades, and so forth, and honor society, but I never really--and I took the exams, the SAT and the ACT, and all of that stuff.  I even took a test that was offered by Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and I used it as a sort of a pretest for the ACT.  And I didn't realize that by taking the test, you were applying to Howard.  You know, I aced that test and they sent me a letter.  I hadn't even thought about applying.  They sent me a letter saying they'd give me a four-year scholarship to Howard.  And I was like wow!  This is amazing, you know, 'cause I hadn't even thought about it.  But, at that time, I was very sweet on this young lady who was also trying to be the valedictorian--Sheila Jones (ph.).  And she was much more--as, as I've learned that women are usually a little bit step ahead of young men at that age.  They're thinking further ahead.  She wanted to go to the University of Chicago.  I had lived next to the University of Chicago all of my life and had never thought about the place.  It was a place that we walked through to get to the beach.  That was how I looked at it (laughter) at the University of Chicago.  But once Sheila said she wanted to go the University of Chicago, then I wanted to go there, too, 'cause I wanted to be with her (laughter).  So, we applied to the school, and I got in first.  I got my acceptance letter and I hadn't really had not thought about that place--didn't even know that it was one of the top schools in the country.  I didn't--it didn't intimidate me.  I was not--I was just going where she was going.  That was, that was my concept.  And then, about a week later, she got her letter saying that she had been accepted, so we were really excited.  We're going to the University of Chicago which was in the neighborhood.  You know, I could walk over from my house over to the university.  But I ended up staying on the campus 'cause I wanted to have that experience of being away.
Story_ID: 159368
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from high school [Englewood Technical Prep Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I graduated in 1964.  And in the midst of the whole Civil Rights Movement, it was--it's, turbulent times in, in the school, too, but the changes.  We were looking every day to what was happening in the South and also the development of the Vietnam War, you know.  But I, I think back on that and it was always sort of there on the side.  It wasn't--I wasn't actively involved in it.  So, only when I got into college that I started to really feel the, the closeness of these phenomena that after getting at this, at the university [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and starting to take those courses and in having my mind even further expanded 'cause that's, that's a heavy school.  That's--I have a love/hate relationship with the place.  I love it for what it taught me, and but I don't like it politically.  I don't like what they do.
Story_ID: 159369
Speaker 1: Now, you, you talked about you hadn't really thought about college that much.  When you were in high school [at Englewood Technical Prep Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], what did you think you were going to be?  What did you really want to be at that point?
Speaker 2: I did want to be a chemist.  That's what I would tell people but I didn't have a path to that--I really didn't.  And I wanted to be a scientist and astronomer.  I was--I had a lot of things that I thought about, but when, when people would ask me, I said I wanted to be a research chemist.  Now, that's the last thing in the world I want to be (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, did you think you could be a research chemist and not go to college?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I kind of--it, it didn't really, it didn't come to me like that.  I really, I, I really think Sheila [Jones (ph.)]--because she, she really put my head together for that last year in high school.  Otherwise, I don't know, I might have floundered around.  I might have, though I did have--I did get that scholarship to Howard [University, Washington, D.C].  I might have went to Howard.
Story_ID: 159370
Speaker 1: So, you ended up at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yep, that--
Speaker 1: Describe some of the--you said you had a love/hate relationship.  What was your experience there?
Speaker 2: That was, it was, it was a dramatic change, dramatic change because here you go from a schooling where you're learning facts and formulas, and how to do something to a place where they're asking you to think (laughter).  You have to actually know how to think.  You have to be able to look at information and pull out the cogent and important things out of it, and you have to look at things from different angles.  So, we would have--it's the most reading I'd ever done.  Now, and I thought I was reader, I was a reader prior to going to the U of C.  I was impressed that the blocks of time--they had ten, ten-week quarters.  That was a semester, so it's ten weeks from the beginning to the end.  You're taking your final exams.  And they compressed so much information in all of these subjects in that ten weeks.  And they would stress original text, is that you--we didn't have textbooks.  You would go to the original source of whatever the subject matter is and read that, and get the information.  So, when we're reading humanities, you're reading what they wrote--not some text about it.  When you're reading science and mathematics, you're reading the original treaties--you're not reading a textbook.  When you're reading sociology, you're reading--if like [Sigmund] Freud or so forth, you're reading their--not, not a textbook on sociology.  And that was mindboggling to me.
Speaker 1: Had you decided what your major was going to be?
Speaker 2: I assumed--I was a chemistry major.  And I had a roommate who had come from The Bronx High School of Science [Bronx, New York, New York], which was the number one high school in the country at that time.  Julian (unclear), and he was going to major in chemistry.  And I was going to major, and I'm coming from Englewood [Technical Prep Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], a poor Chicago Public Schools [CPS] high school.  I finished.  He had to leave after the first year.  And that was so, like a feather in my cap--I really appreciated it (laughter).  It's like, 'cause that first year was so dramatic in its change, and the thinking, and it didn't catch until about midway through.  All of a sudden, I realized it was a different way of thinking about school.  It wasn't that somebody is going to give you the formula to how to learn this stuff.  You have to, you have to put something into it.  And once that clicked, man, it was like, okay, I, I know how to do this now.  It was really a challenging experience and something that I really appreciate now.  I, I'm glad that they have taught me how to think.
Story_ID: 159371
Speaker 1: Were you involved in any particular activities, fraternities, black student union, you know, those type of things?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, all of the above was--in fact, when, when I started U of C [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], we had a class of about five hundred something students, and there were only nine African Americans, so we were very, very close--the nine of us.  And then, after about two or three years, the numbers grew--I think the larger class had twenty-six, so we were very close, and we still are.  That group of people are still very close.  And so, we formed a black student union 'cause there was none.  I mean, it was just never was enough people there.  It's a scholarly school.  It wasn't a school that rah-rah, you know, with football teams and stuff like that.  So, our social existence was around our connection.  And then, that was the height of--no, at the beginnings of the development of the Black Arts Movement, the Black Power Movement, the, the change of consciousness from being Negro and coloreds to being self-defined as black--all of that took place while I was there.  And it was quite a transformation that I had to go through.  I love it, I loved--when I look back on it and I say, I actually metaphorized right, right during that time--those four or five years I was there.  I became a different person.  And there was, that this interaction with the university over issues that, that black students all over the country were having.  And at the same time, I joined a fraternity that was on the campus, Alpha Delta Phi.  I became the president of it.  It was, it was--I essentially was part of the integration of this fraternity.  It's one of the oldest fraternities in the country.  So, I was kind of being in both worlds at the same time and, and loving it.  I, I got a lot out of both of those things.
Speaker 1: Were there any academic organizations that you were part of?  I mean, was there like a chemistry fellows or chemistry--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think there was a chemical society.  I did--sort of in the background.  I wasn't the best student at the U of C in the sense of in the sciences.  I was, I was a student.  I got through.  It was a challenge.  In fact, the first "A" that I ever got at the U of C was in art.  The, the--in the sciences and the math, I got through them, but I was an average student at the U of C.  But an average student at U of C is an "A" student everywhere else 'cause they, U of C was one of the places that does not give out grades.  You work for those grades--work very, very hard.  And I'm glad I went through that.  It was, it was a good experience to get knocked down a notch because at Englewood [Technical Prep Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], I was an "A" student and that was great.  In fact, when the biology teacher, when she was counseling me on making the decision between going to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] or to go U of C--she said, you have to make the decision whether you want to be a big fish in a small pond, or a small fish in big pond.  And I chose the latter 'cause she said, you go, if you go to Howard, you'll be an "A" student.  You'll be all the way through.  But at U of C, you, you--she knew that.  I didn't know it.  I was just, like I said, following Sheila [Jones (ph.)] really, and I'm kind of glad I did though.  I really am.
Story_ID: 159372
Speaker 1: Were there any particular professors at U of C [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] that influenced you?
Speaker 2: The ones that influenced me, influenced me negatively.  To this day--and I've repressed his name because he was teaching information sciences at the beginning of the whole information age.  So, this is a very theoretical class, but introductory level, but he was very theoretical.  It wasn't like, here's how to turn the computer on and thing--it was all about language theory, and so forth.  And everybody was having problems with the class.  He was the marshal of the university of the time, so I really have repressed his name 'cause I don't like that man.  He was horrible.  But he gave an open book test for everybody, and everybody in the class, everyone got together to try to figure out how to solve that, the, so answer this test.  And he went and gave all of the black students "D's" 'cause he said you cooperated together.  And I was incensed, and I've never gotten over that--just incensed that he would do that.  And everybody did it.  So, it was, it was, so he was a racist.  That's the--out of the other students--other--there was an organic chemistry teacher--he, he was Japanese.  And organic chemistry is a rough subject.  It requires a lot of memorization.  And the names of compounds are important in how you pronounce them and so forth, and he was really hard to listen to.  And he kind of turned me off.  I think I would have gone further--a lot of people start out in chemistry, and go into medicine.  I think I might have taken that path if he hadn't been so bad.  It was just really difficult to understand what he was saying.  So, that's another negativity.
Story_ID: 159373
Speaker 1: When I got to physical chemistry, I was able to do better.  Oh, Sugarman [Nathan Sugarman], in freshmen chemistry, was exceptional.  In fact, he got the award for, for teaching.  I, in fact, he kept me on track 'cause when I was taking that, first year of chemistry, and he was so good and he got me up into understanding some really, really complex theory, but he was an exceptional teacher.
Speaker 2: What was his first name?
Speaker 1: Nathaniel, Nathaniel Sugarman [sic, Nathan Sugarman].  Yeah, he was exceptional.  There was two instructors that impressed me in, in constrained sort of ways.  I think his name was Gerhard Meyer, and Mayer (ph.)--Mayer and Meyer.  They were teaching a course on modern city and, and what U of C [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] did to me is expand my interest in the world in knowledge 'cause I went in there thinking chemistry, and it came out being a universalist.  It's that I'm, I'm interested in all kinds--in history and Western civilization.  [Christian] Mackhour (ph.) taught me Western civilization.  I was never so impressed.  That was on the edge of your seat listening to this man, he's German--talk about the development of civilization, Western civilization, and I was all into it, really, really.  He would get in his lectures so caught up, he would start talking in Greek.  And everybody was still like, right there (laughter).  And then, when he'd get into the Roman period, he started talking in Latin, and we were just like--I know what he's saying.  And then, we'd go into French and German--it was amazing how he would just engage you so much into understanding the development of civilizations.  Get to Mayer and Meyer--that was an experience that taught me that when information is important, you will overcome so many things to get it.  I can't remember which--Meyer had--it was German--had an extremely difficult stuttering problem.  I mean, just unbelievable.  He would get stuck on words and he couldn't get out of it.  And he'd go, and just keep on going.  And we would still be just riveted 'cause he was talking some important things.  And Mayer--'cause they was two teachers--he had a physical deformity, where he had--it's just like the thalidomide where the arms are real, real small.  And he had these little bitty arms that would stick out.  And, you know, visually, it was between Meyer not being able to finish the sentence and get you right there.  You want to hear every kernel of information.  And Mayer, with his arms going like--it was amazing though I, I loved that course.  I got "A" out of that course.  I loved it, and it's given me an understanding of, of space, geography, of human conditions, and so forth.  The modern city--that was a wonderful class.  Then we had another class where this man--he was teaching linear algebra, and he had one, been in, had a birth deformity on his face, and then had been in a fire or something like that, and so, he basically didn't have a face.  And but, again, it's information whereas I think back, like in high school [Englewood Technical Prep Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] with Mrs. Kolmar (ph.), she kind of like turned me off and made me go off and study myself.  I was kind of disappointed that she didn't teach me the chemistry that I could have.  But, here, these people had real problems, and I'm now just too totally in--I want to hear what you got to say--give me that.
Story_ID: 159374
Speaker 1: Were there any black professors at the U of C [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] then?
Speaker 2: Very, very few.  There was in theology--in fact, Rev. Wright [HM Rev. Dr. Jeremiah Wright] was there at the time.  He was--was he a student there--'cause I remember him.  It's Swift.
Speaker 1: You're talking about Jeremiah?
Speaker 2: Jeremiah, yeah.  I'm, I'm quite impressed with him and, well, all that didn't faze me at all.  I know that, that man is smart, he is--heavy, you know.  [HM Dr. James] Bowman, in--I remember he was in biochemistry or medicine and so forth--Dr. Bowman.
Speaker 1: Do you know his first name?
Speaker 2: You know, this, one of those things, you know, when you're a student, you always have to give them these titles and you kind of forget.  But he, he was dealing with the alleles, blood alleles, and it's gone into now what--God, what's his name--this identification of heredity where you can trace back.  That was the beginning of that study--Bowman--and that was fascinating to me 'cause he was saying that from these markers, these alleles on the blood, the chromosomes from the blood, you could find where people's heritage is from.
Speaker 1: This is pre-DNA?
Speaker 2: Yes, pre- yeah, the beginnings of that.  That was, that was, and he used to open his home and have students come by.  That, I remember--we used to come, go by his house.  If I think long enough, I'll get some more, but--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 159375
Speaker 1: Now, you graduate in 1969?
Speaker 2: Yep.  I had to spend an extra year at U of C [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] because the course that I loved the most, Western civilization, by Christian Mackhour (ph.), I failed because that was the height of 1968, the height of the revolution, you know, the (laughter).  And all of a sudden, I had an epiphany in the midst of that.  It's the end of the class.  The class was Western civilization--it was three quarters, so that was three ten-week periods, and it was this test at the end, and you get the whole credit for that one test.  So it was the comp, the comp test.  And I knew Western civilization backwards and forwards, but [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] got killed, and [Robert] Bobby Kennedy, and the whole bit.  It was just all kinds--the, this, the cities were up in, in flames, and so forth.  And so, I had an epiphany in that Western civilization was not being taught with full recognition of our contribution.  It's that they were talking all about, you know, with the [Karl] Marx, and so forth, the capital, and how these people had developed these industries, and they didn't say how they got that capital.  They didn't say how they got all that free labor, and so forth, so when the comp came, comp exam came, I was so incensed with all that, that I wrote about a paragraph or two--just saying all of the flaws in this thing, and just handed it in and walked out (laughter).  It caused a stir up in the school.  I didn't find out until after I graduated how big of a controversy I had created with that exam-that there were part of the staff, the faculty that were--said that was correct.  And others said, oh, absolutely not, and so, they wouldn't give me credit.  They said you have to take, you have to, 'cause Western civ was a course you had to pass in order to graduate.  They gave me a compensation.  They said I could take African civilization, which was a new course that they were offering again--three, three quarters.  And I took that--the next year graduated.
Story_ID: 159376
Speaker 1: Okay, after graduation, what happened?
Speaker 2: I--by that time, I didn't want to be a scientist.
Speaker 1: Although you had a B.A. in chemistry?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a B.A. in chemistry, but I didn't want to be a scientist.  And I saw the need--I wanted, I was now engaged because now we have made this transition from being Negroes and colored to being, to black and it was all about the people, and then so forth.  So, I now had this desire to go back and to teach again, and to go back to my high school [Englewood Technical Prep Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] to teach.  I was taught--I entered the master's in teaching program at the U of C [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  I was going to get my master's--that was that fifth year.  I was finishing up my bachelor's, and I was started the master's program.  And part of the master's program, which you had to intern, so I went to Englewood [Technical Prep Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].  And I started teaching 'cause they, that was during the period of all the confusion in the public school systems.  The kids were pulling the fire alarm 'cause the, you know, the whole place was up for grabs in '69 [1969].  I went back to Englewood to teach chemistry and physics, and I'm green as grass.  I'm twenty-one, twenty-two years old.  I had students in my class at Englewood that were older than I.  And I came in there with this lab coat--I'm going to teach chemistry, and I was so enthusiastic about teaching that what I had learned--this whole new way of thinking of study.  And I would come there early morning, stay late at night, do all kinds of things, and it, so it infected them.  They started actually liking chemistry and wanting to be in the class--liking physics.
Story_ID: 159377
Speaker 1: In fact, I got taken away once in (laughter)--over the Christmas holiday, I went over to the school [Englewood Technical Prep Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] 'cause the lab was in disrepair.  And I went to the school during the Christmas holiday.  I said, "I'm going to paint this"--I bought paint and brushes and stuff--"I'm going to paint the lab and make it look spruce for the kids when they came back."  Little--I know that the Chicago Public Schools [CPS] is a total closed shop in regards to the union.  You aren't supposed to do nothing unless the union.  So, I went there just a painting, purple and white everything (laughter).  The engineer--one of the laborers, and union people came in there and saw me and left.  And then, all of a sudden, the, the engineer of the school came in and he said, "You have to leave immediately."  He didn't tell me why.  He just said, "You have to leave."  I said, "I'm, I'll leave when I'm finished.  This is my room--I teach in this room."  He said, "You have to leave right now."  And I said, "I'm going to leave when I finish."  So, he left.  Next thing I know, the Chicago Police are coming up and (laughter) and they are arresting me and take me out in handcuffs (laughter) 'cause I didn't want to leave.  I didn't know I was violating union laws.  I--now, I having joined a union, I kind of understand it, but I don't agree with it because that school was scheduled to be painted, like on every seven years, so it was going to be a million years before they--and the school was dilapidated at the time.  So, it turned out that just as I was walking out of the building, one of the building managers for the [Chicago] Board of Education was coming past in a car.  He might have been told about it.  And he came up and he said, "What's going on?"  They told him.  And he said, "Well, turn him over to my custody."  And so, the man put me in the car and he told me, he said, "You know, you've violated the law."  He said, "This is a union shop.  You cannot do this."  And he says, "You have to only do anything when the principal is in the building, 'cause when the principal is out of the building, the engineer is in complete control.  He has complete authority for it."  So, I had to go and eat crow, and when the school started, and go and apologize to the principal.  And the principal says, "You know, if you want to do anything, make sure I'm in the building and don't tell anybody, or have the kids do it."
Story_ID: 159378
Speaker 1: After your experience at, at Englewood [Technical Prep Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], you, you later went on to work for the Indiana--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, Gary [Indiana]--well, it--what happened is that I, I was totally enamored about teaching.  In fact, it's--was the job that I wanted to do then.  I really wanted to teach.  But I was in this intern program because I was supposed to be in this master's teaching program at the U of C [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  And I stayed in that, and was teaching for two years, taking classes at U of C every night.  I wasn't that serious about the classes.  I really was serious about the teaching.  I really liked that.  1971, I was going to go back to Englewood [Technical Prep Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].  I'd taught there for two years and I was going to go back to Englewood.  I'm really not committed.  That's what I wanted to do.  And that was at the height of the movement to integrate the faculty in the Chicago Public School System [CPS].  So, when-because I wasn't a certified teacher, I was just an intern, they transferred me, unannounced, to Lane Tech [Lane Technical College Prep High School, Chicago, Illinois] for the first year that they were doing coed at Lane Tech.  And when I got the letter saying that I had to go to Lane Tech instead of Englewood, 'cause I was teaching at my alma mater, I was really, really stoked about this.  I was that, what's going to be my life's calling now 'cause I saw how it was affecting the students.  I was demoralized as I was transferred to Lane, a school didn't need any exceptional teachers.  They already had plenty of teachers.  It's a huge school.  And they had demoted me down to teaching general science, so I had all these freshmen.  And that was the first year that they were going coed, so I had young girls and boys coming to, to Lane.  And Lane had just a--it was integrated, but it didn't have a large black population.  And so, I'd have maybe one or two African American students in each one of my classes.  And except for one young lady in general science, these students weren't doing very well for me.  And I didn't understand that at all 'cause Lane is a school you have to take a test to get into.  It is not for the dummies.  It was, it was sort of a school at that time where all of the West and North Side elementary schools could send kids to Lane if they scored at the highest levels in elementary.  And so, I had students in my class that were the "A" students in elementary school and yet, they were failing my class.  And I'm like, what's going on here?  Why--and I'm definitely predisposed to ensuring that you will get taught, you know, the African American students.  And so, I, after that first marking period, I interviewed them individually--said, what's going on?  And they, they told me that they would have normally gone to Harrison High School [Carter Harrison Technical High School, Chicago, Illinois], to Crane [High School, later, Richard T. Crane Medical Prep High School, Chicago, Illinois], to Marshall [Marshall Metropolitan High School, Chicago, Illinois], and so forth--all the schools on the West Side.  And I asked them, I said, if you had gone to those schools, what do you think you would have been doing?  And they said "A" work.  But you're coming to Lane, and you're failing--why?  And then, when I started to understand that it was the expectations of being in this integrated environment, they were not expected to succeed.  They were acting out these negative expectations.  And I said, you can't--that's not tolerable.  I will not accept that.  And only one young lady, she was, she was good, but right after I had those conversations, I would (unclear) into the principal's office, and told that my services were not needed (laughter).  It's that they had too many teachers, and they had to lay off people.  So, I was out of a job right after I had gotten kind of stoked about being a teacher.  I was unemployed.
Story_ID: 159379
Speaker 1: So, I'm thinking like, I had moved, and I had my own apartment and I--no money, no income.  So, I, I registered with a headhunter.  And he called me back after about a couple of weeks and said, we've got this position for the chief chemist for the City of Gary [Indiana] in their Air Pollution Division.  I, like I'm thinking, I don't know anything about air pollution--I mean zero--didn't even know what it was, but it was a job.  I said, okay, I'll take it.  And I went over, and the head of the Air Pollution Division, who's under [HM] Mayor [Richard] Hatcher, was a Nigerian, Joel Amobe (ph.), and he was really excited.  And he was kind of caught up in the moment, too, of that black people need to be doing things, and so forth.  So, he wanted a black person as the chief chemist.  And he said, but, you know, you'll learn everything you need to know, and which was true.  And so, I started learning the chemistry of air pollution, and I would--expanded the monitoring system for the City of Gary.  Gary, at that time, was filthy.  Air wasn't great.  Air pollution was atrocious.  Gary was one of the worst places in the country.
Speaker 2: They still have those steel mills and--
Speaker 1: The steel mills, the oil refineries, the cement plants, the chemical plants--it was unbelievable.  I didn't realize that I was being thrown into the fire (laughter) to learn in the worst place in the country.  But it turned out to be a very good experience.
Story_ID: 159380
Speaker 1: And so, I started taking classes on environmental issues in, in environmental science, and so forth, to foster my functioning as the chief chemist in the Air Pollution Control Division [Gary, Indiana].
Speaker 2: Was that at Governors State [University, University, Park, Illinois] at that time?
Speaker 1: No, this was before.  No, these are government classes--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --that were offered by the state or federal government.  You're taking classes.  And I started finding out--this stuff is kind of interesting.  And I still had put on hold my master's in teaching.  And so, after I started taking these classes, I said, well, this is interesting 'cause the environmental movement was just getting started in the '70s [1970s].  It didn't exist prior to that.  There was nothing at U of C [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] or any school prior, in the '60s [1960s].  There was nothing about the environment.  So, I got kind of excited about these classes.  And I looked around and saw that Governors State was offering, one of the first schools to offer degrees in environmental science.  So, I started taking classes at Governors State and was teach- I mean, working in Gary [Indiana].  So, I worked Gary for two, about four years, as the chief chemist and learning, going to the--the federal government was offering courses.  So, I would go over to North Carolina and learn about different environmental aspects and, and also studying at Governors State.
Story_ID: 159381
Speaker 1: And then, it got to a point where I wanted to do the master's degree full time, and that's about 1976.  I took a trip to Europe, quit the job [chief chemist, Air Pollution Control Division, Gary, Indiana], took a trip to Europe, and North Africa--got bitten by the travel bug.  That was wonderful.  And when I came back, I said, okay, now I want to study full time and went into the master's program full time.  And that was an exceptional experience also because since Governors State [University, University Park, Illinois] was one of the first schools in the field to give master's degree, we had some really exceptional professors.  And I got some experiences there that were very, very unique.  Dr. Sebring (ph.), what was, sort of like my advisor, and he was studying an air pollution concept of, of deposition of, of particles into large water bodies like Lake Michigan.  And I had, because I had worked in Gary [Indiana], had done work on air monitoring equipment, so he needed that type of expertise.  So, I worked with him, and he ended up getting a government grant with the EPA [Environmental Protection Agency] to study deposition on the Great Lakes.  And so, I ended up going out on the Great Lakes on this research vessel that the EPA had for weeks at a time.  And we would go out on and anchor in the middle of the lake and do all kinds of exotic studies of, of meteorology and deposition, water chemistry, and so forth.  It was really getting exposed at the forefront of the, of the field.  And then, the other people in the, in that school were in the forefronts of their fields in degradation chemistry and air pollution chemistry, the whole chemistry of, like the ozone stuff where I was being exposed to all of that stuff right there at Governors State--really, really was a wonderful experience.
Story_ID: 159382
Speaker 1: Got my master's degree in '79 [1979].  But at the last year at Governors State [University, University Park, Illinois], I ended up doing an internship, a co-op program with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Laboratory, the central lab down in Chicago [Illinois].  So, I was working there in their lab, and set up their lab for more advanced monitoring and introduced some, some new concepts and analysis and got, sort of got an inroad into the EPA [Environmental Protection Agency].  So, and once I graduated, I applied for a job with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.  And I was only planning to just get a job and stay there for a couple of years, and then go on and do something else.  Actually, it was always hidden in the back of my mind--go back and teach again.  And when I was interviewed for the job, my experience with monitoring of the air 'cause you have--the cities are required to monitor the air quality every seven days.  And I had learned all about that kind of instrumentation.  Well, in the Chicago office of the EPA, they were interested in a whole new program of putting monitoring right on the industry--continue with the emission monitoring.  And so, the, the--Laxmi Kesari, he was a, a unit manager there.  And he wanted to hire somebody that could learn the law associated with continuous emission monitoring and develop a program for the Chicago office in their enforcement group.  And I knew nothing about enforcement.  So, he hired me 'cause I knew about monitoring equipment, so I learned the law real quick.  It was relatively simple and within a year, I was considered an expert, a national expert, in continuous emission monitoring.
Story_ID: 159383
Speaker 1: My personality that had developed in Englewood [Technical Prep Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois] of being argumentative, and so forth--I just fit ready into that whole enforcement concept--was that I had, was not intimidated by--in a situation where you have to argue with people that they should be doing something else, and using the law to move them to do the right thing.  And it was in an environment, the office environment, where the Chicago [Illinois] office--there's ten regional offices of the EPA [Environmental Protection Agency].  In the Chicago office was the most aggressive in the use of the law to bring about change in industry behavior.  Most of the places in the country, there was a, a reluctance till you try to use the law and, and bring people to court, and so forth.  Our office was different.  We had no compunction in approaching people, and saying that you are violating the law, and we will take you to court 'cause the industry corporate attorneys were usually so high-powered, and we usually had no resources or whatsoever.  So, our office developed quickly a reputation of not being afraid, and that we would issue notices of violation to companies that they now had to report on their 10-K forms, that they had received a notice.  And we found out that they didn't like that, even though the notice is not real legally binding, so the decision is not a final determination.  It just said, we have a problem with you, and they didn't like that.  So, what we finally said, by taking that aggressive stance and issuing these notices, we could bring them to the table, and get them to commit millions of dollars in rectification projects of correcting problems.  So, we started to get a sensibility that you could actually use the government's authority to bring about change, even though you didn't actually end up in the court 'cause we were getting them to, to do that.  So, that kind of got interesting in, in the fact that I was able to push the companies to put equipment on their facilities directly to monitor their, their emissions.  And then, we would use that information to issue notes of violation so, you know, they didn't like that.
Story_ID: 159384
Speaker 1: But what came about is it--I ended up liking it a lot and staying there [U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Chicago, Illinois office], much longer than I'd planned to.  In fact, I stayed there twenty-eight years.  Developed an expertise in that field, and then developed a whole another program that I left with after working on it for ten years.  And that is to get an expertise developed in, in the agency among the young people that, that were coming in, and working with us as technical people instead of having enforcement cases being assigned arbitrarily.  It's that--no, give this person all of these type of cases--this particular industry.  Let them learn that industry to the point that they can sit there and talk to the people in that industry intelligently, and that you know you really do understand how that industry works, and what can be done to correct these problems, and how much it costs, and so forth.  So, I, I made a proposal to my supervisor back in the early '90s [1990s] that we needed to develop a team of people that understood the petroleum refining industry, and he gave me carte blanche.  So, I got these young out-of-college kids, and they went and they studied and so forth, and we started learning about that.  We would go in--you know, the EPA [Environmental Protection Agency] has the right of entry to, into industry, so we would go on, in tours and inspections of the refineries, and we'd go to all of them.  We weren't developing cases then.  We would just go there and learn--show me how this is, show me this, and show me that.  So, to the point, we developed this expertise that we really knew how this stuff worked.  I mean, we really knew, understood how this, these systems worked, and that all of this pollution that was coming out of these places was really a lack of due diligence, of a follow-through and, and good engineering practice.  So, then, we started turning that back on them, is that they knew that we knew about their industry.  We weren't not knowledgeable.  We, we actually understood the, the industry and we weren't afraid.
Story_ID: 159385
Speaker 1: And so, we [U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Chicago, Illinois office] took on the industry.  And one of the things that we did, which was different, it turned about in the mid-90s [1990s] after we, we developed our expertise in the, the region that is around Chicago [Illinois], the six states that surround the Great Lakes--that's region five.  So, we had developed a reputation at region five, and I was leading this group, that we were very knowledgeable and we were not afraid of the Exxon Mobiles or the BPs [British Petroleum], and so forth.  And headquarters kind of got wind of that and they started picking up on it.  What had happened in the past was that each region was acting independently of the others.  The EPA [Environmental Protection Agency] did not act as one unit.  It acted as ten separate agencies, so the office of Atlanta [Georgia], the office of Dallas [Texas]--each one acted differently.  And they interpreted the law differently.  Headquarters was seeing--look, we have this serious problem with petroleum refinery pollution.  We've got to get a handle on it.  And so, they took the position that we have to go after this corporate-wide instead of by region.  And so, they brought us in to form a team, and we started--instead of dealing with just the refineries in Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio, is that we're going to send this notice to the corporation.  We don't care where you are.  You've got to come in and talk to us, solve these problems--very dramatic, very big, (laughter), 'cause now we're not talking millions of dollars, we're talking billions of dollars (laughter).  And first, they didn't, they didn't, they didn't want to deal with this.  In fact, one company--that I'd love to jam, but I'm going to leave their name out of it for the moment--said that they would never come in and talk to us.  They would have, they would--you'd have to pull the consent decree out of their dead cold hands (laughter).  They did finally settle with us, okay.  But what happened, there was two companies that were in trouble.  And with, with, in the public's eye, 'cause, you know, they really don't like bad publicity.  And so, we took advantage of that, and they settled with us--this is during [President William "Bill"] Clinton's administration.  They settled it.  One of them was very big, very big corporation.  And once they settled, and we got a couple of other ones to come in and say, okay, we like that deal, that kind of makes sense.  We'll settle with you.  So, then, we had about four or five of them when the administration changed when [President George W.] Bush came in office.  And, you know, Bush is an oil person, so we expected that it would be shut off.  And then, they tried.  But, what happened is that once these big guys were already in, and they said, if we got to do it, they got to do it.  And so, they worked behind the scenes, and the Bush administration had to continue this program because the major, these major oil firms that had already committed to spend billions of dollars were not going to let their competitors not have to spend that.  So, it was like they, once they saw that we were going to be fair, everybody started coming in.  So, that's what I ended up with.  I spent ten years working with the petroleum refinery and got a lot of, a lot of improvement out of that.  And it's, it's an important lesson to me because I learned that it is about, one, knowing what you're talking about, and, two, being fair.  And you can get people to do things as long as they know you're fair, and they, they can be totally different in your politics or whatever--if they can see that you are treating them fair, then they'll go along with it.  And so, we saw major outlays of money.  I give that industry kudos now because of what they committed to do.
Story_ID: 159386
Speaker 1: Would you consider your involvement in the petroleum regulation the highlight of your career at the EPA [Environmental Protection Agency]?
Speaker 2: In one sense, yes, it is, because I learned something out of it.  I, I really did.  You know, it was to the point that companies, their representatives, would be contacting us, and telling us about things that were about to happen that would--could have been very detrimental to us, to the agencies of the government, and so forth, because they now felt we were partners.  And that's what I think has not been developed enough under this administration is that you, we should really be partnering with, partnering with the industry.  We can accomplish all kinds of things, like when the hurricane period was going through there when, and the refineries--they would tell us that to expect, that there would be a curtailment because of that, and that there could be ramifications in markets later, and that you as the government, you should know this.  But prior to that, they wouldn't tell us that.  It's after they got to recognize that we were really working with them, then the information flows that's beneficial.  So, I, I think it is one of the highlights in my life.
Speaker 1: Now, you worked there until 2006.
Speaker 2: '06 [2006], yes, yes, I retired.
Speaker 1: Retired?  Did you ever think about going into industry itself?
Speaker 2: No, no, I didn't want to do that.  People wanted me to do consulting 'cause I was a national expert.  I, I left the, left the agency as a national expert.  I got gold medals and all--I got them all in a room back there.
Story_ID: 159387
Speaker 1: But I didn't want to do that--is that, this bug, this artistic bug has always been there, it's always been there.  But--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Let's get to this artistic bug now (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  And that, when I was in college [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], my roommate in the fraternity, Scott Stapleton, was an art major.  He went on and studied religion, but he started out as an art major.  And I always wondered--how did I get a roommate that was an art major?  And that's what I really wanted to do and I'm studying chemistry.  And one day, he came, came back to the room with a lithograph which is around the corner there.  And I didn't know what a lithograph was, and he had done it and he was telling me about how he had done the stone, and then he drew with this grease pencil and then, he put it in a press.  And then, I thought that was just so amazing, and I bought it.  I said, I want that, I want that.  And that's the first piece that I ever bought.  But I recognized that even in my dormitory and in every apartment that I've ever lived in, I always went and started putting things up on the wall 'cause that's what I lived with as a child.  We always had art on the wall.  I didn't know how it got there, but we always had it.  And so, I always felt of putting things on the wall.  So, even during this period of teaching at Englewood [Technical Prep Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois], graduate school [Governors State University, University Park, Illinois], and then working with the EPA [Environmental Protection Agency], I would go out and acquire things.  And I call it acquire--different from collect--I will go out and acquire art, starting with posters, and so forth.  In fact, the poster behind you is a screen print from the AfriCOBRA [African Commune of Bad Relevant Artists, Chicago, Illinois].  They had it at the Operation Breadbasket with [HM] Jesse Jackson back in 1971.  And that's a high quality screen print, but it was reflective of the period of the movement, and so forth, so I bought those 'cause I wasn't thinking of it as art.  I was thinking of it more of reflective of the movement of the Huey Newton and the Black Panthers and the revolution itself, so I have that.  Now, these turned out to be art pieces.  Now, that, those are the--I bought them for twenty-five dollars, and they are now worth much, much more than that because they are--one, historic and reflective of art.  But I'd always been acquiring work and putting work up on the walls 'cause it--I think that bug in me has always wanted it, to, to come out and to be manifest.  So, I acquiring it and yeah, I'd start with putting one or two pieces on the walls, and so forth.  And then, they started getting--I always wanted to have everything I had visible, so if get more pieces, then I'd just start pushing closer and closer together.  So, every place I've had has always had art on the wall.
Story_ID: 159388
Speaker 1: About twenty years ago, when I was working with the EPA [Environmental Protection Agency] and I had, I had a lot of work then, about a hundred pieces into my apartment.  The artist that I was buying work from would say, you're a collector, you're a collector.  And I said, no, no, no, I'm not a collector, I'm not a collector.  A collector is Rockefeller, Getty, you know, you got tons of money, and you got all this space, and so forth.  And he said, no, no, no, you're a collector.  You are an art collector.  You take it very serious.  You're very passionate about it.  And at first, I resisted that for a number of years.  And then all of a sudden, it just kind of clicked and I said, yes, I am.  And I do, I take this very serious.  I am doing more than just acquiring work.  I've always appreciated work, but I'm doing more than just acquiring--I'm collecting, and it is reflective of the way I see the world, and the way I relate to artists, the, the makers, the creators of this, is that I--it's not just an exchange for an object.  It's an actual relationship and that I want to support and promote that type of work from these people because it means something, it means something to our culture.  It means something to our civilization, like kind of coming back to Christian Mackhour (ph.) in Western civilization, is that these art pieces, 'cause they taught us in that class with art.  They taught us Western civilization, from the art of Western civilization, and I, I started to see just how important art is.  Art is at the core of your, of your civilization.  The culture is the basis on how you see the world and how you approach the world and how you relate to the world, and it forms how you think, and art in this part of the world fosters critical thinking.  And so, when I started seeing it as that, and, and that these pieces that I had acquired had resonance with other people.  When they would come in, they would get involved and start talking about.  I say, wow, this is, this is more than just sort of a past time.  This is serious, so I was gaining a greater and greater appreciation of collecting and the importance of it.
Story_ID: 159389
Speaker 1: We were talking about your transition from an acquirer to a collector, and you were expressing this kind of a passion you have for the arts.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Could you--can continue?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, that carries you to, to get more and more and more, and to interact with artists more.  And what I've learned is that the more you interact with artists, the more you learn.  And you learn more about the art, and you learn more about why it's important.  That stayed sort of like right below the horizon in my life all the way through my, my career with the EPA [Environmental Protection Agency].  All during that time, I would, I was collecting work.  I'd--when I'd travel for the job, go to these inspections in the different--I'd go and look in, in art venues, and so forth, or meet artists, and go visit artists, and so forth, wherever I went.  I'd take the time to take a little side trip somewhere to go, and learn more and more about the art, learn more about the art of our culture and its importance.  But I was doing that singular.  I really wasn't interacting with any other collectors, other than [HM] Jonathan Green, artist.  I would--I met him here in Chicago [Illinois] in '88 [1988].  In fact, that's kind of an important interaction.  I met him just as he was leaving Chicago.  In fact, he was leaving the next day.  An artist friend of mine, Jonathan Sims (ph.), called me and told me that I needed to go up on the North Side to meet this artist 'cause he was getting ready to leave Chicago and he knew that I would like his work.  So, I rode my bicycle up to the North Side to his house.  And Jonathan opened the door and let me in 'cause he knew Jonathan Sims and he was gracious.  I was really surprised.  He had already packed.  All his stuff was in crates.  He was gracious enough to open up his stuff and show it to me.  I was blown away.  I was like, oh, this is awesome.  There's a piece that I had.  I like--gotten--I bought three pieces that day.  And Jonathan told me that he was moving to Florida--Naples, Florida, and that if I wanted to, I should come down and visit him and see some more work, and blah, blah, blah.  So, and I took him up on it, and we've become fast friends.  And I bought quite a few pieces from him since then.  But Jonathan Green is a very important artist and a thinking artist, and he is seen--and a cultural artist, too.  And he's--we would have extended conversations at his house in--about art and its importance, and he would also invite--they would have, he and his lover, they would have receptions every year for major art creators and important people in the culture-[HM] Richard Long, and so forth.  In fact, [HM] David Driskell, and Julieanna Richardson--they, they worked--he hosted this major reception there, and he invited me down for those things.  And that's how I met Julieanna Richardson.  I met David Driskell and [HM] Vivian Hewitt, and had these conversations with people that were important.  And they were talking about the culture, and the components of music, and the dance, and the literature, and the visual arts, and just how important it was.
Story_ID: 159390
Speaker 1: I learned so much from them and learning of what I was doing, and how important it was.  And [HM] Jonathan [Green] is constantly saying, you know, you guys aren't--you, the collectors are really important.  And I was kind of hearing from the other artists here in Chicago [Illinois], too.  That all culminated in, in 2002.  The South Side Community Art Center [Chicago, Illinois], 'cause I've patronized them.  Jonathan had told me that when he was a student here at the school, the Art Institute [School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], he used to come to the South Side Community Art Center, and volunteered to do the work because he knew how important that institution was.  So, he got me to just kind of go over there more often and look at the shows, and so forth.  So, they kind of knew that I was, I was a collector.  In 2002, they wanted to have a series of panels that addressed aspects of the art community, so they would have a panel on collecting, and one on galleries, and one on artists.  So, they asked me if I would be on a panel for collecting.  I said, yeah, I'll do that, even though I, at that point, I wasn't at this strong--strong in the concept that I was a major collector or anything like that, but I said okay.  And they asked Dan, Daniel Parker--Daniel T. Parker [HM Daniel Texidor Parker], and Carol Briggs who was a, the principal of DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois] at the time, and Joan Dameron Crisler, who was the principal of the Arthur Dixon Elementary School on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], 83rd [Street] and St. Lawrence [Avenue].
Speaker 2: Who was Daniel T. Parker?
Speaker 1: Daniel T. Parker, he was a professor at that time at Olive-Harvey [College, Chicago, Illinois], and but he's since written a book on his collection, and he has taught at Chicago State [University, Chicago, Illinois].  We were all on that panel, and they'd ask us to bring slides and artifacts from our, our collections.  So, each one of us made a presentation.  There was no prior talk about do this, do that, and so forth.  We, we didn't know what each other was going to do.  So, I, I brought a PowerPoint, I think, slides of my collection.  I talked about my experience in collecting.  Dan Parker talked about his.  And I was like, whoa, this is, this is deep, you know.  Then Carol talked about the experience of, of art in the schools at DuSable.  And then, Joan started talking about the collection that they had been putting together--I think about seventeen years at the, the Dixon Elementary School.  It's amazing.  It's that each one of these people were saying things that were very profound about the importance of the art in our block of culture and of interacting with living artists.  And most of the artists that were in the audience were artists that we had collected from.  And it was, it was a sort of epiphany there at that moment--it's just hearing other people that were collecting say some of the same things, and saying how important it was for them to collect.  We left with an appreciation of each other, but we didn't leave with any sort of a collective agenda at that time.  It was just like wow--it was other people that, that are doing this and that it's, it's important.
Story_ID: 159391
Speaker 1: Later that year, the Art Institute [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]--or was it the early part of 2003--the Art Institute had a show called A Century of Collecting, or A Hundred Years of Collecting of African American Art [sic, Century of Collecting: African American Art in the Art Institute of Chicago] and I went to the show, was not that impressed with what they said they had been doing for a hundred years.  But they had a panel discussion about their collection, and they had invited several of the artists, African American artists, that were in the Art Institute's collection.  Now the Art Institute is a major institution.  So, I was thinking, when I was going to that panel that I would hear people expressing their appreciation of being--having their work put into the Art Institute--totally different.  It was the most mind-boggling experience I had seen in a long time (laughter).  It was Nelson Stevens, [HM] Kerry James Marshall, John Dowd (ph.) from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], [HM] Dawoud Bey here in Chicago [Illinois].  And I was stunned that, that panel was so negative and critical of the Art Institute of not doing a good job, and not having collected, and so forth, which it turns out they were correct.  But I was just like stunned that they would do this like wow.  My thinking would be that they would be so appreciative of being in there that--so my mouth was hanging up when I left.  I like, whoa, but they (unclear) almost like points of criticism of the--from the stage, like wow.  So I went home.  That evening at the South Shore Cultural Center [Chicago, Illinois], which is another place where I intended to go and, and interact with artists, and buy work and see work, and so forth.  There was a show that evening.  I got there, and one of the artists, Dalton Brown, was there right at the entrance.  And he says, I want you to meet Nathaniel McLin who was an art critic.  He's African American.  He has a radio program at that time at Kennedy-King College [Chicago, Illinois].  And he was an art critic, and he said, I want you to meet him because, you know, I don't (unclear) want you guys to know each other.  You can talk art and so forth.  And when I looked at Nathaniel, I said, oh, I saw him at the panel earlier that day.  And I asked him, I said, "Were you at the panel?" I said, "What was going on there?  Why were they doing that?  And why would they say those things?"  And he said, "That was nothing."  He says, "Art institutions don't pay attention to what artists have to say."  He said there's no harm done.  They could care less what an artist says."  He says, "They only listen to collectors."  Big light bulb went on (laughter).  I said, what?  He said the only people they pay attention to is collectors.  And I, oh, wait a minute.  So, if you want people to listen to you, you have to be, you have to speak as a collector.  And I'm thinking--I just met these three collectors, and I want us to talk.  I want our voice to be heard about what we think is important.  So, I went back to them and I said, let's form an organization of collectors, and they bought, they bought into the idea.  Dan Parker [HM Daniel Texidor Parker] and I--we said we're going to do this.  We're going to form an organization.  And we decided that we were going to be the first voice in our community speaking about the artists, the contemporary artists, the living artists, that we think were important.  We're not going to wait for institutions like the Art Institute, or the Museum of Contemporary Art [Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], or The Gallerist, or whatever to tell us what is good.  We were going to be the first voice 'cause we're right there close to it.  We know the artists and so forth.  We felt that it should be this bottom-up flow of cultural energy instead of a top-down cultural flow.
Speaker 2: This is in 2003?
Speaker 1: Yes, in 2003.  And we said, we're going to do this.  We're stepping out--four people don't realize what we're getting into.  And then, we're going to do all this major stuff.
Story_ID: 159392
Speaker 1: We were going to put on a show.  We're going to call it the Collectors Invitational because we, as collectors, were going to invite artists that we think are good and to show at this, the show.  We were going to select artists out of our collections, i.e., we weren't going to deal with a sort of a popularity contest.  We're going to deal with people that we already had invested in, and we felt needed further exposure, that here, collectors are saying these people are good because people listen to collectors (laughter).  And we were going to do something that exposed a myth about collecting, and that collecting was such a very, very private thing--is that what I had learned all, all of my life is that you, you collected art and you didn't show it.  You didn't let anybody see it, but you didn't.  It was, that's a very private thing.  You don't--and, and there are people today that still believe that, and act that way that you don't show people your collections.  We said no--that's just the opposite.  We want you to see it because we want you to see what we think is important.  So, we started that first year.  We said we were going to have a three-part event.  We're going to have a show of artists that are out of our--that we have selected out of our collections that we think need to be prominently known.  With the Collectors Invitational, we want to have an intellectual exercise associated with that show where we have artists and collectors, and so forth talking.  And we're going to have a tour where we're going to open our homes, so that people can come in and see these artists work in our collections, so that they can see that we're not just, you know, spouting off.  This is real.  We have these people's work and that this work is important.  So, that was in 2003 in October, and it was quite a success.  We had a little bit of press, a community press, and the people were just blown away.  The responses that came back where people were so moved by coming in, and seeing these types of collections 'cause they came to my house, they came to Carol's [Carol Briggs] house, to the [Arthur] Dixon Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois], which has been collecting, and they went to Dan's [HM Daniel Texidor Parker] house.  And it was, it was very, very moving.  It was very moving that, that we stepped out as collectors.
Story_ID: 159393
Speaker 1: We had the good fortune right after that.  I have a friend of mine that was in London [England], and he was starting a journal, a popular culture journal in London called Drum [sic, The Drum].  He was a, and he asked me, would you want to submit an article?  I said, okay, I'll submit an article.  So, we sent, sent an article about our activities of collecting and, and the artists that we had selected in that first year.  And the five artists that we selected--Marva Jolly [HM Marva Lee Pitchford-Jolly]; Makeba Kadem-DuBose; Julian Williams; Dale Washington; and Adedayo Laoye and--
Speaker 2: How did you, how did you select those five?
Speaker 1: We had--it's a secret ballot--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --is that each, each collector would look through our collection and say, okay, I think this artist should be the number one artist.  And then you say, and this should be the number two artist.  And so, you put it on a form and you give, you have weighted points.  And then, we bring these secret ballots together.  We tally it up.  Whoever gets the highest points is in, next highest, so forth, top five, cut it off, and then we treat them equal from then on.
Speaker 2: Now, you didn't have [HM Jonathan] Green in that group?
Speaker 1: Nope.
Speaker 2: Why was that?
Speaker 1: That's, that's to be--think about it.  We are making a collective determination, but we're doing it--each person is acting individually.  So, I can only tell you what I think.  And I'm not going to tell anybody 'cause we keep it totally secret who we voted for.  It's only after we tally it up.  So, first, the artist has to be in your collection.  You can't vote for an artist you don't own.  You have to own their work.  That's, that's the kind of how, how we see ourselves as different from the other groups that have come up where there's sort of like, oh, this is, this the hottest artist today.  You don't own their work, but you still think that they're the hottest artist--no, you have to have their work in our organization.
Speaker 2: Now, not everybody in the group has to have that artist's work?
Speaker 1: No--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but if their artist gets in the top five, they're in.  So, there are sometimes yes, there'll be an artist that we're honoring this year.  I don't own their work, but somebody else does.  And they vote.  They consider them high enough that in the total numbers that came, they were in the top five.
Story_ID: 159394
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about the organization that you co-founded.
Speaker 2: The organization is Diasporal Rhythms.
Speaker 1: I got to ask you--where did that name come from?
Speaker 2: That name, 'cause the name, as everybody has said, told us in the first couple of years--that name sounds like it has nothing to do with music (laughter).  In a way, it does, it does--Diasporal Rhythms.  Dr. Powell, I think it's Richard Powell, has written books about visual arts cultural history.  And I was reading his book, and the chapter that dealt with the Afro Arts Movement in AfriCOBRA [African Commune of Bad Relevant Artists].  And when we were seeking the name, this is during the time we were looking for a name for our group.  And I was reading the section that dealt with AfriCOBRA and it was a section on [HM] Jeff Donaldson, who was the artist at the South Side Community Arts Center [Chicago, Illinois].  He was in OBAC [Organization of Black American Culture].  He was in, he was one of the founders of AfriCOBRA, went on to become the--he was at Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois], did the--oh, gosh, what is the name of that--the (unclear), and then went on to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], became the dean and so forth, was involved with the big cultural convention that was in West Africa [FESTAC] in the '70s [1970s].  He was really good, so I'm reading this section about Jeff Donaldson, and there's a discussion about one of his paintings, the Victory in Zimbabwe.  And Dr. Powell refers to the painting as another black diasporal rhythm.  And it just resonated with me at that moment that here he is talking about a visual piece of art, and he's using a metaphor of music, of a rhythm.  And then I thought about it--yes, our culture is rhythmistic.  It has issues of syncopation and rhythm and so forth, all within in the poetry, and the dance, and the literature, and so forth.  Why wouldn't it be in the art?  And I said, that's right, the Diaspora, and it's a rhythm.  It's, it's the artwork of African Americans, has the same kind of qualities as artwork in the Caribbean, the artwork in contemporary Africa, the artwork in contemporary Europe is that, that diasporal work has a quality that you can see a connectedness of the people of color all over the world.  So, it is a rhythm and it is for--of the diverse people, and it's in the visual arts.  And so, I asked the other people, I said, this looks like this would the name for our group.  And so, we, we adopted it, registered the name, and everything.  So, it is reflective of the culture and reflective of the concept that our--all of our culture has rhythmic qualities to it.  And it, it can be actually seen within the visual art itself, and not just in music, and poetry, and hip hop, and so forth.
Story_ID: 159395
Speaker 1: Now, your organization [Diasporal Rhythms] really emphasizes contemporary artists?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the living artists.
Speaker 1: Why don't you go back beyond them?
Speaker 2: It's that we want to be one of the first voices--not the last voice as that you, you're dealing with the living artists.  You can affect their careers.  You can affect their production--not so much as affecting, like telling them what to do, but by supporting that which you believe is important, you allow it to thrive and to continue.  So, we want to be in that position.  There are people with means that will collect the art of the masters from previous generations, and so forth--that we want people to do.  But our mission, 'cause we have to cut out some sort of a mission.  Our mission is to look, to be one of the first voices in that process because we do believe that the American visual art culture has kind of gotten off track, that it's too heavy in the top-down instead of the bottom-up, and that all of the really important cultural phenomena of American--music, dance, literature, poetry, the performance--are bottom-up.  Those things which are gone on to become American, and then become international have really started at the bottom.  They didn't start at the top.  And so, we said, in order to really give more energy to the visual arts of America, we have to turn this thing around, or take a pause and say, let's start over from the bottom.
Speaker 1: Do you ever collaborate with people who are collecting, say, art from the WPA [Works Progress Administration]--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah--
Speaker 1: --or Tanner [Henry Ossawa Tanner]?
Speaker 2: --I mean, we have people within our group that do that.  What it is, is that when we come together, this is our mission.  We don't stop anybody from collecting whatever they want.  You can get whatever you want, but when we come together, this is what we're about.  It doesn't keep you, like, Daniel Parker [HM Daniel Texidor Parker] collects--he has a phenomenal African art collection--African art, historic in our collection.  I love going there.  [HM] Harold Rogers has one--I love that.  What Diasporal Rhythms does is focusing on living artists of African descent, so it can be anywhere on the planet--African descent, living artists, visual art.
Story_ID: 159396
Speaker 1: Let me step back for just a second.  When you first started acquiring art, were you into acquiring art that was by African, people of African descent--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --or were you just collecting?
Speaker 2: I was just, I was just, I was getting, and still do, I still do.  In fact, when I was saying, my roommate, Scott Stapleton, was not African American or African descent.  I collect what I want.  But when I function within this organization, that's what I'm focusing on.  And I have large--I have a lot of work by people that are African American.  In fact, 10 percent of my collection is not African American.  It covers the map.  Now, 10 percent might sound like a small number, but when you have over a thousand pieces, that's a lot of work that's not by African Americans.  It's more than most people have altogether.  So, I don't feel in any way kind of put back by with a new owner--no, I don't.  I, I look at everything, but this is what I want to function with other people collectively to push.  And I'm expecting that other people in other communities are going to push theirs.  I want them to do that.  I want every community to dig down there, look at the artists that are right around you.  This is the lesson I learned from sitting in to feed a [HM] Paul Jones, [HM] Vivian Hewitt, [HM] David Driskell--you collect the people that are around you.  You start there.  Branch out from that, but you start right around you, so every community of whatever stripe--that's what you should be doing.  I'm doing, I'm starting with the people that are around me, artists that in the next block from here, on my block, two blocks down the street, over this, over the--I'm looking at the people that are right around me.  And I hold this up to anybody else's collection.
Story_ID: 159397
Speaker 1: As I look around the collection here, you have a lot of different mediums.  You got stained glass, you got oils, you got pastels, you got a little bit lithographs, you got a little bit of everything.  How do you decide, when you're looking a piece of art, how do you make that decision that this is something I want in my collection?
Speaker 2: 'Cause I like it.  I like it and it represents a quality.  How do you define quality beforehand?  I don't know, but I know people know how to see it.  Is it--I don't have any restrictions on pieces other than now I'm stuck with that I have to get smaller pieces.  I can't get big pieces.  That's about the only restriction that I have.  I cannot get large pieces, but other than that, it is what I look at, and it moves me.  It talks to me.  It says something to me.  It would--could possibly fit into a theme that I already have it.  It exists, but it doesn't need that.  It doesn't need to do that.  If it just says something to me, then it's like wow, I like that.  And now, I look and realize it is not shoddy, you know, it's not kitsch, or something like that.  It's, it's done with, with a quality and I want it, I want it.  In fact, really, if I look at something and I see it and I recognize--I will be hurt if I come back and somebody has got it (laughter).  Then I feel like I have to get that, I have to get that, 'cause I, I do not want that feeling.  And, and I've talked to other art, other art collectors, and they have the same feeling.  It's there are certain pieces that it, it actually hurts when you find out that somebody else got it 'cause it, it meant so much, even, even it came in an instant, it hurts that you didn't get it.  So, I don't know.  There could be people that have intellectual approaches to why they get certain things.  I'm not that interested in pre-conditions in a sense that I can look at a piece of work by an artist I don't know, and if it moves me, I want it.  Now, I want to know that artist, but it isn't because I know the artist that I want the piece, or somebody's told me about this artist and say, "Oh, you got to have this.  It's going to be the hottest thing."--It's going to appreciate--it's gonna--."  That is of least concern to me.  It--all of this is about something that I feel.
Story_ID: 159398
Speaker 1: I am--I really have a different concept on appreciation when I talk.  When I say appreciation, I'm talking about financial appreciation of things.  And I've, I kind of think that we, as the collectors, are the ones that make things appreciate in value--not that there is some force that is acting independent of us that is going to make this thing be worth twice as much in two years or whatever.  There's nothing like that.  I don't see that.  What is going to, what makes things appreciate is the fact that you like it.  You love it, you want it, you want to preserve it, and you don't want to sell it.  I, I feel like it's, it's actually counter to say that you buy something 'cause you know you're going to sell it in "X" amount of time, and it's going to be worth more.  No--the fact that you buy it and you don't want to sell it, it's going to make it worth more 'cause they can't get it away from you.  You got to pile up more money to get it away from me because I don't want to sell it--not that I do want to sell it.  So, that concept of appreciation of, of being concerned about the appreciation of work predicated on the thought that you want to sell this in the future is actually to me contrary, contrary to how it actually appreciates.  It appreciates 'cause people don't want to sell it because it means so much to them.  It means so much to them and the culture that they are in is that I would not want to sell these pieces.  I couldn't, I could see donating them, so that they are part of the continuing culture of my people, but to sell them, I will have to be in pretty dire shape--
Story_ID: 159399
Speaker 1: Let me-(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --but I would not want to do that.
Speaker 1: --let me ask you.  You have over a thousand pieces.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: Give me your five--I'm going to try to pin you down--give me your five, okay, most collected artists, or your five favorite artists.
Speaker 2: The most collected artists--that's easier.  I'm glad you didn't say my favorite artists because that--
Speaker 1: I'm going to get back to that one then.
Speaker 2: --is that I have a lot of Dale Washington, Dalton Brown, Julian Williams, Joyce Owens [HM Joyce Owens Anderson], Susan Clinard, Juarez Hawkins, [HM] Jonathan Green, and--let's look around here--yeah, those, yeah, those--and now, I've been getting a lot of Luis DeLaTorre work.  Those are off the top of my head, so excuse me, anybody, that I might have forgotten you.  Oh, Makeba [Kadem-DuBose], G.L. Smothers, yeah, those are the people that I've collected a lot of their work.
Story_ID: 159400
Speaker 1: What are you five favorite mediums?
Speaker 2: Mediums--oh, I forgot my younger brother.  I got a lot of his work--Anthony Gassaway.  My mediums, I, I do like painting.  I like to see people express themselves with the brush.  I do like the sculptural pieces.  I like three-dimensional pieces.  I find them fascinating.  And I like the three-dimensional in all different types of metal--wood, clay, I like that.  And I like, I like assemblage and collage, too, where people are taking things, and putting them together, and re-formulating things--sort of kind of comes out of that environmental conservation, recycle things.  And, and I'm really kind of excited that there's a, there's a growing branch of the art where people are looking at things that were about to be thrown away, and then turned them into beautiful items.
Story_ID: 159401
Speaker 1: Before we started, we were--you were giving us a kind of a tour of this tremendous collection.  And you, you know, you were describing in different themes that you have.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Explain that a little bit--how you came up with that--
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah.  This is interesting and, and the, the serious application of themes came when I moved to this apartment seven years ago because I had moved out of an apartment where I had just put pieces up as I acquired them.  I would make spaces and put them up.  I never thought about themes or organizing them at that place.  When I moved, I had to take everything down and bring it here, and so I had in the back room.  It was all this art.  In fact, I had to make two moves.  One move was furniture and then one was with the art divisor [ph.].
Speaker 1: Which one came first?
Speaker 2: I moved the--did I--I don't know.  I moved some of the art in before I moved the furniture in.  I sure did, I sure did 'cause I would, I was ferrying it back and forth in a car and, and in a truck.  But I had all this artwork in the back room.  And, true to form of being of African descent, when you move in, while you're starting to put up your furniture and everything, you want some music (laughter).  Right?  So, you set up your stereo first--you get your stereo.  So, I had put the stereo up and was still--I think we were still even in the process of moving in.  And a girlfriend that was over, she, she was sick.  She asked me the question of what did I put up first?  And I said, the stereo.  She said, well, then you ought to put, put all your artwork associated with music around it.  So, it gave me an organizing theme right there.  And I said, oh, yeah, that makes sense.  So, I took all of the pieces that dealt with music and dance, 'cause this was the first place I set up in the apartment, and it was like an alcove, and I just put it all around there.  I said, okay, I, I want that, when you're listening to the music, you can see something that is directly related to that particular type music, whatever the music is, or the dance, or so forth.  And then, it sort of gave me an idea--I said, okay, instead of just putting pieces up in this apartment, this, this unit, I was going to use it, use some organizing themes.  And I looked at the windows.  That was next and I knew I wasn't going to put any drapes or blinds or, or shades up there.  I was going to look straight out at the world.  And I said, oh, I'm looking at the world, and I'm going to be looking at people, and people wear masks.  So, I put, and, and got all the images that were mask-like, contemporary masks, and I put them around the window to remind me that people have masks on.  They are not what they appear to be.  They--there's always something beneath that.  That little bookcase there was a perfect place for my bicycle collection.  As I have travelled all over the world, I'm an absolute bicycle fiend.  I love cycling.  I can need it to work for thirty years.  And I've been collecting bicycles from all over the world.  So, I, I said, I'm going to--instead of put books up there, I'm going to put my bicycle collection, and all of the artwork associated with images of bicycling.  And behind you was the, the two AfriCOBRA [African Commune of Bad Relevant Artists] pieces, which are kind of large, and I knew I would want to have them in this room.  And I realized that they represented the struggle.  And so I went--the struggle of African peoples in the Americas.  So, I went and got all of the images that had--that were on that theme that I had been collecting over the years--Marcus Garvey, Nat Turner, Frederick Douglass, the African Liberation--all kinds of things and put them in that area.
Story_ID: 159402
Speaker 1: Along, in this little alcove over here, I couldn't think of any furniture to actually work with it.  I--it's like, what can I do with this?  And I had this Sudanese maska (ph.) that I had built for the, this, the mask, the Sudanese mask, that represent the seven days of the week.  So, I put them, I put that, that wooden mosque that was done by Phil Cotton [Phillip Michael Cotton], I put that in there.  And then I realized it became sort of a place of reflection and contemplation, so I put pieces that dealt with that concept that would slow you down, and make you think about things of life--without being overly religious, but more to, to evoke the spirit of, of life.  The entrance way, I put a theme that I gained knowledge of when I went to Greece.  And going back to my Western civilization course, recognizing Greece was not so much the, the birth of Western civilization, but a sort of a, a carryover from Egyptian civilization and they, they had borrowed a lot of the Egyptian concepts.  And one of them was the Eye of Osiris, an all-seeing eye.  And the Greeks have taken that, and have used it as the protective eye, the eye that protects against evil spirits--the, the--and when I was in Athens, and all through the Greek islands, I would see people always have eyes at the door.  They sell the little trinkets and stuff, but they always have eyes--is to keep off the evil eye.  So they, they put eyes at the door.  So, I said, I'm going to go one better.  And I took all these images with strong eyes, and put them all at the entrance, all the way around, 360 degrees, so when you walk in my house, you're being looked at.  You're being X-rayed by these images that are going to look at, and look at your intentions.  So, they become sort of like the protectors, so when you walk in that space, you'll see eyes all around you.  On--down the hallway, I have images of women on one side, the wall of women.  And on the other side, I have images of men, the wall of men.  And then, they look at each other, 'cause that's what they do (laughter).  And, and all different types, abstracts, all, but basically, all, all figurative works, assemblages, and prints, and oils, and acrylics, and so forth.  In the first bathroom, I dedicated that one to the City of Chicago [Illinois] because the motto of the city is "Urbs in horto," which means a city in a garden.  So I have an image of the skyline of Chicago.  And then, I have acquired, over the years, flowers from all of the different contemporary artists--all they--whatever way they wanted to just to pick the flower and I put them up in that bathroom.  Even the shower curtains are hand-painted with flowers, and so forth.  The first bedroom is what I call orange origins because I love the color orange.  And I've realized I had gotten a lot of pieces that were orange, but I also was interested in the origins of things, starting with the origins of our people, the origins of this city, the City of Chicago, the origins of myself.  And so, I have all kinds of images in that room that deal with, with the origins or beginnings of stuff.
Story_ID: 159403
Speaker 1: The second bedroom is dedicated to the problems of black men and their solutions.  So, half of the room have images that can be considered kind of dark 'cause they, they deal with all the problems that I have seen as, as an African American growing up in America that we have been troubled with.  And I--it sort of has driven me to seek out some things in, in--as I have gone through the collecting.  I keep thinking, what, what other kinds of issues have troubled black men in, in over our history.  And I see if I can find an image to, to reflect that, or I will see an image and realize, oh, I don't have that.  That's, that's an image that speaks to an aspect of it.  And in fact, just a week ago, I was at a show.  And this Mexican-American woman artist, she had a piece that was a broken heart.  And it had a black man's face across the heart and it was fractured down the middle.  And I realized that--I think, oh, I haven't gotten that--the broken heart.  And I, and I put that up, so that's one of the recent acquisitions in that room.  The other half of the room is about solutions, so all of the things that I--'cause having just dark images or negative images would be too overpowering.  So I, I balanced it off with images that I had been collecting that, that speak to rebirth and transcendence and, and love, and so forth, and family.  So, so I balanced it off, so you see one side that's very telling of all of the things going down to murder, and gangs, and drugs, and all that stuff.  That's on one side.  And then, on the other side, very calming, and peaceful and, and uplifting.  Right before you get to that room is a section that I deal with sports and athletics because that is, that's an important aspect of our life.  And so, I show it through images--all of the different ways that it has been described in this life.
Story_ID: 159404
Speaker 1: The master bedroom is called sensualities, spaces, and places because that is what I think all of those are combined together--that sensuality is connected to a place.  And so, I have the landscapes and interiors, and so forth, in addition to images that have sensual qualities.  In fact, the one piece that I have from my father [Thomas Mercer McCoy] is a surreal piece of, of a female figure that's very sensual.  And it's the only piece in my collection that is older than I am.  And it's one that I cherish 'cause I did talk him out of it, and it, more than likely, is a painting that I was born under, 'cause we only had two rooms.  And I was born at home so I, more than likely, was born under that painting.  So, I really feel kind of honored that I have that, that painting in my collection.
Speaker 2: Want to tell us the name of it?
Speaker 1: Oh, the name is 'Masturbation', 'Masturbation', and it's always been known by that.  And I was amazed when my mother [Jeannetta McCoy Wheatley] came in.  She said, oh, you still have 'Masturbation'?  I said, "Yes, I do," (laughter).  And the last bath- bathroom is dedicated to my mother because all mothers tell you as, when you're a child, to go wash your hands and face.  So, I collected all the images--sculpture and paintings--that have strong hands or faces, and I put them in that one room.  I've got about forty or fifty pieces in that, in that one bathroom, and they're all hands and faces.  Well, so that's the walk-through.
Story_ID: 159405
Speaker 1: Now, as you look around here, you have just about every wall and space covered.  Where are you going to put the rest of your acquisitions or collections (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  That's a, that's a real question.  I've just participated in a show at the Hyde Park Art Center [Chicago, Illinois] called Not Just A Pretty Face where the patrons were asked to commission artists to do a work for them.  And it could be a portrait, but it could be other and a portrait.  That's why it's called Not Just A Pretty Face".  And they reached out this year, which was very interesting.  They reached out to the African American community--asked me if we would participate.  And when they told me that we could use our artists, I said, we're in, and I talked it up.  I had a salon here, brought artists and collectors together and said, let's participate in this Not Just A Pretty Face.  They're going to have a show.  They'll put your work up.  They're going to do a catalog of the work.  They're going to have, in the catalog, descriptive--I mean, pros about the artists, and pros about the collector.  I said, we need--if we're going to be the first voices about these artists, we need to have our artists into this show.  And as a result, we have a third of the artists at the--if they're sixty artists in the show, and a third of them are from the African American community.  I went overboard (laughter).  I commissioned eight pieces.  One of them is a trunk that's made with a Dogon door that I acquired some years ago.  And I had the door and I didn't know what to do with it, so I asked this artist, a architect-artist, I said, can you make something with this?  And he said, I can design a trunk, so I've got a trunk
Speaker 1: What artist was that?
Speaker 2: Brian Ellison.  And my younger brother [Anthony Gassaway], I commissioned a stainless steel sculpture that was supposed to be table-top size and he did it, and it's five feet tall.  Again, (laughter), I've got an ostrich egg that's been painted in color field theory by G.L. Smothers.  I have a collage, that is very touching to me, by Paul Benjamin where he took photographs that I took back in the 1980s.  And he collaged these photographs and incorporated a photograph of my father [Thomas Mercer McCoy] and I, and bicycling, and watermelons, and so forth--all the things in my life--he got all of that into that collage.  Luis DeLaTorre did a watercolor in a pixelated style that I've got.  And Dale Washington, who's the preeminent in a number of pieces in my collection--I had him do a ballpoint pen drawing of me.  So, I've got eight pieces coming in--oh, and Juarez Hawkins did a, an amazing piece.  I just like, take it away.  She had come to my home some years ago.  She's an artist and a performer.  She'd come to my home and I greeted her at the door.  As I usually am very casual, I had--I was barefoot that day.  And she came in and saw the collection.  She was very impressed.  She went back and wrote a song called 'Barefoot Boy' about coming and seeing the collection, so she gave me the music, and so forth.  So when this opportunity came around, I said, Juarez, I'd like you, I'd like to commission you, and I would like you to use this song somehow in the piece.  So, she's been working with boxes, and assemblage, and painting, and so forth, and it's a phenomenal portraitures.  And so, when I came to the show, I hadn't--didn't get the chance to see the piece before.  She had this cigar box with the door open, and on the outer door is a portrait of me in orange, with my favorite color, as an old man, as an older man.  And on the inside, it's in 1972.  On the back are small wooden paintings that can be rearranged.  She says I'm a collector, so that collectors are always rearranging, so she--all these difference portraits, (unclear), are all her styles that can be rearranged on the back of it.  And on the facing sort of a background is a stress version of the music.  It's awesome.  It's off the chain (laughter).  It's, uh, but I have to bring all of that in here in January, but I'll find a place.
Story_ID: 159406
Speaker 1: How much longer are, are you going to do this?
Speaker 2: Until I die (laughter).  More than likely, I will be reaching to buy some pieces when I die (laughter).  I can't stop, I can't stop.  It is life.  It's like--I, I think about it in terms of music.  It's that the people who like music--when do they stop?  They never do.  And I think about in terms of music that Americans, and, and I know African Americans do, but I actually am seeing Americans are actually collectors of music.  All of us individually have our music that we collect, and we're very serious about it, and we are critics of music.  We don't have any hesitation whatsoever of saying, I like this.  I don't like that.  And I can give you reasons why I like this, and I can hear something, and before it's even finished, I can tell you--I like that, I'm going to get that.  And so, when I listen and see that and I think about, but when you switch that over to the visual arts, most people say, I don't know anything about art, and I don't know what I like, and I'm waiting for somebody to tell me what I should get.  I'm saying that something's wrong with this picture.  Something is totally wrong because we don't have any hesitation of dealing with music at a high level, yet in the visual arts, that which we can see, we back off, and we give over to experts.  We give over to institutions, and critics, and galleries, and say, this is the hot stuff.  And I go to some of these places, and I just want to be sick when I look at how horrible some of the stuff that is claimed to be good.  And I was like, no, this is horrid.  This is good.  So, I feel like we have some learning to do.  We have to unlearn some bad habits.  Americans, for some reason, have bought in to this top-down concept instead of the bottom-up.  And then, once we, as a people, recognize the bottom-up flow, that we actually have an agency and a voice with our visual arts, we're going to take our art to the highest.  It will be international.  Everybody will want it, just as they want our music, they want our dance, they want our fashion, they want our literature, they want our poetry, they want our raps, because all of those are bottom-up phenomena.  So, once we get in tune with that, the sky is the limit.
Story_ID: 159407
Speaker 1: What's the--I'll say, the goal in Diasporal Rhythms, and what would, what would ultimately be, you know, something that your guys would like to do that would kind of cement everything you've done (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: The end, the end result, the ultimate goal would be to have a museum, to be able to have a place where all these types of things can go, where people can see what was the culture of the African American community at this time and a time set to follow, so that we continue this process that people collect the art of the living artists instead of having it to be some sort of artificial activity.
Story_ID: 159408
Speaker 1: If you had to give up your entire collection and could only keep five pieces, which five pieces would that be?
Speaker 2: That's a question that I really couldn't answer in a sense that I see this collection as a whole, as an organic whole, that I've been building.  To tear it apart, and take it down to something, like some miniscule component is, is unfathomable.  I, I don't, I don't see that.  I could see me signing the documents saying that I'm going to bequeath or donate it to--into entirety to an institution, whatever.  I could see that, but to say, while I'm still alive, that I'm going to get rid of certain pieces, and only hold on to others, I don't see that.  I really, I--people have asked me that before, and I really can't wrap my head around that.  It, it--these are my children.  This is, this is something that if, if--see, maybe it seems stronger than that.  It's me.  I played with that concept that this is a museum of me.  And so, I'm putting this together bit by bit--how can I say I'm going to tear it apart?  That's, that's equivalent to suicide.
Story_ID: 159409
Speaker 1: Now, you talk about a collection like this.  You're around it every day and just like other collectors, how do you open this up so that, you know, other people can enjoy what you have collected?
Speaker 2: I'll put it up all the time.  I extend to teachers, college teachers to bring their classes here, people that want to expose young people to it.  I'm open for it.  People that call me--say, oh, I heard about your collection--can I come?  Yeah, come on by.  I'm a social person.  I love this, and I know what it does to people, and I want to encourage that.  I want that to happen, so this is part of how I see the world is that I want people to be motivated by this.  If it changes their behavior, if it changes their approach to things, then, and I believe that it does.  It--they would want to have our--they want to display it in their home.  They want to acquire that which means something to them.  I want those things because I know what it does.  It encourages human beings to talk to each other.  When people come in my home, conversations shoot off just like that, take off like a rocket.  People talk about really important things.  They might not be talking about the art, but the environment gets human beings to talk to each other.  I want that.  The reason I've noodled it around and I said, why do people talk here when I go to other people's house, and they got a television sitting in the middle of the living room, and everybody's just staring at it.  They--you can't get a good conversation going at all.  And I say, why is that--why do people talk here?  And I noodled it out and said, because the art's already talking to itself.  It's talking to--all of these things are talking to each other.  He said, when you're in a room like that, you start to make relationships between these images.  So, they're communicating with each other, and just like when you go to a party, if the party's already started, you can get into it real quick.  But if the party is not started, everybody sits around, hands in their lap, waiting for it to get started.  When you come into a home that's filled with art, the conversation has already started.  You're just getting into it.
Story_ID: 159410
Speaker 1: Now, do you invite a lot of artists to come through here?
Speaker 2: All the time, all the time.  I want them to see each other's work, and they get off.  I enjoy that the--what--that's one of the most fun things to happen is when I have a new piece or something like that, and I invited other artists over to see it.  In fact, a stained glass artist was over yesterday and she saw this air vent that you see over there.  That was done by this woman that does work in wood and metal, and you might think it was a painting.  It's actually an air vent.  I had her custom design it and the girl looked at it--she says, I'm hating on her.  That is so bad (laughter).  And she went into the house, saw the rest.  She was absolutely just floored, that it just moved her so much that somebody had done something.  It said--and it seemed like it just opened floodgates in her head of possibilities of things to do.  That's what I like.  And they come and look at each other's work all the time.  In fact, there are several artists come here--I got to come for my fix (laughter). And they come and they just walk through.  I go on and do what I got to do.  And they just walk through, and look at the stuff, and look at each other's art, and then, 'cause they, they have eyes.  They can really see some stuff.  They could see things that you don't even see 'cause they know techniques and so forth, so they can see--oh, wow, they did this.  I didn't know you could do that.  And make there, and then they tell you, and so they teach you.  [HM] Mr. Paul Jones, a master collector in Atlanta [Georgia], he told me that--he says, artists teach you, they teach you.  You'll become an expert in art.  You just hang around artists.  They will teach you.  They'll, they'll teach you so many things.  One of these, and I feel like we really have to get art back into the schools because it opens up critical thinking.  Kids need--have to be exposed to it at the earliest age, earliest age, they need to be exposed to art.  They should always have art in the curriculum.  It opens up their heads.  After their heads are opened, you can drop anything in there.  I don't think it's a coincidence that we give the title to our degrees, the bachelor of art of the thing, or the master of art of the thing, is that the art is what it is.  You are actually learning the art.  I don't think that's a coincidence--the art is where everything flows from.
Story_ID: 159411
Speaker 1: Now, in terms of sharing this collection, do you have, say, individual slides of every piece of your work?
Speaker 2: Not yet.  Fact is, it's a task that I want us to do as an organization [Diasporal Rhythms].  We see a problem.  It was manifest early this year.  Daniel Parker [HM Daniel Texidor Parker] had a fire in his condominium, and he lost about a hundred pieces.  And in helping him in cleaning out and addressing that, which took about two months, I saw that destruction of an art collection is actually a really, really, really devastating affair in America because the system is not actually set up to protect that.  You have a sort of a catch-22 with us 'cause we're collecting the contemporary of the living artist.  In order to get full insurance coverage of your art where you have a named piece that is insured fully for its value, you have to have it appraised, just as you were having your house appraised.  And they're certified appraisers and you have to hire them and so forth.  The cost of appraisal is so high--it--in relation to the value of the art that it becomes a catch-22.  You can't--why would you pay three, four hundred dollars for a piece that cost five hundred dollars to get it insured for five hundred dollars?  So, you get a situa- because appraisal is a very detailed follow the procedures way in which it has to be done, and it's very research intensive.  And it's just like a house.  You got to get comps and all this stuff.  This--it's depending on a lot of information being readily available.  When the piece is worth a lot of money, that's not a problem--one, the cost of appraisal is very small in relationship to the value, and the information is available.  But when you are down here where you have a lot of pieces, and none of them have a lot of information written and readily available, then the cost of appraisal is going to block you from getting insurance.  So, you end up with insurance that is homeowner's insurance that just covers everything in your house.  But what we saw with the situation earliest this year is that the insurance companies will fight you.  They will not want to give you--and that's nothing wrong with that.  I understand that.  They're not there to give out no money.  You have to--the burden then becomes on you to prove--one, you had it, this was the value, especially when you don't have an appraisal.  So, it becomes a catch-22.  We're looking, collectively, at trying to reduce the costs of appraisal.  If we could get enough collectors to do what you said, document all of their, their collection, with all the, the information, the promenades, and all this stuff--all, all, and the costs and the values and so forth--and put it into a database that is under the umbrella of the organization.  So, you have your section of this database that belongs to you, and then you have access, too.  But then, there's a way in which you could go across that database as a paid subscriber and appraiser or whatever, to get into that database, and look quickly across to see where are the costs?  The costs of appraisal could, should, should go down because if we have--let's just give a name--a Joyce Owens [HM Joyce Owens Anderson], and we created the database and two hundred or three hundred of Joyce Owens' pieces are in that database, how long does it take?  It's a push of a button to get the information.  So, how can you charge me this high amount for the appraisal of this piece when we have given you the information?  We just want you to go through your procedures for appraisal to verify that, so I can now go to my insurance company to get insurance for it.  So that's one of the things--I'm glad you brought that up--'cause that's one of the things that we think, collectively, that we can accomplish that we could not do individually.
Story_ID: 159412
Speaker 1: Would you consider a database that was accessible to the public so that they could see your collections and the collections of the other collectors?
Speaker 2: With a certain amount of security and determination of act--of access.  I think libraries and appraisers and so forth should have access to that.  But I think the appraisers or insurances (unclear) should have to pay to get in that.  The general public to get into a person's particular collection--I think there's, there's going to be some security issues that you want to deal with.  There can be ways to work that, so that if you want to know about a particular artist's work, you can get that.  But to say, I want to know Mr. so and so's collection, what he's got in there, I don't think I want to know, I want you to know that.
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: That, that I think there could be things that--decisions that certain amounts could be made public.  Others not, whatever, that those are, those are decisions are still to be made, but I, I think that would not be the purpose of a, of a database for, to show somebody's collection.  I think that is a decision that the individual collector can make.
Speaker 1: Wouldn't that give more exposure to the artist that you're trying to promote?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, we're doing that now and, but it's all done by a group in a sense that nobody in our organization [Diasporal Rhythms] is required to open their doors.  We do that.  And you like, if we're having our tour, we ask our members who wants to be on the tour 'cause you don't have to.  You can still be a private collector.  There's nothing wrong with that.  Isn't that what we're saying, conceptually, we're going to be much more open, but that doesn't mean that you have to be.
Story_ID: 159413
Speaker 1: I'm going to try to bring this to a--wrap this up a little bit, but I know we could go on for more hours and hours.  Is there anything else that you would add, like to add to anything we talked about that we didn't ask?
Speaker 2: How does that--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Any thoughts you have about the industry or the--
Speaker 2: -- yeah, right, there isn't that--what is it?  There's a thought that came about in preparing for this interview.  And where did I get this passion?  And I, I kind of stumbled on it in preparing for this--that it actually was in my family, is that when I looked at the types of things that my grandmother, my great-grandmother, my father [Thomas Mercer McCoy], my grand-aunt, they accumulated just large numbers of photographs covering more than just the set photographs of here's the family.  But they obviously, from the last hundred years, have been collecting images.  And I didn't think about it until preparing for this interview that my family has always been doing that.  They've been collecting images and so, I got it honest.  And I, I'm kind of giddy with the thought of that, that it goes back to my great-grandmother that she's got images.  And in fact, I've got one--I got to find in the back room, of a young man, sent her a photograph in 1897.  And he's had himself photographed and dressed up and so forth.  And this, on the back of it, is a message to her.  And I'm thinking, wow, one, she kept it (laughter).  It was important to her, you know.  And he felt sort of compelled to present himself in a way that was more than just here's a picture of me, and had it made into a postcard and so forth.  So, I'm, I'm, I'm really kind of giddy with the concept that this is actually a sort of a heritage, or genetic feature, or something like that (laughter) in my family, that we've always had images and collecting images.  And I'm thinking other people need to look into that of where they are, you know, 'cause there could be other things that they have as phenomena that could be a part of their diasporal rhythm, as sort of a diasporal rhythm.
Story_ID: 159414
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about some of the things--you've done some writings and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --up on the contemporary African Americans.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I write about this after the 2002 'cause I didn't like writing.  Like I said, I had a lot of experience with my English teachers in high school 'cause I did not like to write.  But now, I find that it actually is kind of fun to get across some concepts that you really are interested in, so I like to write about Diasporal Rhythms.  I like to write about art collecting, why it's important, and what I've learned.  And one of the things that I wrote about in an article for Paint.  That's a journal that--I mean, sort of a magazine, uh, news magazine that's put out in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] by October Gallery.  And I wrote an article, just kind of a fun article, 'cause it--I interviewed myself (laughter) which is kind of funny itself.  I asked some of the same questions you asked.  But in the process, I identified something that I had learned.  It goes back to that room, their origins, the origins of Chicago [Illinois].  Chicago was founded by Jean Baptiste Point du Sable--got from--he's from Haiti, but you recall an African American.  He had gone and he had studied in France.  His father was a French captain, sea captain, and had married this--had a child by this Haitian woman.  But he took care of them and they sent him to, to France to study, and then he came back.  And he decided to go out on his own and went to New Orleans [Louisiana], had ran into some problems, so they tried to put him into slavery.  And, and he then went up to the, up to St. Louis [Missouri], and he branched out into this area back before it was developed in the 1770s.  And he eventually became ingratiated with the Indians and Native Americans, and they incorporated him into their tribal structure.  And he functions, but most people don't know.  He functioned as the Ralph Bunche for that time period.  There was a big war that was about to start between the Potawatomis and the Ileana, and he negotiated a peace and they didn't have to go to war.  And the chief of the Potawatomis offered him whatever he wanted and he asked for this.  He asked for Chicago which was, at that time, not inhabited, 'cause it was a swamp land-- very, very stinky, and also a battleground area.  So, he asked for this.  He had some vision.  And then he ended up marrying a Native American woman [Kitihawa], which became Catherine, his wife, but he developed this thriving trading post here.  But one of the things I found out when I was researching him, 'cause I've always liked him, is that he owned twenty-three paintings.  And when I--that was in the bill of sale when [Juliette] Kinzie negotiated this secret deal and bought the stuff from him without being in the forefront.  When I saw on the bill on sale that he had twenty-three paintings and also now, I think about he and DuSable has the only house in this whole area.  It was a five-room house with stables and all this other stuff--big place.  He had twenty-three paintings.  They were no roads.  How do you get twenty-three paintings?  It indicated a certain bent because more than likely, it had to be portaged, coming--and I know how difficult it is to get--move paintings around today.  And I'm thinking, twenty-three, and the only house in this whole area, so he had the first collection in Chicago.  He was the first collector.  He had the first gallery because I know if he had twenty-three paintings, and his is the only house, everybody came to see them (laughter).  So, when I thought about it, I said, oh, DuSable, as an African American, was the first collector, so he should be in our organization.  So, we inducted him (laughter) as first collector.
Story_ID: 159415
Speaker 1: How would--what would you like your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: It would be kind of--well, I, I like the fact that I've lived my life.  I've done things that I really like to do and I've done then with a gusto.  And in the environmental field, in travel and arts, and so forth, that I'm just gone, and this photography--I've just done what I wanted to do, and done it with an energy and a passion, and I've been happy along the way.  And people like me and I like people.  I can't say that the art transcends what I did in the environment or vice versa, and so forth.  I like all of it.  I like it for the fact that I've lived my life fully and plan to continue.
Story_ID: 159416
Speaker 1: Is there anything you haven't done that you want to do?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Something I wrote back in the late '70s [1970s]--a list of things.  I would like to go to Machu Picchu in Peru.  I'd like to see the midnight sun.  I wanted to go to Angkor Wat [Cambodia].  And now, I want to go to Cape Verde Islands to hear the music.  I want to walk around Cape Verde to hear the music.  I'd like to--yeah, those, those are the ones, those are the things I'd like to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 159417
Speaker 1: This is my grandmother's grandmother, my great-great-grandmother, grandmother Hester (ph.).  This is in Austin, Texas, about 1907.  This is my grandmother's maternal grandmother.
Speaker 2: Good, next.
Speaker 1: This is Janie Vance (ph.).  This is her daughter, my great-grandmother.  I lived with her up until twelve years old.  She died in '98 [1998].  This would have been taken 1950s or so.  She lived in Texas and then came and lived with my grandmother in Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 2: Okay, good, next.
Speaker 1: That's my grandmother in 1924.  She was a very liberated woman, so she was a flapper girl during the roaring '20s [1920s], and did a lot of travelling.  This is about seven years after my father [Thomas Mercer McCoy] had been born.
Speaker 2: Hold on now.  Try, if you can, just sort them by size a little bit 'cause if we go back and forth between large and small, it takes more time to reset the frame for each one.  So try to do--we kind of start with the larger ones, and let's try to do larger working towards smaller.
Speaker 1: For, in terms of chronology--
Speaker 2: But we, they're--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: They're doing a chronology by virtue of the caption (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, next, please.
Speaker 1: This is my mother [Jennetta McCoy Wheatley] in 1946.  She was pregnant--I think she was pregnant with me at that time and living here in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Hold on, please, (unclear).  Okay, good, next.
Speaker 1: This is my father.  This is about the 1960s.  He was--this is before he lost sight in one of his eyes from glaucoma.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: And this is the bookplate that my father did of himself.  He took that photograph.  That's his paintings in the back.  And he set this up to reflect his book, 'Ex-Libris', and it shows him asleep because he was narcoleptic, and he always was (laughter) asleep at inappropriate times.
Speaker 2: Correct, got it.  That's a good shot.
Speaker 1: This is my father when he graduated from high school.
Speaker 2: A little clear on that one though 'cause of the (unclear).
Speaker 1: You can cross in front of the (unclear).
Speaker 2: We're just looking for, for an "A" frame (unclear).  You got to move down and hold it on, on both sides.  You are in the middle.  And slide it to your left a little 'cause it's off center.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then just hold that for a second.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.  (Unclear), please.
Speaker 2: This is my father at one years old in 1918.
Speaker 1: Hold on, please.  Okay, next.  (Unclear)  You can just go there.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is my grandfather, Leander (ph.).  He was quite a dandy.  I think this was around 1915 in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.  Which one do we want now?   The--
Speaker 2: The matriarch--the patriarch in the family.   That is my great-grandfather, Anderson Jacques McCoy, Sr. (ph.).  He's the one that brought the family from New Orleans [Louisiana] up to Chicago in 1911, and he had six children.  So, this photograph was with his passing in 1934.
Speaker 1: Okay, good, next.  Okay, now that one--didn't we do a narcolepsy one (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: I'm talking about this one.
Speaker 2: Well, you need--it says, you need to turn it upside down, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and keep another one--one (unclear) 90-degree rotation.
Speaker 2: One more 90.
Speaker 1: Put it on the box so you have to--it's like if it, it wasn't on the backing or slide it over to the center (unclear), change tape.  It was like--
Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead with the description.
Speaker 1: All right.  This is my uncle Wilbur (ph.), the grands-uncle Wilbur.  This is my grandfather's brother.  This is taken back in the 1940s.  He was an attorney here in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Okay, one more.
Speaker 1: Okay, next, okay, description, please.
Speaker 2: This is my graduation picture from high school, from Englewood [Technical Prep Academy] High School [Chicago, Illinois] in 1964.
