Story_ID: 111409
Speaker 1: I'm Tracey Lewis.  And I'm here today interviewing Mr. Eugene Morris.  And Mr. Morris, if you can state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Okay, my name is Eugene Morris; it's E-U-G-E-N-E, M-O-R-R-I-S.
Speaker 1: Do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: No.  I'm, I'm, I'm technically a junior.  I just never used the junior part.  I got called that a lot when I was growing up, so I kind of left it, left it behind me.
Speaker 1: That was your nickname, "Junior?"
Speaker 2: Well, no, it was a kind of, it was a kind of derivative of Junior, which I never tell anybody what that name was, so--
Speaker 1: "Junebug?"
Speaker 2: No, but you're gettin' close.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: You're getting close.
Speaker 1: And can you tell us where we are at the moment conducting this interview?
Speaker 2: Well, right now we, we are in my office at E. Morris Communications, which is an advertising/public relations agency that specializes in developing advertising/marketing programs toward mul--multicultural markets, primarily African American.  And we're located on the north side of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is January 24, 2006.
Speaker 1: That's right.  This month has gone quickly.
Speaker 2: Had to think about it a minute.
Speaker 1: And can you tell us your, your job title and occupation?
Speaker 2: Yes, I am chairman, CEO, and founder of this agency.  And as I said, we are, we, we develop advertising and marketing programs.  We work for a number of major clients, a lot of people you've heard of, like Walmart and Tyson Foods, American Family Insurance, and people like that.
Story_ID: 111410
Speaker 1: Okay, well, I'm gonna, to jump into our five People magazine-ish questions--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: -- break the ice.  What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I think it must be green.
Speaker 1: Green--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause you have your green--
Speaker 2: I have a green--
Speaker 1: --chair.
Speaker 2: --chair; I have a green sofa; a green car, you know, so--
Speaker 1: Green walls.
Speaker 2: --so, you know, and, and of course money is green.  I like that too; I like that color.  I like it much better than red, you know.
Speaker 1: Most definitely.  And do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, wow, I love food, so it's difficult for me to pick one, one favorite.  I really like, I know I like Italian food, so I like pastas.  You know, I love macaroni and cheese, but almost everybody loves macaroni and cheese, but, so I guess I'm not very unique in that, feeling that way.
Speaker 1: That's okay.  It's gooey, cheesy goodness.  Do you have a favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I think I like spring and summer more.
Speaker 1: Than winter and fall?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean I, I like to be out.  I like warm weather.  I was born in the warm weather, so I guess I also like to live in it.
Speaker 1: And is there a particular spot you like to vacation, or spots?
Speaker 2: No, I mean I, I love to travel, and so I travel a lot, but I tend to, I do tend to travel to warm weather destinations.  I mean I don't--some friends of mine used to try to get me to go skiing, and I said but why would I leave Chicago [Illinois] and go and find more snow?  So, I tended to head for the beaches or places where it was nice and warm and sunny.  One of the places that has become a favorite of mine is South Africa.
Speaker 1: Oh, wow.
Speaker 2: I was just there a couple of months ago.  We [Morris and Demetra Morris] spent our honeymoon there, so I really, I really like it.
Speaker 1: That's right, because you were just married in November [November 13, 2005], congratulations.
Speaker 2: Yes, thank you.
Speaker 1: Oh, the last question for you is, do you have a favorite saying or is there a saying that was like maybe passed down from your father that you find yourself repeating?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know if there is anything that, that was, that was passed down, and but I think one of the things that I, I have a great amount of respect for is good old common sense.  And you hear people saying that "common sense ain't common."  And I really, I really, I, I really, you know, I value education and all those things, but, but common sense is something that, that I, that I really look for in people.
Speaker 1: Do you mind if I use that one?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.
Speaker 1: I love that one.
Story_ID: 111411
Speaker 1: Well, (unclear) jump into the life of Eugene Morris, July 25, 1939.  Where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born here in Chicago [Illinois].  Actually, I, I wasn't born in a hospital.  I was born in the house.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: I am, which I've never quite figured out because, why?  Because Michael Reese Hospital [Chicago, Illinois] was about four blocks away, and there was another hospital, I think I was called Lewis Maternity Hospital [Lewis Memorial Maternity Hospital in Chicago, Illinois], which, which used to be on 30th and Michigan or someplace like that, but--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was born on 29th and Prairie, so, you know, you could have literally walked to either one.  I don't know why we didn't do that.  I, I don't know if it was because we didn't have money or because my mother [Willie Mae Mitchell Morris] or, or because, you know, I don't know if they were admitting blacks into those hospitals in those days, which could have been.  I mean you're talking about 1939.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, I, I don't know, but I, I was born at home.
Speaker 1: But you didn't hear any particular reason why--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --you were born--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --at home?
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Story_ID: 111412
Speaker 1: Now you're the only boy.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: And you have several older sisters.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: What was, what was that like, being the youngest and the, and the only boy?
Speaker 2: Well, actually I was, I was, my sisters were quite a bit older.  I mean my, my youngest sister, Doris [Porter], who was ten years older than I was, she, she was, she was like my best friend.  I mean she, she was the one who really gravitated toward me.  I had a couple of other sisters who were, who were older, and they were kind of appalled that my mother [Willie Mae Mitchell Morris] had a baby at thirty-six, so they really didn't want a lot to do with me.  But, but my youngest sister, who just, she always embraced me from the very start, and that bond existed in, you know, until she died in 1996.
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry to hear that.  Oh wait, now can you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --tell me your, your sister's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --names?
Speaker 2: And then I had, I had a, a, a, another sister [Mary Tyler] who didn't live with us.  She was really my stepsister, but I still, I still call her, I still call her my sister.  She lived in, in Texas most of her life.  She's still, still there now.  I think she left and went to California at one point, but, but I never had much of a relationship with her growing up until I became an adult.  Now we have a very good and positive relationship, and we talk on the phone all the time and visit each other occasionally.
Speaker 1: That's nice.  Now, can you give me your sisters' names?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the--
Speaker 1: In their, in their order.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my oldest sister was Mary [Lawrence], and she was about 14, 15 years older than I was.  And she's, she's still alive.  She's eighty-one years old.  And then my middle sister, Ora [Jeffries], she, she died very young.  She was, she was like 38, 39.  She had some heart problems, and so she died, you know, very prematurely, and as I said, my other sister, Doris, and then--who, who I lived with at times.  She worked here for a while; in fact, she was working here when she died--and then my stepsister, who is also named Mary, and, and she lives in Texas.
Story_ID: 111413
Speaker 1: Okay. And I want to talk about your parents.  Can you tell me your mom's name, and her maiden name, and the year she was born?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother, my mother's maiden name was Mitchell.  And she was, she was born in, in 1902, or '03 [1903], I'm sorry, [September 5] 1903.
Speaker 1: And her first name?
Speaker 2: Willie Mae, W-I-L-L-I-E.
Speaker 1: And what do you know about your, your mom's side of the family, and, and you know where she was born?
Speaker 2: Well, my, my family was born in Texas.  I mean I was the first person in my family to be born outside the state of Texas.  They, they migrated here around 1936, and, and, and I was born three years later.
Speaker 1: Part of the great migration.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And do you know anything about your family before the 1900s, like post-slavery or in the--
Speaker 2: No, not very much at all; in fact, I never--I think, in, in kind of preparing for this, it, it really stimulated me, because when, when I was trying to fill out some forms, and I thought, boy, there's a lot of stuff I don't know.  And now I've waited so long that almost everybody is dead.  So it's really gonna be difficult to unearth some of it.  In fact, I have my cousin; I have a cousin who lives in California.  He near--he lives near a Mormon temple, and he's, he's doing some research for me right now to see what he can unearth.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's, that's a perfect--
Speaker 2: --on, on our family.
Speaker 1: --place to start.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but you know, as I said, they were, my mother was born in a little town in Texas called Athens, and which is southeast of, of, of Dallas [Texas].  And interestingly enough, my father [Eugene Morris, Sr.] was born almost equal distant point from Dallas, Northwest.  So, I guess somewhere in between they, they got together, 'cause both those little towns are--he, he was born in Dennison, Texas.  And, and they're both about seventy miles from Dallas.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now do you know how your parents met?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Nobody told the story?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Now your, I know on your, on your--bio, or you listed your, your paternal and maternal grandparents.  Did you ever meet them?
Speaker 2: I met my maternal and paternal grandmothers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I never, I never even, I never even knew who my paternal grandfather was.  I didn't, I didn't know him at all.  And he was never talked about, so I guess, he must have done something that made somebody mad, because they never talked about them.  My, my maternal grandfather, I heard people talk a little bit about him, but I, I didn't, I didn't really know him.
Speaker 1: Okay, can, can you tell us their names?  Your--okay, we'll start with your, your, your mother's parents.
Speaker 2: Well, my mother, my mother's mother, she had an unusual name, Birder, B-I-R-D-E-R, Birder McQueen.  And she, she was married to a man named J. B. McQueen.  She was, she was either married, I guess she was married several times 'cause she had, there were, there were several different children, my aunts and uncles, and they all had different names.  Most of them began with "Mc" There was a McQueen and a McGee, and a, and of course there was a Mitchell.  And so I guess she liked men whose names began with, whose last names began with M, because everybody had a, an M in their name, virtually.
Speaker 1: Let me say that it kept it easy--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess so, you know, yeah.
Speaker 1: All M's.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) and your, your father's mother, what was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Evelyn [Morris].  And I only remember meeting her a few times when I was very young and when I would--my mother would take me to Texas periodically.  But we, we seemed to, we always visited my mother's mother and her side of the family.  We never, we seldom visited my father's side of the family.  But I never--he never went with us, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 111414
Speaker 1: Now do you, kind of jumping into your, your early childhood, what are some of your earliest memories of, of your childhood?
Speaker 2: Well, I was, I was born on the south side of Chicago [Illinois] on, on 29th and Prairie, and that's where we lived for the first five or six years of my life.  One of my most, most earliest memories is that we lived in a house for a while.  It was we rented the house; we didn't own it, but it was a coach house.  And it was, it was a big mansion in the front of it, and we lived in the back.  And I didn't realize, I didn't think much about it when I was a kid, but after, after I got older, and we would talk about it, and I started to think back about it, it was a pretty fascinating house, because the, the lady who owned it, she was a former madam, and back, I guess in the, in the early thirties [1930s] and twenties [1920s].  And, and, and I think that she used to run a brothel in, in her house.  And, and I guess--I don't know if she had speakeasy or, but they were doing some illegal things there.  And what they used to do, 'cause this, this house had a pull-down stairway that, when it went up in the ceiling, you didn't know it was there.  And you--but you could, you would get something, and you could pull it down and, and that--they said that, that if the police would come, and they would, they wanted to raid, they would run to this house and run up the stairs, get up in these stairs, and hide up in this crawlspace.  Or, there was also a trap door that went down in the basement where you could go down in the, in the, it was a garage underneath, and you could go down in the garage and get away that way.
Speaker 1: That is so--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: --fascinating.
Speaker 2: --and to me, I mean this was just fun things to play with, but I'd never, I never--they didn't tell me when I was a kid why, and I never asked why.  But it was a very, very interesting house.
Speaker 1: That is so funny.  I guess, now I'm thinking 29th and Prairie, that's where the McCormick is.
Speaker 2: Well, it's a, it's a little, it's, it's, it's, McCormick Place is west of there.
Speaker 1: I see, the, the new--
Speaker 2: --I mean east of there, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: --the, the addition, 'cause I was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But, but no, the, the, the McCormick Place addition is around 20--stops at the, around 20--26th Street, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the, the police, there's a police station, which is directly on the, it's on the, the northeast corner.  And we kind of lived on the, on the north--I mean on the, on the, on the southwest corner.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I, I'm thinking, I'm too far north.  I'm thinking of, of where the homes that they've restored, like the Marshall Field--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Mansion--
Speaker 2: No, that's, that's more, that's north of there.
Speaker 1: North, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, I'm--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I'm too far north, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so now I, I'm in the neighborhood and I'm like yes, those are, were grand, amazing homes over there where Chicago's wealthiest used to live.  Wow, that must have been a lot of fun.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was.  We had a big, you know, I had a big yard to, to play in and everything.  But again, I mean I was a little kid, and we moved away when I was about five years old.  So, you know, when you're a kid, I mean it is what it is, and you don't even think about it.  That's just your surroundings, and so that's what you do.
Story_ID: 111415
Speaker 1: So, now where did you move to after you were five?
Speaker 2: Well, interestingly enough, we moved about three blocks from here.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yes, 163 West Chicago Avenue [Chicago, Illinois], so, you know, that's, that's a little ways; it's, it's three blocks from, from here.
Speaker 1: And what was the neighborhood like then?
Speaker 2: Well, it, it was totally different.  It was a big old, it was a three-story building that, that took up the whole block.  It started at, it was between LaSalle and Wells, and so it, it, it started halfway from LaSalle, between LaSalle and Wells, and went all the way around the corner for another half a block on, on Wells.  So, I don't know how many, how many units were in there, but it was a big, big old building, not very well maintained.  And we lived on the, on the second floor, and it was a pretty large, pretty large apartment.  I mean I think it must have had maybe four bedrooms, something like that.
Speaker 1: That's nice.  So, now at this time, so after you're five years old, who's, who is still at home, just you and?
Speaker 2: Well, every--at that, at that point--
Speaker 1: --and Doris [Porter]--
Speaker 2: --everybody--well, when we first, when we first moved, I think everybody was still at home.  All, all my sisters were still, were still at home.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think my first sister, Mary [Lawrence], she, she got married around 19 or 20, so she, she must have moved out shortly after we moved there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 111416
Speaker 1: So, yeah, well, this is an interesting neighborhood to have grown up in.  Where did you go to elementary school?
Speaker 2: Well, the, the school building is still there.  It's, it's right down the street on Wells, on Wendell and Wells.  It was called James A. Sexton [Elementary School in Chicago, Illinois].  And the building is still there.  It's still owned by the Board of Education, but they use it for some other purpose.  It's, it's, it's not a school anymore.  And I, I went there through, through fourth grade.
Speaker 1: Now do you remember what kind of student you were--
Speaker 2: Oh, I was very--
Speaker 1: --that--
Speaker 2: --good student.  I was a very good student.
Speaker 1: What were some of your favorite subjects, do you remember?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, I, I think that I, I seemed to excel in reading, spelling, more, more of the social studies kind of things.  I didn't--math I did okay in, but, but, but I seemed to, I, I really enjoyed reading.  I, I've, I've always been a voracious reader.  At that time I mean I would read at least a book a week.  And I, I just always enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: What were some of the books that you really enjoyed as a, as a small boy?
Speaker 2: I remember there was, in fact I was--we got--what was the name of it?  I got some at home.  I'm having a, a senior moment here, 'cause there, there were--you know, I can't think of--it was a whole series of books.  It'll, it'll come to me in a minute.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, but it was a, it was an advent--it was adventures about this young boy and all his adventures.  And I keep wanting to say "Tom Sawyer" [by Mark Twain]  It's not "Tom Sawyer," but, but he, he, he, whoever the author was, he must have written, you know, 15 or 20 of these, of these books, and I used to read them all the time.
Speaker 1: When the name comes to you, just shot it out--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --because I, I, I recall what you're talking about, but I cannot think of it either.  And it's a very famous series just for, geared just for young boys.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I, and I read, you know, I read a lot of science fiction; I liked that a lot.
Speaker 1: Oh, there are some great sci-fi back then.  Anything in particular that you recall that you liked that were just--
Speaker 2: No, I just remembered that that's--I used to, I used to read a lot about it.
Speaker 1: So after you left Sexton in the fourth grade, then is that when you went to Forestville [Elementary School]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you stayed there until sixth grade?
Speaker 2: Till I graduated, and I graduated from there.
Speaker 1: Or eighth grade?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: I keep forgetting, middle school's a, a new invention (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No, they, they didn't have those in those days.
Speaker 1: So any teachers that you remember from, from your elementary--
Speaker 2: Oh, great--
Speaker 1: --years?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, absolutely.  There were, there were really two.  My fourth grade teacher, I remember him.  He was actually at, at Sexton, and his name was Mr. Williams, Clarence Williams, oddly enough.  And I, I really liked him.  I mean he was a very, a good teacher, caring teacher, spent a lot of time with us, took us on a lot field trips and so forth.
Story_ID: 111417
Speaker 1: But the teacher who impacted me the most in, in, in, in, in grade school was my sixth grade teacher [at Forestville Elementary School in Chicago, Illinois], and her name was [HM] Frances T. Matlock.  And she was a little bitty lady, although she didn't look very little to me, 'cause I was a little bitty kid.  I mean I, I grew very late.  But she was, she was very tough, very tough, physically tough.  I mean she would, she would get very physical.  She couldn't exist today, but in those days, I mean she didn't hesitate to lay a little corporal punishment on you if, if you got out of line.  But she was a tremendous teacher.  She was the first and only teacher until I, I guess sometimes in college where I--she taught us anything about black history.  And she was doing this in 1950.  And she used to bring, during, during February, she would bring all kinds of materials to school, and we would have skits and plays and things like that.  But she taught us a lot about having black pride, I mean, you know, long before anybody ever, ever mentioned it.  You know, and she taught us a lot about black historical figures who, at, at a time when nobody was taking about it.  And I always--you know, she, she taught us just about, about life and wanting to excel and wanting to live a better life.  And she taught us social skills, and, and music, and all kinds of different things that, that went above just the regular curriculum.  In fact, I, I might be getting ahead of myself, but I had not, had not seen her for a very long time.  And one of the things we, we might talk about this later, but I'm real big on, on celebrating my birthdays.  And the, the--my E. Morris [Communications] team here, they know that I really like this, and so they always try to do something to surprise me for my birthday.  And so one day I had planned to take off for my birthday, and they called me and told me that something had happened, and I need to come in.  And so I came in, and they said it's in, in the conference room.  And I went in the conference room, and all these people were in there.  And so, I--(unclear)--ah, man, they're just trying to trick--it's a birthday surprise, and I thought it was just the staff.  But then when I started looking around, I could see, well, wait a minute, there're some other people here, was a friend who I grew up with, who I, I main--maintained contact with.  His mother was here and several other people.  And then so I see this little lady, and, but she had her back turned, and I couldn't figure out well, who is this?  And at first I thought it might have been one of my aunts, and then I said no, it's not her.  And she turned around.  It was my sixth grade teacher.  They had found her.
Speaker 2: How had the found her?
Speaker 1: And they found her--
Speaker 2: That's so awesome.
Speaker 1: --they found her, and, and I just started screaming: Ms. Matlock, Ms. Matlock, 'cause I had not seen her in forty-five years or something, you know--
Speaker 2: And she was still alive.
Speaker 1: She, she was still alive.  In, in fact I found a picture of her that we took that day, because we, we, after the, after we had our little champagne and cake celebration, we, we--they had rented a bus, and we went on a tour of all, a lot of the places where I used to live and where I went school.  And Ms. Matlock rode the bus with us and spent the whole day with us.  And it was just, it was just a fabulous birthday present.
Speaker 2: That's beautiful--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I love that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's so sweet.  Was she proud of you?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.  I mean she brought me, she brought all kinds of--she had these clippings and stuff.  She had some things that, some clippings that, of, of, that were written about me in the school newspaper, all kinds of things, you know.
Speaker 2: She had been following you all of these--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --years.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: That is such a beautiful story.  Ah, I wish it was like that still.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, I wanted to ask, were, was your--was Forestville [Elementary School in Chicago, Illinois] integrated at that time?
Speaker 1: No, it was an all-black school.  It was located on, on 45th and, and St. Lawrence.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: So it was, it was all-black school.
Speaker 2: So wait now, I guess--were you still living here on the north side then, or--
Speaker 1: No, no, we had moved, we had moved back to the South Side.
Speaker 2: Okay, right, that's what--
Speaker 1: We were always moving.
Speaker 2: Okay, I just wanted to get that--
Speaker 1: I don't know why.  I don't know if we were trying to stay one step ahead of the rent man or what, but we moved a lot.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's what I was trying to figure out.  I'm like, wow, you had a black teacher here on the North Side.  That's really cool.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 111418
Speaker 1: Okay, now, high school you went to Tilden [Tilden Career Community Academy High School in Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: And you know, also, you were in school at the time of Brown v. Board of Education [1954].  So, how did that--I mean if you could recall like what impact that had, if it had any, on you as a high school student at that time?
Speaker 2: Not really, and Tilden was, it was an integrated school.  It was a very interesting school.  When I went there it was probably--well, they had--it was a, it was a real mixture; I mean they had virtually, virtually any ethnic group you could find were there, but it was predominantly white.  I mean it, I guess it--when I went there it was probably eighty percent white, so it wasn't a lot of us there.  No, it wasn't a lot of black, black kids there.  And it was an all-boys school.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: And it was--
Speaker 1: Where's Tilden located?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: It's at 47th and Union, 4747 South Union.  It, it's not a, it's no longer a technical school.  It, it, it is a, it's, it's kind of a--they are teach more trades and arts, 'cause have a great cooking school there.  I've, I was over there a couple of times for principal for a day.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: But it's a very, very different school.  But in those days, it was a good school.  I didn't, I didn't realize how good a school it was until af--long after I was gone.  Again, it was a school I went to.  It was a school I wanted to go to, and I wanted to go there because my brother-in-law, the, my brother-in-law who married my oldest sister [Mary Lawrence], he had gone there, and he was very smart; he was very bright.  And, and I always liked people who were intelligent.  So, because he went there, I wanted to go there, and that's where I ended up going.  But there were some challenges to going there.
Story_ID: 111419
Speaker 1: I want you to kind of repeat the, the first half of your story of when you were a young adolescent and renting horse and cart--
Speaker 2: Well, I was always--
Speaker 1: --to make extra money.
Speaker 2: --I was always enterprising.  I mean I always did something to make money.  I mean I, I didn't realize it at the time, but I was, I was very entrepreneurial.  It, but it never--I never thought about it as being that, and my family was kind of like that.  You know, we own restaurants and things.  And so, so it, it was kind of there, but I never thought about it.  Again, I was just doing what was there.
Speaker 1: So, now how did, how did--you and a friend rented a cart and a horse, but how--could you describe that process of going to take up the, the horse and cart?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean it, it was a--we lived on 26th and Prairie [Chicago, Illinois], and so we'd walk over there.  I mean it was about five blocks away, and we would just walk over there and tell 'em this is what we wanted.  And you'd have to pay in advance.  We'd give 'em the five bucks, and they would hitch it up, and off we would go.
Speaker 1: To collect--
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I don't think we, I don't remember feeding the horse.  I remember that we must have stopped someplace and got him some water, but I don't ever remember having any hay or anything to feed him.  But, but I do remember that we, we did--'cause they, in those days, in the '50s [1950s], they still had--and I think there's one left.  I, I think there's still one of these on Michigan and Chicago Avenue, these old fountains, where--
Speaker 1: Oh, that's right.
Speaker 2: --people could drink--it was like three, three different things could drink out of it.  People could--they had water coming up where people could drink out, then they had a big trough where the ha--horses could drink, and then they had, down at the bottom, they had a little thing where dogs and cats could drink out of.
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: So it, it, it--
Speaker 1: --right.
Speaker 2: --it was a multipurpose fountain.  So--
Speaker 1: So the--
Speaker 2: --I think we would find one of those, and, and you know, we would water the horse, but we never, we didn't feed him, 'cause we would be out, you know, maybe seven, eight, seven hours, something like that.
Speaker 1: So your, your parents [Willie Mae Mitchell Morris and Eugene Morris, Sr.] were just fine, like okay?  Now, did they call it--well, I know you have your secret nickname that they called you.  So they would tell you, Junior, to go okay, that's fine.  I'm going to go rent the cart and horse.
Speaker 2: You know, I don't even know, I don't even know if they knew it.  And you know, I knew they knew that we--'cause it's not like we went around our house, 'cause we--there was nothing around there to pick up, so we'd go, we'd go places where we thought that there was, you know, good prospecting.
Speaker 1: Where was, where was good prospecting?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things we, we did a lot of is go--one of routes was to go up and down the alley underneath the tracks.  We would from, usually go, we went as far as Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois].  We, we'd--Hyde--we found, we kind of stumbled up on Hyde Park.  I didn't, I had never lived there.  I was fascinated by it, 'cause I thought, man, these alleys are cleaner than our streets.  And we found, you know, that people would throw out what we thought was really good stuff, you know.  So Hyde Park was a, was a good place--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: --for us to go.
Speaker 1: --where would sell all these great things you--
Speaker 2: Oh, at the junkyard.  The junkyard was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --was at 30th and, and, and State Street.
Speaker 1: So you'd come back--
Speaker 2: So we'd come back, and we'd sell whatever we, we had.
Speaker 1: And since your friend was a little bit older than you, did you split it evenly or--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, no, we split it evenly.  I mean he--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --wasn't that much older.  I mean I was maybe, I was probably twelve, and he might have been fourteen, so it wasn't a big, big age difference.
Speaker 1: Good wholesome-
Story_ID: 111420
Speaker 1: So, we left off at the previous tape you are in high school at, at Tilden Tech [Tilden Career Community Academy High School in Chicago, Illinois] in Bridgeport [Chicago, Illinois], which for people who are not from Chicago, can you tell us a little bit about Bridgeport neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well, it was really Back of the Yards [Chicago, Illinois].  I mean it was really a little, just a little south of Bridgeport, but not that far south, you know.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: It, it, it was, it was a neighborhood where a lot of, lot of low income white folks lived as well.  I mean it wasn't like this was, it was an affluent neighborhood.  A lot of the students who went there, they came from the same kind of neighborhoods we came from, except they weren't, they weren't black.  And it was a, it was an interesting education, being in that kind of environment, you know.
Speaker 1: Because Tilden was all-boys, public school, a technical school, so what were you interested in, and, and how, 'cause you said it was eighty percent white, so how did you and your other black classmates interact--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, it was the usual.  I mean we, the black guys hung out together.  We had our own school store.  The white guys had their school store.  We didn't go into theirs as a general rule, and they didn't come into ours as a general rule.  The only time we went in there--I know there was one called Manetti's [ph.], which was directly across the street, and you really didn't wanna go in there.  The only time you could go in there is they had a lot of drafting supplies in there.  And so if you really had to get some drafting supplies, you could go in there, but you'd get what you needed and you would leave, you know.
Speaker 1: So, you mean to tell me that there was literally a like, you know, I wanna get, buy notebooks and papers, etc., there's one for the white students, and there's another store for the--
Speaker 2: Basically, yeah.  I mean, would nobody say that.  I mean, you know--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --but that's just what it was.  It was this kind of unwritten rule, and that if you, if you went in there and if you're just gonna go in, go in there to have a sandwich or some pop or something, that did not work; that didn't fly, so.
Speaker 1: In those kind of instances, because, like in the South and as I see from your, your great collection over here, there are signs, and they tell you exactly where you should go and what you should do.  But here, in the North, we didn't.  How, how did you know those things?
Speaker 2: Well, you knew, I mean, 'cause you know, you--because the guys who, who were there first, I mean they knew.  I mean when, when you came there as a freshman, well, they said you know, this is our store.  This is their store, and--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --we don't go in theirs; they don't go, come in ours.  We interacted fine in class, except every now and then--I, I can't remember--I know we had a couple of riots once where we would, was kind of ridiculous because I remember that we kind of rioted at lunchtime, and then we would go back to school, in school and sit there like nothing happened.  It was crazy.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) What were you rioting over?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't even remember what the, what the problem was, but we had, we had some kind of problem.  And we were out there throwing rocks and bottles and stuff at each other.  And then the bell rang, and we all went inside.
Speaker 1: That was that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: But, but it did, I did, one of the things I learned, you know, I used to think that, you know, instead of growing up in a, in an all-black neighborhood, the, the think--the thought was, I guess because we came from kind of tough neighborhoods, we all thought that, basically, we thought all white people were soft and that, that if you were black, if you got into a fight with a white guy you would just win because you were black.
Speaker 1: Just automatically?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but when, when I got to Tilden we learned that was a myth.  That was a myth.  Fortunately, I was able to find out by observation.
Speaker 1: Not by actual experimentation?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because, because I saw a few people, they got their feelings hurt real bad.  And I was saying, you know, I think I'd better rethink this theory, 'cause it doesn't quite work like that.  'Cause we didn't understand was that the guys grew up in the same kind of environment and circumstances we did.  They just were, were white.
Speaker 1: And that was--
Speaker 2: And, and--
Speaker 1: --the difference.
Speaker 2: --some of 'em, you know, you didn't wanna mess with them, you know.  I mean you'd do what you had to do, but you didn't necessarily wanna find yourself in that situation all the time, so.
Speaker 1: Oh, my goodness, that is so awesome, you thought that they were soft, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we did.
Speaker 1: --somebody--
Speaker 2: I don't know where that came from, but that's what we thought.
Speaker 1: --just the belief--
Story_ID: 111421
Speaker 1: So, outside of, you know, rioting and lunching, and what other things were you doing (laughter) while you were at Tilden [Tilden Career Community Academy High School in Chicago, Illinois]?  Like, did you play any sports or--
Speaker 2: Well, I ultimately, I, I was, I, I always loved sports, but I was little.  When I, when I went to high school I was about five feet tall, and I weighed around a hundred pounds, maybe a little more.  I was five fee, 5'1", maybe a 100, 105.  So, it wasn't a lot that I could do.  I mean I, I couldn't play football for sure.  Basketball wasn't a, wasn't a major option.  I always wanted to play baseball, but again, my size was just a real impediment.  I, I grew slowly.  By the time I got to, to my junior year, I was about 5'7", and I weighed about a 130, a 135 pounds.  So I decided to join the wrestling team, which was an interesting thing to do, 'cause Tilden had great wrestling teams.  They'd won something like twenty-five consecutive city championships, and they, you know, they would win the state championship ever third or fourth year.  So the, the, the worst thing, the most difficult thing was wrestling in practice, because you were wrestling against people who were city and state champions.
Speaker 1: Champs, right.
Speaker 2: And you had to, you had to practice against, against these people, which supposedly made you better.  But you also got your butt kicked a lot, at least I did, you know, 'cause, I mean it's--
Speaker 1: On a regular basis?
Speaker 2: --not, it's not like I was a great, a great wrestler.  I was just doing something; I just wanted to do something.  Cause I said, I have to get an athletic letter before I get out of here.  And so that was my, that was my sole focus.
Speaker 1: To get your "T?"
Speaker 2: To get my "T," right.
Speaker 1: What are your school colors?
Speaker 2: Blue and gold.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you did, you got your "T" though, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I got my "T."  And you know, I was able to put it on my senior sweater, which was a big deal because--
Speaker 1: That's so cute.
Speaker 2: --what I didn't know, I mean I, I, you know, I, I wasn't, I wasn't a socially advanced kid, but in, but I found out that girls, you know, girls from the other schools, they, that they really liked Tilden guys.  And so--
Speaker 1: Ah.
Speaker 2: --they wanted to wear that sweater, you know.
Speaker 1: So that's, that's a very important in attracting--
Speaker 2: And so it, it served as a, as a, as a nice entree.
Speaker 1: That is nice, that is nice--
Story_ID: 111422
Speaker 1: So, now in high school [Tilden Career Community Academy High School in Chicago, Illinois], are there any teachers that stand out in your memory that were helpful or, or encouraged you?
Speaker 2: Not particularly.  There was one teacher that I had a great relationship with, a shop teacher, and, and I ended up staying in his, in his class for two years.  But I stayed there as a shop assistant.  It wasn't 'cause I couldn't get out.  But he made me a shop assistant, but he was, he was--it was a machine shop class, and he was actually encouraging me to get a job at one of the machine shops around the school or around the city [Chicago, Illinois] or be a tool and die maker or something like that.
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: But fortunately, I, I didn't do that.
Speaker 1: Yes, I was just gonna ask you, at this time, what did you think you, you wanted to do as, as a young adult?  Were you thinking about college?  I mean had any, did any of your sisters go to college or--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: And, and your--
Speaker 2: Nobody in my family had ever been to college--
Speaker 1: To college.
Speaker 2: --before me.
Story_ID: 111423
Speaker 1: And now wait, what did your father [Eugene Morris, Sr.] do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well, my father did some interesting things.  In, in the latter part of, of his life, we owned, we owned some restaurants--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --not multiple restaurants, one at a time, but we owned them in different locations.  I would say from, from the mid-fifties [1950s] to the, the late sixties [1960s] we had a restaurant, and--
Speaker 1: What was it called?
Speaker 2: It had several different names.  One, the first one was called Toppers Inn [ph.].
Speaker 1: Where was it?
Speaker 2: And it was on 18th and Wabash [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: It was right, right underneath the el. [Chicago Transit Authority in Chicago, Illinois]  It was on, on 18th Street between Wabash and State, and then it moved around.  One time it moved around the corner on, in the 1800 block on Wabash, and then it moved across the street to the 1700 block on, on Wabash, 'cause they wanted a larger space.  We were doing reasonably well customer-wise.  And then, and, and at the time, I, I worked in the restaurants a lot.  I mean I spent time, I did everything from sweep the floors, wash the dishes, cook short orders, serve tables, and it-- that's kind of where I learned a lot about food and cooking.  And I was never really--
Speaker 1: All right--
Speaker 2: --intimidated to be in the kitchen because I kind of grew up doing that.
Speaker 1: You had, you had always been there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Story_ID: 111424
Speaker 1: So you definitely have a, a model of an, of an entrepreneur, but not necessarily encouraged by anyone at high school [Tilden Career Community Academy High School in Chicago, Illinois] pursue it an, an academic path.  So--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --what were you--where were--you're at this cross was--where did you feel--
Speaker 2: Well, I, I kind of thought that I wanted to do something in, in the technical area, maybe an engineer.  And I was taking, as I said, it was a good school, so I mean I took chemistry and physics and, and you know, all the math, algebra and all those things.  And I thought, I really did think that I was gonna be an engineer.  My friends were all traveling that same path.  They wanted to be engineers, so I thought that's what I wanted to do too.
Speaker 1: So, now in the fifties [1950s]--yeah, I guess--did, did you have to take--
Speaker 2: Like an ACT or something?
Speaker 1: Right, the SAT or something like that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, we did do--you know and I can't remember what it was, but I remember that we went to--we took it, in fact, I remember taking two tests.  I remember taking something at, at the University of Illinois [at Navy Pier in Chicago, Illinois], which was, this was before Circle Campus.  It was the Pier; they had a--
Speaker 1: Oh, right.
Speaker 2: --a campus at Navy Pier.  And I remember taking a, a test there, and I remember going to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and, and taking a test there.  So I always, I tested well.  I just, some reason in the, in the early stages in high school, I kind of lost my way.  I, I don't know what, I can't figure it out today; I don't what I was doing or what I was thinking about, but I wasn't very focused on school.  You know, I was--I did enough to get by.
Speaker 1: Right.  Did, did you have--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: --I mean was your mind just elsewhere, or you just kind of, is it because you weren't getting that encouragement in high school like everyone else gets?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know.  I just, I just wasn't focused.  I don't think I can blame anybody but myself.  I mean I just didn't really apply myself to the full extent of my ability.  And it--my wakeup call came after my, my junior year.  The end of my junior they posted, they started posting the class rankings.
Speaker 1: Ah.
Speaker 2: But they did it in a very interesting way.  They posted them fifty at a time.  So, one day, they posted the first fifty.  And I had a good friend, who I hung out with in, in, in, in high school, and I (unclear) never forget this: he was number thirty-six.  So, you know, of course I didn't, I hadn't shown up.  So, they posted the next fifty, and I went and I looked, and I wasn't on there.  And this, this was happening--I, I can't remember exactly how much time they took, a day or two in between.  So finally, they had--our class was about 400 people.  So, they got to 200, and--
Speaker 1: Still no Eugene Morris?
Speaker 2: --still no Eugene Morris.  And I was really embarrassed, because I said come on, you know, you're not this stupid.  Finally, they, I think when they got up, about 250 or 300 or something, then my name came up.  And I said you know, I can do better than this.  I will do better than this.  And that, that really motivated me, so I, in my senior year, I was, I was on the honor roll, simply because I just applied myself.
Speaker 1: Imagine that.
Speaker 2: And I was barely able to sneak into the top half, but with that big spurt at the, at the end.
Story_ID: 111425
Speaker 1: So, now here, you're finally, you know, putting pedal to the metal, now what do you wanna do?  Are, I mean are, you wanna gonna to college?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm. I'm still thinking, yeah, I'm going.  I, I decided, I went to, to the city college [City Colleges of Chicago, Illinois].  They were junior colleges then.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh yes, what you--no, I know you said city college, but which, which one, 'cause I know there's (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, I went to a bunch of them.
Speaker 1: --Wilson (laughter)--
Speaker 2: But I, I started at, at what was then Wilson Junior College--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which--
Speaker 1: Is now Harold Washington I think.  No--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, it's, it's, it's, it's on 67th and--
Speaker 1: Kennedy-King.
Speaker 2: Kennedy-King, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's it.  So you started Wilson.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Then, where did you after that?
Speaker 2: Well, I was in and out of there, 'cause I, I was, again, I don't know.  I went into another malaise, and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause 1956 to '60 [1960]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was just, I was just kind of there.  I was in and out of school.  I dropped out a couple of times.
Speaker 1: Now what were your parents [Willie Mae Mitchell Morris and Eugene Morris, Sr.] saying about this?
Speaker 2: They were telling me that I could do better, you know.  And I was telling them that I would.
Speaker 1: One of these days.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I still wasn't really, really applying myself.  And part, but part of it was that I was, I think I was pursuing the wrong path because I was going down this engineering path, which as I, you know, I eventually discovered wasn't really my strong suit, you know.  I was really struggling with--in, in, in, in college when we got to, in advance math classes, like descriptive geometry and calculus and all those things, it was--
Speaker 1: Eek.
Speaker 2: --it was not pleasant for me.  But, you know, the oth--on the other side of the equation, I, I, I did okay, but it, it, it just wasn't working out real well for me.  But I was determined.  I still, it still didn't occur to me: well, maybe you ought to change and do something else.  But I didn't think like that, 'cause all, all my friends, they were engineers, and I didn't think they were any smarter than I was.  So, I said well, eventually it'll click.
Speaker 1: So, now 1960 comes along, and you are working in the post office.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I was working there, I was working there part-time and still kind of in and out of school.  I mean I was going to, I took some classes at, at--what was it--Olive--(unclear)--I don't know if it was Olive-Harvey [College, part of the City Colleges of Chicago, in Chicago, Illinois] then.
Speaker 1: Harvey, okay.
Speaker 2: But I went to a technical school for a while.  And I was, I thought well, maybe, if I'm not gonna be an engineer, maybe I'll be an electronics technician.  It was called Chicago Tech, that's what it was.  I went there for a while.  So I was just kind of bouncing around aimlessly, and this continued into 1962.
Story_ID: 111426
Speaker 1: When you went to the [U.S.] Army?  Were you--
Speaker 2: And then one day--
Speaker 1: --drafted?
Speaker 2: I got, yeah, I was drafted.  Although there was a little story behind that too, just that--
Speaker 1: Oh, oh, tell us.
Speaker 2: They had actually started to send me, I, I would get, I remember I got a letter from the Selective Service early in 1962 or late 1961.  And as you said, I was working at the post office, so I didn't know what was in it.  So I didn't open it.  I took it to work.  And I probably shouldn't say this 'cause maybe, I'm sure--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Come and get you (laughter)--
Speaker 2: --the statute of lim--I'm sure the statute of limitations have run out by now since it was forty years ago.
Speaker 1: I think so.
Speaker 2: But, but I took it to work, and I marked it as addressee unknown, and I sent it back.  So, they sent me, they sent me three or four, you know, in over a period of months they sent me--you know, I would periodically get another letter, and I would do the same thing.  So one day, this was in--I'll never forget this.  This is October 18th.  I remember this vivid, vividly.  It was October 18th, 1962.  I came home early because my friend, the guy I mentioned earlier who was in the top of his number thirty-six in the class.  We were gonna drive to Washington, D.C., to Howard University's Homecoming, and so I was there.  I was at home.
Speaker 1: Which is lots of fun.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was at home, I'm all excited, you know, getting ready to pack, and the phone rang.  And it was a woman, and she said, "Eugene?"  I said "Yeah."  She said, "Eugene Morris?"  I said "Yes, who is this?"  And she said this is Mrs. so and so from the Selective Service Board.  And I thought oh, my God.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) No.
Speaker 2: And she said you know, "Do you still live at 5413 Ellis?"  And I said "Yes."  And she said, "Well, we've been sending you these letters, and they've been coming back marked addressee unknown."  And I was like, "Really?  I don't know how that happened."  And so she said well, we're gonna send you out another one.  And I went to homecoming, and I came back that Monday night.  And I had a letter telling me to report on November 5, 1962.  So I was caught, and away--
Speaker 1: But you had--
Speaker 2: --I went.
Speaker 1: --but you had done so well avoiding.  That's really an awesome--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --story (laughter).
Speaker 2: But, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, at least you could, you had to, you had a chance to enjoy Howard's Homecoming.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did, you know.  It's a nice little, and, and a nice little farewell party for me.
Speaker 1: To civilian life.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So where were you initially--where'd you do your basic training--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: I, I went to Fort Knox, Kentucky.  And then from there, I, I went--because I went in November, I came home during Christmas, right in the middle of basic training.  And I went back and finished basic, and then they sent me to Fort Jackson, South Carolina [Columbia, South Carolina].  While I was in, while I was at Fort Knox, I was thinking about--I passed the test for, for, for officer can--Officers Candidate School.  And so I thought well, maybe it'll be a good idea for me to do this.  But the Army being the Army, they kept, you know, it was so much bureaucracy, and there's so much--just kept dragging this thing out and dragging this thing out, and by the time I finished basic training, they were still sending me through all these tests.  And so when I got to, to my next duty station, which was in Fort Jackson, South Carolina, and I was being trained as a radio operation.  I'd send and receive Morse code and things like that.  And I--they told me that my tests, all the tests I took at Fort Knox, that I would have to take them all over again, even--and I said "Well, why?  I mean this is the same Army," I mean.  But, but anyway, they wanted me to do this all over again, so I said the hell with this, I'm not doing this again, you know, because I, I, I just wanted to--I thought, if I have to spend an extra six months in, in an Army as an, as an officer, it would be worth it, rather than spending two years as an enlisted man.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, when it looked like that was gonna drag the process out even more, I thought nah, nah, it's not, the return is not good enough.
Speaker 1: I'll just--
Speaker 2: So, so I just dropped that idea, and I would finish, I finished school down there.
Story_ID: 111427
Speaker 1: And they [the U.S. Army] sent me overseas to Germany, which really turned out to be one of the best things that ever happened to me.
Speaker 2: Really?  What--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --what are some of the things that you think impacted you--
Speaker 1: Well, what happened was--
Speaker 2: --most?
Speaker 1: --as I said, they trained me as a radio operation, so you know, I could do my did-da-da-did-it-who did-it-da-da-did-it, you know, and do my little Morse code thing, and I, I could do that pretty well.  But when I got there, my company commander, who was a captain, and who was an African American, he said "Well, we don't need any radio operators."  'Cause they had sent two of us there.  He said we--you know, "I got two of you and I don't even need one of you, so--" They looked at my records, and they said "Well, I, I see, I see you've been to college, and you can type.  Why don't you be the company clerk?"  And I said, "Well, I really don't wanna do that."  And he said, "Well, I think it would be a really good idea if you did that."  Then I--and I was like "Yeah, but I don't think I would like that."  And he said, "I don't think you understood what I said."  Then I remembered where I was--
Speaker 2: In the Army.
Speaker 1: --that I'm in the Army.  It's not like, this, this is not negotiable.  So, I ended up being a company clerk, and it started out horribly.
Speaker 2: Why?
Speaker 1: Well, it was a whole bunch of crazy stuff happened right off the bat.
Speaker 2: Like what?
Speaker 1: Well, first a guy who we were, when I got there we were--they were already working on paperwork to try to get him out of the, out of the Army.
Speaker 2: Like drum him out?
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause he was, he was kind of acting up.  And he, he got drunk one night in a jeep and crashed and killed himself in a jeep.
Speaker 2: Good Lord.
Speaker 1: You know, so, it was a lot of work and stuff (unclear), so.  And I, I was a fair typist; I wasn't great.  It was struggle, you know, but I could get it done, but it was, it was tough.  So, I had to type up all this stuff and get that out of the way.  The very next week another--he was a sergeant who had his wife and family, and they lived off post.  She committed suicide.
Speaker 2: Oh, geez!
Speaker 1: And so, again, more stuff, more paperwork investigations and all this.  So, you know, this goes on for a couple of weeks.  And, and, and my, my commander, he was, he was--he wanted to be a major, so everything with him was serious life and death.  So he didn't think anything about keeping me up all night, working me fifteen hours or whatever.  So I thought man, I don't wanna do this.  Then the mother of all things happened.  I was in a company that we serviced light planes and helicopters.  And one night a guy, another guy who we were trying to get out, who had, he had been in the Army for 15, 20 years.  And he had been as high as an E7, and they had busted him all the way down to an E2.  He was a crew chief, which meant he was in charge of, of the crews who worked on the planes.  Well, he took a plane.
Speaker 2: Oh no.
Speaker 1: But he didn't--and, and nobody knew the plane was missing, and they didn't find out until the next day.  But somehow, he managed to get in a plane, start it out--it was a little two-engine plane, but he started it up, taxied away from a guarded airfield, and nobody knew it.  So--
Speaker 2: Not good.
Speaker 1: No.  Well, well, they found him and the plane the next day.  He had crashed it in the woods and killed himself.  So I thought man, it's more people dying around here than in combat.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: But the amount of paperwork it took was unbelievable, 'cause we had it, we had to talk all these depositions from the people who were on guard duty so they could try to explain--
Speaker 2: How they let--
Speaker 1: "Now help me with this.  Now you were on guard duty, right?  You were walking the airfield, and somebody started the engine, taxied for several hundred yards down the runway, took off, and nobody knew it, right?"
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, you know, and they were coming up with all kind of stories.  The real story was everybody was asleep.  That's what had happened.
Speaker 2: The real story.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I, I had walked guard duty a couple of nights before, and I walked one, one time and nobody else came to wake me up.  So, you know--
Speaker 2: That was that.
Speaker 1: --'cause you, you know, you'd walk four hours on and four hours off.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So after I did my first four hours, I went back to sleep and wait, to wait for somebody to come pick me up from my second, and nobody came.  So--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --everybody, I knew everybody was asleep.
Story_ID: 111814
Speaker 1: But any particular sights, sounds, and smells from your, your youth that spring to mind, like soot or food, or like your mom cooking something?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I mean my, my mother [Willie Mae Mitchell Morris] was, she was a wonderful cook.  And I really remember, especially when we lived in this, in the, in the house, and so I had to be very young, but I remember a, around the holidays when she would cook.  And I, apparently I was around the kitchen somewhere, and, and I just remember how the house would smell.  And I remember how she would, when she made cakes, she would always make a sample.  She'd just make a little piece or thing that she would put in there just to see how the cake was.  And I would always hang around so I could get, you know, get, get part of that sample.  I mean it was a very, very simple time, you know, but I really, I really re--remember that.
Speaker 1: Who was the, the best cook in your family, your mom or your father [Eugene Morris, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother did most of the cooking.  But one of the things my father did extremely well is he made biscuits, homemade biscuits, and that was one of the things that he could do.  My mother made great biscuits, but my father's biscuits were outstanding.
Speaker 1: Do you have the recipe?
Speaker 2: Unfortunately, I don't.  I'm still trying to make biscuits.  I, I still work at it.  I still can't, I can't come close.  It drives me nuts.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: You know, I, I hit about, about one out of five times I get it right.
Speaker 1: Just--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But all these recipes, I mean everybody died with them.  I mean my, my mother, then my, my youngest sister [Doris Porter], she developed into a great cook, which was a shock to everybody because she couldn't cook a lick.  But she turned out to be a fantastic cook, but she kind of died suddenly.  I mean I just never thought that that would, I would had to--I would had--I was gonna have to think about that with her.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: But she was, she was a great cook.
Speaker 1: What about your oldest sister, Mary [Lawrence]?
Speaker 2: Well, she's, she's also a good cook.  She developed into, in, in, into a pretty good cook.  I don't think she could hang with my mother or Doris, but I mean I never hesitated to go to her house for dinner.
Speaker 1: Being the smart brother.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and my middle sister [Ora Jeffries], the, the one who died young, she was also a very, very good cook, and she really--'cause she was always a housewife.  She never really worked.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She just always stayed at home.  She just loved to stay home, take care of house, and cook dinner.  I used to love to go to her house because she always had lots of food.  I mean, you know, because when I grew up, at first we didn't have a refrigerator.  We still had iceboxes.
Speaker 1: Oh, with like, with the iceman--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you have to go--yeah.  So, my sister was the first person to have a refrigerator, and she always had, it was always full of food.  I mean you could always go there and find all kind of stuff in it, and that--
Speaker 1: So you just knock on the door and--
Speaker 2: --and that, that was just fascinating to me, to go--and, and of course, refrigerators are light--lot bigger than iceboxes, 'cause you couldn't, you couldn't put a lot of stuff in an icebox.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  Like how long would a, a chunk of ice last anyway?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know.  It must have, it probably, you could probably--we would normally buy fifty pounds.  A typical icebox held fifty pounds.  And I think it would probably last two or three days, maybe two days.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then you, you have a little sign you could put in the window.  It was a rec--kind of rectangular, not quite square, but it had 25, 50, 75, 100, so depending on what you wanted, you would put it in the window and turn it that way.
Speaker 1: Oh, so the iceman would know.
Speaker 2: And so the iceman, he could look up at the window.  And so just in case, you know, you didn't see him.  I mean he could see that you wanted some ice, and he would just bring it up.
Speaker 1: That is so cool.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But no, they had--
Speaker 1: Life was simpler than--
Speaker 2: --icemen, milkmen, all that stuff.
Speaker 1: I do remember milkmen.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I do remember that.
Story_ID: 111815
Speaker 1: So we're gonna leap back to you in six--between '62 [1962] and '65 [1965].  And I wanted to ask you about life in, during basic training in the South.  And I mean this is during the, the volatile civil rights era in the South and particularly you're in South Carolina [Fort Jackson in Columbus, South Carolina] and Kentucky [Fort Knox, Kentucky].  Do you recall any particular incidents, we were talking about off camera?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, you know, in Kentucky, I never, I never went off post one time.
Speaker 1: Oh, not once?
Speaker 2: I never left.  I mean the only time I left was, I, I left to come home for, for Christmas break, and I left to go to South Carolina.  Other than that, I, I didn't, I didn't leave 'cause I knew that there was nothing good gonna happen to me there.  I mean we, we only got one opportunity to go, to go into town anyway, and it was about two weeks--oh, this is in Kentucky--it was about two weeks before I was supposed to go home.  And I said well, why would I do that, 'cause I'm just gonna go there, get in trouble, spend all my money, and I'm gonna be home in two weeks.  I'll just hold out for two more weeks, and that's what I did.
Speaker 1: You can do it.
Speaker 2: But then when I went to South Carolina it was--I, I hated that place.  It was--
Speaker 1: Now where, yeah, where is--
Speaker 2: It's--
Speaker 1: --Fort Jackson?
Speaker 2: --Fort Jackson is right outside of Columbia, Columbia--
Speaker 1: Okay, the capital.
Speaker 2: --South Carolina.  And I was, you know, I was the only African American in my class.  And so a, a, a number of the guys in my class, we had all been in basic training together.  And so, I guess about four or five of us, we got a pass just for the day to go into town.  And we tried--of course, first place we headed, well let's go to a bar and have a drink, and they said well.  So we went, we went to this bar, and they wouldn't let me in.  And so we tried a couple of other times, they wouldn't me in.  They wouldn't let me in any bars, so then we tried--well, let's get something to eat, and they wouldn't let me in any restaurants.  We couldn't go to a movie.  The only place that we could get in, where, where I could go, was the USO [United Service Organizations].  And who wants to go to the USO and get some cookies and milk?  I mean I can get cookies and milk on the base.  So I told them, I said look, you guys go ahead.  I'll just go back to the base, so.
Speaker 1: Was that your first experience with that type of, of segregation and, and racism, I mean having grown up in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I had run into, I had run into a few things in, in the South, you know, when I was younger, when, when we would go South.  But I guess the fact that I was in uniform and the fact that I knew that at any time that I could be called upon to die for this country, and yet there were these people who I might end up dying for who hated me so much, you know, just because my skin color, that they wouldn't even let me in their establishment to have a drink.  And that was like wow, man, this is, this is really deep.
Speaker 1: So, yeah, so profound and that's--I can't say it any better than you just did.
Speaker 2: You know, it's like man.
Story_ID: 111816
Speaker 1: So, now you're, you're stationed in Germany at, at Coleman?
Speaker 2: Coleman Barracks [Coleman Army Airfield in Sandhofen, Mannheim, Germany], yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in, in--
Speaker 1: In Sandhofen--
Speaker 2: Germany, Sandhofen, Germany.
Speaker 1: And what we were saying before the, the tape break, you were discussing the insane life of a company clerk--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --where half of your--other soldiers are committing suicide in really bizarre ways.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, after I think you, you mentioned the--
Speaker 2: Well, after the, after the third person, I went to the company commander and I said, "Sir, I would really like to work somewhere else."  And he said, "We really like your work, and, and I want you to stay," which meant I was gonna stay 'cause it wasn't like he, you know, it wasn't like I could quit.
Speaker 1: Wasn't negotiable.
Speaker 2: So, so I, I did stay, and it turned out to be the best thing that ever happened to me, because I found out--well, a couple of, couple of reasons: one, I didn't realize at the, at that time that the company, a company clerk's job is one of the best you could have, because as company clerk, I mean you're like the executive assistant to the company commander, and everything comes through the company clerk.  Company clerk knows everything.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And nobody in their right mind messes around with the company clerk, even the officers don't mess around with the company clerk, because you have access to all their records.  You know, things come, correspondence comes to you before it comes to them.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: You know, I mean you, you have access to the company commander, so nobody messes with the company clerk.  The company clerk usually doesn't have guard duty; you don't have KP [kitchen patrol]; you don't have any of that stuff.  But you control--I controlled the duty roster, you know, who, who went on KP, who went on guard duty, all those things.  The--when you want, when somebody wanted a pass, who do they submitted it to?  They submit it to the company clerk first.  So we had a quota; only so many people go on pass at any given time.  So people would say "Hey, man, how's the pass situation look?"  I'd say "Oh, it looks terrible.  Everybody's trying to get a pass this weekend."  "Come on, man, let me buy you a drink," you know.  So--
Speaker 1: Suddenly things change.
Speaker 2: So, so, yeah--
Story_ID: 111817
Speaker 1: So, so people did not fool around with you 'cause you could do some things, and, and I did do some things to some people who got on, on the wrong side of me, you know.
Speaker 2: Like what?  Tell me one anecdote.
Speaker 1: Well, I'll tell you a, a, a small one.  A--one of the sergeants, he came to me and he wanted me to, he wanted to make a, a change in his bond deduction.  You know, 'cause everybody takes a savings bond.  It's important that the company is a hundred percent parcit--participation.  So he wanted to change it.  He wanted to, to change the--he had some huge deduction.  It was like two or three hundred dollars a month, and he wanted to take it down to fifty.  And so he said, "I need you to do this."  And I said "well, is it all right if I do it tomorrow? 'Cause," I said, "I'm, I'm getting ready to go to basketball practice."  And he said "No, I want you to do it now."  And I said but "Serg, I can do it tomorrow.  It'll be fine, you know, it, it'll still take effect at the same time."  "I don't care about your basketball practice.  I told you to do it now."
Speaker 2: Power hungry.
Speaker 1: I said, "Okay, sir."  I, I didn't have to call him sir, but I was being sarcastic.  So, I sat there and I typed out all the information, and I gave him his copy.  And I had to have a copy for us, and a copy for battalion. You had to send one to battalion headquarters because that's the way it would, that's where it would take effect.  So, when he left, I took the battalion copy, and I tore it up.  And so, when payday came, he comes running there and he said, "I thought you, you were supposed to change my bond."  I said, "I did."  He said, "Well, how come it didn't take, it didn't happen?"  I said, "I don't know.  I guess those guys at battalion messed up again," you know.  And I said it in a way, and I looked right at him, and I said it in a way that he knew I had done something.
Speaker 2: But he couldn't prove it.
Speaker 1: But he couldn't prove it, you know.
Speaker 2: But I bet you he was nice to you--
Speaker 1: But, but that never happened again, you know.
Speaker 2: If you need to go to basketball practice.
Speaker 1: You know, or whatever.  You know, so, I mean, but there were just all kinds of things that you could do.  You could put people on.  You know, you could accelerate the number of times that they went on guard duty, you know, or you could, if, if, if, even if the pass quota wasn't full, you could tell 'em it was.
Speaker 2: Because--
Speaker 1: They, they wouldn't have any way of finding that out.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Or, if it was full, and one of my friends wanted to, wanted a pass and somebody I didn't like was already on the list, I could take them off and put them on, you know.  So what I learned was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was gonna say what did you learn?
Speaker 1: I learned from that--and I tell my assistant that, I mean that was one of the first things I told her when I interviewed her.  I said, "You know, power does not always come with rank and position.  Power can come in some different places."  And I said in, "In effect, at one time, I had your job."  You know, when I was working--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --for him, I was essentially doing what she does.  So, it put me, even though I had no rank, I was an E-4, the people, you know, most of the people I dealt with were E-7s and E-8s and officers, but I had a lot of power--
Speaker 2: Oh, heck yeah.
Speaker 1: --a lot of power, and the same thing with her.  Because she works for me, that gives her a certain amount of power--
Speaker 2: 'Cause--
Speaker 1: --because she knows things that other people don't know--
Speaker 2: And control the flow of information.
Speaker 1: That's right, she can control who sees and who doesn't.  I mean it's all kinds of things that she can do.  And so I learned a lot about power, so when I came out, you know, I, I came back, I came back a very different person for a lot of reasons.  I got to travel all over Europe, you know.  I, I mean I took the time to do it, 'cause being in Germany, I mean you're right there.  I mean you're--
Speaker 2: France--
Speaker 1: --an eight-hour train ride from anywhere, London [England], I mean, France, Italy, everywhere.  So you could take trips for virtually nothing, and so I, I went all over, all over Europe.
Story_ID: 111818
Speaker 1: So then did you, did you remain stationed in Germany for the duration of your service?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: So you never had to go to Vietnam?
Speaker 2: No, in fact, I ended up, what I did is, my enlistment was supposed to be up in November of '64 [1964], 'cause I was supposed to serve a two-year term.  But I was having such a good time that I decided to extend my enlistment for another six months, 'cause I wasn't ready to come home, just so I could travel around Europe some more, 'cause I was having a good time.  I was also engaged in a little--few businesses.
Speaker 1: Your entrepreneurial spirit--
Speaker 2: --that were kind of, well one of them was blatantly illegal.  Well, now that I--yeah, yeah, it was blatantly illegal.  One of them was just kind of quasi, it was kind of marginal.
Speaker 1: Were you meeting the needs of, of, of your market?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, then--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.  I was also, I was also lending money at a rather usurious rate.
Speaker 1: What was it?
Speaker 2: But not--I, I didn't set the rate now.  Make--let me make that clear.  I didn't set the rate.  The rate was set when I got in.  I kind of stumbled backwards into this business, because I was all--I always took care of money.  I mean I never spent my money foolishly.  And so a couple of times people--on day a guy came to me and said "Lend me ten dollars," and I said, "No."  And he said, "I'll give you fifteen back on payday."  Well, payday was about three days away.  So I'm like, wait a minute, that's fifty percent in three days.  So, I said sure.  And again, I, I wasn't worried about him paying me 'cause I'm the company clerk.
Speaker 1: Right, I'm forgetting.
Speaker 2: So he's not--he can't go anywhere.  I mean I know, I know he's not going to transfer out without my knowing it, you know, so I, I did.  So the following, you know, next month, you know, he came back, then some of his friends came back.  So pretty soon, I was lending out hundreds of dollars a month, at this--and I, I, I felt badly about it, except that they--I mean I was performing a service, because they really needed it, and they--
Speaker 1: They came to you--
Speaker 2: --they did--they weren't mad.  You know, that's because if they--if, if I told them no, they would probably try to find somebody who would do the same thing.  So, I thought well, okay.
Speaker 1: So, again, your, your entrepreneurial spirit rises.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 111819
Speaker 1: Now [1965], but it's time to go home.  You're back at the post office.  So, now how was that transition for you from [U.S.] Army life and, and having that, that great unchecked raw power then--
Speaker 2: Well, it was startling--
Speaker 1: I'm kidding about that.
Speaker 2: My first week back, and I went back to, you know, the same job, same place, and I thought--you know, I remember when I got my first paycheck.  And I thought well, now I gotta wait another two weeks before I get paid again, 'cause I was accustomed to getting money all the time, you know.  And--
Speaker 1: From all your businesses?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and, and I was, I was thinking, you know, last month, two months ago, I mean I was walking up and down the Champs-Elysees [Paris, France] and, and Piccadilly Circus [London, England], and you know, I'm in Rome, I mean I'm--and now I'm back here.  This is not gonna work.  There is no way this is gonna work.
Speaker 1: So did that help focus you when you, you had that feeling, because no more--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I thought, I have to go back to school, you know, because I can't--you know, I've tasted a life that I liked, and I'm not ready to give this up.  So I thought okay, well, what are you gonna do?  Well, one of the things that being a company clerk helped me with is that I found I was much better at administrative things than I was at technical things.  So I said I'm gonna go back to school, but this time I'm gonna major in business administration.
Speaker 1: The ah-ha moment.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so that's what I did.  But I had to go back to, I started back, I went back to junior college again to kinda, for, for a, a year, just to kind of pay for some of my past sins, great my grade point average up, and so I could apply to a four-year institution.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then you went, you went to Roosevelt [University in Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was at--I wanted to go to the University of Illinois at, at the Circle campus [University of Illinois at Chicago, Illinois], but they weren't very interested in me.  They were giving me a hard time.  And one of the teachers I had at, at Wilson [Junior College, now Kennedy-King College, part of the City Colleges of Chicago in Chicago, Illinois] said well, why don't you go to Roosevelt?  And she really kind of sold me.  And, and she, she put me in contact with someone there, and so I ended up applying there.
Speaker 1: And so you graduated from there [in 1969] with a B.A. in, in what, business or--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --business administration, yeah.  But, again, I had another, it was another situation where I ran into somebody, which I seem to always do, who changes the course of my life.
Speaker 1: Now why do you think that is?  How do you thing that, I mean--
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I mean I've, I've--it's, it's always given me a feeling of confidence.  You know, now, at this point in my life, I would give credit to God.  At that point, I wasn't, because I wasn't thinking in that way.  I, I thought of myself not as being blessed, but being lucky and being in the right place at the right time.
Speaker 1: But now you, you take on a more ecclesiastical--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --view on it?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: You know--
Story_ID: 111820
Speaker 1: That was one thing that I, I meant to ask earlier.  I know that you, you lived in several different neighborhoods here in the city [Chicago, Illinois], but did your family go to church a lot, or were you a churchgoing family?
Speaker 2: Not really.  My mother [Willie Mae Mitchell Morris], my mother was, was very religious.  She didn't go to church a, a lot, oddly enough.  I'm not sure why.  But, I mean she read the Bible all the time.  She always made me go, but she--
Speaker 1: But she didn't (laughter)?
Speaker 2: --didn't go.  No, she didn't go.
Speaker 1: What, what denomination?
Speaker 2: Baptist.
Speaker 1: Baptist, okay.
Story_ID: 111821
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so leaving back, so you finished Roosevelt [University in Chicago, Illinois] in '69 [1969], but you also started, you started interning, what, at Foote Cone [Foote, Cone and Belding]--
Speaker 2: Well, well, I was doing a couple of things at the same time.  I mean I, when I, when I got my undergraduate degree and then I had--while I was in my last year, I had da--had done an internship, a summer internship, at, at Foote Cone.  And this happened because my--I had to take my first advertising course in my senior year, and the professor who taught it was in charge of the internship at Foote Cone.
Speaker 1: Ah.
Speaker 2: And by this time I was a very serious student.  And he had a, he had this midterm that was known throughout the school, throughout the business school as being a killer test.  And so I took it, and I got a 98.  And he said "Hey, let me talk to you.  Who are you?"
Speaker 1: (Laughter) "I've never see you before."
Speaker 2: You know, I mean, and so I talk and I told him that I was working full time at the post office and all--(unclear)--"Why you working full time and getting 98 some on, on my tests" and all that stuff, you know?  And, and he, he offered me an internship.
Speaker 1: Because how old are you at this point?
Speaker 2: At this time, I was like twenty-eight.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I said "Well, one, I'm not interesting in advertising; and two, I already have a job."  I mean, I work at the post office.  And he thought that didn't make a lot of sense, that I would turn down a job at--
Speaker 1: Top advertising agency.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But I explained to him, well, okay, so I take this internship, which is good for the summer.  Well, I'm not graduating until February.  So that means I have to live three or four months--
Speaker 1: Oh, with no job.
Speaker 2: --with no job.  So that's not gonna work.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you're a grown man.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And so, as it turned out, I ended--this is a, it was kind of a long story, but he, he did get me to go for the interview.  I didn't want it; I, I turned it down the first time.  He made me go back a second time, talk to somebody else, and finally I ended up saying okay.  And I ended up working at Foote Cone, keeping my job at the post office, going to summer school, and I was the treasurer of the graduating class.  So I was in, so I was busy--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --busy.
Speaker 1: --but it, it sounds perfectly fitting in, in everything else that you've done.  You, you have many irons--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the fire.
Story_ID: 111822
Speaker 1: So, now you were at Foote Cone [Foote, Cone and Belding] for like six years.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: And you moved--did you, you ended up as an account exec [executive] or was--
Speaker 2: No, when I went, when I went there, I went there as--when, when, when my internship, I worked as a media buyer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so when I came back the following year to work full time, I went to the media department, but I went into media research, which again turned out to be something that was very, very good for me.
Speaker 1: Because?
Speaker 2: Because I learned so much more about media, working in media research than I ever would have working as a buyer, because a buyer, you only learn so much.  You work in a very narrow channel.  But working in media research, I learned about all parts of media, and I got to see the big picture; I got to see the strategy behind it.  So it, it, it was a lot more beneficial for me to, to work in that area.
Speaker 1: So now, at the same time that you're at Foote, Cone, you are also in the M.B.A. [Master of Business Administration] program at Roosevelt [University in Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm
Speaker 1: (Laughter)  When did you actually eat or sleep or--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: You do any of those things?
Speaker 2: Well, it was, it was, it was a real sacrifice, because you know, I'm not--I mean I'm still basically, kind of a young man.  But 28, that's not like being 19.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, all my friends are out of school, you know, they got jobs.
Speaker 1: And married.
Speaker 2: They're partying.  They're doing all this stuff, and they're calling, saying hey, man, let's hang; let's do this and let's do that, and it's like, I can't.
Speaker 1: I'm at work, at school.
Speaker 2: So, you know, I'm, I'm trying to do all this stuff, and it was, it, it, it took a lot of discipline for me to, to do that, to, you know--there were also a lot of women around in those days, you know, and there was a lot of women at the agency.  And they were like well, come on, let's go out, let's do this.  I'm like, can't.
Speaker 1: Because--now, I mean, so, you know, after those early years of, of not being focused, now you're, you're extremely focused, so much so that--and did you feel, in looking back now did you feel that, like you'd sacrificed your, your social life and that kind of social growth, I'm sure and other people are getting married and having children?
Speaker 2: Well, I felt like I guess it was my punishment for not doing it earlier when I could have, you know.  I mean I, I didn't, I put myself in this position.  I mean nobody else did it but me.  I didn't have to do that, but I did it 'cause I, because I wasn't focused, you know.  And I remember I was, I was dating a woman who I was just crazy about.  And she was already out of school.  She had a master's, and she was teaching school.  And I remember one day, because I worked, I worked a lot of odd hours, but I usually works, I worked seven days a week when I was, when I was--before, before I, I graduated I, I worked seven days a week.  'Cause some nights I only worked like five hours, but it totaled up to forty hours at the end of the week.  And I remember one Saturday I wanted to, I'd planned to, to, to spend the weekend with her.  And I remember she had stopped by my house, 'cause I was living with my parents [Willie Mae Mitchell Morris and Eugene Morris, Sr.].  And when I--when we left and I walked downstairs to her car, 'cause we were going in separate cars, and she saw that I had a book, and she said, "Where are you going with that book?"  And I said well, you know, I had finals on Monday, so I thought at some point, I need to--
Speaker 1: Do a little studying.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And she said, "You're not taking a book to my house."  She said "You're in school, I'm not."  And I said, "But I have finals."  She said, "It's you."  And I said well, I guess I won't be going to your house.  And I went back upstairs, and I was really angry and hurt because I thought, you know, this is supposed to be my woman, girlfriend, or whatever.  I haven't seen her all week, and I'm sacrificing, trying to get this degree so I can do better, and she's totally insensitive to that.
Speaker 1: And, and not supportive.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I said you'll regret that one day.  I was really mad.  I was, I was mad sad, I was mad and I was hurt, you know.  But I went back upstairs, and I focused on my book.
Story_ID: 110128
Speaker 1: Okay, now we left off at the last tape, oh yes, the, the non-understanding girlfriend who didn't realize that you--couldn't take in that you had to finish your education and get your M.B.A. [Master of Business Administraton], and, and she wasn't willing to--
Speaker 2: Well, I was working on my, I was working on my undergraduate degree then.
Speaker 1: Oh, that, that particular story, okay.  Well, that's really not understanding then.  I mean since she had a master's, so she had a very good idea what it, it took to get to that point.  Well, I guess you, you weren't with her very long then thereafter (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, no, we, we kind of hung around for, for a while.  I guess I, I wanted to prove to her that one, I was really gonna do this, and that two, she was gonna regret it.
Speaker 1: Oh, right, that's right, 'cause one day she is gonna regret it.
Story_ID: 110129
Speaker 1: So, I, I wanna put you in a larger picture of kind of what's happening in, in Chicago [Illinois] and, and the world.  '68 [1968], we have Democratic National Convention, which is at the, at the Hilton, the Conrad Hilton [Hilton Chicago in Chicago, Illinois], which is steps away from--
Speaker 2: Where I was.
Speaker 1: --Roosevelt [University in Chicago, Illinois].  I know it was in the summertime [August 26, 1968 through August 29, 1968], but were you in school at, at, in the summer or--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I was in school all the time.
Speaker 1: Well, what do you remember from, from, from that, that hot summer--
Speaker 2: You know, I, you know, I have thought about that because I don't remember as much as I would think I would remember about, you know.  I mean I don't re--I don't ever remember seeing anything--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Really?
Speaker 2: --you know.  I mean I remember seeing people, you know, going up and down the street, and you know, all these odd looking people all over the place.  But I never saw any of the altercations--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --or, or anything like that because by that time I was probably back at the post office working 'cause I worked in the evenings, although in '60 [1960]--let's see, '68 [1968], '68 [1968], I also would have been, 'cause '68 [1968] is when I went to, I, I worked at, at, at FCB [Foote, Cone and Belding] in '68 [1968].  So, I was working there--(unclear)--also--I mean I was working there during the day and then, but I was still working.  I was going to school a couple of evenings a week.  The week--the evenings I wasn't in school I was working at the post office.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I was some place all the time.
Speaker 1: And not--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So I was probably oblivious to everything but what was, what I was trying to do.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  So there's, there's a lot of--there's a revolution happening around you but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I'm just going doo-dee-doo-dee-doo, oh, man, I gotta get done.  It's time for me to work; now time for me to go to school; time for me to study; you know--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --you know, time to go to my second job.
Speaker 1: That's right, 'cause you're still doing all of these things.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know--
Story_ID: 110130
Speaker 1: I wanna jump back five years, '63 [1963], when you're in the service [U.S. Army] and President [John F.] Kennedy is killed.  But I, I know you're in Germany at the time, but what do you recall at that time, like how it impacted your personally and, and some of your fellow soldiers in the U.S. Army?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I remember that day vividly because one, when he came to Germany, he made that, the famous speech, "Ich bin ein Berliner," [on June 26, 1963] that I was planning to go, 'cause I really wanted to go.  And the guy was--but I didn't have a car, and the guy I was supposed to arrive with went off and left me.  So--
Speaker 1: Rotten guy.
Speaker 2: --I, I didn't, I didn't get a chance to go.
Speaker 1: But you were in, you were in Germany--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --though at the time.
Speaker 2: And, and I was really, of course I was really into him.  And I remember that night that I, I walked into the--we were having an inspection the next day, and I walked into the orderly room where a guy--'cause it was in the, there it was in the evening.  And I remember it was a, a sergeant on duty, and he said "Hey, Morris," he said, "You know everything."  He said "Who--if both the president and the vice president are killed, who takes over?"  And I said "Oh, I think the Speaker of the House."  But he didn't tell me why he was asking me that, and I hadn't heard it.  'Cause we were--
Speaker 1: No way.
Speaker 2: --preparing for an inspection, and so, you know, we didn't have any televisions in the barracks.  And so I went back and then it was only a few hours later that I heard that President Kennedy had been killed.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) What--
Speaker 2: And I was like, wow, I can't, I can't believe this idiot knew this, and he's sitting there like, he's asking me questions and not saying anything, not expressing anything.
Speaker 1: No emotion.
Speaker 2: No, nothing, yeah.
Speaker 1: Wow, wow, and you yeah, what an odd--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --way to--like, wow, the president was just killed.
Speaker 2: Yeah, or "Did you hear" or, you know, we were wondering--he's asking me a lot of questions about: well, you, you know all this stuff.
Speaker 1: The hierarchy--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --of, of, of succession.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And, and I was so, I was so shocked when I, you know, when I, when I found out, and you know, like most people, I mean stunned, and hurt, and everything.
Story_ID: 110131
Speaker 1: So, yeah, I mean, and '68 [1968] is a particularly volatile year because in June, Bobby Kennedy [Robert "Bobby" Kennedy]--or is it April--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]--
Speaker 1: --in April [April 4, 1968] and in June [June 6, 1968].
Speaker 2: --and in--
Speaker 1: --was Bobby Kennedy, then here is August [1968 Democratic National Convention in Chicago, Illinois].  So, what do you recall about those assassinations in '68 [1968] while you're still in the midst of, of all of your, your educational--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I mean I'm really wondering what's, I guess like everybody else, what is going on here, you know?  I mean what's, what's gonna happen?  'Cause you start to think that maybe there's really something going on that you don't really know about.  You know, we had Martin Luther King and, and Bobby Kennedy killed within a few months of each other.  It, it was kind of scary to, to wonder well, what's gonna happen next?  You know, who's next?  Is this the forerunner to some kind of revolution?  Who's doing this?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: What's gonna happen?  What is all this gonna end up?
Speaker 1: But at the same time, you're staying--
Speaker 2: But I'm, I'm, I'm still saying--
Speaker 1: --focused.
Speaker 2: --hey, I'm twenty-eight years old; I'm gettin' out of here; I'm, I'm gonna graduate; I'm moving on; I'm gonna get this done.
Story_ID: 110132
Speaker 1: So, so you, you finished Roosevelt [University in Chicago, Illinois] in '69 [1969]?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then, still while you're at FCB [Foote, Cone and Belding], do, that's when you enroll in the M.B.A. [Master of Business Administration] program at Roosevelt too?
Speaker 2: I was still that, and I was still, I was still working at the post office part time, 'cause I was only, I was only making $8,000 dollars.  That was my starting salary, it was $8,000 dollars.
Speaker 1: Now how much did a car cost then, to kind of put it in perspective for, for people?
Speaker 2: Well, let's see--
Speaker 1: Or a loaf of bread.
Speaker 2: I bought, I, I was paying--I moved out on my own, then I was paying for--I had a, a studio apartment, which was $111 dollars a month.
Speaker 1: That's what I pay for like gas and electric (laughter).
Speaker 2: You know, yeah.  And--
Speaker 1: Where, now where was your studio?
Speaker 2: It was on 49th and Drexel, 4901 Drexel [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Ah, okay.
Speaker 2: It was my first, first little bachelor apartment, had, had one of those beds that pull out of the wall--
Speaker 1: Oh, the Murphy bed.
Speaker 2: --you know, a Murphy bed, yeah, yeah, yep.
Speaker 1: That is awesome.
Speaker 2: And I had, I, I had a, at that time, I must have had, I had an Oldsmobile, a--
Speaker 1: How interesting.
Speaker 2: --because I had bought, when I, when I--another story, I got out, when I, when I was discharged, I had ordered a car while I was still in the service.  So, I got discharged in New York [New York City, New York], and I picked the car up, and I drove it home.  It was a--
Speaker 1: Nice.
Speaker 2: --it was a 1965 Chevy [Chevrolet] Impala, a 396 engine, four and a four.  It was hot.
Speaker 1: What color?
Speaker 2: It was white.
Speaker 1: What was the interior?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Very nice.
Speaker 2: So, I got home on Friday night, 'cause I, 'cause I actually stopped; I drove through Syracuse, New York, 'cause I used to have oh, a girlfriend up there.  And I went up there to, I was planning to stay there for the weekend.  But when I got there, I thought, man, I haven't been home in two years.  So I, I stayed, I spent one night there, and then I left, and I came home.  So I got home on Friday night, and that Saturday night, me and, and my friend, friend from high school, number, guy was number thirty-six--
Speaker 1: Number, number thirty-six (laughter) at Tilden [Tilden Career Community Academy High School in Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: --me, me, him, and--
Speaker 1: Wait, now what is his name?
Speaker 2: His name is--unfortunately, he's deceased now.
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: His name is Raymond Moore [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, we went out to celebrate, me, him, his wife, his brother, and his brother's wife, and me and my girlfriend; we went out to celebrate my homecoming.  And we went to his place on 63rd and Cottage Grove [Chicago, Illinois].  I can't even remember the name of it.
Speaker 1: Sixty-third, okay.
Speaker 2: But it was a place upstairs.  Somebody was having a party--I mean a, one of those dances, 'cause they had a shake dancer and all that stuff there.
Speaker 1: Okay, what's a shake dancer?
Speaker 2: A shake dancer?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You don't know what a shake dancer is?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Oh, used to have a lot of them in the, in the fifties [1950s] and sixties [1960s].
Speaker 1: I have no idea.
Speaker 2: Well, it was a woman who was kind of a stripper, and she would go around, but, but she would do a lot of shaking I mean, and she would was very scantily clad.  And sometimes it would even be a man.
Speaker 1: A man could be a shake dancer?
Speaker 2: It could be--well, I mean it wouldn't look like a man, but it was a man.  And, and, and they would take unsuspecting people, like if you were like from the country or someplace, and they would put them close to the floor, 'cause it wasn't a stage; it was just floor.
Speaker 1: Like the ha--like in somebody's apartment or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, put it--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in a big dance floor.  And, and so that's where the shake dancer would operate.  And, and so if you were, if you were unsuspecting, sometimes they would put somebody up there like in a chair like this, 'cause we were just sitting in regular chairs.  And the shake dancer would come and jump on their lap and you know, start doing all kinds of stuff to 'em.  You know, and of course the audience got a big kick out of it 'cause they were, would be in shock.  But it was a number of, what is the name, Rosemarie [Rosemarie Black] and a few other big time--
Speaker 1: A shake--
Speaker 2: --shake dancers.  I mean they, they, they would be at all these events.
Speaker 1: I have never--
Speaker 2: And like at the Grand Ballroom [Chicago, Illinois] they would have 'em.  It, it was pretty standard.  They'll have a comedian, you know, I mean back in the days of, you know, Pigmeat Markham [Dewey "Pigmeat" Markham] and those kind of people.  It was, I was another, it was another couple, a man and wife--who, Salt and Pepper?  Pepper and somebody.  It wasn't Salt and Pepper.  It was something like that.  But they had a number, you know--(unclear)--comedy acts and you know, you'd have the typical, you know (unclear) somebody's singing or, or group, and then you'd have a shake dancer, and then you'd have a comedian.  That was kind of the standard program.
Speaker 1: I love shake dancer--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I've never heard of that before.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 110133
Speaker 1: So anyway, we leave--well, there's another part of the story.  I guess I won't tell that, but, but--
Speaker 2: Aah--
Speaker 1: --when we left, I, I told the lady I was with, I said it, it was just starting to rain, so I said, stay here. My car was parked almost in front of the Trianon.  You know, 'cause the Trianon Ballroom [Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --was on 62nd and Cottage Grove.  And it was maybe, I don't know, a few yards north of--south of the Trianon.  And so I was kind of running with my head down, 'cause I knew--and I was just kind of looking out of the corner of my eye, 'cause I knew eventually I would see my car.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All of a sudden I looked up, and I was in front of the Trianon--
Speaker 2: And no car.
Speaker 1: --and I hadn't seen my car, and heart stopped, and I turned around, and I looked back up the street, car is gone.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's the day before the Club and, and LoJack and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, car is gone, my second night home car is gone.
Speaker 2: Did you ever recover it?
Speaker 1: No.  What, what happened is that the, the, the guys who stole it, who later got caught, they had chopped it up, 'cause they found a lot of my--and they sold it for parts, 'cause they found some of my Army stuff, 'cause I still had all my, my--
Speaker 2: Right, you're--
Speaker 1: --duffel bag and everything--
Speaker 2: --fresh--
Speaker 1: --was still in the trunk 'cause I hadn't even taken it out.  So all my Army uniforms, my little medals, and all that stuff were gone.  And--
Speaker 2: That fast?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and the police--
Speaker 2: And it was a new car.
Speaker 1: --the police came.  They said well, are you behind in your payments?  I said I haven't made any.  I mean (laughter) this car is--I haven't had the car but three days.
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness, I hoping for a good story like the man who got his car, his Corvette back after--
Speaker 1: No, no--
Speaker 2: --thirty-seven years.
Speaker 1: --we didn't hear back.  So then the, the insurance company bought me another one.  And about three or four months later I went to work on, on Sunday at the post office, and I parked it right up on the ramp.  And a couple of hours later I--a mail truck came to deliver some mail.  And when I raised the door where my car was, it was a, the truck was backed up in there.  I'm like wait a minute--
Speaker 2: My--
Speaker 1: --my car was right here.  It was gone.  They stole that one.  It was the exact replica of the other, except it was, it was a kind of a maroon car.  But it was, it was four in the floor--
Speaker 2: It was a beauty--
Speaker 1: --big engine and all that stuff.  And the thieves wanted it more than I did.  And I had, I had a burglar alarm on it; I had a chain around the brake and the, and the steering wheel.
Speaker 2: Nothing stopped them.
Speaker 1: They, they took it and were gone.  So, I decided no more--
Speaker 2: Impalas.
Speaker 1: --no more hot Chevy Impalas.  I'mma get me a nice staid Oldsmobile Cutlass, and that's what I did.
Speaker 2: Now how interesting, your, your love of Oldsmobile, which comes to play--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --a little bit--
Speaker 1: Years later.
Speaker 2: --a little bit later.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 110134
Speaker 1: So, now you're at FCB [Foote, Cone and Belding] until '74 [1974].  What makes you jump over to, to Burrell Advertising [now Burrell Communications Group]?
Speaker 2: Well, they called me.  And the agency Burrell was about three years old then.  It was very, still very small.  And he asked me if I was interested in coming.  And we talked about it for a while on and off, you know, over a couple of months.  And I finally decided: well, this could be an opportunity for me.  And I, you know, working for a small black company and (unclear) tote--totally different thing, 'cause Foote Cone was, you know, very large, very, very white.  I was the first, you know, you--I went in--I started there in media, and then I went from media into client services as an account executive, they had never had a black account executive before.
Speaker 1: While--so, what was it like for you in, in client meetings and, or some of the accounts that you, you handled--
Speaker 2: Initially, I worked on the Armadile [ph.] business, and I worked primarily on, on their can foods, and they also had a new products division, and I worked on their new products.  And--but I never had any problems with the clients.  Most of my problems were with the agency.
Speaker 1: With, oh, with your, your coworkers--
Speaker 2: Yeah, because--
Speaker 1: --like--
Speaker 2: --they didn't, you know, most people didn't want me to be in that position.  As I said, they never, they never had a black account executive before.
Speaker 1: And you're--
Speaker 2: So, and that was considered to be, when you were in account management at Foote Cone, I mean, you know, you were, this was like heaven.
Speaker 1: The top.
Speaker 2: This was, this was it.
Speaker 1: Because your professor at, at Roosevelt [University in Chicago, Illinois] had--
Speaker 2: Dr. [Robert E.] Snyder.
Speaker 1: --had encouraged you to go for that?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: So, with, with Tom Burrell [HM Thomas J. Burrell] you saw an opportunity to not only rise but avoid--
Speaker 2: All these crazy--'cause again, I mean that's a, that's a whole--'cause, 'cause I really do wanna do a book one day.  And I mean some of the stories, some of the things that happened to me there would definitely be a, a part of it, you know.
Speaker 1: Like, give us an anecdote.
Speaker 2: I'll give you one, one story.  I don't, I try not to make it too long, but--
Speaker 1: That's okay.  That's what we're here for.
Speaker 2: But one night I had been, I was at home on a Sunday night.  And I had been an account executive maybe six months, maybe.  And I got a call, and it was from the guy who was--the equivalent of a management director.  This guy is high in management, and he was the person who brought me into his group, you know.  When, when nobody else would do it, he said you know, you come on, you can be in my group.  I know you wanna do this.  So when, when, when my phone rang, and, and it was probably about 10:00 or 10:30, and my phone rang and it was him, and it scared me to death.  It was like, why is he calling me at home on a Sunday night?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And he told me that next, that following week that there was a, a, a lady, a young student, she was a student at Northwestern [University in Evanston, Illinois], but she was a, a, a civil rights activist.  And they said that her name was Eva Jefferson [Eva Jefferson Paterson], and they said Eva Jefferson is gonna be at our church.  And I want to--my family and I are gonna go, and I'm gonna take Bill Poole [ph.], who's my direct boss, and a few other people, and we want you to go with us.  So I said okay, great, you know.
Speaker 1: Ten thirty at night?
Speaker 2: But, but I couldn't figure out well, I'm going to work on Monday morning, but, but anyway, I'm like okay.  So, the next morning I get to work and, and, and our--the secretary of our group, when I walk in she said, "Hey, Jesse, how you doing?"  It's like huh?
Speaker 1: Jesse.
Speaker 2: So, but, but we used to play around with each other, so I didn't know what she was talking about.  But then she, she kept saying this all day.  And so finally I said why are you, "What is this Jesse stuff?"  And she said, "Oh, you know, what I'm talking about."  And I said, "No, I don't know what you're talking about.  What did, what are you doing?  Why are you saying this?"  And so, she, after a while, she said, "No, you really don't know, do you?"  And I said, "No, I don't know."  She said, "Well, maybe you'd better go talk to Bill Poole," who was my immediate supervisor.  So, I'm like okay, this is getting real deep here.  So I went and I said, "Bill, can I talk to you for a minute?"  And he said, "What, what about?"  And I said well, I said "Marianne [ph.] keeps calling me Jesse, and I," I said, "I don't know why, and she said you, you would know."  So he gets up and he closes the door--
Speaker 1: Not good.
Speaker 2: --and comes back and sit down.  I'm like what the hell is going on here.  So he tells me that my--that his, it's actually his boss's boss, the guy who called me, he said that he has had a nervous, he had a nervous breakdown years ago.  And I guess every now and then, he kind of drifts off for a little bit. (phone rings)
Story_ID: 110135
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: So anyway, we're in his [Bill Poole (ph.)] office, and he's telling me about--
Speaker 1: His, the boss [at Foote, Cone and Belding]?
Speaker 2: My boss, his boss's boss, how he kind of has these issues sometime.  And he says sometimes when he gets like this, he likes to be around, he wants to be around people he really likes.  And he says he really likes you, so he's gonna, that's why he invited you to church, to, to see Eva Jefferson [Eva Jefferson Paterson].  Like, okay, but that explains that, but I don't under--what, what's Jesse?
Speaker 1: Jesse.
Speaker 2: What's the Jesse thing?  He said well, he told the people at church hat he's bringing Jesse Jackson, and you're gonna be him.  And I said Bill, I know you're my boss, but you must be crazy if you think that I can go--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --and pretend to be [HM Reverend] Jesse Jackson [Sr.].  Now the church, his church is in Libertyville.  So I said now maybe--
Speaker 1: Maybe.
Speaker 2: --if Eva Jefferson wasn't gonna be there, I could go there and the people in Libertyville [Illinois] would not know that I wasn't Jesse Jackson.  But Eva Jefferson sure in the hell knows that I'm not Jesse Jackson, and as much as I wanna work here, I, I don't, that's, that's not gonna work.  That, that can't--
Speaker 1: That was not in the job description?
Speaker 2: I can't, I can't do that, I mean, 'cause that's, that's not gonna work.  He says well, no, I, I--we know it's probably not gonna work, so we're gonna try to, we're gonna fix it.  And I was like, how?
Speaker 1: You could call Jesse.
Speaker 2: And he said well, you know, we'll fix it.  Don't, don't worry about it, but obviously, I couldn't help worrying about it.  So, to make, to make a, a long story short, what happened was we, we didn't go to the church to see Eva Jefferson.  We went to his country club instead, me, him, the, the, my, my boss's boss is white, him and his wife, his daughter, our secretary, and my boss, and his wife, we all went to, to, to this country club.  And we got there and he said, when he got ready to introduce me he said, "I want you to meet the Reverend," and my heart, I almost had a heart attack 'cause I thought sure he was gonna say--
Speaker 1: Oh, my--
Speaker 2: --Jesse Jackson.  But he said, "This is the Reverend Morris," so.  He couldn't make me Reverend Jackson, but for some reason he was determined I was gonna be--
Speaker 1: Reverend some-
Speaker 2: --I was gonna be Reverend somebody.  So he started introducing me as Reverend Morris.
Speaker 1: What country club was this at?  Do you remembered?
Speaker 2: I remember it was out in Libertyville.  I'd never been to--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I'd never been to a country club before.  I didn't know where the hell I was.  I just remember driving for a mile be--you know, once we went through the gate before we ever got to the building.  I had never been to a country club in my life--
Speaker 1: Oh, my goodness.
Speaker 2: --you know.
Speaker 1: So, how, what did you have to do as Reverend Morris?
Speaker 2: Oh, nothing.  I mean we, I mean because it was no--we were just all having dinner.  And, and the, the wait staff was referring to me as Reverend.  But it was bizarre.  I mean we left there.  We went to his house, and he ended up locking himself in a room with my boss's wife, and he wouldn't let her out 'cause she--he was talking to her.  I mean I don't think they were really doing anything, but, but it was just, it was a bizarre evening.  I didn't get home till about 3:00 in the morning.
Speaker 1: I hope--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: --I hope they gave you the next day--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And I was like, well, I, I, I, I didn't come to work in the morning 'cause one, I was just too freaked out about what had happened.  I was like what kind of place is this?  And it was, it was crazy.  And so I told a person who worked there, one of my friends, and I was trying to explain to her what happened.  And she said come on, man, you're making this up.  You, you have to be lying.
Speaker 1: 'Cause that's just too far out.
Speaker 2: But it was, but it was, that's the truth.  I mean it--you know, that was, that was probably the worst thing--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --most bizarre thing.  But it was a number of bizarre things that happened, and I said you know, being this little ink spot in this sea of buttermilk, I, I don't know.
Story_ID: 110136
Speaker 1: So Tom Burrell [HM Thomas J. Burrell of Burrell Advertising, now Burrell Communications Group] represented--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a life preserver.  Let me get out of here.  Let me get out of here.
Speaker 1: So, you know, Burrell, like you said, it was, was a very young at that time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was only seven or eight people there when I went there.
Speaker 1: So what were some of the accounts that--actually, you know, you worked what, on some of the best ones, the, the--
Speaker 2: Well, well, I worked on McDonalds early on.
Speaker 1: Johnson Products [Company].
Speaker 2: Yeah, eventually I worked on, my two main accounts--well, I had two jobs when I went there, because I was, I was an--I had the title of account supervisor, but at that time they didn't have a media department, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because I had media experience, I became the, the media director, even though I didn't have that title.  But I did all the media work as well, so I was really multitasking.
Speaker 1: So, for people who may not know what a media director does, can you tell us what--
Speaker 2: Well, a medi--media department is, is, is the department that plans and, and, and buys all the media for the agency.  So if you're gonna--when the, the commercials that you see, somebody has to decide, well: where do they run, you know; which, which, is it gonna be on radio; is it gonna be in print; if so, which publications, you know, which months, all those things.  So the media department takes care of all those things.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I guess also, during TV, then choosing what time, like will we run during "Bernie Mac" ["The Bernie Mac Show"] or will we run during--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --"Friends."
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Story_ID: 110137
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, and I'm, I was trying to remember some of the jingles from Coke [Coca-Cola Company] and McDonald's, the ones that were targeted towards the African American audience, and I couldn't think of any.  But I was hoping maybe you could remind me like of, you know, one of those great ones that, that really put--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --Burrell on the map.
Speaker 2: --a couple of things.  When I first went there, McDonald's had just come up with the line, "You deserve a break today," for--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --the first time.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: And--but, mean Burrell [Burrell Advertising, now Burrell Communications Group] didn't do it.  The general market agency [Needham, Harper and Steers]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --had done it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But one of the challenges that we were faced with is that that line didn't play very well with, with black folks, because that's not the way he thought of McDonald's.  I mean--
Speaker 1: As a, as a break from--
Speaker 2: --"You deserve a break today," so you mean you're saying I did something really special or really good, now I need a break, so you're taking me to McDonald's?  I don't think so, I don't think so.  So they weren't buying that at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, so.
Speaker 2: So, so, so we ended up developing a campaign called "McDonald's sure is good to have around," you know.
Speaker 1: I don't remember that one.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, wait, how--did it have a song to it?  I mean I am so inundated with, with TV all the time, I can't think of anything anymore.
Speaker 2: No, I don't, you know, I don't even remember the, the, the tune.
Speaker 1: It's good to have a--
Speaker 2: But, but, but--
Speaker 1: --McDonald's is good to have around.
Speaker 2: --that's, that's what, that's what it was about, because it dealt with the fact that McDonald's was just a place where, you know, it was convenient; the food was good; it was hot; it was--
Speaker 1: It was an option.
Speaker 2: --affordable, and all that, but it, it, it, it wasn't all, it wasn't all that.  But it was, it was, it was what you needed, you know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And what about the, the--
Speaker 1: Coca-Cola?
Speaker 2: Coke--
Speaker 1: Well, the, the Coca-Cola, I remember that one of the things--this must have been in '75 [1975], when they were--we were working on the campaign for the bicentennial.  And they had a campaign called "Look Up, America," and it was all about the bicentennial.  And again, we said well, wait a minute, black folks aren't that excited about the bicentennial because in 1776--
Speaker 2: We were all slaves.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So I don't think this something we want to celebrate.  So we ended up having to develop a different campaign for, for Coca-Cola.
Story_ID: 110138
Speaker 1: Which brings me to another question of how important was it that, like Burrell [Burrell Advertising, now Burrell Communications Group] and other black advertising agencies existed at that time, and if, if you can, kind of place in a larger context of advertising which featured and was geared towards black people.  So this is '76 [1976], but beforehand, what was, what was advertising like in the black communities--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, well--
Speaker 1: --targeted towards?
Speaker 2: --well, for the most part, it, it, it wasn't.  The, you know, there were black publications.  And you know, of course, Ebony and Jet were around.  Essence and Black Enterprise didn't, you know, they came along right around 1970.  So the Ebonys and, and, and Jets, they, they had some, they carried a small breath of advertising where they had a few black models.  They were, they had, by that time, they had reached the point where they weren't as stereotypical.  I mean they would, they didn't have the Aunt Jemimas and the Uncle Bens and, and the guy who did [coughing]--excuse me--Cream of Wheat and that kind of thing.  They, they had gotten past those images.  But there wasn't very much in terms of television.  It was still an oddity to see black people on television.  In fact, in the seventies [1970s], you know, late sixties [1960s], early seventies [1970s], if you saw a black person in a commercial, you'd tell - "Hey, come look, there's a black person on television."
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That, that revolutionary.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I mean that's, that's how rare it was.
Story_ID: 111428
Speaker 1: We just left off with Mr. Morris telling us a little bit about some of his accounts at, that he handled at Burrell [Burrell Advertising, now Burrell Communications Group] and, and why the, the campaigns developed for those companies did not necessarily work in the black community as, as initially conceptualized.  So, "You deserve a break today" morphed into what for the black commun--the black audience.
Speaker 2: "McDonald's sure is good to have around."
Speaker 1: And, and then with Coke [Coca-Cola Company], let's see, "It's the real thing," "I'd like to give the world--
Speaker 2: Well, we did, we did--
Speaker 1: --a coke."
Speaker 2: --a real, we did real times, "It's the real times," instead of "Just the real thing."
Speaker 1: Real thing.  Real time--
Speaker 2: So we always had a little twist to it, 'cause we had to stay close.
Speaker 1: Within the, the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --boundaries developed by--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, by the general market agencies so they would have some synergism, but, or some synergy.  But sometimes it was difficult.
Speaker 1: To, to do that like--any particular account that you recall that was, it was difficult to kind of adopt the general market--
Speaker 2: Well, the most difficult one was where we, actually we didn't.  When I first got to Burrell we worked on the Canadian Mist account, and the whole account was about the, you know, Canadian--it's Canadian whisky, and so it was about the Canadian Rockies, and the moose, and fishing in the lakes and all those kind of things.
Speaker 1: Moose.
Speaker 2: And we said "nah."
Speaker 1: South Side.
Speaker 2: That is not gonna work.  That's not gonna work.
Speaker 1: Now, now obviously they understood that, that necessarily wouldn't work, so that's why they would hire Burrell to develop that new idea, or--I mean oh, so you know, and I also, let's say that I forgot to say that we were talking about advertising and the black audience pre-1960s, so that it wasn't really targeted towards black people at all.  It was a rarity to see black people on, on TV.  What, what were some of the things you think impacted or, or helped cause a rise of, of black advertising in marketing agencies?
Speaker 2: Well, I think it's people can see there were some people, and still not enough, who could see that, that this really made a difference, you know, I mean where there was, that we were making an impact by what we were doing.  And, and so, I mean for the Canadian Mist example, where, when we started working on the business, they were selling maybe 50-- 60,000 cases of Canadian Mist to black folks.  Ten years later they were selling a million.
Speaker 1: Woah.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: Just from, from advertising--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --and marketing?
Speaker 2: --I mean a, a totally different campaign, and, and so it was very obvious that it was, it was the campaign that we were developing was making that happen.
Speaker 1: 'Cause how else would people have known about Canadian Mist?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and, and the, and the rest of the brand wasn't growing that fast.  It was growing, but the, but the African American segment was growing dramatically faster.
Speaker 1: Wow, wow, so--
Speaker 2: And we did it, you know, we did more with less because the general market budgets were much larger.
Speaker 1: And they, and you're based like a subcontractor is that they like we--do, do they--
Speaker 2: Well, now we, we work--
Speaker 1: --hire you or--
Speaker 2: No, we--
Speaker 1: --does the company hire you?
Speaker 2: --the agency didn't hire us.  The company--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --hired us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I mean it's, you know, the same thing, the same thing happens now.  I mean we're, we're with, with Wal-Mart [Stores, Inc.], with Tyson Foods.  I mean we're working with--we have our own budget, we, we, we have similar campaigns, but they're able to track what happens.  And you know, we're demonstrating that it works.
Speaker 1: Right, because I, I'm jumping ahead for a quick second, but I love the "Powered by Tyson's" commercial with the grandma who does the Double Dutch.  I--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --I laugh every time.  And then I also contrast that with the, the Purdue [University in West Lafayette, Indiana] son who's running and jumping through--it's a very different kind of field to, to both of those and is when I realized that, that you did the, the, the black version.  It's like aah, now, you know, I can really see and understand that campaign and know why it's developed.  But we'll get to that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I just wanna tell you that I, I love that--
Speaker 2: Oh, well, thank you--
Speaker 1: --commercial--
Speaker 2: --appreciate that.
Speaker 1: --'cause it's so--my mom and I laugh every time it comes on, 'cause she even has her little gloves on and--
Speaker 2: But I'll tell you some more about that later, I mean about that whole Double Dutch thing, 'cause that's an interesting phenomenon.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Story_ID: 111429
Speaker 1: So, so you're at Burrell [Burrell Advertising, now Burrell Communications Group].  You rise to senior V.P. [senior vice president management supervisor] then you realize what at that point?
Speaker 2: I realize that one day I walked into Tom Burrell's [HM Thomas J. Burrell] office, and he said, "you're fired."
Speaker 1: Hm, well, that does change things.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it does, it does.  It wasn't exactly like that, but, but it was close.
Speaker 1: There was a, a schism.
Speaker 2: Well, it, it really--I, I don't know.  I guess that all, there'd always been a little something, you know.  I was there for over twelve years, so I must have been doing something right.  But I never felt real totally comfortable there, and I'm, I'm not sure what it was.  I think I made him a little uncomfortable.  I mean 'cause we were--well, I mean we're almost the same age.  I mean we both grew up on the south side of Chicago [Illinois].  I, I think, in my own way, I mean, you know, and of course he was a, an icon; I mean he owned the agency; I mean he was well-known; I mean he was famous; and, and, and he was doing extremely well.  And I think a couple of things were happening.  I think one, in my own right, I was also doing well.  I didn't have that kind of notoriety, but certainly within the industry I was very well-respected.  The, the clients, the accounts I worked on, my clients, you know, I mean I had great relationships with them.  I sometimes think that made him a little uncomfortable, even though he was benefiting--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --from it.  And I also think that maybe he might have felt that I didn't revere him as much as other people.  I mean, I respected him, I did.  I mean he was, he was one of the smartest people I, I know.  But, you know, I mean he was still a guy, you know.  I mean, so--
Speaker 1: He put his pants on one leg at a time?
Speaker 2: --I, I mean I, I think, I think maybe there was a little something going on that was unspoken between us.  And I think no, no, neither of us ever said it.  But, I mean I understood that he owned a hundred percent of the stock.  Don't get me wrong, you know.  I understood where my paycheck came from, and I, I think I worked very hard to justify what, what he paid me.  You know, and I don't think I was ever, ever disrespectful, but at the same time, I mean I didn't genuflect every time I saw him.  You know, so, so anyway, eventually, he brought another person in over me, and the person, he wasn't, you know, we weren't, we didn't really get along well at all.  And so eventually they said well, one of you gotta go, and we decided Gene, it's you.  So, I said well, I guess it's that time, so I got my little stuff and left.
Speaker 1: Wow, well, that, that must have been very jarring though, because it--I mean had you kind of sensed it in the air or it really--
Speaker 2: No, I mean 'cause--
Speaker 1: --unexpected?
Speaker 2: --this had, this had probably had been going on for--I mean this guy had, had been there for, I don't know, not quite a year, maybe six or seven months, something like that.  And it was obvious that, that he was trying to do me in; you know, it was pretty obvious.  But I had decided: well, look, I mean hey, I, I'm free to do pretty much what I want in terms of running my accounts.  I mean I got good relationships with them, so I'm happy doing what I'm doing, so they can do whatever they wanna do.  I'm just gonna continue on like they're not there, you know.  But that, eventually that caught up with me; it didn't work, so--
Speaker 1: Right, right, because--
Story_ID: 111430
Speaker 1: Well, so, in 1986, you're now kind of on your own, and then you start Morris Randall Advertising.
Speaker 2: Well, that was the following year.
Speaker 1: Okay, '86 [1987], '87 [1987].
Speaker 2: What happened was I got, I--because it was late in '86 [1986].  I got, I got fired in November.  I left Burrell [Burrell Advertising, now Burrell Communications Group] in, in November of '86 [1986].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I didn't know what I was gonna do.  I, you know, it's not like I planned to get fired, so I didn't have a plan B.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) True.
Speaker 2: But, so what I, what I did is I went to the Bahamas for a couple of weeks.  And when I came back, I had a, a stack of messages like this from all kinds of people saying, "Call me we, we wanna talk to you."  And one of the messages was from one of my former clients from Johnson Products [Company], who had recently assigned their advertising business to a, a creative guy that I worked with at, at Burrell, Joey Randall [Joseph Randall].  And they said you know, we, we like Joey, and we think he's a great creative, but we think he could benefit from someone like you, the kind of expertise you have.  And it'd be great if you guys got together.  And I knew Joey.  I'd worked with Joey, and I said no way; it's not gonna happen (laughter); I'm not doing that, no way.  But anyway, to make a long story short, I eventually agreed to work with him as a consultant.  And we worked together for a few months, and it was working very well, and so we decided to actually go ahead and form the agency, which became Morris Randall.
Speaker 1: And--but now that was just for, for like a, a year--
Speaker 2: A year.
Speaker 1: --or two--
Speaker 2: Well, because a very short time later, I mean a few months after we had formed this alliance, and I mean really got going, we got office space and everything, the first thing that happened is we lost the Johnson Products [Company] business because the people who hired us got fired themselves.  They brought in a new director of marketing, and he fired us.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: So when, by the time we physically got the agency's doors opened, we had no accounts.
Speaker 1: Which is--I, I suppose one of the--
Speaker 2: Which is not a good--
Speaker 1: --pitfalls--
Speaker 2: --position to be in, not a good position to be in when you have, you know, you just signed a five and a half year lease, and you have no revenue.
Speaker 1: Where was your office?
Speaker 2: Right down the street, 325 West Huron [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then about three or four months after that, that's when Joey started to act kind of different.  He started to do some things that suggested to me that this, we weren't gonna make it.  And so what I ended up doing was essentially buying out his interests and keeping what little we had--we didn't have much--but keeping that little and trying to build it.
Speaker 1: So then become--
Speaker 2: Became E. Morris Limited [E. Morris Communications, Inc.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now what made you decide to, to remain out on our own as opposed to going back to another large firm?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't wanna work for a general market agency, and I, and I, and I didn't wanna be fired by anybody again.  I wanted to have more control of my own destiny.  So I guess eventually those entrepreneurial leanings finally kicked in.
Speaker 1: So you're renting the, the horse and, and cart and running your businesses in Germany--
Speaker 2: Little snowball stand and doing all those kind of things, you know.
Speaker 1: Finally all culminates--
Story_ID: 111431
Speaker 1: Now, you know what I, and I did kind of skipped over it, but in, in '70--I think it was in 1971 when your, your father [Eugene Morris, Sr.] passed away?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Which is, is like--I guess you were at FCB [Foote, Cone and Belding] at that time, so I didn't get a chance to ask you how that impacted you at, at that time.
Speaker 2: Well, it, it, it, it really was difficult for me because my father and I had just really--not just, but my father was a, was an interesting man.  I mean he was--I never doubted the fact that my father loved me, even though he never told me that.  You know, he wasn't one of those huggy, kissy, feely; "Oh, son, I love you," but I always knew he would run through a brick wall for me.  I mean he took me to baseball games, and we went fishing, and we did all this stuff together, but he didn't talk a lot, you know.  And, and so he wasn't always--he didn't open up and share a lot of things with me.  And that really didn't start until maybe I was in my twenties.  Then, and so he was just really starting to open up and where I could go to him and talk to him about stuff.  And I found out, man, this old man knows a lot of stuff.  He's been keeping this stuff away from me--
Speaker 1: A secret.
Speaker 2: --all these years.  You know, so I, I really had developed a, a great relationship with him.  So, you know, when he died, just at a point when I felt like I was really starting to move in a direction, and had my act together, so to speak, and I was really kind of looking forward to the day--you know when I could share some of these things with him and, and have him share in my successes, and, and, and then he died, you know.
Speaker 1: That really changed--and then, in, in 1985, then your, your mom [Willie Mae Mitchell Morris] passed away as well, so.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And that was, that was maybe even more difficult in the sense, I mean I was a mama's boy, you know.  I mean my mother and I were very, very close.  And I think that, I, I'm real, I really am a combination of both my mother and my father.
Speaker 1: Like what--
Speaker 2: Because they were like--
Speaker 1: --what aspects?
Speaker 2: --they were like two different people in many ways, 'cause my father, my father had a very volatile temper.  My father didn't like for people to mess around with him.  I mean he wouldn't bother you, but if you ever bothered him, you had a problem, you know.  And, and once he erupted--
Speaker 1: That was it?
Speaker 2: --it was not a good place to be around, you know.  But, and my mother was sweet, quiet.  Oh, my father also, I mean he loved to have a good time, you know; he lived to, to, to party, and drink whiskey, and smoke cigars and all that stuff.  My mother didn't drink; she didn't smoke; she didn't curse.  I mean if my mother said "hell," people would just fall out laughing, because it sounded so strange, you know.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Coming out of her mouth.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And no, she, she, she took everybody in.  I mean everybody in the neighborhood's always called her "mama" and all that stuff 'cause she would do anything for anybody.  And, and I'm kind of, I'm kind of both those people, depending upon when you catch me--
Speaker 1: Volatile yet loving.
Speaker 2: --you know, you know.
Speaker 1: So, so yeah, that was a year before you lost your job at Burrell [Burrell Advertising, now Burrell Communications Group].  So now you're--it's kind of the ultimate buckling down.  Like, you're starting your own business.  You're, you're parents are gone.  How did that make you feel though that they weren't there to--
Speaker 2: Well, it, it--
Speaker 1: --share in your success?
Speaker 2: --a lot of times it really, you know, I would think about it a lot.  'Cause I remember my, my mother died just before I got, I was scheduled to receive an award from the old black book, the Dollars and Sense Award.  And she was in the hospital, and I was telling her, I said you know, "You really gotta get better 'cause I want you to be there when I get this award."  And she died about two weeks before, and it, it, it really bothered me, you know.  But I remember one time I heard a, a minister, he was preaching a funeral.  And he said you know, it's natural for people to grieve over the fact that you've lost someone you love.  But the focus should be on the good times that you spent with them.
Speaker 1: That's so true.
Speaker 2: And if you think, you think in those terms, it's easier to overcome that loss, you know.  And, and I think that's, that's what I've tried to do, you know.
Speaker 1: That is--because I guess when you, think about the fact that they're not there, there's an empty space.  But when--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you remember like, you know, her making that little extra cake for you to nibble off of, you're, you're right there, and you can smell, and taste, and she's there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and you know, I remember my father, and I'd ask him, I'd, when I'd ask him for money, "Boy, you're always asking me for money.  Every time I look around you want some more money."  And all the time he's going in his pocket giving, 'cause he knows he's gonna give it to me, but he would be cursing and everything.  But he, he all--whatever I wanted--
Speaker 1: It, it was there for you.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was there.  So, you know, you, you, you miss all those things.  And then I, then I think, then ten years later [in 1976], my youngest sister [Doris Porter], who I'd this real close bond with--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --you know, when, when she died, I mean that, that was like, wow, man, this is, it's really tough.
Speaker 1: So a lot of hits?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but you know, I mean there was time in between, but you know, when you lose people like that, it's, it's, it's difficult.
Speaker 1: Most definitely.
Story_ID: 111432
Speaker 1: So, even though those things are happening in your personal life, on the, the business side of things, you're really taking off.
Speaker 2: Yeah, things are going along pretty well.  I mean we haven't, it's, you know, this is a volatile business; you have ups and downs.  And you know, the first major account we [E. Morris Communications] lost was a Kool-Aid business, which at the time was equivalent to the Oldsmobile business ten years later when we lost that.  That was, that was very difficult.  But you know, right after that Wal-Mart [Stores, Inc.] came along, and we--
Speaker 1: That--
Speaker 2: --kept right on motoring, you know.
Speaker 1: The rising tide lifts--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --all boats.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: So, yeah, I wanna kind of jump to 2001.  Well, I, I should ask you: so, who were some of your, your clients in those earliest, like '87 [1987] to '95 [1995]?
Speaker 2: Well, the first ones, one of the first ones was one of my former clients, Brown-Forman [Brown-Forman Corporation] beverage, I worked on at Burrell [Burrell Advertising, now Burrell Communications Group].  We worked on the Jack Daniel's business and Southern Comfort, and they, they eventually came over here.  Then I also worked on the Carnation, had the Carnation business, which I'd also had at Burrell, they were kind of the people who kept us going in the beginning, then we got the Kool-Aid business.  And, and so we were really starting to roll along.  And that, that was the people who kept us in business during the early years.
Story_ID: 111433
Speaker 1: And what you provide to them is actually not just advertising necessarily, not just marketing.  Can you tell us a little bit about what you provide your clients?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I've always believed that, especially for, for this segment, the African American segment, if, if you're gonna be successful as an agency, is that you have to provide your clients with a total service.  So right away we developed this con--this concept called the total marketing concept, which mean that it's not just advertising; it's not just public relations; it's not just promotion, but it can be a combination of all those things.  And whatever mix you choose depends upon what the needs of the clients are.  So, it, it doesn't matter if it's 80 percent advertising and 10 percent public relations and 10 percent community relations or it's the reverse of that, as long as it helps to achieve that objective, then that's what you do.  And you don't get hung up on trying to make the next great commercial.  If it means that you need to go and do a great promotion, then you go focus on that, 'cause that's what's gonna make it work.
Story_ID: 111434
Speaker 1: So, 2001 Oldsmobile represented a great deal of your--
Speaker 2: Yeah, about sixty percent of our [E. Morris Communications, Inc.] business.
Speaker 1: --of your revenue.  And then GM [General Motors] decides to fold the entire Oldsmobile line, which is certainly something no one has ever--I can't think of a, a major U.S. auto that's folded in--yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, I mean it was, first of all, it was the oldest car line in America.  I mean it even went all the way back to '03 [1903], '04 [1904] or something like that [sic, 1897].  I mean it was--oh, it just--they had just--no, older than that, 'cause they'd just celebrated--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's like a hundred--
Speaker 2: --a hundred years--
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: --just a hundred years.  So, you wouldn't think that that would happen, you know.  And we--and it was also one of the most successful campaigns we had ever had.  I mean we had tripled their business in the African American market, so.
Speaker 1: Wow.  And then you get the call, well--
Speaker 2: No, we didn't even get a call.  We read about it in the newspaper.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) They weren't even nice enough to, to give you a ring?
Speaker 2: No, no, we read it in the newspaper.  So that was, that was tough.  And you know, we ended up having to lay off fifty percent of our staff, which is about twenty-five people.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: And that was extremely difficult to do.
Speaker 1: Because it all falls on your shoulders.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and it's, you know, this is not, you know, everybody here is, you know, you walk up and down the hall and you see 'em every day.  So, you know, you--I know who has a family.  I know who has young kids.  I knew who's a single mom.  And so when you have to tell one of those people that they don't have a job anymore, that's very--even though a lot of times I didn't do it directly--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --but you know, I still had to be the one to make the final decision.
Speaker 1: Of, of who it was.  Well, I mean how did that make you feel because yes, your, your name is on when you walk in the door, but like you said, it's made up of all these individuals.
Speaker 2: Well, the, the worst thing about it is that you know it long before you have to do it.  So you have to walk around with it.  You have to walk past these people, and you can't tell them that you've gotta do it.  Because you can't say well, in two months I'm gonna have to fire you, you know, because then, I mean you, then you don't get anything out of 'em.  So, and, and you're also hoping that something is gonna happen to reverse the situation, so you don't wanna say that.
Speaker 1: Just in case.
Speaker 2: But you know that that's probably gonna happen.  And you kind of know if this has to happen, it's gonna be these people--
Speaker 1: Ouch.
Speaker 2: --you know.  And that, I, I did--I didn't sleep for a couple of months.  You know, I didn't have a good night's sleep because I'd just think about that all the time.
Story_ID: 111435
Speaker 1: So you have that issue and then Septem--you know, September 11 [2001], with--(unclear)--yes, it impacts the travel industry or people willing to fly, but my first thought is not necessarily advertising, how it affected that, could you explain the impact--
Speaker 2: Well, everybody gets scared.  You know, they don't know what's gonna happen.  It did, you know, it's a kind of a domino effect, so it's things, everything starts to affect something else.  And then the next thing you know is that some company is saying well, you know, our profits are not gonna be what we hoped, so therefore we gotta do something to impact that.  So one of the things we're gonna do is we're gonna cut our advertising budget, 'cause that drops right to the bottom line.  And because we work on an African American segment, last hired, first fired.  So the first thing that they, they do is they cut our budget--
Speaker 1: And there you go.
Speaker 2: --'cause they feel like well, this is lit--the, you know, it's, that's not very essential so we'll do that.
Speaker 1: Like, what was one of your clients that you lost after September--
Speaker 2: Well, we worked on, we worked on the Ralston, Ral, Ralston Purina [Company], and that went away, in addition to the Oldsmobile.  We had been, we had been working on the, on the State of Illinois Tourism and was one other piece of business we had at that time, and, and just went away.
Speaker 1: Dissipated.  One thing you said in your, your Black Enterprise interview, that kind of like when the going gets tough, the tough get going, and, and you knew if, if people didn't really have a commitment to marketing and advertising in the black community, that they were going to, to be gone.  And so did you feel like those were some of the people that weren't really committed to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I mean you know that this, it's like in, in a, in a, in a way it's like being a coach of an athletic team.  You know that the day you get hired, one you're gonna get fired.  And it doesn't necessarily mean that you did something wrong, but it's, it's, it's gonna happen.  We're, we're in a business the scary thing about this, if you allow yourself to think about it, is that right now on the space we have, we have well, in--on February 1 [2006], we will have about 19,000 square feet of space, which I will have a lease on until 2010, which I signed five years ago, four years ago.  So, I got a ten-year lease.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All my agreements with all my clients say that it can be canceled at any time between 30 and 90 days.  So, I'm really working on a 30 to 90-day contract, but yet I have commitments that go on for four or five years.
Speaker 1: After that.
Speaker 2: And so when you, when you look at the number at the end of what, at the end of that lease and what that obligation is, it can be kind of scary, you know.
Speaker 1: So what do you do to keep from letting that overwhelm you?
Speaker 2: Well, fear can do a couple of things: it can paralyze you, or it can motivate you, it can energize you.  So, I try to let it motivate and energize me rather than paralyze me, because you can, you can become so fearful that you don't do anything, or you do all the wrong things.  But if, you know, you, you can, fear can make your adrenaline flow and you know, make you think faster and quicker and more clearly.  And so if you take that route, then it, it, it becomes a positive instead of a negative.
Story_ID: 111436
Speaker 1: So, you know, you, you hit a low [when Oldsmobile folded in 2001], had to fire half of your staff, how do you come back from that?  What do you do, especially because you still have all the same competitors, and everyone is still facing those same issues that you are.  What did you do to distinguish yourself?  And now I know what, in 2004, you had more revenue than you did pre-2001.
Speaker 2: Well, I, I think, I decided well, what, what do I do?  What makes more sense?  I mean the first thing I do, the first thing I did is I thought oh, we gotta get that business back.  So we started running around chasing everything that moved.  And you know, after I did that for a while, I said wait a minute, what the hell are we doing?  This doesn't make any sense, I mean 'cause I'm chasing all this business, and I'm sitting here.  First of all, I worked for the largest corporation in the world, largest corporation ever existed.  Why don't I ask them for some more business?  Why don't I focus on that for a bit?  You know, why don't I focus on--we have American Family Insurance, been our client for, next month--this, this month is ten years.  Why don't I go to American Family insurance and say hey, we can do more for you?  Why don't I talk to the people I already work with?  Because they talk to us; they return our phone calls.  The people out there who we're trying to get, they don't know us from Adam.  They don't even return our calls.  So that's what we did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We turned it internal and tried to grow organically.  And it, it worked out pretty well.
Story_ID: 111437
Speaker 1: As we left off before, you made a strategic decision to stop chasing new business--not so much stop chasing, but--
Speaker 2: Chasing, not, not completely.
Speaker 1: Right, but to--
Speaker 2: But change our focus.
Speaker 1: --to existing clients and providing even more service to them.  So, for example, with Wal-Mart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.] at, at the time, what were you, were you just doing advertising for them or marketing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were, we were doing advertising primarily.  Well, not primarily.  I mean that's, that's, that's all we were doing.  And they had a, you know, their own strategy and approach to what, what they should do and, and, and how they should do it.  And we were just, we're just kind of going along with that, you know.  And then we decided well, let's propose some different things.  Let's propose some different strategies and, and you know.  And we know we're not gonna make Wal-Mart change the direction that they're going in, but perhaps if we could just redirect some of it, just--we don't have to redirect it a lot.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Just a little bit, and it'll make all the difference in the world because they're so big, you know.
Speaker 1: Exactly.  So, I mean, you're definitely really innovative with, with Wal-Mart's messaging, because before you handled their account, what were really doing in the--
Speaker 2: Well, well, they didn't--
Speaker 1: --black commun--
Speaker 2: --do--nothing.  I mean it was a cold call when we got the Wal-Mart business.  So it was just--
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Wow, wow, that, now that I didn't know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you just said hey.
Speaker 2: Well, I was reading about Wal-Mart, and it was right after Sam Walton died [1992].  And it seemed like a company I would like to work for, 'cause I'd worked on the Sears business years ago, and it, it kind of reminded me of the old Sears.  And just coincidentally, we had, we had been asked to make a hypothetical commercial for the "Today Show."  They were doing a campaign on the political candidates.  And so I thought, and, and so our, our, our campaign revolved around, revolved around [President] Bill Clinton.  So I thought well, he's from Arkansas--
Speaker 1: Arkansas, right.
Speaker 2: --you know, so I'm, I'm gonna send this down there and see if they like it--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --show 'em how we did, and what we did, what our thinking was, and we sent it down, and they said come talk to us.  And that's how we got their business.
Speaker 1: Very nice.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Very nice.
Story_ID: 111438
Speaker 1: Now, you've been really innovative in, in some other aspects, as I mentioned earlier, the, the Atlas System, which I know is, it's proprietary, but that's something that you personally developed?
Speaker 2: Not personally.  I mean we developed here an agency.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And can you describe that, because it, it is innovative--
Speaker 2: Well, I mean--
Speaker 1: --practice.
Speaker 2: --all, all it is that there are a lot of people who think that, and they say wanna, we wanna target black people, so all black people are the same.  They think we're just one monolithic group.  And they don't pay attention to the fact that we're, there's lots of differences, you know.  And so what we have focused on is subsegmenting the segment so that, when we did the Oldsmobile campaign, we had fourteen different segments that we looked at who could be possible, potential buyers for the different cars.  I mean the or--Aurora buyer was very different from the Intrigue buyer, and the Intrigue buyer was, was very, was, was very different from the Bravada buyer.  So we developed segments based upon income and based upon--but mostly, mostly upon their different attitudes and interests and things like that.  And, and, and so we were able to drill down to the most important subgroup.  And that's, that's where we developed our advertising.  We developed our advertising for that group.  It didn't mean that it didn't affect a broader segment, but--
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: --our core target was these people here.  But we still--I mean you, you can't, usually you can't buy media to focus on that narrowly, and it wouldn't be very efficient.  But in terms of getting your message across, that's what makes it work.
Speaker 1: It'll, it'll resonate.
Story_ID: 111439
Speaker 1: And the, the other thing that you've done is, is to form the Association of Black-Owned Advertising Agencies.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What, what led you to start that?
Speaker 2: Well, it's, it's something that's long overdue, and we've tried to do this before.  I mean it's been tried a number of times.  And for a number of reasons it, it, it never worked before.  But it's important that African American agen--agencies be able to speak with one voice.  I'm very vocal, and I'm always mouthing off about what's wrong in our industry, and why do you do this?  And I write letters to people, you know, to companies and to the media and all that.  But they can blow me off, like well, who are you?  You know, you're a little guy.  You got a little $40 million dollar agency, you know, what do we care about you?  But if you have ten agencies or twenty agencies, and we're all saying the same thing, we write a letter, and everybody is on the, you know, is a signatory to it, then people have to pay a little bit more attention to it.  And so, we have a lot of problems and a lot of challenges within our industry, and some of them are very specific to African American agencies.  And so we need to be addressing those. And I think fortunately, because I have been around a very long time, and I think that I have always conducted myself in a way, tried to make people respect me, tried to operate above board, be a person of my word, know the people, people know that they can count on me, so I, I, I think I was able to get a bunch of agencies in the room, and they know that I didn't have a real agenda, other than this is something that we all need to do for our collective good.  It's not just for, for Eugene Morris.
Story_ID: 111440
Speaker 1: Oh, right, I wanted to talk about two other accounts.  Going back to, to Wal-Mart [Stores, Inc.] for a second, they always have--or always--Wal-Mart has had some issues of, of building in the black, the stores in the black community.  And people object to their corporate policies.  But you've taken a really interesting tact, like with the Buffalo Soldiers documentary that, that you developed.  Can you talk a little bit about that, because that's a very, very different thing for Wal-Mart as well?
Speaker 2: Well, well, one of the reasons for that is that we wanted, we wanted to demonstrate that, that Wal-Mart is not just about trying to sell you something.  I mean Wal-Mart gives away a lot of money.  I mean they support a lot of causes.  I think for, for us (unclear) no, no client treats us better.  I mean we are fortunate; we have some clients who, who treat us very well, but Wal-Mart has always been extremely fair to us.  A lot of the things that you see, you, you read about in the newspapers, I've not experienced those things at all.  And I, and I, I think I'm, I'm pretty close to the situation.  Not that I'm suggesting that Wal-Mart is perfect; there's a lot of things that, that they can do better.  And they'll tell you there's a lot of things that they can do better, and I think they're trying to do that.  But we wanna make, we wanted to, to demonstrate that Wal-Mart is interested in our community; they care about it; and they, they wanna do things that, that will allow them to not just have the community come to them but for them to come to the community.  And so we decided that we were gonna find stories that needed telling that maybe people didn't know the full story.  And so we started looking for stories like that, the Buffalo Soldiers.  Currently, we're working on one which will, which will be, which is gonna air next month on the Gullah/Geechee Nation--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --about Sapelo Island [Georgia] and, and, and those islands [Sea Islands] down in South Carolina.  Again, it's something that people don't know very much about.  So, we, we wanted to find--that's one of the niches that we wanted to establish for Wal-Mart where other marketers have not gone before.  But it demonstrates that they have a real commitment to this community, and they care about it.
Speaker 1: That's exactly what I wanted to hit on because I can't think of a, a documentary that McDonald's has produced or Coca-Cola [Company] has produced that is not directly tied, you know, is not an infomercial I suppose--
Speaker 2: No, oh, not at all, in fact, when we fir--when we did the first one, and we were doing the, the credits, and we had all this stuff in there about all the Wal-Mart people and thanks to them and all that stuff, they made us take it all out.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: I mean, so it's--I mean it's a--you, you know at the end that, that Wal-Mart did it.
Speaker 1: Right, but--
Speaker 2: But it, it, it was not a lot of information, or you know, we wanna thank Bob Connelly and all these people and Lee Scott and everybody.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: They weren't, they weren't mentioned.  But that's the kind of company they are.  I'll give you another quick example.  When we had our tenth anniversary with Wal-Mart, and we issued a press release, which we, of course, let them read first before we sent it out.  And we were saying, you know, thanking them because they've been greatly responsible for our growth and all the good things that they've done for E. Morris.  And they totally rewrote it.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: And they, they ended up thanking us for being their agency, and for giving them good advice, and doing good work for them, and all these things, you know.
Speaker 1: They're totally--
Speaker 2: Turned it around, yeah.
Speaker 1: That is so interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that's how they are.
Story_ID: 111441
Speaker 1: Now your account with the Illinois Department of Transportation and the $600 million dollar--uh, when I--
Speaker 2: Dan Ryan [Dan Ryan Expressway in Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 1: --think about driving on the Dan Ryan (laughter)-- I'm sorry, I just had a flashback of being on there late the other night.
Speaker 2: It's only gonna be worse for the next couple of years.
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: Sorry.
Speaker 1: But what has been great for you and all that, is their, their prior agency did not do a good job of communicating what was happening with the, the reconstruction, but you stepped in.  And can you talk a little bit about what, what you have done to, to get their message out?
Speaker 2: Well, I think one of the problems with, with the, with, with the other agencies, that they weren't from the community--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --so they didn't, they didn't really understand.  They didn't really understand the community, so they didn't always know who to talk to; you know, they didn't always know, they didn't really have their finger on the pulse; they didn't always know what some of the problems were, what some of the issues were.  So I think that, you know, we are the community.  I mean most of the people who work at E. Morris [E. Morris Communications, Inc.], they live south [in Chicago, Illinois].  I mean we have some people who, who live north.  But we have a lot of people who are gonna have to traverse the Dan Ryan over the next couple of years during, during all this construction.  So these people feel it.  I mean it's, it's very real for them.  So we can talk to them.  We, we know what their feelings are.  We have people who kind of along in that corridor, so they know what kind of disruption it's causing, not just from a traffic standpoint, not just getting to work in the morning, but getting across the thing--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and having to live with all the dirt and dust and all those things.
Speaker 1: So I guess we should probably explain, because when somebody watches this in fifty years, they'll say what are they talking about?  The reconstruction on the Dan Ryan, which is a major artery in the Chicago [Illinois], right now, for the first time, would you say since the Dan Ryan was built, they're actually paying attention to it in the, the traditionally black area of the city?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I mean it, it's gonna be--it's not only gonna be, affect the traffic flow, but it's gonna be a, a beautiful expressway.  I mean we're working to have some neighborhood art along the walls and, and, and all kinds of things, so it'll be, it'll be wider; it'll be landscaped better; and it's, it's gonna be a beautiful, a beautiful expressway.  So, it, it, believe it or not, I know it's hard to believe at this point that--but it will be worth the pain once it's done.
Speaker 1: Well, I will say this, it, that, that first phase that's complete right now, it is really quite amazing.  I, I can't believe that I was driving past it for all these years.  I'm like, when did they do that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Change the, the on and off ramps--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and rebuilding all of the overpasses, and, and, and widening them, and, and, and reinforcing them and in an area that has been neglected since the Dan Ryan was built, basically, and (unclear) we weren't important.  So IDOT [Illinois Department of Transportation] said okay, we need to tell people what's going on because what, were they getting a lot of complaints and, and how did you address some of the issues in the community?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things we did, as, as I said, because we are part of the communi--community, but we went right to the community.  We went to some of the people who were having the problems to ask them, you know, what is it that you need?  How would you like to be--how would you like for us to communicate with you?  What, what works best for you?  Is it, is it email?  It is it the newspaper?  Is it, is it the radio?  Is it a flyer?  Is it a, is it a neighborhood newsletter?  I mean, so I, I think that's, that's really the key.  I mean it's, you know I--early on I talked about common sense.  A lot of what we do is common sense.
Speaker 1: It ain't so common.
Speaker 2: I mean it's not rocket science, but it ain't as common as, as you, you would think.  So, I mean it, it, it wasn't really that hard to figure out what we needed to do.  We just needed to do it.
Story_ID: 111442
Speaker 1: So, would you--of, of all the things that you've worked on, all the accounts, what would you, which one would you pick out and say yeah, this has probably been not only my most successful, but the one I'm abs--you know, really proud of, where we really made a difference?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I always, I always have to say. you know, a mother, I mean all my, all my children are beautiful.  I'm not gonna say that--you know--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You--
Speaker 2: --and, and one of my clients might see this, so obviously I'm not anxious--
Speaker 1: They're all--
Speaker 2: --to say well, you know, I, I, I like this.  But, but I, I think in terms of what's, what's happening right now, I would, I would say that what we're [E. Morris Communications, Inc.] doing with Tyson [Tyson Foods, Inc.] is extremely interesting.  And, and the one reason is because we've got a, you know, we've got a smaller budget.  I mean we don't have a Wal-Mart [Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.], a Wal-Mart kind of budget.  But I think one of the things that Tyson is doing is that they are doing all the right things in terms of we, we have done research to understand our consumer.  I think that they have involved us very early on in the strategy so that we're not just executing something, but we really are involved at the strategic level, so we can say well, no, maybe instead of going that way, maybe we should be doing it like this and, and--
Speaker 1: "Double Dutch," how did that, remember you said to mention the "Double Dutch."
Speaker 2: Well, I mean it, the Double Dutch thing, one of the things we've--when we tested these commercials, they tested extremely high among everybody, black people and white people.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: And one of the reasons why we find--and this is something we discovered a long time ago, is that a lot of times white people and black people are both interested, but they're interested for totally different reasons.  A black, a black woman watching it might watch it and think oh, I remember that.  You know, you remember so and so?  Morris, she could really get it.  So they're, they're relating to the experience.  A white person watching, they might under have ever seen anybody jump Double Dutch before, but they think wow, isn't that interesting.
Speaker 1: That little old lady.
Speaker 2: There's somebody, they got two ropes, you know.  And, and so, it, it, it, it holds people's interest, but not always for the same reason.  But for us, as long as it gets their attention, and they remember our message, and then eventually they go out and buy the product, then our job is done.
Speaker 1: It's really--I have to say that I really remember that one.  And before I looked, I was like, this is so hilarious.  I usually--I mean the Tyson's chickens commercials usually have been fairly humorous anyway.  But I couldn't remember one where I saw black people in it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So that's why I really, it really stuck out in my mind.
Speaker 2: But, you know, one of the things, and, and it's, part of it is also based on a principle.  It's like if, if I would go to a, a family reunion or something like that or someplace or to a party where there were, were there were kids.  And they see me, this man is sixty-something years old, and the next thing they know I'm out on the dance floor and I'm dancing.  And they think wow, we didn't know he could do that, because they think, well, you know--
Speaker 1: He's old.
Speaker 2: --what's old grandfatherly kind of man, what, what does he know?  You know, and the fact that, that you're doing something that's out of context for them--
Speaker 1: It sticks--
Speaker 2: --helps, helps--
Speaker 1: --sticks on--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --helps resonate.
Story_ID: 111443
Speaker 1: Well, I guess I kind of wanna tie all of these, these ends together.  That, that's why I was kind of leading you into that.  How would you like to be remembered?  Because I notice on the outside of your office you have three pictures: one of Nelson Mandela, [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], and [Chicago Mayor] Harold Washington (unclear) you also have prominently featured in here as well.  So I, I, I, I know they all have amazing legacies.  What, what is one that, that you want to leave and, and be remembered by?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know.  I, I think that I, I really feel strongly about being respected, you know.  I, I often say that I would rather be respected than liked.  I mean I, I wanna be liked to, but, but I, I wanna be thought of someone who did something while I was here.  You know, I, I, I, I've been working in this business now for almost forty years.  I, I wanna be thought of as somebody who would never give up, that no matter how great the odds, that I would always hang in there, you know.  I wanna be thought of as someone who has a tough mind but a tender heart, that, you know, you can count on me, that I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm always ready and willing to help somebody who needs help, that I always, I looked out for other people, you know, and that I had a good time doing it, because I've, I've, I've enjoyed myself.  I mean when I think of the life that I've lived, you know, sometimes people ask me are, are you living your dream?  And I said, I didn't even dream about this.  'Cause a lot of the things that I've gotten a chance to do, I didn't even know they existed.  I didn't even know people did them.  And to think that one day I would do them, it's fascinating to me.  And, and I feel, I feel so blessed that I've had the chance to travel to places that I've traveled, to experience a, a lot of the things that I've experienced, I mean everything from driving a, a horse and wagon, you know, and pulling a pushcart, to driving a vintage Jaguar, I mean, you know, and, and, and flying first class, and doing, you know, just doing things that I never even, I never even thought about.  You know, I didn't even, I didn't even allow myself to dream that big.  So, for me, I, I, I feel extremely blessed.  I've said that one of the things that when, you know, when God sees, sees fit to take me away, one of the things that I want to be said is that, it's a little old, it's--I guess I, I know I must have stolen part of this from somewhere, but it--I've, I, I wanna say that: sing no sad songs for me, 'cause I've been as blessed as blessed can be.  And, and that's really the way I feel.  Whenever, whenever it's, it's time for me to go, I mean I'd have to say well, okay, God.  I mean I have to be ready because of all the blessings I've received here on earth.
Story_ID: 111444
Speaker 1: What, what do you think your parents [Willie Mae Mitchell Morris and Eugene Morris, Sr.] would say about all your success if they could, you know, come into your, to your office right now?  What do you think they'd say?
Speaker 2: I, I think they would be amazed, I mean they would.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Like, we couldn't get him to pay attention in class.
Speaker 2: You know, yeah, because--and, and I think they, I guess they would say--you know, my mother would probably say that he finally got it, because she knew that, you know, when I was, when I was growing up, when I was a kid, I was a very smart kid.  So, she knew that I--that there was something; you know, I had something, but I just never exploited it.  I never took advantage of it, and--but, but I think they would be very pleased.  I think my mother would be extremely pleased that I'm, I'm in church every Sunday, that I--and, and that I, that I'm really working hard to live the, to live that life, you know.  My father would be pleased to know that I still enjoy a glass of wine, and I still enjoy having a good time, so, so he would know that some of his, his genes are still present.  So I, I--and, and, and I think they would be, they would be proud if, if they asked people about me, that most people would have good things to say.  I mean there's always gonna be people who don't like you and gonna say bad things about you, but I, but I think that they would, they would be proud that, that people would say nice things about me, and I think that would, that would make them feel good.
Speaker 1: That's important.
Story_ID: 111445
Speaker 1: Just kind of my--my last question is, since you have, have done so many different things, and here, you know, here you are in, in your own advertising agency [E. Morris Communications, Inc.] and your own business, what advice would you offer to, you know, probably a student who'll be watching this in the future who never thought about advertising or, or being an entrepreneur?  What would you tell them they should, should do?  Is there anything in particular they should do or not do, and how would you advise someone?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I don't know.  We got a, a couple of things.  I'd say a couple of things: one, I, I believe strongly in entrepreneurship, especially for African Americans.  There's nothing like having your own, but it, it's, it's not just gonna happen.  I mean even me, I mean even though I was just kind of stumbling around sometimes, I still had some thoughts as to what I could do and what I couldn't do.  I understood that when I started this business that I didn't know--I knew about the advertising business, but I still had to understand the business of business.  I wasn't an accountant, you know.  I wasn't, I wasn't a writer.  I wasn't an art director.  So I knew I had to surround myself with people who knew how to do the things that, that I couldn't do.  I knew that I couldn't allow my ego to block my hearing, you know, where I, you know, I get so full of myself that I don't pay attention or listen to, to anybody.  And I think sometimes people can get caught up in, in their, in their own ego, with their own egos.  I think--I, I strongly urge people to remember this is a very, very small world.  So when you're doing things to people, and you're mistreating people, and you're misusing people, you never know when or where you're gonna have to see those people again.  So be very careful about that, and, and just prepare yourself.  I mean, and, and don't, you know, don't give up.  Don't let fear paralyze you.  I mean let it, let it motivate you.  And, and, and, and, and try to live that dream, 'cause when you, when you get it right it's, it's certainly worthwhile.
Story_ID: 111446
Speaker 1: And I guess the, the final thing that I wanna say, which we haven't, we haven't really touched on is that I think that there's no doubt with me that, that my life has taken a change for the better since I brought God in my life.  And I think that the woman I'm currently married to [Demetra Morris] was very responsible for really helping me to see that.  And I'm, I'm really grateful that she came into my life.  She came late.  I mean I wish she had come a lot earlier.
Speaker 2: Like, where have you been?
Speaker 1: But, but, but you know, but she did get here, and I, I think that she's had a profound and very positive effect on my life.  And it, it was, it was another blessing that I, I just seem to have been surrounded by for so long.
Speaker 2: That's really beautiful.  Be sure to tell her that you said that too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 110158
Speaker 1: Well, that photo was taken in the summer of 1956, right after my graduation from high school [Tilden Career Community Academy High School in Chicago, Illinois].  And I was wearing my sweater trying to show off that, the, the young girl in the picture with me.  She was visiting.  I remember her name was Mary, and she was from Old Hickory, Tennessee, and she was there for the summer.  So I was just trying to impress her with all my exploits.  And so even though it was probably too warm to be wearing a, a wool sweater, I did it anyway.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: I'm not sure, oh
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Go, go ahead.
Speaker 1: --I'm, I'm not sure why it was pose picture, because it was really taken in the back of our restaurant, and I guess I'd been playing catch.  And this was in about 1954.  We had a restaurant, which was not far from, from this location right on 18th and Wabash [Chicago, Illinois].  And baseball was a great passion of mine.  I thought that one day I'd, I would be a professional baseball player, un--until I reached a point where they could throw real live curve balls, and then I quickly decided that education might be a better alternative.
Speaker 2: That's a prom picture.  It's, it's one of my favorite pictures even though it wasn't my prom.  I had gone to Parker High School's [now Paul Robeson High School in Chicago, Illinois] prom, and I thought that that was one of the best pictures I had ever taken, up to that point.  I thought it made me look a lot more handsome and debonair than I was, so I always, always treasured it.
Speaker 1: What year was that?
Speaker 2: It was about 1957.
Speaker 1: This is a family photo.  It's the only one like this that I have.  It's my mother [Willie Mae Mitchell Morris], my father [Eugene Morris, Sr.], my younger sister, Doris [Porter], who is, you know, we were always together.  And this was taken in 1946 in Lincoln Park, [Chicago, Illinois] one Sunday afternoon.  And you know, my family didn't take a lot of pictures, so this is the only one like that in existence.  And I'm really glad that I was able to find it.
Speaker 2: And what was your nickname back then?
Speaker 1: Are you still trying to get that out of me, huh?  Well, actually it's printed on the picture.
Speaker 2: I know.
Speaker 1: It's, it was Junie, J-U-N-I-E, I guess.  I don't know.  I never wrote it down, so.  But I guess that's what it was.
Speaker 2: And this is a picture of my father, who was a very stylish and well-dressed man.  It was taken, I'm, I'm kind of guessing here, but I think it was taken around 1950 when he was in his late forties or early fifties.
Speaker 1: And this is probably the favorite, my favorite photo of my father.  It was taken in 1938 when he was probably around 36, 37 years old.  And it was taken outside of Wrigley Field [Chicago, Illinois].  He was actually on his way to a baseball game, and one of those photographers who just kind of take pictures randomly of people snapped him.  And again, I thought it was so him, you know, going to a baseball game in a, in a hat, a three-piece suit, a double breasted suit. And when, and the first time I saw it I was about that age.  And so I was really amazed at, at, you know, how much I looked like him and how much I was like him at that, at that same age.  So I really got a kick out of finding that picture.
Speaker 2: That is so fantastic.  That suit is a beauty.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother and father when they were very young, looks like early twenties [1920s].  It was taken in, in Dallas, Texas, so we're, we're guessing that they were somewhere between 19, 22 years old when that picture was taken.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this picture was taken around 1998 at Real Men Cook, an event that I participated in for about fifteen consecutive years, where I'd bake chocolate chip cookies and, and cheesecakes.  And I, I used to really enjoy doing that 'cause I, you know, I really enjoy cooking and baking, so it was quite an event.  And I even had a chef coat embroidered with my initials and all that stuff, so I really took it very seriously.
Speaker 1: Where was this event held typically?
Speaker 2: That particular, that one was held at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] on 63rd Street [Chicago, Illinois].  It, it was in a number of different locations.  It's now at the South Shore Cultural Center [Chicago, Illinois], but that was on 63rd and Stony Island.
Speaker 1: That picture was taken at our company [E. Morris Communications, Inc.] Christmas party in December of 1994.  And I'm with my sister, Doris [Porter], who was working for us at that time.  And it's one of, one of my favorite pictures.  It kind of shows us having a good time, which we tended to do a lot.
Speaker 2: This photo was taken in, around December of, or Janu--December '62 [1962] or January of '63 [1963].  I was in basic training, Fort Knox, Kentucky.  And I'm with one of the guys I used to kind of hang out with, a guy named Sid Olsen [ph.] from, from Minnesota.  We had been out on a little march that day and stopped and, and had a little photo session.
Speaker 1: This my baby picture, of course.  I was eight months old.  And I remember one of the things that had happened, I, I took it to--we had a, a little thing at the office one day where everybody had to bring in their picture, and, and then we would try to guess who was who.  And we had one white person working for us at the time, and everybody guessed that that was her.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) But you don't particularly look like a white baby, but okay.
Speaker 1: My fifth grade picture [at Forestville Elementary School in Chicago, Illinois], and it was taken in 1949 when of course I was about ten years old.  And I'm in the second row, the third person from the left.
Speaker 2: Right there?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now where is [HM] Herbie Hancock?
Speaker 1: Herbie Hancock is in the same row.  He's the third person from the right.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, he looks the same, without the glasses.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And then that, there's a, the girl in there in the first row, first person on the right, that was the, the love of my life, the person I thought that I could never life without, but I've eventually learned to do it.  But it did take awhile.
Speaker 2: You guys dated until you were how old?
Speaker 1: Oh, well, I mean it was kind of--I didn't really date her then.  I just, I was, I had a great interest.  She didn't have very much interest in me.  But, but this kind of went on until, into my thirties.  But it's a (unclear) in the back row.  He was my best man at my wedding, so.
Speaker 2: Oh, wait, he's the one that was number thirty-six ranked in, in your class?
Speaker 1: No, not him.
Speaker 2: That's--okay.
Speaker 1: But we still, we still stay in contact and yeah, so, there's a lot of, couple of interesting picture--people in there.
Speaker 2: Sure why we took that picture, but it was a class picture.  It was taken in high school.  I was a, a sophomore in high school, which would have been in around 1954.  And I remember that, I remember that tie 'cause I didn't even own a tie, and I had to borrow my brother-in-law's tie for that photo.
Speaker 1: And this photo was taken in 1963 upon my graduation from basic training at, at Fort Knox, Kentucky.
Speaker 2: This is me.  This was taken the same day that family photo in 1946 in Lincoln Park.  I don't know, it was, well, it was in September, so it might have been around Labor Day 'cause I'm holding a--standing by a flag for some reason.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my oldest sister, Mary [Lawrence], who is on the left, and her daughter, Anita.  And the, this was taken in 1963.
Speaker 2: And this is my youngest sister, Doris.  This was also taken in 1963.  And you see a jukebox in the background 'cause it was taken at, at the family restaurant, which at that time was located at 1730 South Wabash.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the restaurant?
Speaker 2: That one was--let me see, what was it called then?  It might have been Topper's, Topper's Inn, 'cause they changed the name a couple of times.  I think it was, think it was Topper's Inn then.
Speaker 1: And this was middle sister, Ora [Jeffries], who--and this was also taken in 1963.  And she was in her mid-thirties.  She, she died a few years later, so.  She died in 1965.
Speaker 2: And that is Ms. [HM] Frances T. Matlock, who was my sixth grade teacher.  And she's on a bus on, on, on my birthday when my staff surprised me with her attending the party.  And we went on a little tour of, of Chicago and a lot of the places that I had, had lived and grew up as a kid.
Speaker 1: What year was that again?
Speaker 2: That was in 2001.
Speaker 1: And this is me standing with her just before boarding the bus.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I'm sorry, continue.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so this was in 2001 at the--and we were just getting ready to board the bus to go on that little historical trip I mentioned.  The thing about it is I, I've always, when I was in her class, I always thought she was so big, you know.  And so seeing her 40, 50 years later, it was little difference.
Speaker 1: This was taken I think around '03 [2003].  And I was, for, for many, many years I've been the chairperson of the Sickle Cell Walk-Jog-Bike-a-thon, and this was taken the day of the event.  It's always held the second Saturday in June.
Speaker 2: And this was taken November 13th of 2005, and it is a picture of myself and my second wife, Demetra [Morris].  And this was taken at the Four Seasons Hotel, had about 140 guests.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this was taken of course the same day.  And our pastor, [HM] Bishop Arthur M. Brazier, who married us, and a man I really admire and respect, was who officiated at the ceremony.
Speaker 2: This picture was taken in 2001.  It's me and Demetra and Wynton Marsalis.  This was taken at--I was receiving an award from Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois].  It was the Harold Washington Award for Distinguished Alumni.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That, what are we doing this day?
Speaker 1: This was, this was taken in '04 [2004], and I had just completed a skydive with the Golden Knights, which is an Army parachute team.  So it was a pretty exciting day.  It was something I'd always wanted to do, and having an opportunity to jump, and then to jump with them, really made it special.  It also gave me a lot more courage 'cause I figured they knew what they were doing, 'cause I sure didn't.
Speaker 2: Did you do a tandem jump or you jump like--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was a tandem jump, yeah.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of myself and Dr. Robert E. Snyder, who was my, one of my college professors, but he was the professor who really is the reason why I'm in the advertising business today.  He hounded me to make sure that I went in this direction.  And this day I was presenting him with the Rolf Awar--Rolf Weil Award, who was a former president of Roosevelt [University in Chicago, Illinois], for Distinguished Service.  And this was about, a, around 2000.
Speaker 1: And this is a picture of myself and the current [Chicago] Mayor [Richard M.] Daley.  This was taken in 2001.  I'd just received an award for being one of the fastest growing businesses in the nation.  And they, they, they honored us at a ceremony at, in the Chicago City Council chambers for all the Chicago businesses who made the list.
Speaker 2: And this one was taken at our seventeenth anniversary of E. Morris Communications [Inc.].  And we always have some kind of celebration, and this was one of the pictures that, that they took during that little observance.
Speaker 1: In what year was your seventeenth anniversary?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--from 19--
Speaker 2: It was 2004.
