Story_ID: 283123
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, our videographer today is Scott Stearns, and observing is Neculai--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Burghelea.
Speaker 1: Okay, Burghelea--that'll work.  And we're slating this interview for The HistoryMakers.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Harriet R. Michel, M-I-C-H-E-L, H-A-R-R-I-E-T, M-I-C-H-E-L.
Speaker 1: Now, what does the R. stand for?
Speaker 2: Richardson, my maiden name.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, is there a story behind the name Michel?
Speaker 2: Well, my husband [Yves Michel] is from Haiti and--hence his name and I liked Michel better than Richardson, so I was glad to take his name.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Seven, five, forty-two [07/05/42], Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I don't know how to describe myself; I guess I'm an executive of the, of a not-for-profit organization that matches corporations with minority businesses for them to do business together, which is awkward, but I'll say it better later.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Three, seven, o' five [03/07/05]--March, March the 7th.
Speaker 1: Is it the sixth or seventh?
Speaker 2: Seventh, because this is the fortieth anniversary of the Selma March--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, so that's why I know that.
Speaker 1: All right, 2005, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in New York City [New York, New York] in the National Minority Supplier Development Council's [NMSDC] offices, 1040 Avenue of Americas--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --New York, New York.
Story_ID: 283124
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type lightweight questions that we ask as kind of a warm-up--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and the first question is, ma'am, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: No.  I like to eat a lot; I'm very fond of food.  I consider myself a, a gourmet cook and a gourmand eater (laughter), and so I don't have any single favorite food.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Probably summer because I was born in the summer.  I like warm weather.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, I've been lucky enough to travel the world, but I also am fortunate enough to have a house on the beach in Haiti, and it's a wonderful house and so we're very fond of going there.
Speaker 1: Whereabouts in Haiti, if I may ask (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's in a little fishing village called Luly [Haiti], which is about thirty-five miles outside of Port-au-Prince [Haiti]; we built it about ten years ago and it's a nice big house right on the water.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so; there are colors I stay away from but I don't think I have a favorite color.
Speaker 1: And now the last question in this series is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, but I can't say it in polite company (laughter).  Yes, I do, but I'd rather not say.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right; I understand.
Story_ID: 283125
Speaker 1: Well, I'm going to ask you about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [John Richardson, Jr.] side.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: We'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Vida, V-I-D-I--V-I-D-A, Harmony, H-A-R-M-O-N-Y, Fish, F-I-S-H, Richardson.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, when do you--what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side of the family?  How far back do they go, and are there any--
Speaker 2: I have cousins that know more than I do about this, but on my mother's father's side, Frederick Fish, they came from West Elkton, Ohio.  It is said that my great--that my grandfather, I don't know if it's the truth, Frederick Fish, was a very learned man, and--that part I know is true--was a classical violist, played the viola, and was very interested in the Niagara Movement, and at some point might have been involved with W. E. B. Du Bois.
Speaker 1: So, do you know his date of birth and--
Speaker 2: No, I think I put it on the sheet, but I don't know if I have it here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, where is West Elkton, Ohio?
Speaker 2: Southern Ohio; southern--southwestern Ohio.
Speaker 1: Southwestern?  That's near Cincinnati [Ohio] or Dayton [Ohio], or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, down around, down around there; I've never been there.  For years, my grandfather had sisters who lived there, and my aunts and uncles knew them but I never knew them.  My grandmother's side--Rosella Artis; we don't know anything about her at all, and all the relatives who might have known have since died.
Speaker 1: That's A-R-T-I-S?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there's nothing--you really don't know much about her at all.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh; very little.  She--part of the reason is that she was out of the picture very early because she had a brain tumor and she was institutionalized for years and years.  I didn't even know I had a grandmother until I was almost an adult; my mother never talked about it.  In those days, I guess, they were ashamed of anyone who had mental illness and so she was institutionalized for a long time, and my mother used to go and visit her, but we were always told that she had died so we didn't know very much about her.
Story_ID: 283126
Speaker 1: Now, did you ever meet your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Frederick Fish?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was very stern, very elegant kind of early 20th century man, very proper, very interested in the classics, very well-read, very strict with his children because he--there were ten children in the family and my grandmother [Rosella Artis], I take it, got ill early and my grandfather was stuck trying to raise those kids by himself with the aid of housekeepers and so-on, and so in order to keep up with a brood of ten, I think he became even more strict, and many of my aunts and uncles on my mother's side got married early so they could out of the house, out from under his thumb.  My mother [Vida Fish Richardson] ended up being--she's the third from--was the third from the last, and so she ended up being the mother for the--her younger sister and brother, and which shaped her very much, which I'll talk about in a minute, but who was very much a part of who she was as she mothered them and nurtured them.  And my grandfather--but when we visited, I'm told, and I remember, he was always very pleasant, although their memories of him were that he was fairly cold (laughter) and, and pretty stern.
Speaker 1: Now, what did he do for a living?  Was he associated with a school or something?
Speaker 2: Well, he--I'm, I'm not sure; I think he was a clerk for a while; there's some rumor that I don't remember that early on, he went off to Washington, D.C. as an administrative assistant or something; he had some kind of job at the--in the capitol until they found out he was black, and he was fired, but I don't know what that job is.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he didn't necessarily look black; not like, really like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So is there a--do you know where he went to school?  Did he go to college?
Speaker 2: He went to--no, he di--yes, he went to two years of, I guess, beyond high school which I guess then was normal school, or whatever it was called, and--I don't remember.  Boy, this is really bad, but I don't remember this; I should have talked to some of my relatives before I sat down and talked to you, I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay, well this is--these are clues anyway, and anybody looking at this interview, if they want to follow up there will be something to follow (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, right.  He spent--they spent many years in Elizabeth, New Jersey, which is where my mother was raised; she was born in Maryland but she was raised in Elizabeth and so someone's looking Elizabeth, New Jersey, and their records would be a good place to look.  My mother went to high school there and graduated from high school in Elizabeth.
Story_ID: 283127
Speaker 1: So he [Michel's maternal grandfather, Frederick Fish] didn't spend the longest time in Ohio.  Now is there a tradition on that side of the family about--concerning whether they were free or enslaved or anything like that?
Speaker 2: I know very little, tell you the truth.  I have an uncle who's since deceased, and his daughter that--that was very interested in the family history, and his daughter is the proprietor of that, and I faded in and out as they've talked about it.  I'm much more familiar with my father's [John Richardson, Jr.] side of the family because we were much closer to them growing up, so I have a little more information about them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, did your mother [Vida Fish Richardson] talk about growing up before we leave your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and it was hard.  My mother ended up being--I think because she didn't have a mother and wanted so much to have one, she--all of the things that she would have liked to have had in a mother she became, so she was, in our view, of all my siblings, the absolute perfect mother, and so much so that each of us was thought to be an only child, which was probably not a compliment, but that's as much love and energy that she invested in each of her kids.  And with each of us--and we were spread out over a seventeen-year period, all of our friends came to our house because our mother was just so warm and receptive and open, and so mother-like.  I mean I don't know how else to describe her except she was just the perfect mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now her name; I mean a name like--I'm interested in knowing what her brothers and sisters were named if her name was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, there was also a rumor--
Speaker 1: Vida Harmony; I mean that's such a--okay--
Speaker 2: Well, Fish is even more interesting because there are some people who say that the family is somehow related to the Hamilton Fish family, and in--the truth of the matter is if you look at their eyes--because if you remember the Hamilton Fish family had kind of bulgy eyes?  My mother's family had that as well, so there were some rumors, but I don't know that anybody has ever proved the, the connection, but there was some discussion that they were part of their family.
Speaker 1: Now Hamilton Fish was in--yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Congressman from New York, and the Fish family--I don't think there's one now, but for generations, represented, represented New York and the, and the government.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--well, let me go to your father's si--oh, can you give me your mother's birthdate?
Speaker 2: Oh, Lord, I wrote it down; it's September 14th and she would have been eighty-five, so we have to figure back like 1915 [sic. 1919]--something like that?  What are we in 2003?  We--somebody figure it out--
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventeen [1917], yeah, 1917, yeah.
Speaker 2: Seventeen [1917]--whatever; yeah, she would have been eighty-five, for sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 283128
Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side.  Can you give us your father's full name, and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: John Robert Richardson, Jr.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: March 21st, maybe 19--oh God!  He would have been ninety last year, 2004, so that meant he was born in 1914, right?  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And what do you know about his side of the family and about his ancestors (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A lot, a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The family comes from Rural Retreat, Virginia, the father--my great-grandfather was John Benjamin Franklin Richardson who married Sarah Warhop [ph.] who was a, an Indian [Native American], and they produced fourteen children, of which my grandfather was the baby, John Robert Richardson, Sr.  My--the family grew up there, my, my great-grandfather fled the scene; nobody kinda knows where he, he went, but my great-grandmother stayed there and reared all those children.  She was a medicine woman for the community, she birthed babies and practiced Indian medicine, I guess; she was kind of a root woman but, you know, she knew enough about herbs and acifidity bags and things like that, that she was often called on to minister to people when they were ill because nobody could access a doctor; they were up in the--in Rural Retreat, which is pretty mountainous.  It was an extraordinarily handsome family; all of them were prizes, I guess.  They were thought to be the children of, of John Benjamin Franklin and Sarah.  My grandfather met my grandmother--oh, I don't know what year, and--whose name was Viola Douglass, who was a school teacher.  My grandfather used to drive cars for wealthy white people.  There's a wonderful story about my grandfather that my great-grandmother used to take in wash and, and that's how she supported herself in addition to these medical things that she did which--for which I'm sure she didn't get paid very much, and that my grandfather, as the youngest child, used to deliver this laundry for her, and that there was some white woman up in the hills to whom he delivered the laundry on a regular basis, and the woman sent the message to my great-grandmother that she was interested in my grandfather, and that my grandmother would have to--my great-grandmother would have to agree to that, or she would accuse him of rape, so she would have him one way or the other, and the story is that they then shipped my grandfather out of Rural Retreat, out of a situation that was threatening to be very dangerous.  Now, I never discussed that with my grandfather; I heard it said about him by many family members on the Richardson family, and there's a lot of history written about the Richardsons by the way--the county has done--there's a, there's a history project in Virginia where the Richardsons are--that their family history has been traced; there were a lot of them (laughter).
Story_ID: 283129
Speaker 1: So a lot of history is being written down about them [Michel's paternal family]--
Speaker 2: Yes, a lot of history 'cause one of our fam--that--the reason I know so much about that family is that we have regular reunions; they used to have going home reunions when my dad [John Richardson, Jr.] was little, and all the brothers and sisters--my dad kind of moved furthers north, my grandfather [John Richardson, Sr.] having moved to Pennsylvania, but they would go back to Virginia every, every year, and then that tradition of family reunions was suspended for a very long time, and about twenty years ago when there were twelve members of my dad's generation still alive they, they initiated these reunions, this Richardson family reunions, so we've gone to a retreat--we've gone to the church that the family used to worship in, we've seen the graveyard where the Richardson headstones and that sort of thing are.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, where is Rural Retreat [Virginia] in relationship to [Washington] D.C. maybe, or Richmond [Virginia], or--
Speaker 2: No, it's, it's between the Virginia--it's on the Virginia line between Virginia and North Carolina and, I guess, West Virginia is where the three states--it's way south and it's, and it's rural, you know, it's really rural.  I guess they grew cabbages there later 'cause people used to talk about how it used to stink (laughter), so it, it--for some reason, at some period of time they grew a lot of cabbage there; don't ask me why.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The name Rural Retreat, do you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's two, it's two words, Rural Retreat, Virginia, yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and it's still a little--phew--town, and we've tried--every time we have a reunion, there different Richardsons who show up, but it was a, it was a big family, a big family.  And most of them stayed--of my, my grandfather's siblings, stayed in the region and my grandfather was the only one who came as far as, as Pennsylvania; most of 'em stayed in Virginia--some of them went to Tennessee, and so on.
Story_ID: 283130
Speaker 1: Your grandfather [John Richardson, Sr.] moved to Pennsylvania.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Whereabouts in Pennsylvania?
Speaker 2: Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]--Coraop--well, Coraopolis, Pennsylvania, which is where I graduated from high school [Coraopolis High School, Coraopolis, Pennsylvania], which is about thirteen miles outside of Pittsburgh; it's one of those little mill towns that runs from Pittsburgh down the Ohio River toward, toward West Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Did your father talk about growing up there?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My, my grandmother [Viola Douglass] and grandfather divorced when my father was twelve years old; my father has three younger siblings, and because my dad was twelve, he decided to stay with his father in Coraopolis and the three younger kids, because they were too young to make the decision, moved with my grandmother to, to Pittsburgh.  Her name was--I told you it was Viola Douglass--with two s's--out of Virginia as well.  Now, her story is interesting because her mother was white and her father was black, and her father--I guess her father had a brother or something that had been slaves, but in any event, how--of course miscegenation was certainly outlawed in Virginia, and they ran them out of the state and they came to Western Pennsylvania, the Douglass family, with these four daughters, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your father likes to--he stayed there with his father and what did--yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Coraopolis, and Coraopolis is a very small town.  He graduated from his high school, as did I and, and two of my siblings.  He worked in a--my grandfather did odd jobs; he painted, he did--he was a very hard-working man.  He did maintenance work and all sorts of things, but he was known in the little town 'cause he'd been there most of his life--not most of his life but most of his adult life, and he was known as very trustworthy and dependable and you know, he did wallpaper and painting and, you know, and that sort of thing.  My dad graduated from high school there, and was in music.  My father used to have a band; he was the singer, and he lived in Pittsburgh and he used to--there was a theater there on Centre Avenue at Pittsburgh, which was the heart of the Hill District [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and the center of black life in the 19--what--'30s [1930s], '40s [1940s] or '50s [1950s], and there used to be a theater called the New Granada [Theater], G-R-E-N-A-D-A [sic.] Theater, and it was owned by a Jewish man name Harry Hendel after whom I am named, Harry--[HistoryMaker] Harriet [Michelle Michel], and they had a ballroom upstairs.  My father did everything at the theater; he managed the theater, he drove for the theater owner, my mother [Vida Fish Richardson] sold tickets and candy at the theater when I was very young.
Story_ID: 283131
Speaker 1: But before I was born, my dad [John Richardson, Jr.] used to sing in this band that would play upstairs in the [New Granada] Theater [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], but after they got married, my father decided to give up, to give up music, so--
Speaker 2: He was singin' like big band type stuff? Swing and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  I mean, you know, a lotta musicians came outta Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] in those days--Erroll Garner, Billy Eckstine--this is a whole buncha people.  And I don't know why it produced--we've often talked about that--why it produced so many musicians in those years, but it did.  And a lot of musicians came through there, you know; that was the home of the Homestead Grays, the black baseball team, and so on.  So there was a lot of life in Pittsburgh in black life in, in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] particularly.
Speaker 2: Right, and it's often written about by August Wilson; he keeps it alive (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, oh yes.  August Wilson's plays detailed--that's right; very much so.
Speaker 2: Several plays, and all of these in Pittsburgh and right in his home town.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so it is a place that was jumpin', you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean I remember that as a, as a young girl; we lived in Pittsburgh until I was eight, and my father, by that time, had a job as a--in a steel mill, in J&L [Jones and Laughlin] Steel [Company], and he thought that he would move the family to Coraopolis [Pennsylvania] and kinda--the Hill District [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] was getting kind of rough and he wanted to move us to this small town which we all hated (laughter).  My mother [Vida Fish Richardson] did, I did, and my older brother [John R. Richardson] did; my two younger siblings, my sisters [Denise Pegram and Monica Pride], didn't have much to say about it, but we were really unhappy about moving to this small town, but my father, of course, had grown up there, and so he knew it quite well and very familiar with it, and we felt it was stifling.
Story_ID: 283132
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your mother [Vida Fish Richardson] and father [John Richardson, Jr.] met?
Speaker 2: I don't know, except my dad was playing at this, at this ballroom [New Granada Theater, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and my mother was there with her older sister.  My mother graduated from high school in Elizabeth [New Jersey], and came to live with Helen Veezee [ph.] who was her sister that lived in, in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] then, and at age seventeen or eighteen went to this dance and met my father, and they danced, and the story is he told her, "For God's sakes, would you allow me to lead?"  (Laughter) But there's an interesting story about my mother and father.  I have an older--had an older brother [John R. Richardson] who's five years older than I, and when my mother and father--when my mother got pregnant, my father didn't marry her at first because his family didn't want him to, and so it was five years later when I was about to come, that they finally got married, and I didn't learn that until I was trying to do the fiftieth anniversary of my mother and father, and they finally told us that, you know, my dad took a few years before he did the right thing, but he did, and they had four children together.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how do you spell Coraopolis [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: C-O-R-A-O-P-O-L-I-S, Coraopolis.
Speaker 1: Coraopolis, okay.
Speaker 2: C-O-R-A-O (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: P-O-L-I-S.
Speaker 1: Oh, like Cora-Opolis.
Speaker 2: Cora, like the woman's name, Cora, and then -opolis on the end of it.
Story_ID: 283133
Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Oh, God (laughter).  I think my mother [Vida Fish Richardson] bringing my baby sister home from--no, no, that's not right; when I was watching 'Lackawanna Blues' the other night, and the rooming house with the parties and stuff.  When we were little, my--we lived in, we lived in an apartment; we lived at 2351 Centre Avenue in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and--which was really the heart of the Hill District [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], and my dad [John Richardson, Jr.] was bartending and doing all sorts of things and, you know, he had been in music so he had lots of friends, and they used to give parties because down in our basement--we were renters, we weren't owners, but we had this early version of a rec [recreation] room, and they had a bar, a couple little old beer signs up, and all these kinda curled-edge pictures of, you know, Billy Eckstine and Sarah Vaughan and people like that, and they used to give these parties, and my mother would make chili because that's all they really could afford; her chili was famous, and my sisters and I all make my mother's recipe now, and I still make chili on Christmas Eve--big pots of it.  But they used to have these parties and they'd have the--I think it was 78s in those days, the old 78 records, and they would play them, and my brother [John R. Richardson] and I would go downstairs into this basement in our pjs usually, and none of the people there--some of the people--very few of the people there had children, and so we just got all this attention and I (laughter)--we were pretty spoiled by them all, and the fact that my father did not marry my mother until I came along also caused me to be very spoiled by my dad.  There's this great story about my birth, which is that my father, who drank heavily, was out celebrating the fact that I was coming; my mother and my father's sister went to Shadyside Hospital [UPMC Shadyside Hospital, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and, and they had segregated nurseries there.  When my mother and my aunt went in, they put--and they put my mother in with white people, and when I was born, I was in the white nursery, okay?  'Cause there were segregated nurseries in 1942.  And the story goes that my dad, when he came, they realized we were all black, and so they moved me from the white nursery to the black nursery, and the nurses in the black nursery were so upset that they bought this satin pillow and they carried me around for the--and those days, you stayed in the hospital longer; I got--I had this satin pillow, so my life has (laughter) pretty much been on a satin pillow.  I mean that's, that's the story; I don't know if it's true, but I was a very wanted and loved child, and these, these parties that my parents had--you know, we had lots of interaction with adults and we were very comfortable; my brother and I were very comfortable with them, so that's really my earliest memory.  And at some point, we were sent upstairs to bed and, you know, the party would continue.
Speaker 1: Now, do you just have the one brother?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's deceased.
Story_ID: 283134
Speaker 1: Okay we were talking about the truly wild nature of your father [John Richardson, Jr.], I guess; you said he was really a wild party kind of a person (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father was a man who loved to have a good time; the entire side of his family, the Richardson family, is--as I was saying, are known for three things--for their intelligence, for their attractiveness, but mostly for their sense of humor.  They have--my dad would go to great lengths to pull pranks on people, you know, take you all the way down a road and then crack up laughing; he liked to embarrass you with a prank if he could.
Speaker 1: Can you think of a good prank he pulled that you--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes; I can think of two.  Once when he was dating my mother [Vida Fish Richardson]--she was very shapely, I guess, and they were at a swimming pool and a group of men were talking to her, and he jumped in the other end of the pool and pretended he was drowning (laughter) so people would come and try to rescue him, but he was really trying to get the guys away from my mother.  Another one, which was--is really family lore; when my mother and father were first married, they lived with my [paternal] grandmother [Viola Douglass] and my aunt, and I guess it was an awkward situation for my mother 'cause they hadn't wanted her to marry my--my father to marry her anyway, and they were having an argument and he jumped out of bed and he ran into the bathroom, and the next thing anybody heard was a shot, and my mother of course thought, you know, he had shot himself, and she runs in the bathroom screaming, "Bobby, Bobby, oh, my God, oh, my God."  And he's laying on the floor like this.  Now, his mother's up, his sister's up, they're all like, "What have you done to my-our son?"  And he then started laughing as he was laying on the floor.  Of course he hadn't shot himself.  He thought that was the--I mean (laughter) it was kind of stupid if you think about it, but that was the kind of wild stuff--I mean he would just do things like that; not, not quite that bad, but he loved a good joke, he loved a prank, loved a prank, was known for his sense of humor, and we all, I think, have--those of us who see ourselves as Richardsons when we get together, we have that kind of wild sense of humor.
Story_ID: 283135
Speaker 1: Now you've been talking about some of them, but what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Music, always; my dad [John Richardson, Jr.] loved music.  As a matter of fact, at his funeral, the last thing we played was [Duke] Ellington's 'Diminuendo and Crescendo in Blue,' which is a very famous piece played in 1956 at the Newport Jazz Festival [Newport, Rhode Island] by Duke Ellington; it was a song we all grew up with.  I used to dance on my father's feet to the song, and I knew it, my siblings knew every note of it, my kids know every note of it, probably when I die it'll be played at my funeral.  I mean it's just, like our family, it's a very long, very exciting, big band piece.  My dad loved big band music.  We weren't particularly religious, although we went to church.  The church [St. Paul A.M.E. Zion Church] that we went to in Coraopolis [Pennsylvania]--in fact, the bricks had been done by my grandfather Douglass; he was a brick mason--my [paternal] great-grandfather Douglass, my grandmother's [Viola Douglass] father.  My best memories are of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]; I didn't like Coraopolis very much.  There were--there was music, there was laughter, there were always people around.  When we got to Coraopolis, it was a small town and all the problems that small towns have, you know; a lot of competitiveness and jealousy and, and so on, and I knew my mother [Vida Fish Richardson] was very unhappy there, so that probably rubbed off on me somewhat.  I guess music dominated.  I used to sing; I sang for a very long time.  I sang in the church choir, I sang all through high school [Coraopolis High School, Coraopolis, Pennsylvania], every assembly, every whatever they had, you know, it was [HistoryMaker] Harriet [Michelle Michel] singing a solo.  I used to sing (laughter), I used to sing on Memorial Day for the town's Memorial Day service in the cemetery; I used to sing, "Sleep soldier boy, sleep on," ['Sleep, Soldier Boy'] which very few people know, but anyway--there was someone that came along that wanted to give me formal music lessons but, for some reason, my parents put the kibosh on the idea, so I never had any formal training.  So when I went to college [Juniata College, Huntingdon, Pennsylvania], I actually ended up singing with a jazz group from a nearby college, and got through school that way 'cause school was a--college for me was a pretty difficult time.  So music dominated, really dominated my life, and a lot of people thought I was going to be a singer.  I can't even carry a tune these days, but there was a time in my life I think everybody thought that I would have ended up being a professional singer.
Story_ID: 283136
Speaker 1: Yeah, I can see--music on both sides of the family--your father [John Richardson, Jr.] and on your other--on both sides (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah, and all my father's family.  My father's family--footnote--I'm trying to name--think of the name of the group.  My father and his sisters and brothers were the first black kids on KDKA in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]; they did a Saturday morning show, and it was called the Candy Kids, or something like that, and they sang four-part harmony, and--
Speaker 1: Well, they may have been the first black kids on radio period.
Speaker 2: Well, they might have been--
Speaker 1: KDKA was the first radio station in the U.S.
Speaker 2: Oh KDKA, yeah, right, right.  But anyway, they--
Speaker 1: It started in 1920, and your father was born in 1914.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they--
Speaker 1: How old was he when he started--
Speaker 2: I don't remember that, I don't remember any of that but they did have--
Speaker 1: He might have been--he was--well, we can certainly say he was one of the first of--you know, he and his brothers were the first black children--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I don't know how long they did it but they, they did, they were on, they were on the radio as the Candy Kids for a while.
Speaker 1: Historic KDKA Radio.
Speaker 2: Yes, very much so, very much so, yeah.  I remembered it; my God, I remember the call letters.
Speaker 1: Did they have a name of their--did they call their--themselves--
Speaker 2: I think they were just called the Candy Kids; I don't, I don't remember--
Speaker 1: The Candy Kids?
Speaker 2: I think they were called the Candy Kids, but I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Problem is, in so much--we had a small family to begin with, and so many of them have died off.  I don't--it's a--it's a terrible thing to be--to get to a point in your life when you have memories and there's nobody else around to validate 'em, and that's where I find myself now--hmm.
Story_ID: 283137
Speaker 1: What were you like as a little girl?  What was your personality like?
Speaker 2: I was (laughter); oh, I was terribly spoiled, probably obnoxious--just very sure of myself.  I, I mean that's always been a trait of mine, you know; often wrong, never in doubt.  You know, my mother [Vida Fish Richardson] and father [John Richardson, Jr.] told me I was terrific; my mother was making up for the fact that she didn't have a mother, my father was--particularly with me because, you know, I was a child for whom he had done the right thing by his wife, and so I mean I just got it all.  Less--my siblings didn't get quite what I did, although they certainly got a lot of love, but I--you know, birth order's important, and I just came along at a time in my parents' life when things were great and my dad was feeling terrific about himself.  I was always thought of as very bright, and people always told me I was going places, you know?  My parents never made a big deal about our being black, or about me being a girl.  There was never any suggestion that, that neither race nor gender were limiting qualities, or would be limiting qualities, so I never figured they would be; I never considered them really, until I went abroad and then, then the race issue came in, but as I grew up in Coraopolis [Pennsylvania], I mean I knew we were black, for sure, and there weren't that many black families there, but still, it just wasn't a big deal, you know--not at all.
Story_ID: 283138
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't--the family really didn't discuss some of our racial politics coming along (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We really--we had--no, not, not really.  We had--my father [John Richardson, Jr.] had a sister that passed, and that was problematic for me and for him.  She--'cause she had a job that she felt, I guess, that she, she needed to be white in order to keep, or something, and I remember she, she was a cosmetic salesman in a store called Kauf--Kaufmann's in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and there weren't that many black women then--or any black women then that sold cosmetics, 'cause white women wouldn't touch them if black women, you know, had touched these cosmetics.  And I remember one time my dad and I went into the store, and she acted like she didn't know us and my daddy was crushed.  He was very upset, and I was very angry with her for hurting my father like that.  I was more angry at her about her rela--you know, how she treated my dad than the fact that she ignored me, and she and I--I went through my Black Power period later, you know, with a large afro, and they just--members of my dad's family just didn't really understand that at all.  My father was always cool with it, but I think it was the reaction to being so--my family was so pale, you know?  I remember sitting at my [paternal] grandmother's [Viola Douglass] funeral and--she died when I was twenty-one, and all these people gathered and just thinking, my God, you know, because by that time I was race conscious, of course, you know; that these were just all these pale people, and the funny thing is that my generation, all of my cousins, we all married dark skin men; I don't know if that was a reaction to the family, or what, but we, we didn't discuss race as race, you know?  We didn't.  Yeah, my grandmother was part of the Urban League in Pittsburgh [Urban League of Greater Pittsburgh] in the, in the early years, and was a club woman; she was very busy but--and knew she was black, but typical response, I think, of a family at that time.
Speaker 1: Now, there was a special on the other night on '20/20' where they were discussing race--prejudice within the black community.  Did your family discuss that kinda thing, or was there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, any--I mean--
Speaker 1: Was there any undue pride for being light, or how did--
Speaker 2: I don't know about undue but, you know, you, you got the sense that--yeah--not my dad; not my father and my mother [Vida Fish Richardson], but certainly my grandmother and my aunt that passed; there was, there was a sense that, yeah, we were a little better off because we were, you know, but somehow my, my mother and father never passed that on to us, thank God, and that was not how we operated; that was not at all.  But I would say in the larger family, yeah, there was some of that.
Story_ID: 283139
Speaker 1: You were saying that church was not a big deal.
Speaker 2: No, I mean I went, and sang in the choir [at St. Paul A.M.E. Zion Church, Coraopolis, Pennsylvania] and, you know, did all that kinda stuff and my mother [Vida Fish Richardson], I think, belonged to a, a, a woman's group there, but she was never comfortable in Coraopolis [Pennsylvania], you know; that was where my father [John Richardson, Jr.] had come from, and had sown a whole lot of wild oats, and so she, she just--plus, it was a little dinky town, and my mother was a very elegant woman and I don't think it was a whole lot in the town to keep her very interested, tell you truth, but--
Speaker 1: Is there any id--do you have any idea right now, when you reflect back on it, as to why your father--you know, you said he wanted to go to a smaller town but he seemed like to have--be having so much fun in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Well, I think he might have been having too much fun, but the other thing is he was working; by that time, he was working in Coraopolis at the steel mill [Jones and Laughlin Steel Company], and coming back and forth to Pittsburgh got to be a drag, and I think he just decided that his family could do better if he moved us to this, to this small town, but I was maybe nine, ten when we moved.  My brother [John R. Richardson] would have been fifteen; my brother never made the adjustment, ever, and ended up going back to Pittsburgh and finishing high school in Pittsburgh 'cause he just couldn't, he couldn't handle this little, little dinky town.
Story_ID: 283140
Speaker 1: Now, what impact did television have on you?  'Cause it came out when you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I recall we were--oh, yeah; well, you know, my dad [John Richardson, Jr.] ended up being a--he was a foreman; he was a shop steward in J&L [Jones and Laughlin Steel Company] before the bottom went out of the world, and we'll talk about that in a minute, but--so, he had a little money, you know, as a blue collar guy, and my mother [Vida Fish Richardson] at that point would--I think, was working for white folks, you know, cleaning their houses and stuff; not every day, but from time-to-time, and we were--we had a television before we left Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  We were one of the first families; we had an old DuMont [Laboratories] and, you know, with all the wood around it and a screen about that big.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they're in museums now.  They're at the--in Chicago [Illinois], Bruce DuMont, who's actually a descendant of the DuMonts, has a show ['Beyond the Beltway'] on public television where he interviews people or he appears on 'Chicago Tonight' on--
Speaker 2: Oh, wow.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but the DuMonts--
Speaker 2: But--well, I remember that thing because before that, my brother [John R. Richardson] and I used to listen to Saturday Morning; we listened to Saturday Morning radio and we fought over the cereal box, that's how I remember that.  We used to listen to these programs every Saturday morning, but that's when television was only on at night, and when my dad bought this DuMont set, people in the neighborhood would come and watch because we were the only people--we were the first people to have a television.  And I can remember, I really remember the early shows; I remember thinking at first that people were inside.  I mean you, you just couldn't figure out the technology, you know--this miracle of television.  And I mean I remember shows like ['The] Ernie Kovacs [Show'], you know, and the early ['The] Ed Sullivan [Show'] and shows like that--GE ['General Electric] Theater' and--
Speaker 1: With Ronald [Wilson] Reagan, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, with Ronald Reagan (laughter), right.  It, it--you know, was part of our life; it's like kids now with computers, I guess.  I mean it--you just grow up with it forever and, you know, when it came in, it was a big deal, and then it became more and more a, a part of our life as programming expanded and, and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: So you were about eight or nine years old (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was about eight, I think, maybe, when we got our first television.
Speaker 1: Nineteen forty [1940], yeah--well--
Speaker 2: Forty [1940].
Speaker 1: Fifty [1950], I guess.
Speaker 2: It was 1950, so tele--yeah, I'm telling you, it was--he was really one of the first people to have any when I got it--yeah.  Now I don't watch television, I just watch the news 'cause I think programming is--unless you really search long and hard, but it was certainly a defining thing for our lives 'cause as we grew, it grew in terms of its influence, you know, on society and, to the extent that by the time I got to college [Juniata College, Huntingdon, Pennsylvania] and [President] John [Fitzgerald] Kennedy was assassinated, it was kinda the first thing that I remember being covered 24/7 almost, you know?
Speaker 1: That's right, it was like a breakthrough for television news.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean that's kinda the first thing I remember just being riveted to the television all hours of the night and day 'cause there was this, you know, continuous broadcast of what had, what had transpired, and playing the videotape over and over and over again of, you know, them riding past the building, and that sort of thing.
Story_ID: 283141
Speaker 1: Was Coraopolis [Pennsylvania] segregated like Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] was, or--
Speaker 2: No, no.  Well, they did have a--they did have a section of it called the Bottom, which is where most of the black people lived, and when we first got to Coraopolis we--my dad [John Richardson, Jr.] rented an apartment in the Bottom and--but not long after we were there, we moved up on the hill at 625 7th Avenue and--boy, I can remember it--
Speaker 1: Sounds like a New York [New York] address (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah (laugher), and we were moving up in the world 'cause we moved into a house; still wasn't ours; we were, we were renters, but at least we, we had a house to ourselves with a front yard and a porch that had a glider and a backyard that had fruit trees and the barbeque and stuff, so--wasn't much of a backyard but it was a backyard, and my dad was very proud of the fact that he could move his kids--his wife [Vida Fish Richardson] and kids into this house.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us about school now.  What--where did you go to grade school?
Speaker 2: A. Leo Weil [Elementary School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  A, period, Leo, W-E-I-L, I think.  It's, it's closed; it was in the Hill District [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  It was on Centre Avenue in Pittsburgh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I went to--now it shows you how life is; I can't remember the name--McKinley [Elementary School, Coraopolis, Pennsylvania]--I went to McKinley when I got to Coraopolis, and then I went to Coraopolis Junior [High School, Coraopolis, Pennsylvania] and Senior High School [Coraopolis High School, Coraopolis, Pennsylvania], which no longer exist because they merged it with another town--with Moon Township [School; Moon Area High School, Moon Township, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, everybody had pegged you as a good student, so you must have liked school, I guess.
Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't--no, they pegged me as smart; I didn't say they pegged me as a good student--there's a difference (laughter).  Maybe I was smart-alecky, too, I don't know.  You know, some of the classes, science and stuff, I struggled with, but basically I had good grades.  I was always great in English and sociology and, you know, things where I could run my mouth.  I had--you know, my, my junior and senior--my, my, my elementary school in Coraopolis was just adjusting to the fact that I was no longer in Pittsburgh, which was hard for me.  By the time I got to junior high school, you know, I was just a regular kid.  I was always a little ill at ease in Coraopolis; I mean I always felt like I really belonged someplace else, or I was going someplace else; I was never really settled there.  It was never my town per se, you know?  And again, it might be (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So did you have friends in Coraopolis?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I--you know, I had some.  But the interesting thing is I, I don't keep in touch with any of them; I don't know if they're dead or alive, or--you know, when I left Coraopolis, I left, and with really not a whole lotta interest in, in going back.
Story_ID: 283142
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers, either in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] or Coraopolis [Pennsylvania], who were, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Stand out in my head?
Speaker 1: Yeah that kinda stand out.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  When I was in the first grade, I had a teacher named Ann Snyder [ph.], and I hated her 'cause I felt she picked on me, and picked on me in the sense that she was always calling on me, you know?  And I remember telling my mother [Vida Fish Richardson] that--how much I hated this teacher.  She was Jewish and most of the teachers we had in A. Leo Weil [Elementary School, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] then--Weil were black, and when I got promoted to second grade, damn if she wasn't my second grade teacher, too, and I thought it the end of the world.  I remember coming home crying when I went to school the first day, and telling my mother, "My God, I got her as my teacher again."  But her position was that I was bright, and that she wanted to push me to do and to be.  And my mother, years later, credited her with my being a better student 'cause she felt that in the first and second grade this woman had given me a lot of discipline, but boy, I disliked her for a long time.  When I was in high school [Coraopolis High School, Coraopolis, Pennsylvania] and junior high school [Coraopolis Junior High School, Coraopolis, Pennsylvania], I had a--the band teacher's name was Mr. Carson [ph.] who was kind of the personal shepherd of my voice in those days because I sang so much.  I was, you know, the lead singer in the choir and all that kinda stuff, and he was very kind and very helpful.  And finally, I had a, a English teacher who had taught my father [John Richardson, Jr.], a maiden lady who had to be past retirement age when I got her as a senior in high school; she taught senior English, and she took me to see Marian Anderson out of her own pocket; she bought these tickets for us to go and see Marian Anderson because she felt since I was singing, Marian Anderson was so wonderful that I should have this experience.
Speaker 1: Now this is 1960, right?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty [1960], yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.  And what was the teacher's name?
Speaker 2: Mary Crawford [ph.], Mary Crawford.  But she taught my dad in--she taught my dad English in Coraopolis High School, and there I was and she was still there.
Speaker 1: Now, where did you go to see Marian Anderson?
Speaker 2: At Syria Mosque [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] in Pittsburgh, which is a big performance space in Pittsburgh.  But, but we got on the bus, the two of us, and we went to downtown Pittsburgh, which was a biggie deal, you know, in those days.  She didn't have a car, I don't think, and didn't drive, and so we got on the bus and went to Pittsburgh and saw Marian Anderson.
Speaker 1: Wow, that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Which was a very gracious and, and nice thing for her to do.
Speaker 1: Is it--was this your first time at some kind of a venue like that where you--
Speaker 2: No, I had gone there with my mother before; I had gone to see Mahalia Jackson there with my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, did you have a lotta opportunities, really, to--
Speaker 2: To see the performance?
Speaker 1: --to see the culture and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, one of my memories is that I belonged to the all-city choir and, you know, I had always been this big fish in a little pond, as far as my voice was concerned, and as part of the all-city choir, I was a soprano and I tried out for a lead in a song and I didn't get it, and I was crushed 'cause it was the first time (laughter) I'd ever been in competition and somebody had, you know, taken something that I wanted, and that was at Syria Mosque too, so we--you know, we did, we did things.  My parents--once we got to Coraopolis, we didn't do--we came to Pittsburgh to see my father's family but we didn't do a lot of cultural things in Pittsburgh.  Our dad did baseball games and, you know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --[Pittsburgh] Pirates and the [Pittsburgh] Steelers, but we didn't--we stayed pretty much in Coraopolis.
Story_ID: 283143
Speaker 1: When you were in high school, you went to Coraopolis High School [Coraopolis, Pennsylvania]--[Coraopolis] Junior High School [Coraopolis, Pennsylvania] and then high school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--and then senior high school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Senior high school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Oh, sociology and English, you know, yeah; any subject that would allow me to pontificate on world events.
Speaker 1: Now, did you do a lotta newspaper reading when you were a kid?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I--you know, I think I watched the news on television, but no; I, I read--I looked at--the, the Coraopolis [Pennsylvania] paper was a--nothing, of course, because it was just news of the little community, and I looked at the Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] paper.  I certainly wasn't aware of any national newspapers at that point in my life.  What turned it around for me was--there was a new program in, in our town called the Americ--well, it was not new, it was new for us the first year that they started this program, the American Field Service [(AFS); AFS Intercultural Programs], and they sponsored American kids to go abroad and they sponsored foreign kids to come and live with families in the United States, and (laughter) there were four girls who were proposed to the committee that, that was in Pittsburgh to be the first student--exchange student outta Coraopolis to go abroad; one was the--a minister's daughter, the other was the lawyer for the school district.  I can't remember the third one--like the coach's daughter, and me--and they were all white.  If the decision had been made in Coraopolis, I'd have never been selected, but the decision was made by a committee of people in Pittsburgh, and so I got selected and--to go abroad with the American Field Service.  And when that happened, my dad [John Richardson, Jr.]--J&L [James and Laughlin] Steel [Company] had closed down; many of the mills had moved outta Western Pennsylvania and were going to the South because of labor issues with cheaper labor, and my daddy didn't have a job, and the little church [St. Paul A.M.E. Zion Church, Coraopolis, Pennsylvania] where I had been singing all those years and my family had been part of for so many years, they gave--they got together and bought him books of S&H Green [Stamps] trading stamps so I could buy luggage to go abroad.  And they all brought in these books and gave them to my mother [Vida Fish Richardson], and I was able to buy three pieces of Samsonite luggage in order to go away, brand new pieces, because the church and, and the town, to a certain degree, but certainly the church, felt very much a part of this experience that I was going to have.
Story_ID: 283144
Speaker 1: What was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: St. Paul A.M.E. Zion [Church, Coraopolis, Pennsylvania], and it's still there.  But I remember, I remember people telling me now, you know, "When you go, you get on the"--oh, they wanted me to be baptized 'cause I hadn't been baptized, so before I got on this boat--'cause I went--we went on the SS Rotterdam to Europe, and (laughter) before I got on the boat, they wanted to make sure I was baptized in holy water, I guess, in case I went down in the sea or something, I don't know; but anyway, I climbed in the pool and got baptized before I left.  But the, but the church was very excited, and people wanted me to write back and let them know how I was doing because many of those people, they--you know, they were blue collar simple people, uncomplicated people who hadn't been many places and here was a child of their church having been selected, going to Europe.  That was big stuff.
Speaker 1: Now this is--you're going to--were you going all over Europe or just to Norway (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I went to Norway.  I went to Norway and I lived with a family, which was unbelievable--opened my eyes in ways that I could (laughter)--I mean it's, it's--you know, I had wanted to go to--they asked me, they asked kids, you know, where you wanted to go so, of course, what did I know?  I put down Paris [France] and Rome [Italy], and they end up sending me (laughter) to a very small town on a fjord; it was a, it was a ferry crossing in, in Norway where people had never seen anybody black, and people used to rub my skin, they used to--my hair was long and they used to cut pieces of my hair.  I was just a real oddity to them, but they could not have been more wonderful.  They were welcoming and it--I lived with a family that became my brothers and sister and my, my father; the mother was absent.  It was just--it was an incredible experience because there I was having grown up in a small town, barely knowing anything about the United States at that point, and I'm on a boat with nine hundred kids.  I got in--got on the boat in New York Harbor, and we crossed and went to (unclear) France, and we went to Rotterdam [the Netherlands], and then I got on a train and went on and on.  At each stop, there were fewer and fewer kids, so by the end of the journey, I was kind of by myself on this bus, supposed to get off at a certain stop to meet the family that was going to pick me up, and that's how I got there.  It felt very strange being on this boat with nine hundred kids and being the only black kid.
Story_ID: 283145
Speaker 1: How big was this town in Norway that you stayed in?
Speaker 2: It was a fjord--ferry crossing on the banks of the fjord.
Speaker 1: So was it bigger than Coraopolis [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, it was tiny, tiny; and part of the way I learned Norwegian is I would have to--the, the family I lived with, the father was the sheriff of the village, and part of the ways I learned Norwegian is I would go down to the bakery every morning and get the bread for the family, and I had to practice speaking my Norwegian; they all thought that was hilarious, but anyway everybody helped me.  It was in a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did you have to say to get the bread?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I can't remember; I really--I, I don't even remember, but it was in a--in an agricultural area, so there was no real--the nearest town was a town called Trondheim [Norway] and--which was fairly sizeable city, but we were pretty rural, and it was--the Norwegians then--I don't know if they're the same now, but they were very dark, brooding people--agricultural, a lot of drinking in the, in the dark months of winter, a lot of alcoholism.
Speaker 1: Now, is that where it stays dark for long stretches of time?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.  Well, in all of Scandinavia, but particularly the further you go north, and I was north of Oslo [Norway] so, you know, it, it--I saw in the summer that the sun never went down; it just kind of dipped toward the horizon and it stayed light all night, and in the winter, 'course the sun didn't come up.  In the summer that was pretty cool, you know?  And you could do lots of things; it was just like you had all this energy 'cause the sun just kept shining and shining (laughter), and we kept going.  And in the winter, just the reverse would happen because it was so dark and so cold; just, you know, deep dark thoughts trying to stay warm and stuff.
Speaker 1: And so you think that affected the personalities of the people?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?  Yeah, they had a very different--different from the Swedes, even; very, very heavy, dark.  Their, their literature is dark.  [Henrik] Ibsen is, is Norwegian.  You know, their folktales are about trolls living under bridges and stuff like that (laughter), you know--not light, airy fun stuff, but it, it comes outta coming outta--they, they--again, it was an act--then, an agrarian culture dealing with kind of the vagaries of, of the weather, you know?  So that didn't make you too lighthearted I'll tell you.  But they--by the same token, when I got to Scandinavia, I found a great sense of freedom about personal self.  I mean I remember I was riding along on the back of a motorcycle and these kids--there were two or three motorcycles, and these kids decided they wanted to go swimming, and they just jumped off their bikes and stripped off all their clothes and jumped into the water, and I, coming from the United States, had never seen that many naked people in my life.
Speaker 1: How old were these?
Speaker 2: I was sixteen, you know?  I hadn't--where, where was I going to see naked people (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Well, how old were they?
Speaker 2: Eighteen, nineteen, twenty; they were, you know, high school, university students and stuff.  But it--there was nothing sexual about it, it was total freedom, total acceptance of their bodies, you know; it was as natural to them as, as breathing, and I knew that this was a whole different culture from whence I had come.
Story_ID: 283146
Speaker 1: That's different from 1950s--Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Heck yeah.  Remember now, I grew up in the repressed '50s [1950s] (laughter), you know.  It's still in the '50s [1950s] with people still wearing circle pins to show that they're virgins, you know, and so, you know, to have this kind of freedom and, you know, we--I remember one summer night we went off with a, a guy, my--one of my sisters and I.  There were two girls in the family and, and one guy, and the guy had just gotten married.  Anyway, we went off on this--to this cabin and we made homemade beer, and we stayed up on the fjord all night; we were fishing for herring or something, out on the fjord singing to the top of our lungs, drunk as hell off this homemade beer, having a wonderful time, and the father didn't have any problem with us kind of going off.  But again, nothing sexual happened, you know; I mean it was just--this was how they lived.  It was a wonderful experience; it opened my eyes to so much that there was a world beyond Pittsburgh.  I, I kept thinking when I got to Europe--I don't what I thought.  My education, I guess, was so deficient I thought I was going to see, you know, 18th century hovels or something.  When we got to Rotterdam [the Netherlands], and the city was so modern, I couldn't believe how modern and, and progressive and large everything was, you know, 'cause what did I know?  I mean I, I just didn't expect that.  And the same with Norway; even though I lived in a small town, they were very progressive in their thinking about lots of things, and I was busy trying to play catch-up.
Story_ID: 283147
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know in this country, especially in those days, we were told that America is the freest country in the world, and all that--even with the racism and stuff (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--the transformational, and I, and I call this--I do a speech where I talk about transformational things happening in my life; it wasn't just going to Norway and living in a different culture.  I--at that time, Orval Faubus was preventing the Little Rock Nine from going to school [Central High School, Little Rock, Arkansas], and the Russians [Citizens of the USSR] were broadcasting these very negative programs.  The, the men of the village would come to the house where I lived--my father's house, my Norwegian father's house, every night to smoke and drink and discuss the day's--the world's events, and they would listen to both the 'Voice of America' [VOA], and whatever this Russian broadcast was, and the Russians, of course, were making a big deal out of this discrimination thing, right?--that was going on, and the men started asking me about race and how I felt about being black, and it was the first time in my life, at age sixteen, that I really began to talk to white people about what it meant to be black, and it changed my life 'cause I've done that since then in almost every job I've ever had.  But that's where it started.  I, I began thinking about things that had never even crossed my little mind before, and thinking about them in a very different way.  And we used to have long discussions and I would listen to the broadcast--I would listen to the one from Russia.  It was broadcast in English, by the way, and I'd listen to the 'Voice of America,' and to the extent that I knew anything, I would try to explain to them 'cause they were very curious wanting to know about America and the race situation and that sort of thing, so I began becoming a race woman, I think, with that experience.
Story_ID: 283148
Speaker 1: I guess did their knowledge of what was going on over here amount to much?
Speaker 2: Well, they only knew what they heard, you know.  We certainly didn't have television in Norway then.  They, they only knew what they heard on--what they read in the paper or they heard on these broadcasts, and the Russians [Citizens of the USSR] were trying to score points and exploit the situation because it was ugly, and the 'Voice of America' [VOA] would kind of come in with a--you know, their broadcast at night would, would broadcast events in a better, in a better light.  It was really interesting to hear that contrast.  I just knew that something pretty terrible was going on; I mean I certainly understood that these kids [Little Rock Nine] were being blocked from going into this school [Central High School, Little Rock, Arkansas] because they were black, you know?  But it was just interesting time, interesting time.
Speaker 1: What was it--okay, okay.  Did they--I guess what I was getting ready to ask, did they seem to really know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They didn't know, but they were interested; they only knew what they heard.
Speaker 1: Well, what did you tell them, I guess, that (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, to the extent when I listened to the broadcast with them, I would try to listen for, you know--and they would say, "Well, does it really--do they really keep black people out?"  "Yes."  You know, "Can you go anywhere, everywhere freely?"  "No," because we would--couldn't then; this was still the '50s [1950s].  They just wanted to validate what they were hearing about race through me.
Speaker 1: Did they find it surprising that the United States had--racism?
Speaker 2: They found it sad I think, yeah; they were surprised, they were surprised.  You know, I was a local celebrity because I was black--just because I was an oddity, and they just couldn't understand.  You know, the Norwegians are--you know, their, their whole position about war and that sort of thing, it really--they just really could not understand very well that whites would treat blacks like that just because they were black; they had a hard time with that.
Story_ID: 283149
Speaker 1: So when you came back now--you stayed [in Norway] for, what?
Speaker 2: A year--
Speaker 1: A year?
Speaker 2: --nine months.
Speaker 1: Nine months, okay--a whole school year.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So--well, I guess your next two years in high school, I guess, right?  What were you--did your trip affect your career aspirations (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, because I--it's--no, not career aspects; it affected me because I then--I was really unable to relate to the kids in Coraopolis [Pennsylvania] then, I mean 'cause I'd been abroad, I'd had all this freedom, I'd had all this, you know, exper--all these experiences, and suddenly I'm back (laughter) in this little high school.  That year, the American Field Service [(AFS); AFS Intercultural Programs] sent a Swedish girl to our high school and she and I became fast friends, and we used to have to make speeches for the program at different places around Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] or different communities that were thinking about either taking a student or sending a student, and so there were a group of, of exchange students; I think they were all European, but I don't recall, that I really hung out with because I felt that I had more common--in common with them at that point than I did with my, my classmates, which didn't make me tremendously popular, needless to say. First of all, I had the advantage of going, you know, and then I came back and I kinda--was probably snooty.
Speaker 1: Was there a--how was your social life at Coraopolis High School [Coraopolis, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: When I came back, I actually went to my senior prom with a German guy I was dating.  You know, I was very much in with the--and it wasn't that they were white, it was that they were European, and I felt that their view of the world--you know, they smoked, they drank, I just thought they were very worldly compared to the boys that I knew at Coraopolis or around Coraopolis.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was there any--was there a high school teacher that was really important in your development that you can think of?
Speaker 2: No, I got through it, you know, 'cause I knew I had to.  I came back and I just got through, but I spent a lot of time with those kids and they--the Swedish girl and I spent a lot of time together.  She became my best--we became best friends.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how--what is the percentage of black students at Coraopolis High School?
Speaker 2: There were like eighty kids in my graduating class 'cause I just looked at my high school commencement thing the other day; I think there were eighty and, I don't know, maybe six--five, six kids were black, I mean it wasn't a whole lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Wasn't a whole lot.
Story_ID: 283150
Speaker 1: Well, when you were a senior [at Coraopolis High School, Coraopolis, Pennsylvania], what, what were your career aspirations?  What did you think you were going to do?
Speaker 2: I didn't know.  I never, I never had any specific career in mind; I knew I was going to go away.  I thought that I was going to go away to school and be this great scholar because I had spent time abroad, so I was ready to kind of really hunker down (laughter), but I wasn't sure; I mean I, I didn't know what I wanted to do, but I figured I'd figure it out once I got to school.  I--the school I went to--the college I went to was another one of those transformational (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did you choose Juniata [College, Huntingdon, Pennsylvania], right?
Speaker 2: They chose me; that was it.
Speaker 1: This is Juniata College.
Speaker 2: You know, my dad [John Richardson, Jr.] still didn't--my dad still, you know, was doing odd jobs; he didn't have a regular job and, you know, I, I was a fairly strong student; I had had this international experience, so I was accepted by several colleges and Juniata College, which was in a system of eight schools, was run by the Church of the Brethren.  The Brethren are an off-shoot of the Mennonites and the Amish, so they're very serious (laughter), and they came to our school and they administered a test, and I scored very high on the test.  Among their eight colleges, they had little or no black students and so they really kind of went after me, you know, very hard, and they gave me a big financial aid package, and so I went--you know, in those days, you went where you got the best deal, but it was a mismatch from the beginning; I mean it was just terrible.
Speaker 1: Were there any other black students on campus?
Speaker 2: There were--there was one boy who was ahead of me, there was an African in my class, but there were no black faculty, no--there's one black family in the town.  This school, Juniata, is located just north of the Mason-Dixon Line in, in, in Pennsylvania, which is very southern.  It's only thirty miles from Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, State College, Pennsylvania], but Penn State might as well have been in another universe 'cause it's separated by all these mountains.
Speaker 1: I guess it was like West Virginia (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it's--no, no, it's in central Pennsylvania; it's near Johnstown [Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --south [sic. north] of Johnstown.
Speaker 1: So, the Mason-Dixon Line but the state--I mean (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Remember--yeah, but Maryland and West Virginia.
Speaker 1: West Maryland.
Speaker 2: Maryland and West Virginia.  And somebody said recently if, you know, "If they'd won the Battle at Gettysburg, Pennsylvania would have been the South" (laughter), you know.  But Southern Pennsylvania was pretty southern, and very conservative, and off I went.
Story_ID: 283151
Speaker 1: Now the [Church of the] Brethren, now, they are--now they're Mennonites and they're Amish and they're--yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But the Brethren, their lead--the most liberal among them, but--and the old Brethren churches--'cause I sang in the college choir; in the old Brethren churches, men and women sat on separate sides of the church, women wore long dresses that had hooks and eyes and not zippers, they wore these little accordion pleated things on the back of their heads that had these little ties underneath them.
Speaker 1: Yeah their little bonnet (unclear)--yeah.
Speaker 2: That's the old-fashion Brethren church, yeah.
Speaker 1: And their zippers were considered too modern, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Too modern a device to have?
Speaker 2: Yep, yep.  Now they drove cars and that sort of thing but they, they were pretty stern, you know; outta that Pennsylvania, Dutch, German ancestry.  But on the other hand, they're registered pacifist, the Brethren are, and I guess they figured they--they were seen as liberal on issues of war and peace, and yet they didn't--they weren't doing so hot on the racial stuff, so they really made a big play for me, you know, and it was very flattering, and off I went.
Speaker 1: Now, did you ever think, whoa, I made a big mistake?
Speaker 2: Oh, as soon as I got there, I knew I made a mistake.  I, I was outta, I was outta kilter because I--you know, even if I'd been white I, I wouldn't have fit in.  Most of the kids were from small and rural towns in Pennsylvania; they'd never been anywhere, never seen anything, didn't know any black folks, just didn't have much sophistication or exposure; very nice, you know, salt of the earth kind of people, but they just didn't.  And I, you know--nobody would date me; none of the white guys would date me, but I--and I wanted to leave but they had a policy then that if you left, you had to pay back your scholarship; well, if my parents [John Richardson, Jr. and Vida Fish Richardson] couldn't afford to send me the first time, they sure as hell couldn't afford this--have me go someplace else while they were trying to pay back, so I later found out that policy was illegal, but that's what kept me there.  My mother said, "Yeah, you can come," 'cause I was on the phone crying, "Ma."  My mother said, "You can come home, but that's the end of your college career."  So I stayed.  And I fought every step of the way (laughter).  I always have a big problem with authority anyway; I've always had problems with authority and Juniata [College, Huntingdon, Pennsylvania] and I just were at it for the four years I was there.
Story_ID: 283152
Speaker 1: You sang, you said, to support yourself--you were able to sing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I sang, yeah.  I did get to get, you know, walk-around money--my scholarship and stuff.  I worked in the library and, you know, I had student loans but not a lot and it was mostly scholarship, but I, I sang in the chur--in the school choir and traveled with the school choir, which was really wild because we'd go to these very conservative churches, and the church speaker would put us up for the night and I was either the first down the aisle in the church, or the last, and when people would see me, they--the people who had signed up (laughter), signed up for a female student, would just clutch when they saw me 'cause it was like, "Uh-oh, who gets her for the night?"  You know, "Where is she going to spend the night?"  Then I found a group--I found a way to get to Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, State College, Pennsylvania], which was a whole different world; over the mountain, you know, huge school, lots of people.  And I found a jazz group to start singing with there, and that is really what enabled me to get through Juniata [College, Huntingdon, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was pretty close to the--State College, Pennsylvania (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's thirty miles, it's thirty miles--yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it was a different world over there, and I was able to--I didn't have--interestingly enough, I didn't have a group of black friends; the musicians that I played with were all white (laughter) and, you know, we used to play at little jazz things and stuff, and that didn't endear me too much to the people back at Juniata, but I always managed to kind of stay just inside the lines so they couldn't--they didn't have grounds to throw me out.
Story_ID: 283153
Speaker 1: How long were you at Juniata [College, Huntingdon, Pennsylvania]?  That's--so you went in in 1960, right?
Speaker 2: No, I went in in 1961 'cause you remember I spent a year in Europe (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixty-one [1961]?  All right.  Oh, so that doesn't count toward your--so you have to spend an extra year in high school.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I didn't know that.  So--okay, so you were--so you're going in 1961--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and--now, I know the famous incident we're talking ab--you know, that we were going to get to.  I don't want to rush us to it, but--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: We, we--you had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We've talked about as much about Juniata as we need to talk about (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, well the big experience there was when you went south to Selma, Alabama in '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-five [1965], two years--two months rather, before graduation.  I--there was a man who was a poet, poet-in-residence; his name was Galway Kinnell.
Speaker 1: What is it again?
Speaker 2: Galway Kinnell.
Speaker 1: And spell his last name.
Speaker 2: K-I-N-N-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they had only started this resi--is--this artist residency program my senior year; the first semester it was an artist name [Lawrence] "Larry" Zox who came from New York [New York]--a Jewish guy from New York who was a fish outta water, and then along came Galway the second semester, and he had spent time in voter registration; he's Irish but--and he is a humanist and he was--he taught a course which I took, and he and I became very friendly, and as the--it was Freedom Summer in 1964 when college kids began going south and helping to register people.
Speaker 1: Did he go down for Freedom Summer?
Speaker 2: I don't--no, he did not.  But he had been involved in the civil rights activities; not a lot, I think, but some way.  But he was very sympathetic to the plight of southern blacks, and as these things heated up that spring semester, we talked.  He and I were like lost souls because he was--here he is this kinda dark, Irish poet in this conservative (laughter) religious school, and there I am this twenty-two year-old just waiting to bust out, and we found each other, and he began to talk to us, to all of us in the class, about the issues of the day, and we got more and more passionate and decided that we had to go.
Story_ID: 283154
Speaker 1: And I as a student leader, you know, was all over campus.  Now, you have to understand, I was an anomaly among the students and for the faculty, 'cause they'd never taught any black kids before either.  And, you know, people used to ask me all the time was I an exchange student, so I spent my four years at Juniata [College, Huntingdon, Pennsylvania] explaining what it meant to be a black American and--which continued my journey as a race woman, you know, 'cause if I'd gone to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] or someplace like that, I--you know, these, these issues would have never come up; not in the same way.  But I had to always, I felt, in class and with, with faculty, with kids, you know, put my stake in the ground as a black American--not as a woman, interestingly enough, but as a black American.  And so when we decided to go south--I was a student leader and there were a buncha kids that were gonna go; it was like a hundred people that said they were gonna go, but the school made all sorts of sounds; they did not want us to go.  They made the kids that were under twenty-one get permission slips from their parents; I was twenty-two, and so I didn't have to get permission.  But the day we were leaving, I called my mother [Vida Fish Richardson] to say, "Ma, listen.  I just want you to know I'm on my way to Alabama and a group of students and I"--and my mother flipped out and told me I could not go, and I said, "Ma," you know, "you don't understand; I'm the student leader, I gotta go."  And we left in very harsh terms which made me feel terrible because I was going into a dangerous situation, and the last conversation I had with my mother was a very--my dad [John Richardson, Jr.] wasn't home so he wasn't part of the conversation--was a very negative one.  And I mean with her just really threatening me and, you know, all kinds of stuff about going.  Well, the school was already threatening to throw me out (laughter), but we went, and just by an accident of history, Life magazine took a picture--a man name Charles Moore; he was a very famous photographer of the Civil Rights era--because the poet, Galway Kinnell, got hit.
Speaker 2: Well, tell us the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The gist of that?
Speaker 2: --conversation and, and what led up to him being hit 'cause this is an interesting story.
Speaker 1: We, we were in Montgomery [Alabama] and--because SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]--
Speaker 2: You came down right after the--
Speaker 1: We came--down after Bloody Sunday, which was March 7th [1965] because they had stopped people from going over the Edmund Pettus Bridge [Selma, Alabama].
Speaker 2: So you knew about Bloody Sunday before--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's like a eighteen-hour drive or something from--
Speaker 1: I--it was nine hundred miles, so we drove a long way, and we didn't stop, by the way; we slept in the car, and fifteen of us ended going--ended up going, and three faculty members and a, a couple of clergy people.  And when we got there, we were going to go to Selma [Alabama], but the SNCC, 'cause we were reporting to SNCC, told us to go to Montgomery because they were doing demonstrations in the state capital.  The whole idea of the Selma to Montgomery March was to carry the petitions to [Governor] George Wallace in the [Alabama] State Capitol on behalf of black voters, so we went straight to Montgomery, and the first night or so we were there, I recall we were in a church; it was hot, and the church was packed and [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and [HistoryMaker] James Forman and all these people were preaching and telling us, you know--all these college students assembled, to take heart, be strong, you know, talk about the [Civil Rights] Movement.  "This is what we're doing"--lotta singing--'We Shall Overcome.'
Speaker 2: Was that the Dexter Avenue Baptist Church [Dexter Avenue King Memorial Baptist Church, Montgomery, Alabama]?
Speaker 1: No, no, no, no.  I don't remember what church it was, tell you the truth, but it wasn't Dexter Avenue (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay; the one across from the capitol.  All right.  But it wasn't the one across from the capitol?
Speaker 1: No, I don't think so.
Story_ID: 283155
Speaker 1: And I remember--the reason I don't think it was is because we were afraid of who was waiting outside for us, and thought that there might be some Klans people--[Ku Klux] Klan [KKK] people outside.  But it was very inspirational and, you know, hearing [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and singing all those freedom songs and getting sweaty and hot with everybody (laughter).  And the, and the next day, we did a demonstration without--in Mont--in Montgomery [Alabama] without incident; the third day we--they let us march from the black neighborhood to the white neighborhood, at which point they surrounded us.  These are state troopers on horseback--most of 'em, and they had a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This was March 16th, I guess.
Speaker 1: Well, they--there were houses on this side where white people lived, there were cops here, cops over here and cops behind us, and Galway [Kinnell] and I were sitting on--at the edge with our backs to the, to the cops, and Galway tried to engage one of the cops in, you know (laughter), his enlightened conversation, about why we were doing this, because they were calling him "nigger lover;" I mean it was just ugly, and all the kinds of things they were saying.
Speaker 2: And he's a poet and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He's a poet, you know, with a poet's heart and soul.  And he believes that there's good in every man, I guess, if you just kinda get down to the core.  So we're having these conversations with these guys but they had--you know, he was a, a white man, an older man, you know, clearly from the North; they were not liking him very much.  For some reason, once they hemmed us in on three sides, our leaders told us to disperse because they could see the situation was dangerous.  There we were hemmed in in a white neighborhood.  And when we tried to disperse, somebody called for the troopers to attack, and they came on these horses.  And the thing that I remember that was most difficult was these big horses 'cause I was afraid that a horse was going to rear up and come down on my head; I mean they were huge beasts charging into a crowd.  As soon as the cops started coming toward us, the same one that Galway had been talking to took a night stick and tried to gouge his eye out; they just came at him like that.
Speaker 2: Just poked him right in his eye?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and they missed--they missed his eye and hit his cheek and his cheek split open.  Well, if you ever see a boxer get hit there, you know you bleed profusely, and I mean, you know, I went nuts.  I ran and tried to get some sorta rag or something and I'm standing there with him; the blood is all over him and I'm standing there, and that's when Charles Moore took the picture.  There were also news--television news people there that night and we kept telling 'em, "Take this picture, take this picture," you know, "so America can see what they're doing to us."  Meanwhile, the white people up on the porch were screaming and hollering at us and stuff--"Ah!"  You know, you try to figure out well, where does all that stuff come from, you know?  And yet is was there--little kids; I mean--and it reminded me later of when they had the lynch parties, you know?  When they used to pack picnic baskets and the wives would come out with the kids to see this lynching.  But these people were in it, I mean they were--their faces all contorted in anger.  Any event, somehow we got Galway stitched up and we continued to march, and a couple-a days later we came back [to Juniata College, Huntingdon, Pennsylvania].  I did not participate in the Selma to Montgomery March; we had to get back to school.  I think we might have been on Easter break or something that year, but it was clear that if we missed school we were going to give the president [Calvert N. Ellis] of the school reason to kick us out, so we had to get back.
Speaker 2: So this is May--I'm sorry, March 16th (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is--no, this is March 16th, 17th, so I think it was Easter break or something.
Speaker 2: --in 1965, yeah; I think it was the 16th when I really--
Speaker 1: We went down like on the 14th, 13th, something like that.  And we got in these cars, and couple days later we came back.  And when we got back to school--
Speaker 2: How did they let you--now, wait a minute--what happened that they let you go?  I mean I--you know, you hear these stories of people surrounding--okay--
Speaker 1: Well, they--because the, the newsmen were taking the pictures and finally they just stopped attacking us because they could see that the attack was on television, and it was on television that night--
Story_ID: 283156
Speaker 1: How did the attack end?  I mean how did it end?  What caused the attack to end?
Speaker 2: I don't know, except we were all running in all different directions, but because the news cameras were there, and I mean both still and, and television cameras, they were recording it all.  I think the--whoever launched the attack finally called it back; there was only about ten, fifteen minutes, but boy-oh-boy, was that a long ten or fifteen minutes.  I mean they were reaching over their horses hitting people, you know, with billy clubs, and they had chains or nooses or something--ropes, you know, and as I said, most of 'em were on horses charging into a crowd, although they had some on foot.  So it was just chaos afterward, and people started running back toward the black neighborhood [in Montgomery, Alabama] because that's where we were going to have safety.
Speaker 1: Had you been trained to deal with non-violent confrontations (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They had given us some training.  Well, yeah, but somebody's whipping on you now you (laughter)--we, we had had some training; we were, we were only down there a short period of time.  We had had some training but when you--I, I don't know that anybody can train a horse coming at you, you know--train you to respond when there's a horse, you know.  They train you to do like this--protect your head, protect your chest, and that kinda stuff, but these were horses, and it was terrible; I mean it was just--you know, it took me a long time before I could see a horse and feel good about it.
Speaker 1: So did you escape injury yourself?
Speaker 2: I didn't--I was not injured, I was not injured.  I was pushed and shoved and knocked around a lot, but I was not injured, but Galway [Kinnell] was.  I guess we went back to the black neighborhood; I, I don't remember much about it later but we, we came back a couple of days later and on the way back, I got food poisoned because when I--by the time I got back to Juniata [College, Huntingdon, Pennsylvania], they had to rush me to the hospital and pump my stomach out, and I think I was purposely--I don't think I just had, you know, a bad cream donut; I think somebody put something in the food at one of the places we stopped to eat in the South coming back because we were clearly northerners, we had clearly been part of the demonstration, so I just think somebody decided to do something.  I was really sick and scared 'cause I didn't know what was wrong with me at first.  The school treated us terrible; the local paper in Huntingdon [Pennsylvania], which is where Juniata is, wrote all these editorials citing me particularly as, you know, as a rabble-rouser and (laughter) taking these poor innocent white kids to slaughter, basically, and meddling in people's business--it was none of my business, and all (unclear), and we were shunned on campus by some people.  The president [Calvert N. Ellis] was furious.
Story_ID: 283157
Speaker 1: When we came back [from Montgomery, Alabama], we did some teach-ins, but we were getting ready for finals and graduation, so I had to--Juniata [College, Huntingdon, Pennsylvania] has this thing they call comprehensives--used to--you had to take seven hours of tests to get outta there; six hours of written exams and one hour of orals in your major, and you had to pass it no matter what your GPA was, and so I had to get serious about my comprehensives to pass 'em so I could graduate.  But there was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was your major?
Speaker 1: Sociology, with a minor in criminology.  I had wanted--at that point, I wanted to go and work in prisons, but at the time, Pennsylvania had a rule that females could not--could only work with female inmates, and there was only one female institution [State Industrial Home for Women; State Correctional Institution Muncy] in [Muncy] Pennsylvania and I wasn't interested in working there, so I started looking around for a job.  Galway [Kinnell] and I had a relationship, so I thought coming to New York [New York], not to continue the relationship necessarily, but coming to New York, which I liked from a distance, would be a good thing since (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, was he in New York?
Speaker 1: He was--no, he, he was based in Vermont but he was in and outta New York all the time.  I wrote to this organization called the National Scholarship Service and Fund for Negro Students [NSSFNS], which had given me some scholarship money; it's out of business now.  It was called NSSFNS, which was founded by the woman who started the organization Catalyst [Inc.]--Felice [N.] Schwartz was her name.  Anyway, I wrote to them and said, "I'm about to graduate."  I, I wrote to several people, but I wrote to them and, and I said, "I really would like to come to New York to work," and they hired me, so I had a job and I knew where I was coming.  At graduation, I think there was a collective sigh of relief on the part of the faculty (laughter) when they handed me my diploma, to get me the hell outta there.  So that was it.  It was a turbulent four years.  I think the school learned as much as I did, but I got a fine education; I mean as much as I can say it was a difficult situation, Juniata was very--it, it, it's a fine, fine liberal arts school, and I learned a great deal.  I don't have a graduate degree--I never went back to school.  I have an honorary doctorate, but I never went back to school.  And I felt like, you know, I had gotten a good--even with all the turbulence, I had gotten a solid education there.
Story_ID: 283158
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, how long did you work for the National [Scholarship Service and Fund for Negro Students (NSSFNS)] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From 19--Lord--'65 [1965] to 1970, and it was a, it was a counseling organization that helped black kids broaden their options to go to white schools, and I was a counselor.  I'd travel around the country and meet with colleges and high school students and that sorta thing.  Great job, first job, for somebody--you know, some young person who wanted to see the country.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how far did you range as a--
Speaker 2: Oh, I went--we went all over on--you know, I--Iowa, Minnesota, visiting Luther College [Decorah, Iowa] and Carlson College in--Carleton College in [Northfield] Minnesota and, you know, I--and I drove myself, we'd fly places--I'd fly places and drive all around; it was a great way for me to get to learn the country and to be very independent.  I was twenty-three, I was on the road--it was great.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--then you started working for the New York Foundation? That was the next (unclear)--
Speaker 2: The--on the--a board member of the New York Foundation was a man name John Hyman [ph.], whose family had funded and founded the New York Foundation, which is the fourth oldest foundation in the country, and John had--was very much involved in civil rights and felt very strongly about race issues, and there were--I don't know if there was any black woman at the time--there was one--working for a foundation, so he thought it would be a kick if he hired this young black woman, and I was maybe 29, 30--no, younger--28 maybe--and he hired me as a program associate at the foundation.  We gave away 3 to $4 million a year and, again, great job 'cause I got to meet lots of people and do a lot of things, and we had a particular interest in the South, so with John I actually went back to Alabama and Mississippi; I went down to Greene County, Alabama and I remember being very nervous.  This was in the '70s [1970s], but we did; we gave a lot of money to civil rights organizations then.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was primarily civil rights organizations?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: No, just some?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't primarily civil rights, but civil rights was part of what we did.
Speaker 1: So, did you give some to SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference], for instance?
Speaker 2: Southern Regional Council [SRC], SCLC--yeah, a lot of voting rights projects, lot of, lot of human rights projects there, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, this is, this is around 19--well, this is getting close to '68 [1968]; now are you--
Speaker 2: No, no; I'm in--I'm from--I was--'65 [1965] to '70 [1970], I was with NSSFNS.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Seventy [1970] to '77 [1977], I was at the New York Foundation where I was the president.
Story_ID: 283159
Speaker 1: Okay, I just skipped the [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] assassination and I wanted to go back to that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The what?
Speaker 1: --Dr. King's assassination.  I wanted to go back to that and just find out what you, what you were doing then and what you were thinking.
Speaker 2: Oh, man.  I was incredulous like everybody else.  I lived in a walk-up on East 89th Street [New York, New York], which was a very German neighborhood where I was called "schwartza" more than once.  I, I remember my neighbors coming over and kinda comforting me, we just kinda crying together.  I had four, four apartments per floor, and we were very close; one of 'em was a German girl and nobody could believe it--no.  You just felt like it was the end of an era, an end of a dream, an end of progress for black people, you know?  It just seemed like--we, we knew an era was over--I knew.  But when you have a leader of his stature, even though toward the end of his life, as you know, there, there were questions and he got off into other kinds of crusades, it, it was just a tragic, tragic loss.  I, I was working for NSSFNS [National Scholarship Service and Fund for Negro Students] then, in the high sch--in the college counseling arena.  It was terrible, as was the Bobby Kennedy [Senator Robert F. Kennedy] assassination, and as was the Malcolm X assassination when I first got to New York [New York]; he was assassinated that summer, in 1965, yeah.  I mean, you know, these, these events of an era that really change the course of history, really--yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was killed in--I think it was February of '65 [1965]; that's before--but the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was he?  Well, maybe I wasn't here then.  Okay, I wasn't here then.
Speaker 1: I mean I'm sure the reverberations of it were still going on, yeah.
Speaker 2: I wasn't here then.  I didn't come until--well, we knew, and I knew certainly who he was.
Speaker 1: This was prior to the march on Edmund Pettus Bridge [Selma, Alabama], just before he was shot.
Speaker 2: It was, it was--1965 was a hell of a year, I'll tell you that; It really--a lotta stuff that happened all in civil rights 'cause [President Lyndon Baines] Johnson as a result--let's just go back to that for a minute.  Johnson, as a result of these pictures, the news media coverage did a statement--did a speech and used the term, "We shall overcome" in his speech, and then deputized the National Guard to protect the marchers going from Selma [Alabama] to Montgomery [Alabama] over the Edmund Pettus Bridge, but it was that foray between the Bloody Sunday pictures and the attack on the students because headlines all across the country, you know, "State police attack college students."  And there were all these pictures of people having been hurt.  It, it really changed things.
Story_ID: 283160
Speaker 1: When you were at the New York Foundation, you said you were able to give money to some of the groups that were still struggling (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we did--yeah, we did; we gave money to some of the groups that, you know, had been working for civil rights in the South because by 1970, things still weren't cool (laughter), you know?  And so there was lots to do, and John [Hyman (ph.)] was committed to doing so.  But we had--we gave medical grants, we gave--you know, it was a interesting little foundation because we gave small amounts of money but we could do creative things; you know, we would be there before a Ford Foundation, let's say, would come in, you know, so we could help people kinda get up and off the ground while they were proving themselves to the larger funders.  It was a great, great job--great job.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you were there 'til 1977, that's how (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I took one year off and went to work for John Lindsay; I was--they gave me a leave of absence and I went down to work in the Lindsay administration.  I was a mayoral assistant with responsibility for drugs (laughter)--drug, drug policy, so I was the liaison with the drug agencies which, at that time, was really very serious because we had a huge heroin problem in the United States then, and they were tryin' to get people--methadone was just coming as a treatment option--was just coming along, and so I was very much--and the city was ramping up, giving grants to methadone clinics and drug-free clinics; it was a big battle between drug-free therapies as opposed to methadone therapies, and I was there during the year that a lotta that was going on.
Story_ID: 283161
Speaker 1: One of the arguments against methadone was that even though it was an alternative to heroin and you could get it without having to rob somebody or--to get the money, you were still high and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but you know, the, the things that take you into addiction don't get addressed, you know?  That, that's the problem.
Speaker 1: And the person's still high, right?--on methadone.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and you're still high.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they're not able to function.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what I'm saying, yeah, right.  But we had a big, big problem in New York [New York] then, and I, I remember going to the medical examiner's office [Office of Chief Medical Examiner (OCME)] because I was looking at the body count; I used to get the statistics every week of the people who died, and I would see this high number of young black and brown boys, and I decided go do a visit at the medical examiner's office and my Michael [M.] Baden was the, was the medical examiner then, and I remember him pulling open a drawer and this kid coming out that was in this--he had, he had shot up on the toilet and--I don't know how long he was there, but I mean it was--body was in this position, and I don't know how long he stayed but it was, you know, that was the reality of the '70s [1970s] or early '70s [1970s] in, in New York City [New York, New York], you know?
Speaker 1: And before crack came along.
Speaker 2: Yeah and before crack, yeah, before crack.  But, anyway, I stayed there [John Lindsay mayoral administration] for a year, and then I came back to the [New York] Foundation as I--I left--I was an associate when I went down to the city, I came back as the executive director of the foundation, so--and I did that.  And during those years, what's significant is, I helped to found an organization called the Association of Black Foundation Executives [ABFE], which was the first time that the few black folks, and I mean few, that worked in foundations formed a, basically a trade association for--a professional association for ourselves.  And I did it along with a guy name [HistoryMaker] James Joseph, who went on to become the undersecretary of [the U.S. Department of] Interior under [President James Earl] "Jimmy" Carter [Jr.], and somebody who should be certainly one of these people that's interviewed as a HistoryMaker.
Speaker 1: Okay.  James Joseph (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) James Joseph; he's--he teaches at Emory University [Atlanta, Georgia] one semester and the University of Cape Town [Cape Town, South Africa], but you probably could write to Emory and get his name.
Story_ID: 283162
Speaker 1: Now, you formed the--
Speaker 2: Association, ABFE, Association of Black Foundation Executives (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, the Association of Black Foundation Executives--
Speaker 2: --which exists today, too.
Speaker 1: And what year was that formed?
Speaker 2: Maybe--I don't know the exact year; maybe '72 [1972], '73 [1973], I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were executive director of the--well--
Speaker 2: New York Foundation.
Speaker 1: New York Foundation.  In what year?  What year did you come back?
Speaker 2: Maybe--oh, man, '73 [1973], '74 [1974].  I was with [John] Lindsay [mayoral administration] early on, and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was the head of the New York Foundation for about five years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's something.  A lot of black professionals were forming black organizations then, and some have questioned, you know, why do we need a black organization, you know? You still need 'em--
Speaker 2: Ours was--'cause you remember now, you're in a--you're in a philanthropic community and these people think they're doing good anyway?  And why would you need a black organization, you know; I mean don't we treat you right?  Don't you feel comfortable here?  What's wrong?  And when we did it, it was a real coop; we, we, we did it in Montreal [Quebec, Canada], had a conference at the annual Council on Foundations conference in Montreal, and it was a real interesting turning point.  I always try to be a change agent, you know (laughter); I always like to be somewhere where policy is being made or change is needed and I--you know, I like being in that position.
Speaker 1: That was a year when a lotta those organizations were formed--from '68 [1968], I guess, to about 1980 (unclear).
Speaker 2: There are a lot of associations, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) National Black Police Association [NBPA] and Association of Black Psychologists [ABPsi], [Association of] Black Sociologists [ABS]--
Speaker 2: Well, at that point, you know, we were--we had gone from being Negroes to black, on our way to being African Americans, and I think a lot of us felt a great need to communicate with one another and I, who had been in such white situations all my life, this was a wonderful connection for me, you know, plugging in with these people.  There weren't that many of us; there might have been eight or nine, you know, when I, when--I remember when I first got to the foundation, tryin' to identify--there were a couple people at the Ford Foundation, there was--Jim Joseph [HistoryMaker James Joseph] was running the Cummins Engine Foundation [Cummins Foundation]; there just weren't a lot of us, and we wanted to address some of the issues of getting blacks on foundation boards and policy toward black organizations--just a lotta stuff, lotta things.  We were one of the early funders of [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L. Jackson]; we used to meet in Paschal's [Motor Hotel and Restaurant] in Atlanta [Georgia], and Jesse would come down and give us the state of black America.  He always had acolytes with him, you know, two or three people he always traveled with (laughter).  Boy, that's in the, that's in the early '70s [1970s]; that was--and then we used to pay for him to come, you know; out of the foundation budgets we'd pay and he'd--we'd meet down there for several days and he would tell us the world as he saw it.  He was running [Operation] PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition], of course, then, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In the early '70s [1970s], did you ever go to the Center for the Black World [sic. Institute of the Black World], there in Atlanta--
Speaker 2: That's the thing; Stanley Weiss [ph.], Bill Strickland [William Strickland]--yes, those were people that we knew well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  [HistoryMaker] Vincent Harding.
Speaker 2: Yes, Vince--right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Bill Strickland is--went and taught at UMass [University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts] for a long time after that.
Story_ID: 283163
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, it's good to know these things were going on (laughter); this is why these conversations are important because I--you know, you really don't know who's connected but you know there are good people in the world tryin' to do (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know who was down there?  The guy who was the head of--the Schomburg [Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Yeah, [HistoryMaker] Howard Dodson.
Speaker 2: Howard Dodson was down there, too--
Speaker 1: Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 2: --and I knew Howard from then--long time ago, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well, I don't know if you were down there with--I can't think of his name now, but I'll get to it.  But let's move on then to--so you were with the foundations until '77 [1977], right?
Speaker 2: Then I went to work for [President James Earl] "Jimmy" Carter [Jr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, I was a presidential appointee, and I moved to Washington [D.C.], which was very interesting.
Speaker 1: Why, why Jimmy Carter?  Now, at the time, 1975, '76 [1976], he wasn't a household word; he was the governor of Georgia, but he--the people really in the black community (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Their, their talent people picked me up somehow; I have no idea.  You know, I had some visibility as a, as a black executive of a foundation, and the White House  [Washington, D.C.] personnel office [White Office of Presidential Personnel] called me and asked me if I'd come down to interview for a job.  One of the jobs I was interviewed for was Peace Corps--as the director of the Peace Corps, but I had young children, and that wasn't going to work 'cause that meant I was going to have to be on the road a lot, but I ended up in the [U.S.] Department of Labor in a new program that had lots of money to give away, and since I had been running a foundation, you know, handling grants and that sort of thing, was not that difficult.  It was part of the CETA [Comprehensive Employment and Training Act] program--the employment and training program that everybody hated.
Speaker 1: Except those of us who had a job (laughter).
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Except for those of us who got jobs.
Speaker 2: Got that right.  And communities who got the money, you know; it was really important to them.  But a lotta people liked to pick on it, you know, as a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know the regulations changed all the time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but anyway, I ended up in the labor department with Ernie Green [HistoryMaker Ernest Green].  I worked for Ernie Green when he was the undersecretary of labor.
Speaker 1: Now this is the Ernie Green who was one of the Little Rock Nine--
Speaker 2: Little Rock Nine; isn't that funny how that comes back around?  Yeah, yep.  There I was talking about him in Norway, and I later came to work for him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, how did you find the Carter administration?  (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, first of all let's, let's talk about the appointees, you know.  When you, when you work for--and I--this is certainly the case when I worked for John Lindsay [mayoral administration]--when you work for a politician and you are just absolutely convinced that what you're doing is saving the city, the state, the country--whatever level of government you're working at, you know.  So we were just probably insufferable, to tell you the truth, 'cause we were just so sure of the black Carter appointees; we were just so sure we were, you know, running the universe.  I never got to see him that much, you know.  I was down in an agency; it wasn't as though I was working at the White House or had a whole lot of access to him, but I enjoyed the job.  I got fired from that job; that was the first job I got fired from.
Story_ID: 283164
Speaker 1: Between Ernie [HistoryMaker Ernest Green] and me, there was a, a guy who was head of the youth program [Office of Youth Programs (OYP), U.S. Department of Labor], and his name was Bob Taggart [Robert Taggart] and he and I just kinda never meshed; he wanted somebody else in the job and I came in.  He was a guy who had been an academic and had written a great deal about employment and training programs, and was kinda highly recognized as this theorist.  I came in brash, sure of myself, didn't know a lot about employment and training programs but I figured I could learn, and he and I just clashed and Ernie--he clashed with Ernie, and he somehow--we had enough fights that he somehow convinced Ray Marshall, who was the secretary of labor then, to fire me, and [HistoryMaker] Roger Wilkins wrote about it in The Washington Post.  Anyway, I soon got a job at HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] because White House [Washington, D.C.] personnel thought it was stupid for him to fire me and they gave me another job; they got me a job at HUD in housing and emp--I mean in--fair housing program.  But it was pretty painful, I'd never been fired before; it was public, I felt really bad.  There I was in Washington [D.C.] with my kids; my husband [Yves Michel] was, was in New York [New York], but I worked for, I worked for HUD until the end of the--actually, I had a contract when I went to HUD so I was in a little different position, so I was really working well into the first year of [President Ronald Wilson] Reagan and that's when Sam [Samuel Pierce]--oh boy--he was a black guy who was the, the secretary of Housing [and Urban Development] under Reagan, and remember Reagan didn't know his name?  He saw him, he met him someplace and thought he was someplace else, and it was his housing secretary.  Anyway--and I forgot the poor man's name now; he's dead.  But anyway, I was there, so I got to see how the Republicans do it, and I'm telling you, it's a whole different world then--you know, we Democrats were in there on ideals; the Republicans came in with these black books that had regulations, programs, and even people that they wanted to change, and those books had been put together for them by the Heritage Foundation, which had just started.  Every agency, every sub-agency had a book and a game plan that the conservatives had written, had written, and the Reaganites came in and boy, they took that game plan and they ran with it, and that's how the Reagan revolution happened because they were so well-prepared when they came in.
Story_ID: 283165
Speaker 1: So, let's just go back a minute.  Now, when the Democrats come in, so they came in with ideals basically (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, you have--
Speaker 1: --tryin' to make the agency work to these ideals--
Speaker 2: Right, right; we had high ideals, we did--I will say that.  We had very high ideals, but I don't know that we were long on getting stuff done.  We did it--employment and training because we had a lotta money.  We had--there was $2 billion in the Youth, Employment & Training [Administration (ETA)] program [U.S. Department of Labor], and a lot of that was for demonstrations, and so, you know, while most of CETA [Comprehensive Employment and Training Act] money went out by formula to cities, we had a lot of free money to give away to various organizations to try these different employment and training approaches with youngsters, and so that part was good, but overall, I think, you know, the [President James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter [Jr.] presidency has been analyzed by, by minds far wiser than I but, you know, not a heck of a lot got done during those years, I think.  When the Reaganites came in, they hit the ground running 'cause they had a blueprint, they had a blueprint.
Speaker 1: In terms of what they actually did, what--I mean they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, they, they, they, they, they changed regs [regulations]; regs are very important when you're running the government--regulations.  They managed to get regulations changed, they actually targeted some long-time civil servants to try to get 'em out; I mean they were trying to push their ideas through, and they did it, they were able to do it; that's why it was called a revolution.  But they were--you know, many of them were conservatives that put--and, and many of them had businesses or professions or whatever, that were in direct conflict with some of the stuff that they were trying to do, but they would put those businesses and trust, in blind trust, and then come work in the government and change the regulations around so it favored whatever business or industry they (laughter) (unclear), then they'd go back out again.  I mean I don't, I don't know why people don't really understand that; it was profound.  It was profound.  It was a Reagan revolution, that's true.
Speaker 1: Right--it is a--it baffles me, too, as to why people don't--even though these things were reported.  I, I remember [National] Public Radio [NPR], when [President Ronald Wilson] Reagan came in, reported a lot of these things and public radio was on the list, and pretty soon public radio was down to Bob Evans and--
Speaker 2: Absolutely; they had targets, and just like, you know, the Bushs had NEA [National Endowment for the Arts] first, you know, the arts endowment, they--you know, they--things they didn't like or they didn't like their perspective or the kindsa things they were doing and they targeted them, and they changed them, and nobody said a word.
Story_ID: 283166
Speaker 1: So you were at--you went to HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] next, right?
Speaker 2: I was at HUD (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You worked with CETA [Comprehensive Employment and Training Act]--
Speaker 2: --and I stayed, I stayed 'til the close of the school year, and this was the first year into the [President Ronald Wilson] Reagan administration, which is why I know a little about, about it.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this is 1981, right?  I guess you stayed until '81 [1981]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I did, and--but my husband [Yves Michel], who had been commuting every week from New York [New York] to Washington [D.C.], said, "If you want this marriage to survive, you'd better figure out that you're coming back to New York," so--I had bought a house on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.]; we sold the house, I packed up the kids and we, we moved back to New York.  I didn't have a job at first, and I had been a trustee of the City University of New York [CUNY, New York, New York], the first African American female to have been so, and I had been the chairman of a search committee of one of the City University's colleges, so I went to that president and he found a space for me in his, in his college, which was John Jay College [of Criminal Justice, New York, New York], and I kind of did odds and ends there, keeping myself busy until 1983 when I was selected as the first female president of the New York Urban League, which is the largest--was then the largest of the [National] Urban League affiliates.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right, now that's--that's historic.  Now, how did that happen?  I mean how did--
Speaker 1: How did I get selected?  I have no idea.
Speaker 2: Were they under pressure to--
Speaker 1: Somebody--well, no, they had a--one of the board members worked for Korn Ferry or some--one of the large firms, and asked me to come and interview--called me and said, "Would you interview for it?"  I did, I got the job.  There was a little consternation because, you know, the Urban League is a very family--when I say family, people go there, they work for years, they start at small Urban Leagues, they work their way up and so on, and I had no Urban League experience and here I was selected from one of the plum assignments.  So I think there was a little--probably some people who were not very happy about that, but we had a good team that I put together.  If I have any strength, it's pulling in very smart and capable people; I have a reputation of always building a very good staff, and we had one, and we built the Urban League, but there was conflict with me and the board.  You're beginning to hear (laughter), you're beginning to hear a theme in my, in my life.
Story_ID: 283167
Speaker 1: I was also very active in TransAfrica, Randall Robinson's organization, and when they did the first demonstrations against the South African Embassy a week later, we did them here in New York [New York] and I led them; not only did I lead the first one, but I then scheduled all the ones that we did here in New York; I don't remember what year that was, but that put me immediately at odds with the board, who said, you know, that I was the president of the [New York] Urban League and I couldn't have--I shouldn't have gone off and done this without consultation with them.  My position was that, you know, I am many things--I'm a mother, I'm a wife, I'm the Urban League president, but I'm also a citizen and, as a citizen who feels very strongly about these things, I had led this demonstration.  Well, that didn't help things very much and I, I am very opinionated and very set in my ways, very--I've told you from the beginning I was sure of the direction I was going and it didn't square with some of the board members, and after five years, in 1988, I was fired, and it happened because one of the wealthy white board members--we were having financial problems.  The United Way [Worldwide] is a big supporter and backer of all of the Urban Leagues around the country and our United Way in New York changed its funding strategy, which left us really in, in a bad way.  We had a city contract that when we tried to go and collect the dollars, that suddenly you had to prove that you spent the money in order to get the dollars; it just created a big funding problem.  And we were scratching around for money and I was at odds with at least a couple of the, couple of the board members, so one of the board members who was a wealthy white lawyer, basically said to the board, "If you get rid of her, I'll give you $250,000 to solve this financial (laughter) problem."  And this was right after I got a, I got a outstanding performance evaluation, but nonetheless--and I thought--and it wasn't the end of the world, and I had come increasingly to believe that the fit between me and the Urban League was not a good one.
Story_ID: 283168
Speaker 1: This is another fish out of water story (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah--well, I wasn't a fish out of water as much as I just wasn't an Urban Leaguer, whatever that meant, so I didn't have this long tradition and, you know--and, and I want to move fast when I'm moving.  You know, this is an organization [National Urban League] that kinda moves, and people have been there a long time and they have vested interest in the organization and all that sort of thing, you know?  And I am not too respectful of that sorta thing; I should be perhaps more, and I'm better now than I used to be but, you know, I was brash and wanted to move ahead.  In any event, they accepted the 250,000 [dollars] and fired me, and I then went to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to the [John F.] Kennedy School [of Government] on a fellowship, joined by other people who had been recently either fired or defeated, or whatever; I mean the, the--I was a fellow at the Institute of Politics with Geraldine Ferraro, with a Republican congressman who had been defeated, with a guy who had run ABC News bureau in Washington [D.C.] who had lost his job (laughter), so--but that's the kinda--that's, that's where you go; you go to lick your wounds at the Kennedy School.  And I shouldn't make it sound like that 'cause they're fascinating people who (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It sounds like Heartbreak Hotel or something like that (laughter)--
Speaker 2: No, really it's not; it's a place where you--it's really a place where you renew your energy and you say, "Okay, this is where"--you gather your strength and, you know, you talk to one another, and the kids were wonderful; it was a wonderful experience for me because not having a graduate degree, I felt like I had to--you have to teach a course, and my course was very popular and it was on race, of course, and I got all kinds of people to come in to talk to the students--[HistoryMaker] Roger Wilkins, [HistoryMaker] Chuck Stone, the very famous writer out of The Philadelphia Inquirer, and so on.  I had--oh, Ben, Ben Chavis [HistoryMaker Benjamin F. Chavis, Jr.] that was part of the Civil Rights Movement, of course, and later went on to head the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]--
Speaker 1: That's before he got in trouble.
Speaker 2: --and that's before he got in trouble.  But that was the kinda people I brought through, and the discussions were terrific and the class was great.
Story_ID: 283169
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the most flattering thing about it was that they asked me to stay on, but they wanted me to start my graduate degree; they wanted me to stay on as an adjunct because they didn't have many black professors at the [John F.] Kennedy School [of Government, Institute of Politics, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] itself and--but my family was in New York [New York], I was living in Cambridge [Massachusetts], and while I loved it and I--it was really the opportunity to me--for me to affirm to myself that I really was smart and I could hold my own; I found that I had a talent for teaching, which I hadn't known, but it's too far away from the action for me, you know?  Teaching is--you're kinda standing back here pontificating where people are out there doing stuff, and I prefer to be out there doing stuff.  So while I was there, I was contacted by another search firm that--'cause I knew I had to come back to New York and get a job, and they asked me to sit for--I mean to interview for this job, and in the fall of 1988, I was appointed as the president of the National Minority Supplier Development Council [NMSDC], and I'm here seventeen years later--almost eighteen years.  It's a wonderful fit, and I, I think what I understand is it is so important for people to continue to seek the right match for them because all the struggling and stuff that I did in my early--in my career, I used to say, "You know, I've been fired twice," and it wasn't, you know, downsizing--me, [HistoryMaker] Harriet [Michelle Michel], was fired, you know, if--because I couldn't get along, or clashes that I had with people, and I used to say--people used to say to me, "What did you learn from being fired twice?"  And I said, "Well,"--'cause each time I had these glowing reports of what I was doing, and all sorta things.  I said, "What I've learned is when the train is coming down the track, I cannot stand there and put my hands up; I have to get the hell off the track."  And so I came here with some sensitivity about how I interacted, but this has just been the perfect job for me, and I've grown, the organization has grown, people give me a lot more credit than I'm due, I think, in terms of the success of where we are and the importance of minority businesses now in the, in the economy, but we've done some great things here with a lotta support from a lot of our corporate members, with an incredible staff, and we've really made it an organization to be reckoned with.
Story_ID: 283170
Speaker 1: Okay, now what exactly do you do here?
Speaker 2: What we do--this is a thirty-two-year-old organization [National Minority Supplier Development Council (NMSDC)] that was started as a result of the race riots in Chicago [Illinois]; corporations were trying to figure out what to do as people were running through the streets in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In '68 [1968] in Chicago where those riots after the death of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.].
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968], right, right.  And they--companies like American Can [Company], AT&T--oh, there were like eleven of them--got together with the Chicago Urban League and did a trade fair for black businesses, and it's from those humble beginnings that this organization grew.  What we do is, on behalf of our corporate members--we're a member--membership organization and our members are the Fortune 1000 companies.  We source and identify and certify minority suppliers across the country for them to do business with, I mean it's simply stated.  And I always say we bring buyer and seller together for the purposes of doing business.  We don't give any contracts, we create all sorts of situations where these people can be in contact with one another in the hopes that they'll do business with one another.  We have thirty-nine--this is the national office; we have the Washington [D.C.] office, we have thirty-nine regional offices around the country.  We now--since I've been here, I've started an international program.  We now have affiliate offices in Toronto [Ontario, Canada], in the, the East Midlands [England] in the UK [United Kingdom], and in Sao Paulo, Brazil, and I'm very proud of that.  We have about--in excess of three thousand corporations that work with us either on a national or a local level--corporations and buying organizations--sometimes colleges, hospitals, but mostly big industrial corporations.  We have about fifteen thousand minority businesses that are certified by us of all sizes.  We have tiny businesses all the way up to businesses that do annual sales of more than a billion dollars.  We deal with Latinos, African Americans, Asian Americans and Native Americans and their lawyers, their construction firms, their manufacturing firms of auto parts, their accountants, their--everything you could imagine we have businesses in here, as long as they have a product or a service to sell to corporate America.  Last year, our corporate members did $82 billion worth of procurement for minority suppliers, so this is a big deal.  Most people don't know about us.  What I find so fascinating is that, you know, people out here talking about civil rights leaders and yet here's an organization that flies under the radar because unless you're a corporate procurement person, or a minority business selling to a corporation, it's not an organization you necessarily know anything about, and yet we have a great deal of influence with corporate America and we have really opened up some opportunities for people of color to get wealthy, create jobs, get back to their communities.
Story_ID: 283171
Speaker 1: Can you give me a story about a minority business that was able to be linked to, you know, a major corporation that you can--I mean a story that you can tell us about.
Speaker 2: Well, I can only tell you that I've had--there are minority entrepreneurs that will tell you that they have grown their business through their association with this organization [National Minority Supplier Development Council (NMSDC)]; let me tell you how.  If real estate is location, location, location, selling is access, access, access.  We are a corporate organization, so anytime we have any events, corporations are there looking for minority suppliers, so once a minority supplier signs up with us, if he attends--or he or she attends any of our myriad of activities that we post, they are going to meet someone from a corporate procurement department that is a potential customer, okay?  So, we've had people that have told me that they have actually grown their business inside of this organization through the contacts that they've made attending our events.  We have lots of things that we do, both for our corporate members--we do training, lots of training programs for our corporate members, on how to run better supplier diversity programs, we have training, we run a program at the Kellogg School of Business [Kellogg School of Management] at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], which is an advanced management program for minority entrepreneurs, we do an annual conference that, that attracts seven thousand people, and those aren't made-up numbers like a lotta conferences--there are seven thousand people there; half of 'em are corporate representatives, half of 'em MBEs [minority business enterprises] looking to do business with one another.  We recognize corporations that fight like mad to get our highest award which is Corporation of the Year, and corporations include those in their advertisements and in their PR [public relations] and that sort of thing because it's seen as a highly respected award.  All we're trying to do is try to position these two factions, corporations and minority businesses, so they'll come together and do business.  It sounds very basic but it, it took a long time to get to this point; this organization is thirty-two years old, people didn't even know about it; now that the population base in the United States has changed so much, people are much more aware.  Corporations surely know that the best way to attract a customer is to do business with them; it's not sufficient just to have black dolls on your shelves, you know, who are made in Taiwan by somebody who's--you know--but to have--to buy products and services from those people you're hoping to sell back to because the more people of color that are working, the more they have disposable income to buy the products that corporate America is trying to sell, right?  So, it's an economic development program.  When people say, "Well, what's the most important thing?"  I think this is the most important thing I've ever done, and running the teenage pregnancy programs and doing the stuff that I did at the [New York] Urban League, doing the stuff I did at the--at--in the [President James Earl "Jimmy"] Carter [Jr.] administration--this is where real change is happening, though, because we are enabling people to do for themselves, to create jobs, to create wealth, that they can do more for their own communities.
Story_ID: 283172
Speaker 1: We're in 2005--March, 2005.  At this juncture in time, what are corporations looking for?  What kinds of--I mean what--who are they really looking for in the minority business world?  What kinds of sources (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, what they're looking for is large enough businesses with capacity to do business with them.  It used to be--this whole supplier diversity initiative has gone through different phases; I told you it [National Minority Supplier Development Council (NMSDC)] started as a response to race riots, and so corporations created programs that were basically response to a political--social political problem, you know?  They weren't real business programs.  Then we went through a period in the '70s [1970s] where we began to get black legislators and then legislation was passed.  In Chicago [Illinois], you had--[Mayor] Harold Washington had that anybody who did business with the city like that had to do 33 percent of what they were doing with minorities, and so on.  And during that legislative period when there was legislation at the federal, state and local levels, people became more concerned about counting numbers than quality of what they were doing, so if a project had to have a 33 percent participation, they didn't care what it was like, they just wanted to make sure they had the number, right?  We've moved beyond that, thank God, to a period where corporations now understand that they have to be real business partners with these minority businesses.  But what has happened in the global economy, which is to force every American corporation, I don't care what kinda business you have, into global competition, they now have fewer suppliers, they need larger suppliers, and that has forced an issue for a lot of minority businesses that tend to be smaller; it's very difficult for them to grow to the size, where corporations need them to be, in order for them to be prime suppliers to them.  But, there are more and more corporations every day that start these programs--companies that we would have never thought before.  Archers [Archer] Daniels Midland [Company], ConAgra [Foods, Inc.], people that for years just ignored us, now their customers are saying to them, "Look, this is important to us."  A PepsiCo or a Kellogg [Company], or whoever uses their products says, "Listen, we are trying to have a supplier diversity program and we want you to be part of this."  So, companies that never before had to even think about minority customers 'cause they're not selling directly to the public, right?  They're (unclear) companies.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Now, all of a sudden there's a different kinda pressure on them, and so you find them beginning to open up and open channels of opportunity for minority businesses.  So--I mean I--the possibilities are endless and exciting, but there's a lotta stresses in the marketplace now because the way corporate America is procuring its goods and services--all this outsourcing, all this off-shore stuff, is really affecting all American corporations and particularly minority suppliers.
Story_ID: 283173
Speaker 1: Yeah, so this--the idea for this was hatched by [Edwin C.] "Bill" Berry back in--at the [Chicago] Urban League way back (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it wasn't hatched by Bill Berry.  I, I think Bill had something to do with it; it was really the--it was a corporate initiative.  This is--this has always been--and part of the strength in the organization [National Minority Supplier Development Council (NMSDC)] is that we're not a minority business trade association, and that's not a bad thing to be; I'm just saying that--but when I speak, I speak for our corporate members, I'm speaking for the largest corporations in America, and so when I talk about trends and issues and that sorta thing, I am speaking from, you know, 60,000 feet as opposed to down here where we're slugging it out.  Or I'm speaking from both places which--because and certainly I talk to the minority suppliers and I know their issues as well.  But I have the advantage of being with very senior corporate management, and being able to talk about what the issues and problems are that they face in trying to achieve these objectives as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Our chair--our board chairman is always the CEO of a corporation and they're involved.  We've had United Technologies [Corporation], General Motors [Company], Kmart, Sears, Raytheon [Company].  Our current chairman is a--the C--chairman and CEO of a company called Johnson Controls [Inc.], which does all the little switches and the controls for the heating thermostats and stuff; they do all of that plus a lot of business in the automotive industry.  We have very, very high and senior corporate involvement here, which is really amazing when you think of it.  These people have very large jobs in that they spend time, energy, and effort with us, which I'm very appreciative.  So it's a, it's a big organization with lots of pieces and parts.
Story_ID: 283174
Speaker 1: I was trying to get a story out of you about one minority supplier (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm trying to--I have to think about it for a minute.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: I don't want you to talk out of school but, you know (unclear)--
Speaker 2: No, I, I'll give you some bad ones where some of 'em have bitten the dust, which is really terrible.
Speaker 1: Well, do people kinda (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, I can tell you about--I know I--we can't take credit for it though, but there's a man name Dave Steward [HistoryMaker David Steward, Sr.]--now, if my brain will not fail me and I can--he's out of St. Louis [Missouri] and he is now doing over a billion dollars a year in his business [World Wide Technology, Inc.], which is technology, and he--a lotta the contacts--he comes to all of our meetings; you would assume that, you know, he wouldn't need us at the size he is, but I mean he's grown because he's got good service and a good product.  I mean I, I don't wanna take credit for that, but by the same token, he acknowledges that it's the contacts that he's made, at least in part, in this organization, that have helped him grow his business.  He's the largest black business in the country.
Speaker 1: What is his business?
Speaker 2: Technology; he does computer stuff.  I don't even know what he does, tell you the truth, 'cause it's so highly evolved but it's, it's technology, and in a minute, before I leave outta here I'll figure out.  We also have the largest female black business in the country that's part of us; she does about $500 million a year; the woman's name is Janice [Bryant] Howroyd, H--Howroyd, H-O-W-R-O-Y-D; her company is ACT-1 Personnel [ACT-1 Group], and she's another one.  I mean these people grow their business 'cause they, they're good business people.  But she's another one that has really learned how to grow her business through the contacts that she's made over the years through this organization.  I mean we create a community of these corporate people who--their jobs--the people who are around us, their jobs are to go out and search for suppliers.  You come here to--anything that we do, whether it's a board meeting or a trade show or a conference or anything, that's who's here--it's the corporate people looking for the suppliers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not very exotic, but pretty interesting, I'll tell ya.  And so I say we fly beneath the radar.  A lotta people don't even know 'cause we have a goofy name, you know, the National Minority Supplier Development Council [NMSDC].  People go, "What is that?"  But I think what we do is really important and critical to--the best way for people of color to get ahead economically is by owning businesses; I'm convinced of that.  You, you can work yourself to the bone four or five jobs, but it's by being a business owner and helping to control your own destiny that you really begin to prosper.
Story_ID: 283175
Speaker 1: There's a little controversy, I guess, in 2000 when I think the standards changed--you had (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not--the standards changed; we decided that--right now--let's see, how are we doing?  Okay, we're in good shape.  The, the traditional definition of a minority-owned business has always been 51 percent owned, operated and controlled, meaning that there is a minority CEO, that the board is majority minority persons, that equity in the company--51 percent of the equity in the company is held by a minorities.  That's the definition that the federal government uses, that's the standard acceptable definition, and it's a definition that we [National Minority Supplier Development Council (NMSDC)] use.  But several years ago, our corporate members kept saying, "We need larger and larger minority suppliers; we have got to figure out how to help these minority businesses grow."  Well, many of the largest minority businesses already had investors; they were holding only 51 percent if their equity, and if they sold off any more, they were going to lose their minority status.  Well, we had spent, we have spent all these years building minority status as a plus in the marketplace, so you don't want then people to say, as they grow their businesses, they'd lose their minority status.  So we put together a group of very intelligent people and we came up with a second definition, not of--called a minority controlled company, which would allow the equity to be held--the equity portion of the definition to go down to 30 percent, but the board, the stock, and the management still had to be majority minority, and we call that a minority controlled company.  On our way to doing this, some of my colleagues heard about it.  We were doing it for our own organization, and once again, I found myself (laughter) in the midst of a firestorm.  [HistoryMaker] Earl [G.] Graves [Sr.], Kweisi Mfume, [HistoryMaker] Hugh Price, [HistoryMaker Reverend] Al Sharpton--must have been a couple of others--all signed this letter saying how terrible this was, sent it out to all of these organizations.  Kweisi threatened to, to, threatened to picket any corporation that voted for this thing.  Corporations were very nervous 'cause they don't want these kinda fights; corporations don't want any kinda fights.  But we managed to figure out a way to get a vote from our corporate members and so we voted in this new status.  We, we've had other interesting conversations around here.  When I first came, a lot of white women were included in the minority definition, and it became impossible when a corporation gave you a number to know, well, what was white women, what was minorities and so--and some of our local affiliates began to, what we call, certify white women and disabled people, and people who were in a pot that corporations wanted.  And we said absolutely not, and we made sure that this definition did not extend to white women or to anybody who wasn't a minority, and the white women got very excited, particularly a group in Texas, told me I was anti-feminist, racist, and so on, but we--they have since gone on to create an organization that is for women exclusively, not just white women, though it's very heavily white women, that's similar to ours where they certify women-owned businesses, and it was good for everybody.  People resisted it at the time, they felt, you know, we were discriminating, but in the final analysis, it turned out to be good for everybody.  It's the same thing with this minority control designation; you have to--any minority business that's trying to grow has got to be able to take on capital, and if you have this 51 percent threshold and you, you are threatened with losing your minority status, that's a problem 'cause you can't grow your company.  So we had to find a way around that, and we have.
Story_ID: 283176
Speaker 1: This is my son Gregory [Michel] and me--my son Gregory, who's a lawyer, and me at the National Minority Supplier Development [Council (NMSDC)] conference maybe four, four years ago.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: This is my older son [Yves] Christopher [Michel] and me at home on the occasion of his thirtieth birthday.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Hold on.
Speaker 1: About what year is that?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: About what year is that, do you think?
Speaker 2: He's thirty-five now; he'll be thirty-six this year (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Five years ago--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's 2000.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Hold on, please.
Speaker 1: It was really 1999.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: This is my husband Yves Michel, Gregory, and Christopher and me in Jamaica.  Oh, probably--Gregory looks like he's about eight; he's thirty now, so we're talking early 1980s.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's me not long after I came to--early in my presidency of NMSDC, so--I still had black hair (laughter), so that had to be maybe 1990, '91 [1991] maybe.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is a picture that was in an issue of Life magazine, a special section that they do for certain subscribers on business.  That must have been maybe 1996 or '7 [1997].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: That's my wedding picture in 1968.  That was in The New York Times, I might add.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That was taken three months ago on the occasion of the ninety-fifth anniversary of the New York's [New York, New York] blackest, black--oldest black newspaper, the [New York] Amsterdam News.  The young woman is the publisher of the Amsterdam News whose name is [HistoryMaker] Elinor Tatum, T-A-T-U-M, and Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: This is my family today.  On the lower--next to me is my husband Yves, above me is my daughter-in-law Valerie [Michel], behind her is her husband Gregory, behind me is my daughter-in-law Michelle, who is Michelle Michel, and behind her is my son Christopher, and on the far left is my sister Monica [Pride].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Did we get an occasion or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I was getting the--I was being sworn in as an inaugural inductee in the Minority Business Hall of Fame & Museum [MBHF&M].
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: That's my deceased brother Bobby [John R. Richardson] and me in about 1946 maybe--'45 [1945], '46 [1946] in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: That's my husband Yves.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's my husband Yves, my son Gregory, and me at a National Minority Supplier Development conference, I would say probably 2000, 2001.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is my official portrait in about--of NMSDC in about 1998, '99 [1999].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: This is a family picture.  This is at a Richardson family reunion in Rural Retreat, Virginia.  My cousin Michele March in the middle, and my cousin Marguerite Brown [ph.] on the side.  Marguerite Brown's father was the athletic director and coach at Tusk--no, Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] for thirty, forty years.
Speaker 1: This is a fundraiser for I don't know who, to tell you the truth; I know it was a fundraiser.  Behind me is Kweisi Mfume, the woman in the pink is Hazel [Nell] Dukes who's the president of the New York State NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], and I don't know who the fellow on the side is, and that was in New York City [New York, New York]--a political fundraiser in about, I don't know, maybe 1995.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: My husband Yves, my son Gregory, and me at a fundraising dinner that NMSDC gives every year in May at the Hilton Hotel; that was about '95 [1995] or '96 [1996].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is me just after I did a speech in Colorado, and I'd say about '95 [1995], '96 [1996].  I didn't realize I had so many from that era.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  We don't have to do all of 'em.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: That's my first school picture, I think.  I think I was in--I was still in Pittsburgh.  Maybe not; yeah, I might have been in the first grade at A. Leo Weil [Elementary] School [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], so you're talking 1940--hm, I was six, so 1948.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: I was maybe two and a half, three in Pittsburgh, so 1945.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Hold on please.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next photo.
Speaker 1: I was being given an award in 2000--this is 2005--2001 in Washington, D.C. by the Black [Women In] Sisterhood [For Action (BISA)], and I was on a calendar, their calendar, that year 'cause I was an awardee.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is one of the Richardson family reunions.  I'm standing over my father [John Richardson, Jr.], and next to me is my son, and I would say that's maybe '85 [1985], 1985.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's me and my niece Carolyn [Pride] who's now 18, 19, 18, and my son Gregory, so whatever 18--in New York; whatever 18 years ago was, I don't know.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's my former secretary at the New York Urban League, Pam Benjamin [ph.], [HistoryMaker Reverend] Al Sharpton, and me at a boat ride, and I'd say the year is probably 2001.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is my son Gregory's law school graduation, and there is myself, Gregory, our son Christopher and my husband Yves.
Speaker 2: These are the last two.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That was 2001, and that's Gregory and Christopher.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Is there one with my mother [Vida Fish Richardson] in it?  No, huh?  I didn't bring one with my mother in it--damn!
Speaker 2: That's it.
Speaker 1: That is me and a woman name Esther [L.] Bush, who is head of the Pittsburgh Urban League [Urban League of Greater Pittsburgh], and that's at a party, at our thirtieth anniversary party at our house in Haiti.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's it.
Speaker 2: That's it?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is the March 7th issue of People magazine on the occasion of the fortieth year anniversary of the Selma to Montgomery March.  The picture on the right--I'm sorry, on the left, is me and Galway Kinnell just after he was hit by the cop, and the picture on the left is two weeks ago at our (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: --fortieth reunion; I hadn't seen him in forty years (laughter).
Speaker 1: Wow, that's something.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 283177
Speaker 1: The question was, did people understand what we [National Minority Supplier Development Council (NMSDC)] were trying to do when we tried to broaden the ability of minority firms to take on equity and yet still be called minority.  At the time, the demand was being made by our corporate members to--for larger and larger minority firms, and the only way corporations can grow is through having capital.  Some people think they grow contract-by-contract, but typically, every three to five years, any firm, minority or otherwise, goes in the marketplace and tries to raise capital to grow their company, grow their capacity, and so on, and that's what we were trying to do, to satisfy the request of our corporate members.  There was a group led by [HistoryMaker] Earl [G.] Graves [Sr.] who decided that this was a wrong decision; they really didn't understand it.  The issue was, though I knew the people who were objecting to it, none of them--people like Ed Lewis [HistoryMaker Edward Lewis] at Essence magazine, on whose board I have served--people like [HistoryMaker] Hugh Price at the National Urban League--none of them called me to say, "What is this?  What are you doing?  Can you explain it to us?"  But they fell in line behind Earl Graves and signed a letter which was sent to every business publication in the country because of Earl's mailing list and his connection to Black Enterprise.  And so the turbulence and the negativity started.  It was a terrible time for me, for this organization.  People began writing letters to corporations saying that they would boycott the company if the company voted for this proposal, if their representative on our board voted for this proposal--a lot of pressure.  The truth is, I nearly had a stroke; my blood pressure was very high, and the stress that I was under was incredible.  I had, of course, flashbacks to previous situations and jobs where I had backed myself into difficult situations and I certainly didn't want that to happen again.  But one day when I thought I just could not take it anymore, I had to give it to God and I did, and I just said, "Listen, show me the way outta this, help me through this, help me to be strong."  But that incident is--first of all, it--the hypocrisy of their position was shown by the fact that Earl Graves later founded an equity fund [Black Enterprise/Greenwich Street Corporate Growth Fund] which was dollars to invest in minority businesses.  He, in fact, put in a million dollars into that equity fund, but he went out and solicited banks and other institutions--large institutions, their pension funds, and so on.  But that's white money, you know; so--but he felt that that was a, a proper thing to do whereas when--all we were trying to do is say, "If a minority business took on white money and their equity went below 51 percent, they could still, as long as they managed and controlled the company, it could still be designated as a minority firm." So, you know, people were signing letters, I, I spoke to Hugh Price and asked him, you know, "Do you know what this issue is about?"  And he said, "Well, no," but, you know, he trusted Earl and Earl had asked him to sign it and he signed it, and I said, "How could you put the name of a major social welfare, civil rights organization on a letter that went far and wide when you didn't understand the issue?  Would you do that in other situations?"
Story_ID: 283178
Speaker 1: Now, each of the people who signed the letter--no--well, what saved us [National Minority Supplier Development Council (NMSDC)] at the time, and it's important to know this--the one person who was asked to sign and didn't, was [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson; he really couldn't because Jesse is--now has what's called the [Rainbow PUSH] Wall Street Project where he is encouraging investment houses, Wall Street houses, to put up more money for minority businesses, so he couldn't sign a letter that basically said, "We can only deal with these businesses if the money is from black institutions or minority institutions or minority people."  But the fact that Jesse didn't join in really gave me some breathing room.  Also, the chairman of our board at the time was a chairman of United Technologies [Corporation], George David, who's a prince of a man, and his company and he are often cited as admirable companies by business, by business publications.  He just stood firm, and has since said that his chairmanship of this organization was one of the proudest moments in his life, that he was the chairman (laughter) when we went through that awful period.  We knew we were right; the problem is, though, for me in all my life, I reach--I, I, I do believe I have vision.  I get so inside of the issues that I'm dealing with, the organizations that I'm leading, that I am able to see far out, and now whether that's the future or not (laughter), I don't know, but see far, and I can come to these conclusions a lot earlier than a lot of other people.  But that situation--there's a "do not disturb" button there.  But that situation has gotten me into trouble while I wait for other people to either understand or catch up, or arrive at where I've already arrived.
Speaker 2: You're talking about--really--you're not talking about so much prescience, but being able to decode the situation, right, yet--control the situation (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, it's not prescient; I, I, I'm able to see through things.  For example, when, when I, when I'm watching comedians, I laugh a half-a beat before everybody else 'cause I know where it's going, you know?  I mean I can see the end of it.  Now, that's not being prescient, it's just that I--my ability to go forward, think fast, is really one of my strengths.  When I was a young woman, though, because I was so sure and because I had (laughter)--you know, I could come to these conclusions, people were far less able to accept my conclusions, my vision, than they are now.  I mean now I get, you know--the things that are written about me and stuff, I get applauded for it, but I've always been like that.  It's now, I guess, with maturity, people are willing to say that I've got enough experience under my belt that I might just know what I'm talking about (laughter), you know?  But I, I think it's--is it a gift?  I don't know, I don't think it's a gift but I think it's a strength that I have that has helped me be a very strong leader for every organization that I have ever led, and nobody--I mean I may have been criticized on some things, but it's never been the strength of my leadership or the direction of my leadership.
Story_ID: 283179
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I guess it was--being able to decode what's in front of you, sort of, and faster than maybe somebody else (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Decode, yeah, yeah.  I can--and it frustrates some people because when I'm talking one-on-one with staff people, you know, I'll come--I'll sometimes cut them off because I, I know what they're going to say next, and so I go on with my answer and, you know, the, the, the, the proper thing to do would be for me to allow them to finish their thought, of course.  But that's just how, you know, this manifests itself in, in lotsa ways, but it's, it's just something I'm able to do.  It's, it's served me well, as I said; in some situations it's gotten me into trouble, but I'd rather have this than not.
Speaker 1: Have you ever been wrong?  Say, "Well this adds up to this and" (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, and, and I have a staff member here whose name is Steven Sims [Steve Sims] who's been working with me in three jobs for over--almost twenty-five years, and on the days when I'm wrong he, he calls up everybody and says, "Harriet's [HistoryMaker Harriet Michelle Michel] wrong today" (laughter), you know, "she's been proven wrong."  But no, my, my instinct is--I mean everybody's wrong sometimes, obviously, but my instinct is pretty solid, pretty solid.
Story_ID: 283180
Speaker 1: Since that time, some of the wounds have healed and--
Speaker 2: I still have scars on my back, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was so public and so ugly, and I had a very strong array of people kinda standing up against me, you know. [HistoryMaker Reverend] Al Sharpton went on BET and, you know, and they did a, they did a--oh, dear--a survey; they asked people to vote on BET.  Now, they're trying to explain these--these are fairly sophisticated thoughts, but they ask on some--of the programs on BET they asked the audience to vote on, you know, whether they thought this was proper, this--you know, us doing--this minority controlled certification was proper or not, and of course most people voted against it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did they cut it?  I mean how did they really cut that for somebody to vote on?  Now, how did they state--
Speaker 2: Well, they, they kept saying we were going to, we were going to allow white people to take over black businesses and still call them black businesses, you know?  If, if you remember the brouhaha about Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] when he sold BET and how many people said, "This is terrible"--listen, the purpose of any entrepreneur going into business is not eleemosynary, it's not philanthropic, it's economic; they go into business to make money extensively.  Yes, they may want to make a good product, offer a good service, but they go into business to make money.  Bob was going to get paid very big by selling out to Viacom [Inc.]; there were lots of people who felt he should keep it a black company.  Well, a black company that's losing market share (laughter) is not a force in the marketplace, which is what was happening to BET; it was losing market share, losing power.  He saw an opportunity to marry it up to a larger company, make a lot of money in the process, and retain some control.  He is still today, four or five years later, the CEO of the company; [HistoryMaker] Debra Lee, his partner, is still a major operator in the company, but what selling to Viacom did for Bob is give him now the financial resources to buy the first athletic franchise--sports franchise.  He ended up buying the Carolina Cougars [sic. Charlotte Bobcats; Charlotte Hornets], I think it's called--the basketball team.  Well, now, there's a whole array of new possibilities for blacks in basketball; not just as general managers, but as front office people, not just those boys on the floor that are pounding that ball and getting pounded themselves.  So, while people criticize and say, "Is it is important for him to keep BET black?" he has gone on to do other things that are beneficial to the black community.  He's trying to start a gambling--I think he has a gambling casino somewhere that is in control of blacks, and his position about hiring blacks and using blacks in management and that sorta thing has always been very strong, so he's able to do more having sold out and made that $2 billion and selling to Viacom.  What's wrong with that?
Story_ID: 283181
Speaker 1: I think what's wrong with this is that you probably have a situation that probably defies translation from the top level where it's going on to the bottom level (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, that's correct.
Speaker 1: In fact, it seems to stymie translation to the near-top level, or the people that are trying to translate the business world, to the black community.
Speaker 2: Well, except [HistoryMaker Reverend] Jesse [L. Jackson] says--
Speaker 1: If [HistoryMaker] Earl [G.] Graves [Sr.] doesn't understand it then, I mean--or can get confused about it, then--
Speaker 2: Well, Earl didn't want us to understand 'cause it wasn't his suggestion (laughter), okay?  It was mine, and I didn't consult with him and he sees himself as a kind of a guru in that community, and I think he thought he's a touchstone and I should have talked to him.  But you know, Jesse has a statement of something that's absolutely true that everybody can understand.  Ten percent of something is a hell of a lot better than a hundred percent of nothing.  And so this need that we talk about in the black community of having things black-owned, well if there's--if they're struggling, if they're barely making any money, if they can't hire people and expand and grow their companies, then you don't have anything.  You have something when you have vital companies that are able to grow, they sometimes take on partners in order to grow, but if they're healthy, vital companies and they're creating wealth and jobs, and paying taxes in a community, then that's a far better situation than having a lot of little all-back 100 percent black-owned businesses that are always teetering on the edge of extinction.
Story_ID: 283182
Speaker 1: Having been part of some of those (laughter), I know--I can feel the--I can feel that--yeah, anyway (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right.  One is--you know, one is, is, is pride, I guess, but I'm very proud of what Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] has done, you know; he's taken a $25--$5,000 loan and turned it into a huge empire where a lotta black people have jobs and a lotta black people benefit.  There's nothing wrong with that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's hard to--in today's world, and even in the world that passed, I guess, it's hard to--when you're dealing with commerce, you--it's, it's very difficult to become nationalistically pure.
Speaker 2: Nobody can.  You know, it's like "Buy America," you know, and they're--in the--or, or shipping jobs offshore.  I think the, the example of Wal-Mart, though I don't defend all Wal-Mart's practices, Wal-Mart is a member of our organization [National Minority Supplier Development Council (NMSDC)], Wal-Mart is now, after having saturated the suburbs and the rural area, now trying to move into urban areas and getting some pushback, but--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Chicago [Illinois], especially.
Speaker 2: --you know, we--yeah, Chicago, and they just got defeated at, at least in one site in New York though they're already--they have identified another site which seems to be--the community seems a lot more receptive.  But we as consumers want the best price; we're always looking for the best price we can get.  We've gotten addicted to sales and low price, and that sort of thing.  Well, you want that, but there's a cost associated with that; that's lower wages, which you very often get offshore by people--you know, labor being in India or China or wherever it is; that's lower wages to your American workers, that's probably a non-union shop and so on, so we can't buy the rock bottom or enjoy the rock bottom prices of our consumer goods or our services without understanding that there's a tradeoff for that.  Now, if Wal-Mart suddenly decided to pull all their production back into the United States, they would no longer be price competitive because the prices of everything they do would go up.  Now--so this offshore issue, now we do have an obligation to train and try to employ workers; I--you know, I certainly wouldn't say that I--we can tolerate large pools of unemployed people, particularly minorities, but we've gotta figure out new ways to engage people and not just try to--when--and when we see corporations--corporate practices that in the final analysis benefit the consumer, we have to try to do some sort of analysis on what that means and what the trade-off is.
Story_ID: 283183
Speaker 1: In that regard--I know I was at a meeting once where kids were--there's a discussion where kids were talking about who makes their shoes, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and there was--one kid said, "Well, they're made in other countries because they can pay kids less to make 'em," which is a problem--you know, it's a statement that has all kinda problems; you got childhood labor, they're paid less, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, child labor laws, right, right.
Speaker 1: Michael Jordan was accused of, you know, sitting idly by while Nike made Air Jordans--
Speaker 2: Air Jordans, yeah.
Speaker 1: --in Indonesia or someplace where they were paying like kids a low wage to make the shoes.  Is there any way to--I mean how do you see the social justice aspect of--
Speaker 2: How do you recon--reconcile that?
Speaker 1: How do you reconcile the--yeah.
Speaker 2: I, I think you're not going to have--you're never going to have comparable wages in, in, in these countries--in third world countries.  You've heard me talk repeatedly in the interview about Haiti; there's a perfect example.  If you said to Haitians right now, who, of course, is the poorest country in the western hemisphere, desperate for jobs, "We are going to put in a factory that employs 1500 people, and we're going to pay you"--I mean some ridiculously low wage, and the factory might be spewing out things that in the long run can be harmful to the environment.  Right now, because of the desperation of the people, they would say, "Bring the factory.  We need jobs, we need money."  I think if I had the answers to this, I'd write a book and make a lotta money, but I think you do have to have some base line, some minimum, some threshold that corporations must meet if they are doing business offshore.  For example, employing children below a certain age for X-number of hours a day; remember, that's how our child labor laws--our labor laws grew, and our labor unions grew protection of those.  There's no reason why those minimum standards can't be put in so that the des--the economic desperation of people is such that they don't work against, in the long run, their own self-interest by taking jobs where their children have to work or, or having environmental conditions which is, is in the long run threatening to their health.  There has to be, and, and, and I think as, as corporations have been exposed, they have tried, I think, to negotiate with those factories where they work to--or they've been embarrassed into a posture of decency by installing minimum threshold kinds of work conditions that, while still won't equal what we have in the United States, at least it's tolerable and bearable in the countries where they're located.
Story_ID: 283184
Speaker 1: Yeah, as I sit here and I think about it, maybe--I don't know, it--you know, I've always looked at it from the activist side of it (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I've always been an activist, so it's very interesting.  People used to say when I first came here, "Have you become a Republican?"  I, I don't, I don't think I have, certainly not the kind of Republican that's in power today, but I do think I am--I saw everything in black and white when I was younger; I think we all do.  I just see a lot more shades of gray now and, and I think I understand the complexities of some of the situations that we face a lot better.  It's, it's--you know, there ain't no straight line to a lotta this stuff, to the answers, you know.  You've got to, you know, go around and turn around and spin around and, you know, sometimes you make compromises.  I certainly compromise a lot more in my life with--both in my personal life as well as my professional life than I ever would have when I was 20, 30, 40, you know.  This is a whole new thing for me; I'm much more patient, I'm much more able, I think, to see another's point of view, but I'm still (laughter) known as somebody who's very direct.  I don't have a lotta time for BS, you know?  Most of my life is behind me; I don't know how much is in front of me.  I'm a cancer survivor; I said that to you the other day, and while I'm still alive, you know, that hangs over my head at, at all times.  I have no idea how much, you know, how much life I have yet to live, and so I really am very intolerant of a lotta BS with people.  I always like to shoot for the bottom line and I say--I try not to be rude or hurtful, but I say what I think, and that's my reputation and I like that reputation as a matter of fact.  I'm known as someone that's tough but fair, and I like being that way 'cause I think there needs to be a lot more honesty in the way people deal with one another.
Story_ID: 283185
Speaker 1: What you've kinda revealed in this discussion is a level of understanding about the business world that I think few people really (laughter) entertain, but yet at the same time, you recognize a need for opposition to some of those two distinct (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I, and I understand also--I understand the, the pain and I, I talk about corporations mostly because the corporations are our members and they fund this organization [National Minority Supplier Development Council (NMSDC)], so it's certainly a big part of my job to try to keep them happy and give them what they come to this organization seeking.  On the other hand, though, I have to be mindful of the issues that face these minority suppliers and the unreasonableness with which some of the, the corporate--corporations demand of them.  For example, part of the new procurement paradigm now is doing what they call reverse auctions, where they get people on computer terminals and they have a commodity paper--it's probably not paper, but a commodity--something that people make, and you as a supplier hoping to get the business, you sit there and you bid by Internet--via Internet against other people, and the reverse auction means that it starts with a price and you just keep goin' down, down, down, down, down.  Well, the big boys can do that because they're doing volume, and so if they make a few--fewer pennies per item, they can tolerate it because they're making it up in volume.  A smaller business, and often a minority business, just doesn't have that latitude, and while some minority entrepreneurs have won these reverse auctions, it's a brutal, brutal playing field, and people are left bloody, you know.  Some corporations do it just to bring down the price of their existing supplier; they're not really serious about giving the, the business to somebody else.  They want to force their existing supplier, i.e., very often a large white company, to bring their prices down, but everybody's out here so price conscious now--corporations are, consumers are, that it's a rough and tumble world, and I have to keep reminding corporations, "Listen, you know, some of this stuff that you say is a level playing field ain't really level," you know?  So I, I have to be sensitive about the suppliers' issues as well; I can't just look at, you know, through the lens of corporations.  I have to really be able to see both sides.  And when I do speeches, as a matter of fact, I spend time lashing at the corporations, and I spend other time talking to the MBEs [minority business enterprises] saying, "Listen, if you want to stay in this game, these are the things you better do."  And everybody walks away feeling good because I basically (laughter)--not chastised, it's probably too strong a word, but I've given direction and I've criticized and--but I've encouraged both sides of the equation.  This is a partnership between minority businesses and corporations, and we are the glue that brings the stuff initially together, and I wanna make sure that everybody's doing things in the right way so the relationship can be successful.
Story_ID: 283186
Speaker 1: I don't think I really asked you about being a woman in this--in the business world and the--and how that affects what you do.  Like I'm not sure how that affected, you know, the decision of [HistoryMaker] Earl [G.] Graves [Sr.] and all those guys to jump on you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, I think it did.  We--and, and other women who were in positions of power at the time, [HistoryMaker] Elaine Jones at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Ink Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund], and there was a woman at the United--at the--oh, I can't remember the organization now, but we--that felt that part of this--that--was that I was a woman coming out with this, and the boys kind of, you know, aligned themselves against me.  Now, [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Height originally signed the letter, but she backed off of it right away and, and apologized to me very early, and said she didn't know what she was signing.  You know, they were kinda all responding to Earl.  But let me say this.  I have been running organizations--I'm sixty-two goin' on sixty-three.  I've been running organizations for--oh, my--over thirty years, and the problem when I, when I first became an executive, albeit a not-for-profit organization; I've never been a corporate executive, nor would I have survived in a corporation, I'm sure (laughter); I am far too determined, I think, to have survived in a corporate culture, so I wisely stayed in the, in the, in the public sector.  But there were no role models for me; there were very few women executives at the time, and I can remember when I was the executive, I was the first black woman to head a foundation; we talked about that the other day.  We used to have our meetings at a very old and august banking investment house here in New York [New York]; it was so old and elegant that they didn't even allow black people to serve; these were Europeans that served us lunch, and they had waiters and they had on white gloves, and we were--this was the Warburg banking family, and after our lunch or dinner meeting, they would bring around coffee and brandy, and they always used to bypass me and I finally said, "Well, you don't know that I don't smoke cigars," and so I would smoke cigars just to (laughter), just to prove that, that I could.  I, I went through a period of--and I still do--I talk rough sometimes.  There's no daintiness about me for sure. You know, there was a period when women executives were encouraged to wear man suits with big padded shoulders and--but I went through all of that and, you know, I'd slap the guys on the back and yeah, I was, you know, hail-fellow-well-met, because I felt I wanted to fit in 'cause most of the people I was dealing with were men.  I don't feel, certainly, that I don't have to do that so much now.  I wish--I, I envy younger women now because they can have role models.  There is so much more training out there available to both men and women on how to run things, how to be an executive.  I have done this totally by the seat of my pants, and so the mistakes I have made (laughter) have been because one, I didn't know any better or thought I was doing right, and sometimes too damn hard headed to change my course of action, but it's been wonderful.  But I, I do some--in some ways envy younger women who have--are better prepared to--either through academic training or through leadership training and--or through having mentors like me, who are far better prepared to move into leadership positions than I was.  I've learned by doing, and it's, it's had its cost, its price, you know?  I wouldn't have trade--I wouldn't trade any day of my life--any day of my life for anybody else's, and if people could come back, I would come back again as myself and live my life all over again; that's how great I believe my life has been.  Not how great I believe I am, but how great I believe my life and my life experiences have been.  I'd be willing to experience it all--bad, good, indifferent, all over again.
Story_ID: 283187
Speaker 1: Tell us about 9-1-1 [9/11; September 11, 2001] and what it's meant for you and for the business community here in New York [New York] and the black community in New York (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, New York became a different place, you know.  New York is known as a tough--a very tough city; we talk fast, we walk fast, we're kind of brittle, we believe we can withstand anything, but yet it's a city of individuals, you know?  New York City [New York, New York] is a place where you can literally re-invent yourself every day, you know.  You don't have to have bona fides, you know (laughter); if you say you are, you can convince enough people, you are that, you know.  But 9/11 forced us all to be a much--one, to slow down, two, to be much more caring about one another, and there was a certain tenderness, I think, of New Yorkers after that toward one another 'cause our psyches and our, and our faith, and our sense of security had all been blown to smithereens, and there was a great need for us as a city to kinda come together and feel a camaraderie and a common spirit in order to fight and, and survive and re-emerge as a city that we, we used to be.  This office [of National Minority Supplier Development Council (NMSDC)] is located a block from the Empire State Building [New York, New York] and many people felt that that would be--we didn't know 'cause, you know, we were trying to figure out what was going on, what the next target might be, and so the Empire State Building was evacuated immediately.  But I was on the street getting coffee when--at a place getting coffee when the first plane hit, and when I came in the office, I said, "Did you all hear that a plane hit?"  And I, I turned on--somebody had a small television, and we turned on the television and the second plane hit and I--and the--we have a heavily female staff here, and I called the staff into this room, this board room, and I said, "We are under attack; I don't know where, or how, or why.  I can only tell you all we have to pray--each of us in our own way; we've got to pray for ourselves and for this country, and I would say that all of you who can get home"--have you--we found that most people called their families, their immediate family, and everybody, thank God, here, their family was safe.  And I said, "Knowing that, I'm going to close the office, and if anybody needs to--because you live in an outer borough"--because they were sealing off all exits getting outta--getting off the Isle of Manhattan [New York, New York].  I offered anybody who wanted to to come to my house and stay there as long as they needed to, but I knew people had children in school and so on, and they wanted to get home.
Story_ID: 283188
Speaker 1: But we came in here and we prayed together 'cause, I mean, what else did we have at that point (laughter), you know, but prayer?  It was very scary, and very--the ash--when I was trying to get home, the ash was coming up--was, was on cars that were coming up from downtown [New York, New York], and the smell of death lingered downtown for a very long time; I don't know if anybody else has told you that, but it was a smell that was unforgettable (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, people told me some months later--
Speaker 1: Yes, a very long time.
Speaker 2: That next February, they were tellin' me, "Don't go down to (unclear),"--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  I never went.  I gotta, I gotta tell you, I didn't go to Ground Zero [World Trade Center site, New York, New York] until many, many, many months later; I couldn't, I couldn't take it, I couldn't--my heart, my soul just couldn't take seeing that spot.  I was just so grateful to God that we did not know anybody and that my kids [Yves Christopher Michel and Gregory Michel], my husband [Yves Michel], our friends, they were all safe; my staff and their families were all safe.  But I could not go down and face what happened there, you know?  We, I think, we New Yorkers--how, how did it affect the business community?  We [National Minority Supplier Development Council (NMSDC)] had a conference--this is important--we had a conference--we have a conference every April where thousands of people come.  A lot of people were canceling their events because people didn't want to get on planes, you know, and so on, and our conference was in the--like maybe October 18th or so, and we really--in, in Atlanta [Georgia], and we really thought about whether we should cancel it or not, but our conference is a major revenue source for us every year, so we decided to go forward.  We had five thousand people show up at that conference; a lotta corporate people didn't come because their corporations wouldn't allow them to fly, but damn if those entrepreneurs didn't come.  And I think those of us who came almost had a survivor mentality.  That was one of the best conferences we ever had; the sense of, we made it, we are here, we have done this.  And so the closeness that people felt and the camaraderie that people felt that year was extraordinary, but we needed a cleansing.  You know, we needed a coming together and say, "Okay, we can resume our lives, we can do the things that we've always done," and that conference was a way for a lotta people to say, "Hey," you know, "we're going to keep on goin'."  And so it was extraordinary, really extraordinary that year.  And it yet was barely a month after 9/11 [September 11, 2001].
Story_ID: 283189
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I can tell you my concern first, and I first experienced it maybe twenty years ago when I was at the [New York] Urban League.  We had a teenage pregnancy program, and we had invited the girls, the young women, down to the office to talk about their predicament and what they were doing, and the first thing I remember is out in the waiting room was a young girl who was about, I don't know, seven or eight months pregnant and she had a two or three year-old leaning up against her belly who had her thumb in her mouth and was rubbing her nose.  But the extraordinary part is so was the mother; she was sitting there like that, too--a child, you know?  There were about twenty girls in the room, and I remember I purposely dressed down that day; I took off my jewelry because I didn't want these girls to feel like, you know, who is this missy coming in here talking to us?  And the girl who was--ran the program--the staff member who ran the program for us, you know, very nicely kind of introduced me and said, you know, this--"Here's a woman who's running this Urban League and" you know, bah, dah, dah, dah.  And I stood up and I talked to these girls, and it was the first time--they were looking at me--nothing was happening.  I was not making a connection, and when I left the room, I sat down and I cried because it was the first time in my life that I felt, as a black person, that our negritude, our blackness was not strong enough for me to connect with them; I wasn't reaching 'em.  Wherever they thought I was was so far away from what their life experience was--we had no ability to connect, and I was devastated.  So, you asked me about my concern; my concern is I have seen over this last twenty years this greater and greater distancing from middle-class black people to people who don't have, and that disconnect scares me because if you look back at our history in this country and the way we've been able to survive slavery and survive Jim Crow, and survive was our sense of a--as a community; that sense, I think, has been badly, badly frayed.
Story_ID: 283190
Speaker 1: I just worry that we've moved so far away.  We middle-class black people have moved so far away from the people who are struggling with drugs and struggling with jobs and struggling with housing and struggling with education and teenage pregnancy, that we're leaving them behind and nobody cares about them; certainly the broader white society doesn't care about 'em.  If we don't care about 'em, who will?  If we don't help 'em, who will?  And so I worry what that, that means for the health, the future health of our black community, of our sense of oneness, of our sense of connection because of being black and the experience that nearly all of us have had except, I guess, for African immigrants here.  It really does concern me and I, and I see it in all kinds of ways.  I live in Harlem [New York, New York]; I've lived in Harlem for thirty-one years and, you know, I've seen Harlem on its behind, I see it now in its renaissance, but there's these pockets of people who--I don't know what's going to happen to them, and who's responsibility are they, you know?  But, because I'm an optimist, hope springs eternal, and I believe that even with all that I've seen and experienced, that there is good in people--in most people; I mean I know there's evil in the world and evil in some people--I believe that, but I also believe that most people are good and, you know, I approach--when I ride subways, which is very seldom, if there's a young man sitting down and I'm standing up (laughter), I will say, "Honey, do you mind if I have that seat?"  Now, people laugh at me almost inevitably--invariably--the young man--because I'm approaching him as a person, as a human being; I'm not--I am approaching him as an older woman to a younger man, yes, it's true, but I give 'em respect and dignity and ask for the seat.  I see deliverymen come in this building and there are white people in the elevators with them and they go like this, you know?  And I'll talk to them, you know, "Have a good day; how you doing?" you know?  I try to say, "Look, you're a person, you're a human, I'm a human."  I think that too often, we see these people who are stuck at the bottom as some different species from ourselves and we relate to them that way, you know, as though they're not smart, as though they don't have hopes and aspirations.  We gotta--we, as middle-class black people, have gotta get a lot better at trying to re-establish that connection to help bring them along--
Story_ID: 283191
Speaker 1: What--this is something that troubles a lotta people that we talk to.  Do you envision--you know, what venue would bring people together from different levels--yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't think there's any general venue, you know?  I, I think that you have to--you know, it's like how do you eat an elephant (laughter); it's one mouthful at a time and, and, and I don't want to get messianic or religious here but, you know, how do you, how do you do it?  It's like one soul at a time, one person at a time.  These small programs that sometimes are run by volunteers, some are run--sometimes are run by organizations, they're very vital.  You know, we have a tendency to overlook them, we get grandiose in our thinking and our aspirations and stuff but, you know, those people who are working out there in those communities trying to work with those kids and those adults, and try to bring them back into some sense of self and pride and, and, and, and achievement are really critical to, to our community; they are our bridge, as a matter of fact, and they're unsung heroes; there are many of them--we don't even know they're out there, but they're there, and we've got to--many of us have got to dig in our pockets and give more money back to our own institutions--(unclear) white institutions, but give money back to our own institutions and our own efforts to try to bring our own people along.  What troubles me is, well, on the other side are these very highly-educated, highly-successful young people who don't feel like they have any connection back to a black community; they did it all on their own and, you know, that bothers me because they don't have a sense--too many of them don't have a sense of connectivity, they don't have a sense of obligation, they don't have a sense of, of being able to or being made to share what they have, whether that's financially or intellectually, or so on, because they're so busy being, and maybe that's a mark--a hallmark of youth, I don't, I don't know, but there are a lot--in this city particularly--in New York [New York], there are a lot of thirty year-olds, forty year-olds who are doing very well monetarily; their careers are taking off, you know, they have opportunities that were unknown to some of us, but they live for themselves (laughter), you know; their interest is themselves and maybe their immediate family.  They don't have any broader sense of community either; they're not connected necessarily back to the black community, and they, too, need to stop and, and think, you know, well, where will I be if I'm the only one?  If, if, if--those of us who are like me--you know, the group gets smaller and smaller and smaller, and the people who are out here and I gotta worry about knocking me in my head or, or being resentful to me grows larger and larger.  What does that imply for me?
Story_ID: 283192
Speaker 1: --That's why I was asking the question about the venue or venues for, you know, instilling this kind of a feeling of community when you don't really have it in the community as it is 'cause it's no, it's no focal point, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 1: Thing is, I mean being of a certain color doesn't necessarily make you affiliated unless you--you've gotta manu--you've gotta do something to keep that affiliation alive.
Speaker 2: I mean I'm sure there always were those people who felt like, you know, I'm not gon' be part of this.  We have minority suppliers today who say, "I don't want to be known as a minority supplier, I want to get out there and compete, you know; I can compete with anybody."  And you know what I say?  I say, "Fool, let me tell you.  We've worked thirty-two years in this organization [National Minority Supplier Development Council (NMSDC)] to make sure that being a minority in the marketplace is an added advantage.  White people--one of the things they know how to do is take every advantage--many of 'em take every advantage that comes to 'em and use it.  Why would you not use this if it could benefit you?"  And when you say it to them like that, they go, "Wow, you know, I didn't think about that."  But there're still people--and that's their prerogative and that's their choice and you can't force--
Speaker 1: But there's still discrimination, right?  Out here--
Speaker 2: Of course there is, of course there is.  And for people to say, "Well, if I'm not known as a black company, maybe that will help me along."  I've got--we've got an $11 million--$12 million organization here in New York [New York]; it doesn't count the budgets of our offices all around the country.  We've got four hundred and odd national corporate members who are, at least on paper, committed to finding minority suppliers; they did, I said earlier, over $80 billion worth of procurement for minority suppliers; they want that credit for doing so.  Why would you keep yourself outside of that if it's going to help you position yourself with a company?  That's crazy and very short-sighted.
Story_ID: 283193
Speaker 1: So you wouldn't probably agree with--I know we were interviewing Ray Haysbert [HistoryMaker Raymond Haysbert, Sr.], in Baltimore [Maryland], of Parks Sausages [Parks Sausage Company]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and they often posed as a white company; in fact, they did (laughter).  They had a white rep [representative] who would go out to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's, that's true.  But some--a lot of our minority suppliers have white reps that go out; I don't have a problem with that, you know.  I mean, hey, you use what you can, you manipulate the situation as you can but, you know, to say, "I don't want to be known as that"--maybe he didn't want to be known as a black sausage company, you know (laughter), I, I don't, I don't know.  I know Ray, by the way--or I've met him; I, I can't say that I'm that--that we're that familiar with one another, but certainly we've met and we've talked and--but, you know, this is a call that every individual has to make, but I don't know how you get to a sense of community if you keep saying, "That designation is going to be harmful for me." We gotta get back to a point where being black has pride, you know, we have pride in it, and that which makes us black which--and, and there is; I mean just like there are things that make people Irish that are, you know, fundamental to, to that culture.  We've gotta take pride in that and lift up those things that are good about who we are as a people, you know?  I mean we just have an obligation to do that if we're ever going to have a sense of community again--a strong sense of community.  You know, integration in part is responsible for some of this; I mean we, we lived together, we're forced to be together, forced to sell our products and services to one another; but I, but I've seen an evolution.  There are more black kids now who are interested in being their own boss than they are in going into a large company; there's a lot more entrepreneurs out there now.  I think black institutions are beginning to see--educational institutions [HBCUs]--more people begin to give back to those institutions.  You know, for a while, the alumna giving to some of those institutions was pitiful.  Hopefully, you know--there's not a single voice though, nor, nor should there be, necessarily, in our community that can call us to action the way it used to be; it--it's just not there anymore.  Nobody--the world doesn't have many leaders; think about it.  You know, it's not just black people so we shouldn't beat ourselves up, you know.  Who the hell is a leader in the United States?  When the Republicans and Democrats looking for, you know--some of us don't accept George Bush's [President George Walker Bush] leadership, you know that, and as the Democratic Party, we're scratching our heads and searching for who would these next--who are these future leaders?  But even on the world stage, beyond Nelson Mandela (laughter), you know, who is a world leader that can call people to action and bring out the best in people?  It's, it's a time where we're all kind of adrift trying to figure out, you know, where we're going.
Story_ID: 283194
Speaker 1: Okay.  When you look back on everything that you've done so far, and you still have other things to do, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: I might have, I might have tried to get myself better prepared for some of the positions that I held, and maybe thereby have avoided some of the mistakes that I made.  You know, the management mistakes--managing a board, managing egos of a board, and that sort of thing; I probably could have done that a lot better.  And if I'd, if I had had some training or sought training somewhere, that might have been a little easier for me, but no, basically, no; I'm real satisfied with the life that I've led, the body of work that I think I will leave behind and, you know, I've chosen to travel the road--I mean take the road less traveled; that's been the history of my life, and I'm not unhappy about that.  You know, somebody--if this is the midpoint in most people's experiences and these are the extremes, most people on a continuum are living pretty close to the middle.  There gotta be some of us out here at the edge that are bumping out (laughter) what's possible and what's doable and what's thinkable, and I just chose to live out there rather than closer to here--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in my own way.
Story_ID: 283195
Speaker 1: Now, what's next?  What are you going to do next?
Speaker 2: Well, that's a blooming problem.  I will have been the president here [National Minority Supplier Development Council (NMSDC)] eighteen years in, in September, and sensitive to my previous--to my career, I don't want to stay on stage too long 'til things get raggedy again, and we have had an incredible run here.  I mean every year we've raised more money, we've gotten more corporations and so on; one has to assume that sooner or later that that continuum, you know, experiences a bump, so I've kind of imposed on myself twenty years; having been president twenty years will be enough, and that I will exit and retire and--at least on a day-to-day basis.  My strength is really building organizations and rallying people, you know.  I'm the drum majorette.  I don't think I want to do that with another organization at sixty-six years old, you know, which I'll be when I leave here.  I think I want to--I'm on a, on a corporate board now which was a little scary at first in this age of Sarbanes-Oxley [Act of 2002 (SOX)], but I'm really enjoying it; hopefully, another one or so will come along.  I don't want to be a consultant 'cause I don't like no (laughter); I don't like to take no for an answer, so I--but, you know, although people have said, "Come join a consulting firm."  I have no idea; you know, my life has been so serendipitous; I mean things--I've never had a life plan, I just expect things to be wonderful, and one of my staff members says that all the time, "You know, you just expect stuff to turn out all right, and it usually does," and it does.  And so I don't see any need now, since my whole life has been kinda--things--I won't say fall in my lap, but when opportunities come, I've been good about seeing what a real opportunity is for me.  I'm just assuming--I mean no, nobody's beating down my door right now saying, "Come work with us, come do this."  There are some people who say, "You know, we have a place for you if you'd like."  But I want to have the freedom to be with my husband [Yves Michel] who's seventy years old now, to travel with him, to be in Haiti more--
Story_ID: 283196
Speaker 1: If there's anything I would like to do, I would like to work on economic development in Haiti to try to bring some relief to the just miserable existence of so many people in Haiti (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's probably the most dramatic example of economic isolation and what it can do to a people, you know.
Speaker 1: We, we do now, in the village [Luly, Haiti]; we live in a fishing village, and--I mean we're almost, you know, a one-family employment agency there 'cause, you know, we have any number of people who work at our house full-time, and when my husband [Yves Michel] is there, we engage as many people as possible so we can put money in people's pockets, and I can tell you with all the turbulence that they had in Haiti recently, and our house is open.  I mean we have, we have a, a brick wall around it but we're open at the sea; if somebody really wanted to get in there, they could.  We have three guys living at the house but it's not--you know, there's not gates on the--if somebody wanted to go in and ransack the house, they could.  And there were a group of guys from another village who tried to come and do something to the house, and the villagers all got their guns (laughter) and chased 'em away.  They said, "You will not touch this house," because they made a decision that we are better as neighbors, you know?  And so they want to keep us there.  And I've talked about a water purifying project; if I had the money-- God knows I always say to the Lord, "If I ever win any money in the lottery, I am going to take a certain amount and take it to Haiti and put it in that little village to try to make the lives of the people there better."
Story_ID: 283197
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done this--thus far, what would you consider to be your legacy at this point?
Speaker 2: Well, on a personal side, my legacy of course is my children [Yves Christopher Michel and Gregory Michel]; I've got two sons who just married last year, two absolutely wonderful daughters-in-law.  I mean if it's true that you can see the quality of your children by the friends they pick and the mates they pick, I believe my sons have gone off and picked girls that are absolutely totally appropriate for each of them, so they are my legacy; they are fine men; they're smart, they are funny, which I value a great deal, they're human, they're loving, and they're going to make great husbands and great fathers, so that's my primary legacy.  With regard to my work life, there are a couple-a things; one is that I was a person, I think, that people--I think people think of me as a person that was always very highly principled, that always stood up for what I believed, even when it cost me, and though, though I may have been wrong in what I believed, I was absolutely true to staying--to, to supporting that belief, and I like being known as someone--I don't care whether people like me or not, I, I would prefer to be known as somebody--someone people respect, and I think I've earned that respect.  This job has been really the cap of my life; it's the perfect job for me--I've said it before--because it best calls on whatever skills and talents that I have, and I will--when I leave here, I will leave behind an organization [National Minority Supplier Development Council (NMSDC)] that has really grown with the help of a lotta people and, and is a force--however big this--or little--this issue of minority supplier development is in the whole scheme of things, however small that may be, we have moved the needle here, and I have helped to do that through these, hopefully, these twenty years of leadership.  So that will be my legacy.
Story_ID: 283198
Speaker 1: Now, did your parents [John Richardson, Jr. and Vida Fish Richardson] get a chance to see you become successful?
Speaker 2: My parents?  Yes.  I had this job [at National Minority Supplier Development Council (NMSDC)] and, and other leadership jobs, and I always--when I had things, I always brought my parents and my kids [Yves Christopher Michel and Gregory Michel] along.  I brought my kids along 'cause I wanted them to see why their mother was not always there when they needed me to be; it was important for them to understand what I did, so they used to go to all the [New York] Urban League dinners with me, and they come--my boys, my boys both work for black businesses, okay?  Not just minority businesses but black businesses, and they attend all our conferences and our dinners.  They're, they're, they're proud, you know, they--although I'm just mom, you know; there's no biggie deal in, in--but they--the other day there's an article in the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette about the Selma [Alabama] issue and what happened; it's really a wonderful article 'cause it gives the context of a college [Juniata College, Huntingdon, Pennsylvania] at the time, and my younger son and I had--my older son wrote back and said, "Okay, Andy Warhol," you know, "what's your next, what's your next few minutes of fame?"  My younger son wrote back who's--my older son's thirty-five, my younger son wrote back and said, "Ma," he said, "this just is depressing because there's so many people in our generation who have no appreciation for what you and people like you did, and we're just," you know--"what are we standing up for now?  What are we doing?"  And, you know--so they're, they're aware of, of, at least to some extent, the contribution I've tried to make throughout my life and, and, and they will make a contribution; I believe that--in different ways, you know.  They're both going to be--will they run organizations?  I have no idea; probably one of 'em will be an, an entrepreneur, but if they just produce smart, bright kids, I'll be a happy person (laughter).  I don't have any grandkids now, and I would just love to see healthy, well-parented grandchildren.
Story_ID: 283199
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything that we haven't raised that you want to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I think we've touched, we've touched on everything.  This is hard; this stuff is hard, you know?  Being in a leadership role, being in the spotlight; I enjoy it, obviously but, you know, you're always getting reviewed (laughter), analyzed, often praised, often criticized, and you just gotta be tough, you know?  You just--and I am.  Life has made me so; my life experiences have, have toughened me to the point where most of the time I can handle most of the stuff, you know?
Speaker 1: Well, our last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I did the best I could with what I had to work with.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
