Story_ID: 159180
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Let's say Greggory McMillion is my real name, G-R-E-G-G-O-R-Y, McMillion, M-C-M-I-L-L-I-O-N, professionally known as Greg Mack or as (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: McMillion is catchy though.  I mean--
Speaker 2: McMillion, yeah, if I could ever live up to it (laughter).  Right now it's more like McThousand (laughter), so we're trying to get there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it does, it does sound catchy though to me, just to hear that here, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, okay, but is there a story behind the name McMillion?
Speaker 2: Actually, it's, it, it was originally McMillan.  That is my original family name, and I was born via a midwife.  And the midwife, when she filled out the birth certificate, put McMillion.  She spelled it wrong.  She even put an extra 'g' in my name.  And when I found out many years later, I said you know, kind of like it.  So I started a whole 'nother branch on the family tree, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Just kind of kept it.
Speaker 1: Alright, and, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is 6/22/59 [June 22, 1959].  My place of birth is Emory, Texas.
Speaker 1: Emory, okay.  We had here Van Alstyne [Texas].
Speaker 2: I was raised in Van Alstyne.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're born in Emory, raised up in Van Alstyne, okay.
Speaker 2: Alstyne, Alstyne (laughter).
Speaker 1: Alstyne, okay.  And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: My occupation is radio, and my title is entrepreneur, CEO, disc jockey, record producer.  I mean I, I do anything entertainment.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: But radio is how I, you know, eat.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is 7/2/14 [July 2, 2014].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at KTWV radio station in Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: All right, otherwise known as The Wave, right?
Speaker 2: Otherwise known as The Wave.
Story_ID: 159181
Speaker 1: And before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is: do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is barbecue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is any time it rains.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination is anywhere I can go fishing.
Speaker 1: And the last one is: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Ooh, that's a good one.  My favorite phrase or saying is, no, I don't have one.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you--
Speaker 2: You know, I've been in radio so long that you, you, you can't get caught up in saying the same thing a lot, you know, 'cause you got people listening.  So I really don't have a favorite.  I mean I, I can't answer that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of disc jockeys [DJs] have like, you know, like a phrase that they use, like--
Speaker 2: Back in the '60s [1960s] and '70s [1970s] and even--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--
Speaker 2: --In the '80s [1980s]--
Speaker 1: --That's my age (laughter).
Speaker 2: --But not, not today's disc jockeys.  You're, you're favorite saying is whatever the program director tells you to say (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: That becomes your favorite.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, 'cause a lot of the old-time guys had something they were known for--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --When they--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that was back in the days of the, we call them the pukers, but, you know, like, "Hey, baby," you know, they talk like that.  And--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I used to imitate 'em, so I know.  And so, and--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --It became more of a natural kind of thing, you know, just people wanted to hear you to be like yourself.  And now it's kind of reverted back a little bit.  Like, if you listen to the younger stations now, the younger disc jockeys are like, "Yo, baby, yo, yo, yo," you know, and talking the rap slang, so.
Story_ID: 159182
Speaker 1: So, I'm gonna ask you about your family history next, you mother's side of the family and your father's side.  We'll start with your mother's side, and then we'll put 'em together.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Willie Grace McMillan, W-I-L-L-I-E, Grace, G-R-A-C-E, McMillan, M-C-M-I-L-L-A-N.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is 2/5/42 [February 5, 1942], place of birth, Emory, Texas.
Speaker 1: Alright, and what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side?  And are there any stories on that side?  What, what were their occupations?
Speaker 2: My mother's side of the family grew up as farmers, living off the land basically, and working for the, the farm owners, and you know, picking cotton, and watermelons, and berries, or whatever, you know, was what the farmer was raising.  So they, they were immigrants that--I don't know how to explain it, other than that it comes straight from slaves, slavery.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's the story.  And were they, they sharecroppers?  It sounds like they might, might be.
Speaker 2: I don't know what you call it.  I just know that we, when we were kids we'd go out with them sometimes and help 'em pick berries or cotton or whatever the case may be.
Speaker 1: Now did they have their own place?
Speaker 2: Yes, they had their own place.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean it was, it was not a very nice place, but yes, we had our own place--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --from what I remember as a child.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they, they weren't sharecroppers as such.  They were, but they did, you know, agricultural labor for--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --people in the area.  Okay, alright.  And are there any stories about the end of slavery or, you know, I know the story of Juneteenth (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, slavery--
Speaker 1: --comes out--
Speaker 2: --didn't exist then when I was a kid--
Speaker 1: I know, but--
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: --but in the history of your family.
Speaker 2: I don't know any of those stories, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, so no, nobody ever talked about, you know--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --the end of slavery or what it was like, what, what the--
Speaker 2: Not to my memory.
Story_ID: 159183
Speaker 1: Do you remember your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Yes, I remember my grandparents.  My grand, grandmother was Hanna Bell Porter [ph.].  And my grandfather was--oh gosh, that's a good one.  I, I don't, I--all I know was, was, was daddy (laughter), so I'm trying to remember.  But I'm pretty sure it was Neelan [ph.] McMillan I think.  I don't know.  I can't be accurate on that.
Speaker 1: Okay, but he was Mc, McMillan too?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright, okay, so, any, any stories from your grandparents and--so they, they, they were farm, farmers too?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They worked for farmers, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --My grandfather.  My grandmother basically took care of us.  And I know she had some part-time jobs, from what I remember, of working, cleaning house for a rich family.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they had a place, but it, this consisted of just a house or, or--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --And the lands around the house, just were on loan--
Speaker 2: Yes, that's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, so did they have a garden they grew, grew vegetables and stuff for that--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: They did have a little garden.  They had raised pigs, and chickens, and goats.  You know, we, we pretty much lived off of all of that.  We didn't go grocery shopping.  And I remember the once a year tradition of killing the hogs and putting them in the smokehouse, and you know, that's, that's how we lived.  That's how we got our bacon.  That's how we got our chitterlings and our pig feet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I also remember them going hunting and bringing back squirrels, and rabbits, and armadillos and whatever, whatever was walking (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, now Emory [Texas] is clo--or in, in Van Alstyne [Texas] or, or, or close to, what are other big cities in Tex, Texas--
Speaker 2: Emory is east of Dallas, Texas.  It's East Texas, and you know, a lot of clay.  I remember my grandmother telling me to go out and get me, get me some clay.  So I'd have to go out and dig up some clay.  They would eat clay.  It had a medicinal reason, fiber.  And, or if their stomach needed settling, they'd go and eat clay.  Whenever one of us got sick, got a cold, we'd go and--go get me some broomwheat.  So there was a particular plant that grows in Texas called broomwheat, and they would boil it.  And if you were sick, you had a cold or whatever, bam!  A few hours later it was gone.  I'm surprised that there is not a, a tea being marketed because I'm here to tell you I know the cure (laughter).
Speaker 1: For the common cold.
Speaker 2: It's broomwheat--
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: --Broomwheat tea.  It grows just wild.  We were a very poor family, so we couldn't afford doctors or dentists or anything like that.  So you had to know the different plants, and weeds, and dirt to get yourself well.
Speaker 1: Now is broomwheat called broomwheat because they make brooms out of the stalks or?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know if that was the reason.  All I knew is, is that it was, we called it broomweed [sic].  All I knew it was a weed that looked a certain way, and when it dried up, that was when it was good.  You never did it when it was green.
Story_ID: 159184
Speaker 1: Now, what did you mother [Willie Grace McMillan] say about growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, it's one of those, what my mother said about growing up, it's one of those things where you can't miss what you never had.  And so we never had a lot, and so she, you know, didn't say much about it.  It was just, it was normal.  It was normal to us and it was also at a time when, and I don't know what war was going on, but when I was about three, four--
Speaker 1: World War II [sic, Vietnam War].
Speaker 2: So that was '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: '62 [1962]?  Oh, oh yeah, yeah, you're right.  You were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And so--
Speaker 1: --Born in '59 [1959], yeah.
Speaker 2: I, I, I think somebody said the Korean War.  I don't know, but--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's, well, '62 [1962] would have been going towards Vietnam [War] then, but it hadn't really heated up really big.  But U.S. forces were in Vietnam--
Speaker 2: Well, one of the highlights to--
Speaker 1: --In '62 [1962].
Speaker 2: --To us growing up around that time was the soldiers passing by and, you know, just caravans of jeeps.  And we'd run alongside, and they'd throw us out cans of fruit and 'cause we'd never, you know, experienced cans of fruit, so it was good.  But I remember the solders used to hook us up.
Speaker 1: Was there a base near, nearby?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I mean there could have been, but I don't know, but I, I just don't think so.  I--the closest base I remember was down South, Fort Hood [Texas] or something like that.  So I don't know why they would have been coming up there other than maybe on their way to Oklahoma.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Or maybe some maneuvers or something.
Speaker 2: Could have been practicing, whatever.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so, now did your mother--what were her aspirations growing up?  Did she--what did she wanna do?  And, and did, did she ever talk about what, what she wanted to do, and did she, was she able to go to school to fulfill any of it?
Speaker 2: No, my mom never--you have to understand, when we were living there I was only three, four, so I don't remember mom ever talking to me about stuff like that.  So I don't, I don't really know what her aspirations were.
Speaker 1: Did she have any special talents or anything that, that you knew of (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Cleaning house. That was all I could remember.  Mom cleaned houses for a lot of people.  Nanny--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I guess.
Speaker 1: So she kind of just followed behind her mother [Hannah Bell Porter] in terms of--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --That occupation?  Yeah, but often people have something else they wanna do, you know, and no way--
Speaker 2: I didn't know what it was (laughter), you know.  That's pretty much what she did.
Speaker 1: Okay, was she able to finish school down there?
Speaker 2: Mom did finish school from what I remember.  I just don't think she went to college.  I think she finished high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, you know, know the name of the high school?
Speaker 2: Had to be Emory High School [perhaps Rains High School, Emory, Texas], 'cause that's where she was born and raised.
Story_ID: 159185
Speaker 1: I'm gonna go to your father's side now, and then we'll put, put them together.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: I don't know it.  Now when you say father, as you know, there is a difference between a father and, and dad.  My blood father, I've never met him, so I don't, I don't even know his name to be honest with you.  I went to meet him once, and he wouldn't meet me, so I don't, I don't know him.  My--
Speaker 1: Was this--how old were you when you sought him out?
Speaker 2: I had to be about thirty-five.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the father that raised me, he's passed on.  His name is Monroe Everett.  He was the only father I ever really knew.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Matter of fact, I never knew that he wasn't my real father until the other kids would make fun of me, "You don't know your real daddy," that kind of thing.  Kids, kids are rude, man.
Speaker 1: Now, where was--do you--so, what, was your biological fa, father from the same area?
Speaker 2: Yes, Sulphur Springs, city of Sulphur Springs, Texas--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Which is about thirty miles from Emory [Texas].
Speaker 1: Do you know what he did for a living?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you went to see him, he didn't, he didn't see you, or but--
Speaker 2: No, I was told he was too embarrassed.  He didn't wanna see me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now he wants to see me.  I hear he's, you know, in nursing home, and he wants to see me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what about your stepfather--
Speaker 2: Monroe Everett?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was, was, was he from around the same area too?
Speaker 2: He was from Van Alstyne, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's how we ended up there.  Him and my mom [Willie Grace McMillan] met and moved me and mom over to Van Alstyne.
Speaker 1: And was he, was he a farmer too?
Speaker 2: No, he was a construction worker.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They built bridges.
Story_ID: 159186
Speaker 1: Were you influenced growing up by your grandparents as well as your parents, or was your major influence your, your, your parents [Willie Grace McMillan and Monroe Everett]?
Speaker 2: I think I was influenced, it was a combination of, of everyone in the family.  You know, I've always been, and I tell people this today, that I'm a country boy at heart and was brought up living off the land.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, when, when you consider the personalities of your, your stepfather, your, your, your mother, and everybody else who was around you, who, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I don't think I take after any of 'em.  I think, I, I think that because they were kind of complacent in life, and me, I've always been adventurous and wanting to do better, and I don't know of anyone in my family that I take after.  The only thing I can tell you that my mother says I get from my grandfather [Neelan McMillan (ph.)] is the fact that I do a lot of things because my, my grandfather would go and help people that needed help.  And then he'd sit there and work, you know, a whole week.  And you know, they'd be going through some financially, some kind of struggle, some farmer, you know.  And my grandfather would just tell him, "Ah, don't worry about it.  You know, I understand. You know, stuff happens."  And he would work, and my grandmother [Hannah Bell Porter] would get mad, like you worked a whole week, and you didn't bring home a check.  "Well, they're going through something."  And so I kind of get that from him because I help people in any way I can, and I don't expect anything from it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, that's a good trait.
Speaker 2: Not always.
Speaker 1: If you, if doesn't hurt you--
Speaker 2: And sometimes it does.
Speaker 1: --badly, you know, yeah.
Speaker 2: Sometimes it does.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I'm trying to grow out of it.  It just won't go away
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, I mean as, as long as you're working, and you have another way to--I mean you're, you're not suffering too badly--
Speaker 2: Right, but when you look at--I, I do think sometimes about all of the people that, that I grew up around, especially in the early '80s [1980s], and I would just help 'em, and help 'em, and help 'em.  And they became multimillionaires, one now a billionaire.  I do think about that sometimes (laughter).
Speaker 1: They haven't come back to you?
Speaker 2: No.  I don't, I, I didn't, when you do things like that you don't think about, okay, well, what are you gonna do for me?  What are you gonna do for me later?  But sometimes as you get older, you're like, you know, that person made, you know, x amount.  You know, it wouldn't have hurt them to at least call you and say thank you.  So, it makes you think about it.
Story_ID: 159187
Speaker 1: Now do you have siblings?
Speaker 2: I have a brother and a sister.  My sister is deceased, but my brother is still alive.  He actually was a big time track star.  He ran for the USA, won a, I think he won three gold medals--
Speaker 1: Really?  So, now, now, now who (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --silver, bronze.
Speaker 1: Is he older than you or younger or--
Speaker 2: Younger.
Speaker 1: Younger, so are you, are you the oldest?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --And--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: We're, I guess you can say we're half-brothers.  We have different fathers, same mother.
Speaker 1: What's your brother's name?
Speaker 2: Danny Everett, Danny Everett ran for Santa Monica [California] track club.  He was on the same team with Carl Lewis, and they used to kick plenty of butt.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He ran the 400 meters.  That's where he won his medals.
Speaker 1: That's, that's a tough race.  You have to real, really have a lot of stamina to run 400 meters competitively--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --'Cause you're sprinting around the track full speed.
Speaker 2: Danny kicked butt.  It was so funny, you'd see Danny, and he'd look all skinny, and then when he'd take off his sweats, his thighs looked like, you know, tyrannosaurus rex, you know (laughter).  He was just nothing but thighs, but boy, he could run.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your sister?
Speaker 2: Stephanie.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Stephanie Everett, and she passed away probably ten years ago.  She was murdered.  At least I think that's what happened, stray bullet.  They never found out who did it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was she at home, or was she--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, hanging out.  My sister had a drug problem.  And me and my brother used to always try and help her, but she just stayed in the streets.  And my understanding of it is it was just a stray bullet.  She got shot in the neck, and we don't know if it was deliberate or if she was just in a bad, wrong place, wrong time.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, but you all three were raised together, right?
Speaker 2: (Nodding yes).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 159188
Speaker 1: Now do, do, you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Such as?
Speaker 1: Well, the earliest thing that you remember in your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory had to be standing on the porch at our house in Emory [Texas] watching a Ford Mustang go by, and I used to love 'em.  And so, I used to tell my folks "I want a Mushtang [ph.], I want a Mushtang," and that used to make 'em laugh like crazy.  And so, that's my earliest memory.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were, you were--Mustang was created I think in '64 [1964] or something, so you would have been about five I guess.
Speaker 2: I guess so.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Whatever they were, that was--I couldn't say Mustang. I'd say Mushtang (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 159189
Speaker 1: So you were raised out in a rural area, but you, you were in a house though.  Were there other--so, so you, you, would you say you were raised in a town?  Is that what you--
Speaker 2: Country.  Emory [Texas] was a city, but we were out in the country--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know.
Speaker 1: Away from the major--
Speaker 2: Away from--
Speaker 1: --part of the city?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  And well, we always ask this question, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: In Emory there wasn't much to see (laughter).  The sounds--
Speaker 1: What was it like?  Was it like flat and dry or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: I'm, I'm thinking about--
Speaker 2: --It, it had, had a lot--
Speaker 1: --East Texas.
Speaker 2: --of trees and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, it, it was just a country.  It was just country.  You know, we had some Shetland ponies that we would wear out and ride the ponies till mom [Willie Grace McMillan] would make us get off.  And a lot of times we would, as kids, get our fishing poles, which back then we used cane poles, and--
Speaker 1: Okay, so we, you, you were give, giving us some of the sights--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --and sounds, and smells of growing up.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it--you know, as kids we were always out hunting or fishing.  When I say hunting, we had a BB gun or, or even a sling shot that we would make ourselves.  You know, we, we were either fishing or hunting, or that was our excitement.  We never sat around the house.  We didn't have TV or radio.  We would entertain--find some kind of way to entertain ourselves.
Speaker 1: So you really didn't have any TV or radio growing up?
Speaker 2: Not when we lived in Emory, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: I didn't really get to experience TV and radio till I got to Van Alstyne [Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay, was, was there electricity out there?
Speaker 2: We had electricity. Yeah, we had lights, but we didn't, there was no luxuries.
Speaker 1: Okay, a TV, yeah.  So, now I heard, I know, you, you, you described in an interview I heard online about, you know, raising your own hog and stuff for--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --for a competition.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: That was in Van Alstyne.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's later (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I--and, and later, yeah.  I--
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, but more sights and sounds and smells.
Speaker 2: That, that was about it.  I mean that was about it that I remember from Emory.  Now if you get off in to Van Alstyne, that's a whole different area.
Story_ID: 159190
Speaker 1: So how old were you when you, the family moved to Van Alstyne [Texas]?
Speaker 2: I had to be about four or five.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Well, what, what about Van Alstyne, is that different from, from Emory [Texas]--
Speaker 2: Well, yeah.  Emory, we were out in the country, where as Van Alstyne, we were in the city.  You know it as fifteen hundred people in the city.  Everybody knew everybody, and if you messed up, the family down the street would spank you.  So you didn't have--and, and then you'd get a spanking from your dad because they had to spank you.  So you'd get a couple of spankings.  So everybody--you've heard of the old cliche of it takes a community to raise a child.
Speaker 1: A village, yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, that, that's, you know, that mentality was rampant in Van Alstyne.  And then you had, on the railroad tracks, you had the blacks lived on one side of the railroad tracks, and the whites lived on the other side of the railroad tracks, and everybody got along.  Every now and then you'd get some racism, but overall, everybody got along as long as you didn't mess with their daughters, then you'd better (laughter) head for the hills.  You know so, and we lived in--there wasn't really a poor area.  I'd say we lived in the black area.  There was a blacks, black-only school when I first got there, which was the church.  But I never (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: What was the name of it?
Speaker 2: --I never attended it.
Speaker 1: What, what, what was the name of the, the church?
Speaker 2: Van Alstyne Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: --With a school attached to it, associated with it?
Speaker 2: That's where the, the black kids went to school.  But my first year of school was the first year of segregation, or, or the black kids being allowed to--
Speaker 1: Integration, yeah.
Speaker 2: --integration, yeah, I'm sorry--to go to the white schools.
Speaker 1: Alright, so this'll be, was it a Van Alstyne School?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: And I gotta tell you it was nothing like the movies.  It was nothing like what you see where there's all these white people lined up mad and da, da, da, da, da.  Man, from day one, all of the kids welcomed me, and there was, you know, it's, it's, it's almost like that rap song, the message where they say "A child is born with no state of mind, blind to the ways of mankind" ['The Message' by Grandmaster Flash].  And, and none of the kids were racists.  It's like we all played together and hung out together, blah, blah, blah.  I think that came along later as their parents, you know, they'd hear them say things.
Story_ID: 159191
Speaker 1: 'Kay so, you're starting school in 1965, right?  And what would be the, just roughly, what would be the ratio of black students to white students at, at Van Alstyne [Texas]?
Speaker 2: Oh God, we were ninety-seven to one (laughter), you know, or, or three.  It wasn't many of us going there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I suppose there were no black teachers, I'm just thinking.
Speaker 2: You know, no, we didn't have any black teachers that I can remember.  They were all white teachers.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you were welcomed, and you said that the atmosphere was fairly positive?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was never, never a problem.  I think that when I got up to the fifth or sixth grade I had a, a few racist incidents, but in the earlier years, I, I'd never knew about racism.
Speaker 1: So, did you like school?
Speaker 2: Loved it.  I loved school, you know.  Because we were very poor, I, we'd get a pair of tennis shoes at the beginning of the year, and they had to last the whole year.  We had two sets of shoes. We had tennis, pair of tennis shoes for school, and we had our Sunday church shoes.  And if your shoes--like, I remember the second half of the year the bottom of my shoes would be all worn out, and you know, my feet were touching the ground and just had to make it, 'cause my parents [Willie Grace McMillan and Monroe Everett], you know, they couldn't afford to get me more shoes.  So, many a time I'd go to school and I'd be scared to show the bottom of my feet (laughter) 'cause, you know, you could see my skin.
Speaker 1: Is that pretty, pretty much the same case with most of the black students or were, were there--
Speaker 2: Yes, I'd say so, you know, not all.  There were one or two that their family was, I wouldn't say rich, but well-off.  You know, they, they had more than others.  And they had a nice brick home, which back, you know, when I grew up, a brick home, you made it if you had a brick home.
Speaker 1: Was that the minister or, or--
Speaker 2: No, just a local family that, you know--I don't, I, I don't, never asked them where they got their money.  I suppose he just worked hard.  But they had a brick home, and so they were like, you know, everybody was like, wow, you have a brick house, 'cause we all had wooden homes (laughter).  So we'd always congregate at their house and play and stuff.
Story_ID: 159192
Speaker 1: So did you gravitate to any particular subject in grade school [in Van Alstyne, Texas]?
Speaker 2: English and spelling, that was where I, where I did real well. Math, not so good much.  But to tell you the truth, I, school was too easy.  It didn't challenge me anymore, and that's why my grades started to go down.  It was just boring.
Speaker 1: And did you like to read?
Speaker 2: I did at one time, but I just kind of lost interest.  Stuff that came easy, I just--I mean even in high school, and we haven't even got there.  But in high school I never did homework 'cause it was boring.  And so, when I'd get to school, I'd go through it, and I'd do the homework, and I'd turn it in.  We didn't have the big science projects like my daughter, who's in the sixth grade, they started gigantic projects, you know, needed parent participation.  I would have failed it if they were doing that back then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: These kids nowadays, man, they're smart.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: What they're, what they're learning in the sixth grade I didn't learn until high school in eleventh or twelfth.
Speaker 1: Now, now was, was church a big factor in growing up?
Speaker 2: We had to go, yeah, every Sunday.  That's why we had our Sunday shoes, as we called them (laughter), so, yeah.  I didn't get anything out of it to be honest with you.  We went because we had to go.  Most of the time I'm sitting in there, you know, doing this (nodding off).  I didn't, I didn't never get real involved.
Speaker 1: And so--
Speaker 2: I have thoughts about churches too, which you can ask me, but--
Speaker 1: What, well--
Speaker 2: I didn't get involved.
Speaker 1: --What, what do you think?  What, what do you think?
Speaker 2: About churches?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I think that they're, overall it's a good thing.  But it's the people that call themselves Christians that make it a bad thing because most of the people I know that go to church every Sunday and sometimes three and four times a week are the most evil people or uppity people, but they're not caring.  They're not, like me, I practice Christianity every day in my own way.  And I, you know, try and do the right thing, but, but they're evil people.  And not only that, but they try and control your mind.  Now, that being said, there was a time after my second divorce 'cause I've been divorced three times, that I, I really got into the Bible.  And once I really started reading it and paying attention, I was blown away.  I was like, "Wow," you know, and it's like it clicked.  It's like, wow, this is, this is pretty deep.  But the church that I was at, I kind of felt like it was a cult because they told me you don't need your, your things, you know.  It's just material, you know.  Sell ninety percent--or sell all of your materials, and give ninety percent of it to the church, and you live off that ten percent.  And when they said that I was like, "Wait a minute (laughter).  I'm not gonna go sell my car," and at the time I had a house.  "I'm not gonna go--or a condo--and all my furniture and clothes and stuff, and just trust that Lord will, that God will take care of me.  What kind of church asks you that?"
Speaker 1: What was the name of the church, and what kind was it?
Speaker 2: You know, I forget the name of it, but I know it, I think they still practice, but--
Speaker 1: Is this a bigger church, a big church, or--
Speaker 2: It's a pretty big church.  And, and you couldn't date unless, you know, four members went with you.  You couldn't talk to a female.  I mean there were so many strict rules.
Speaker 1: What, what, what denomination?
Speaker 2: It was nondenominational.  And that scared me away, and I haven't been a member since the--
Speaker 1: And did you gravitate toward, towards that shirt--that, that church on your own, or was it your ex-wife's--
Speaker 2: It was a friend of mine that, you know, he knew what I was going through, and he said, "Oh, come to our church, come to our church, come to our church," and I was like, "Uh."  And then I, I, I finally went, and I, I really liked it.  I enjoyed it.  And then when they started teaching, you know, reading certain things from the Bible I really got deep into.  And it, it was just like it was powerful.  If you really take the time to read the Bible, you would be shocked at how powerful it is.  But what scares me is the fact that so many people, these so-called Christians, are just evil and crooks.  And that's like, am I missing something (laughter)?
Speaker 1: So did you, did you feel that way growing up at church, that the, the leaders of the church were hypocritical or--
Speaker 2: No, I didn't get that 'til later.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: When I was growing up, I-
Speaker 1: You just kind of--
Speaker 2: --didn't really--I, I went because you had to go.
Speaker 1: So it just, just didn't connect with you?
Speaker 2: No, I would just go there, okay, well, go there and listen then go home.
Speaker 1: Did they have--so, I, I take it they really didn't engage in youth and anything much--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: They did.  You know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --sometimes we'd have to do the, you know, the thing where you stand there and walk people to their thing, or walk around and collect the money, or--
Speaker 1: Ushering and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I tried to avoid that as much as possible.
Speaker 1: Okay, was there a youth choir or something--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I'd get up there, and (moving lips) I'd be singing like that, you know, and nothing ever came out, but I'd be pretending.  You know, it just didn't excite me.
Story_ID: 159193
Speaker 1: By the time you get to Van Alstyne [Texas], you do have radio and television, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --Yeah.
Speaker 1: --How, did you have favorite music on the radio or favorite, or was that a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I used to listen to, there was a guy named Dewayne Dancer, and he worked at I believe it, I believe they were called KKDA [Dallas, Texas].  And I used to imitate him, "This is Dewayne Dancer, KKDA."  I used to imitate him.  And it's funny because I had a different perspective of radio.  Most people listened to it for the music.  I listened to it for the DJs, so I could imitate 'em.  And so I'd imitate mostly Dewayne and some of the other guys but mostly, Dewayne.  I'd imitate him all the time.
Speaker 1: Now did your friends feel the same way, or did you, were you, is it--
Speaker 2: We never talked about--
Speaker 1: --Some, something that you--
Speaker 2: --Music really.  When we were coming up it wasn't a lot of talk.  I know that we used to, when I was in my early teens we'd go to this, it was called the Cafe.  It was a little black juke joint.  So we'd go up there and put money in the machine, and we'd all dance.  And me and my friend, Kevin, man, we'd be up in there tearing it up (laughter), you know, all the Jackson [5] songs, and Supremes, Temptations, all the Motown stuff.  And we would just be tearing it up.  But that was basically it.  We never listened to it really at home, you know.  We started listening to the radio a little bit, but it wasn't a big influence on us.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what about television?  Now, and you started school in '65 [1965]--what was I, what was I asking?  Oh, in terms of television (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: TV.
Speaker 1: --Yeah.  That's a time when a lot of the artists that were, that was exclusively on the radio started appearing on TV more, the pop, you know, the, the artists that, that teenagers liked, you know, better.  And so they had the youth programs like 'Hullabaloo,' and 'Shindig!' and 'American Bandstand,' and then later on 'Soul Train' and you know.  Did you pay attention to those shows, or, or what was your favorite fare on television?
Speaker 2: My favorite show on TV was 'Gunsmoke' and 'Rawhide,' mainly because that's what my daddy [Monroe Everett] watched, and he, he loved westerns.  But cartoon wise, my dad would let us watch 'Popeye' and the 'Flintstones.'  I mean that was just like, you know, fun.  But we didn't get to sit around and watch much TV after that, beyond that, nor did we care to, but those shows we'd watch.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause as you said, you spent a lot of time out, outside?
Speaker 2: Mm-hum, mm-hum.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the--okay.
Story_ID: 159194
Speaker 1: As you progressed in school, now you got involved in Future Farmers [of America].  Is, is that high school or is that like middle school?
Speaker 2: Future Farmers, I actually got into that in, that was high school. That was in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I try, I tried finding myself.  I tried playing basketball, 'cause it's funny how when you're playing basketball with your friends you know, you're pretty good.  But when you get out there to compete on a real court (laughter), and I was kind of short, and you know, it was just a different, different thing.
Speaker 1: Now, had you played much organized basketball as such?
Speaker 2: I sat the bench most of the time.  I'd--
Speaker 1: I mean did they have like a Y[MCA, Young Men's Christian Association] or something like that where you could play--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --Indoors or that--
Speaker 2: No, we were just all played--
Speaker 1: So you all played outdoor--
Speaker 2: Mm-hum.
Speaker 1: --Basketball?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I tried football, and I hurt my knee.  Even to this day it causes problems for me.  I tried wrestling.  And I was pretty good at wrestling until we went to a tournament once, and I had to wrestle a blind guy, and he whipped my ass like (laughter), it had to be five seconds.  I was, you know, I was out of there.  I was doing pretty good until I met him.  And I tried track, which I did pretty good in track.  Baseball I did real good. I was really good in baseball.  But I, I mean I was just trying all of that, not really loving, you know, any of it in particular.
Story_ID: 159195
Speaker 1: But I did like the farming thing because I knew that.  I knew how to raise pigs.  I knew how to raise, you know, cows, animals, chickens, whatever.  And so, you know, my mom [Willie Grace McMillan] and dad [Monroe Everett] helped me get a, a couple of pigs.  And so, and there was special kind of feed they had to have.  And when you fed 'em they couldn't eat like regular pigs.  You had to build a, a thing that they had to stand on it with their front legs to eat, otherwise they couldn't eat.  And what that was doing was building up their hams so that it was muscular.  And then you had to--
Speaker 2: So this is agricultural science we're talking about here.  This is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, man.
Speaker 2: --this is down to a science.
Speaker 1: You had to walk 'em, and you had to have a stick to walk 'em with, and they had to follow your directions.  And you'd rub 'em up under their tummy to make 'em arch their back, so it made 'em look bigger.  And before you'd show 'em, you'd put some bengay in their ass 'cause it would make 'em wiggle their tail like that (laughter), you know.  And then I'd be walking around the neighborhood with the pigs.  They'd walk like, just like puppies, and they'd follow me around.  And you know, and I, I, won first place in the female, the first place in the male.
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Now, this the county fair or, or--
Speaker 1: Mm-hum.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So first place in the county fair is a big deal.
Speaker 1: I won first place for both.
Speaker 2: That, that, that is, that's something.  And, and--
Speaker 1: And we sold the male.
Speaker 2: --You were what?  Now, how old--
Speaker 1: We sold the male.  I think I was, let's see, twelve, thirteen, fourteen.
Speaker 2: Twelve or thirteen?
Speaker 1: Somewhere around there, early teens.
Speaker 2: You said you sold the male for how much?
Speaker 1: Sold the male, I think $350, which was, you know, a lot of money (laughter) back then, but--and I kept the female and you know, let her have little pigs and stuff.  And basically, I had to get rid of all of 'em because I just couldn't afford 'em anymore, couldn't afford it. It was too expensive.  The food that they eat is very expensive.
Speaker 2: Okay, and the--
Speaker 1: --At least it was then.
Speaker 2: --the money you got back didn't offset the, the expense of feeding them?
Speaker 1: I think I ended up losing money on, 'cause I kept the female, which I should have sold.  But I think I ended up losing money.
Speaker 2: 'Cause all of a sudden you had like a lot of pigs, you know (unclear)--
Speaker 1: A lot of pigs to feed and couldn't sell 'em fast enough, didn't really understand business, you know.  And you know, that was not a good time in my life.  You know, my parents were moving away to California, and I was basically raising those pigs by myself.
Story_ID: 159196
Speaker 1: So your parents [Willie Grace McMillan and Monroe Everett] moved away to California and left you in Texas?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Now this is--how, how, how old are you at this point?
Speaker 2: I was about thirteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my parents--I'd had a bad experience in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  We came out to visit my aunt and uncle.  And we were playing out on the basketball court, and these little kids--you know, I think I was what, eleven or twelve.  And these little kids that were about seven or eight came out there and said, "Man, you gotta get off the court so we can play."  And you know, I'm looking down at these little kids like, you know, "Dude, get out of here before I go, you know, or hit you upside your head."  And then it's like, next thing I know I'm surrounded by a bunch of kids.  And I'm sitting here like, what the.  So my dad came running out there 'cause the little kids started pulling out knives and bats.  So my dad saw what was going on, and he, "Get over here, Greg, get over here."  He said, "Those are gangs.  You don't mess with them little gangs"--little seven or eight year old kids.  I mean kids that I could have easily slapped upside their (laughter) head.  And so, after I saw that I was scared to death of L.A.  So when they decided they're gonna move to L.A., I'm like, "I don't wanna go, I don't wanna go." I was crying and stuff.  And so, they asked my uncle if he would move in with us, or move in with me and stay, take care of me.  So that's how they left and I stayed.  But my uncle was such a rolling stone that he was never there, so I raised myself.
Speaker 1: So you're, okay, so you're at home basically by yourself?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, exactly, so--
Speaker 1: I mean, that could lead to a lot of trouble, a little boy could--
Speaker 2: There's not much--
Speaker 1: --Lead to--
Speaker 2: --Trouble to get into in Van Alstyne [Texas] (laughter).
Story_ID: 159197
Speaker 1: And is this the time that you, you become like, you know, your, your speech becomes such that your family is marveling at how you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, this was before that.  This was at about nine or ten.  My auntie would always, you know, bring me in the room, "Greg, get in here, get in here, talk for everybody, talk for everybody," because I always had that different kind of voice than the rest of the kids.  The rest of the kids had kind of a, a black dialect is the best way I can describe it.  And I didn't sound like them.  And I think it's because when I went to Van Alstyne [Texas] and they were still over here in Emory [Texas] that was the dialect that they were raised with.  Over in Emory I was raised around white kids, and so I kind of created a, you know, a white dialect, I guess is the best way to describe it.  But they'd have me come in there and just talk, just talk, talk, and so I'd talk.  So what do you want me to say?  You know, and so they'd start laughing--"Aah, you sound like a white boy. You sound like a white boy."  But they used to love to hear me talk.  You know, I don't think it was, it is anything, you know, to do with radio, I don't think.  I think it was just a matter that I grew up around white kids, and they hadn't heard that.
Speaker 1: Okay, did, did, did the other black students that were going to school with you speak the same way as you--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think, I've, I've talked to a lot of kids that, you know, grew up that way, and they, they say how the--you know, they get criticized.  You think you're white, you know, because you talk like that you think you're white.
Speaker 1: Now, now what's in East Texas, black accents sound like from, from, from, from that region?  Can you--
Speaker 2: There's no way I can describe it.  I, I've--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --never been able to imitate it, but it's like, like kind of slow and y'all, and it's got that drawl to it.  And you know, they kind of talk slow, and it's very--you know, can't finish a whole sentence type.  I, I, I hesitate to say that they're ignorant.  I think that they're very smart, but they just can't express it.  But, see, I've been in radio thirty-nine years, so I've learned how to edit what I say.  But I think before that, I probably would have had a hard time.
Story_ID: 159198
Speaker 1: Were you able to parti, parti, participate in the high school clubs and activities, you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, in high school [at Fox Technical High School, San Antonio, Texas], like I told you, I participated in everything.  I mean whatever came up I wanted to participate.  I tried it all, you know.  It's, it's, I've always, throughout my whole life, have never been afraid to, to fail--
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: --you know.
Speaker 1: --did you run for student government or?
Speaker 2: Didn't run for student government.  We didn't really, I didn't really pay attention to that.  It wasn't athletic.  I was into anything, you know, athletic or anything to do with the farm or outdoors.  I, I never even knew what a prom was until years after high school.  I, I didn't even know what that meant.  So, there was a lot of things that I missed.
Speaker 1: That's, that's something that didn't happen in the black community, I guess, where you were, or grew up.
Speaker 2: Well, it does. It did.  But you have to understand that I was raising myself since I was thirteen.  I did go live with my auntie and uncle there in Van Alstyne [Texas] after about a, you know, I guess a year or two when my mom [Willie Grace McMillan] found out that my uncle was hardly ever there.  'Cause I never complained about it.  I just cooked my own food.  But when she found out, she made me move in with my aunt and uncle, aunt--
Speaker 1: Where'd you get your money?  I mean, I mean, being by yourself--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: She would send me money.
Speaker 1: She, she would just send you money.
Speaker 2: Send me some money orders.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'd go cash 'em.  I was very responsible.  And it wasn't like I would spend it on anything, you know, maybe a candy bar here and there.  But I knew I had to eat, so I had to figure it out 'cause they wasn't, they wasn't sending me enough--I mean they would pay the rent themselves, but, or the lights.  Mama would handle all that.  But when it came to food, I had to make it stretch out.
Speaker 1: So how were your grades in school?
Speaker 2: My grades, I always had good grades.  I never had outstanding, A's everywhere, but I knew that school was easy.  It was just easy.  It was, it was too easy to where I, like I said, I didn't do homework.  I would just, on the way to school fill out something (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, now, did you have any par--particular mentors or teachers that you admired in, in school or older people?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I had a great teach, Mrs. Spencer [ph.], who was my first grade teacher.  I don't remember the name.  She stood out to me most out of everybody.  I don't remember the names of everybody, but I got along great with all my teachers.
Story_ID: 159199
Speaker 1: I had a great rapport.  I was not a bad kid.  I, in, in high school, later, I did get to be the class clown when I went to Fox Tech [Fox Technical High School] in San Antonio [Texas].  Because all the kids were Hispanic, and so they'd always, you know, say Spanish things, which I learned later (laughter) what they were saying.  And so I guess that was my way of acting out, was to get up and make jokes or whatever.
Speaker 2: Okay, so, so you moved to San Antonio at a certain point in--
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Alright.
Speaker 1: After my, I, when I went and stayed with my Uncle Pat--or uncle, Uncle Paul and Aunt Pat.
Speaker 2: Okay, so they lived in San Antonio?
Speaker 1: No, they lived in Van Alstyne [Texas].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Remember, I told you my mom [Willie Grace McMillan] had me go live with them.  And I did that for about six months, and I said mom, you know--'cause my Uncle Paul, he, he used to be in, he used to be in the [U.S.] Army.  And so he, he had kind of an Army mentality (laughter), and I didn't like that, that structure in life, you know, having lived by yourself.  And so she asked my aunt and uncle in San Antonio, Texas, if I could go stay there.  And so that's when I moved to San Antonio.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you're, you're like fifteen?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Fourteen.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  Alright, so, in San Antonio, mostly Hispanic kids in class you say, and, and you, you became a class clown?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and when I say clown, I wasn't like a bad one.  But I was very witty with the teacher to where the teacher had to be very specific with me because I would say something and catch 'em, and the whole class would just break out.  So it wasn't like your typical class clown that was just, you know, doing stupid things.  I was, I was just real witty with the teacher.
Speaker 2: Okay, so people were laughing with you rather than at you.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's a better position to be in--
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: --Right?
Story_ID: 159200
Speaker 1: Is it the schools had, had a program where if you had at least a B average, you could be an intern in a business (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah, the school had a new innovative program they were trying.  And that was in my junior year in high school [at Fox Technical High School, San Antonio, Texas].  And basically, the way it worked is that if you had at least a B average, there were several businesses that would allow you to come and intern, and you didn't have to go to school anymore.  You'd get that average for the semester of, for that class, but you'd have to work forty hours a week at this place.  And as long as you did good--I mean they could still fire you from that place, which if they did, you'd just have to go back to class.  But, so, I said well, you know, what I really wanted to be was a lawyer, so I said well, put, get me, I want an internship at a lawyer's office.  And they were all full.  The doctor's office was all full.  I'm like, well, what do you have?  Well, unfortunately, all we got is a radio station. Radio, you know, so they sent me over there to apply.  And I'm like, anything to get out of school 'cause I was bored.  And I got hired the same day, thinking I was, did a great interview, but it wasn't really that.   The station also had a FCC [Federal Communications Commission] quota to hire at least, you know, a black person.  So that's, you know, it was a great gift to them to have me there.  And I started the same day as an intern and didn't have to go back to school that semester.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is like 1976 or so?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: You're about sixteen.  And--
Speaker 2: No, I was about fifteen when I started.
Speaker 1: Fifteen?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay that's the first year you moved back?
Speaker 2: When I first started at the radio station.
Speaker 1: So that's '60--
Speaker 2: It, it was--'cause I moved back--
Speaker 1: '75 [1975].
Speaker 2: --in the latter part of the year, but I started the internship the first part of the next year--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, so '75 [1975], '76 [1976]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --To go, go forward, okay.
Story_ID: 159201
Speaker 1: You said you wanted to be a lawyer at--I mean what influenced that idea?  Were you sorry you didn't?
Speaker 2: I used to love watching 'Ironside' and all the other legal shows.  That's what I wanna be, is a lawyer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I knew I wasn't gonna make it in sports because I'd hurt my knee at, you know.  And I just wanted to be a lawyer.
Speaker 1: Did you know any black, any black lawyers in town?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: San Antonio [Texas]?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Now, now San Antonio does have some black professionals in town, but, doctors, did you know any doctors?
Speaker 2: No, I wanted to be a doctor 'cause I liked all the medical shows.  What was that guy?  'Marcus Welby, M.D.,' that old show, we used to watch that all the time.  So I was like, God, I'd like to do that.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: They all made it look so easy.
Story_ID: 159202
Speaker 1: Alright, so you're an intern at KTSA [San Antonio, Texas].  So this is like a full-time job, forty hours a week.
Speaker 2: KTSA, KTFL.
Speaker 1: Yeah, KTSA.  So, now there, from what I understand, you met the program director, Lee Randall, was--
Speaker 2: Well, Lee was the one that hired me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Lee was just a great guy.  He had one eye.  He had got hurt in a hunting accident, but he just made me feel really good.  He, he sat me down, and he said you know, you got a lot of potential here, but you gotta lose that, that accent 'cause I kind of had a strong Texas y'all-type drawl.
Speaker 1: Now here they're telling you you sounded like a white person.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Well, he said I had a good voice, but I still had that drawl.  And he said, "If you're gonna make it in this business, you need to sound generic and sounding that, if people listen to you, they're not gonna really know what race you are.  I want you to practice that."  And so I used to practice by reading billboards when I'd go down the street or just talking to myself, recording it, and playing it back, recording it, playing it back, trying to get rid of that drawl, and at the same time, you know, sound generic.  What I did is I went on the air finally years later through the college that I went to.  I went to the college because the college--the, the radio station gave the college a, five hours on Sunday nights.  And so the college would pick five students to do an hour each.  And so I went on their just so I could do that.  And I was, first time I was on the air some lady calls up and said ma'am.  My voice was so high that (laughter) she thought I was a woman.  And so I said "Oh, dang, I gotta work on that too, you know."  So, I, I loved radio.  Radio was fun.  I was the station mascot.  I answered the request lines.  And when I say mascot, there was like a big six-foot bird outfit that I would wear.
Speaker 1: Was it a chicken or--
Speaker 2: Chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We call it the FM File, and it was for KZFM [Corpus Christi, Texas].  And so I'd go out to places.  When I say six foot, that's with the thing on, but the head reached up another foot.  And so, there was a little string that came down in it, and so I'd pull that string and make his beak move.
Story_ID: 159203
Speaker 1: So at KTSA [San Antonio, Texas] you're working on trying to get rid of this accent.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so KTSA, so the, the format is Top 40 music?
Speaker 2: KTSA was Top 40.  It was an AM, number one station in San Antonio [Texas] at that time.  And it's, it's what made me fall in love with radio.  But see, I fell in love with radio for probably the wrong reasons.  I, I liked it because of all the women.  And you know, the top DJ there, his name was Charlie Brown.  And so Charlie, I would answer his phones for him.  So, half the time I'd end up meeting some girl on there, and we'd end up talking for hours and stuff.  But, and I, and I liked all the attention when we'd go out and do appearances, or when they'd go out and do appearances, I'd go with 'em and all the attention that girls gave us.  And I was like, wow, I like this, you know.  And since I was an intern, I didn't have any money coming in.  I started working part time at a bowling alley, so I was a, you know, doing that and, and working at the radio station.  After my internship, they gave me a full-time job, so I, I quit the bowling alley.
Speaker 1: So, so what did you do in your full-time job?
Speaker 2: In my full-time job, well, I'd been, I began being full-time at KTSA, but I was still living with my aunt and uncle there, and so I didn't have to worry about money really.
Speaker 1: But, but what, what were your duties in your full-time job?  Was it the same (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: When I started--
Speaker 1: --As it was as the internship?
Speaker 2: --Full-time at KTSA?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: They had me working in the news department.  I would, for the news guy, he'd give me a question, and I would go out and get actualities.  I'd ask people that question.  A prime example is like when Elvis [Presley] died [August 16, 1977], and so I had to go out and say so, what do you think of Elvis' death?  What do you think of Elvis' death?  And then I'd record that and take it back to the station, and then they would edit it and use it on the news.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was the community re- reaction to you generally positive?
Speaker 2: When I would go out and ask people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause you're the first--
Speaker 2: --Questions?
Speaker 1: --Black employer at the station, so--
Speaker 2: I don't think anybody really paid attention to it.  I, I, I just never got that, that people really paid attention--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --'Cause I, I wasn't DJing [disc jockeying]. I was just working there, and you know, basically I was doing little odds and ends jobs.
Story_ID: 159204
Speaker 1: Sometimes the owner of the station [KTSA, San Antonio, Texas], Bernard Waterman was his name, and so he would have me go and take his car out to be washed.  So, you know, I'd take his Cadillac Seville.  I remember that little yellow Cadillac Seville when they first made 'em.  And I'd drive it, and go wash it up, and clean it out, and take a, you know, a little stroll through the hood (laughter), leaning in his car.  But he, he took good care of me.  He put me through--back then when, when you gotten ready, or you had to have a, what's called a first-class license, and so he put me through school, Elkins Institute [of Broadcasting, Dallas, Texas], which I think is about eight thousand dollars that he paid for, all cash.
Speaker 2: Eight thousand dollars?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm, to go to this eight-week course to study for the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] license.  And I passed it on the first time I took it, which is unusual.  Most people failed it the first few times.  And so I had my first-class license, and that made me very valuable because radio stations back then, you had to have, no matter who was on the air, there had to be somebody there with a first-class license.  And so I became very valuable, although that didn't last but about a year, and then you didn't need 'em anymore.  Anybody could be there, but at that time, it was like, you know, as long as you got that first-class license you can work everywhere.
Speaker 2: Right, right, that's the rules.  So if you have a talk show, no matter who the talk show ho- host is, somebody has to be there with a first-class license--
Speaker 1: With a first-class license.(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --for the show to go on, yeah.
Story_ID: 159205
Speaker 1: What about high school graduation [from Fox Technical High School, San Antonio, Texas]?  Was there anything special about graduation?
Speaker 2: Not at all.  My high school graduation was, it was no big deal.  I mean, you know, the family was excited.  I didn't understand the excitement. I really didn't.  Like I said, even not knowing about the prom, I really didn't understand the importance of school.  I knew that it was important, but I really didn't know why at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, now did you--when you were on the verge of graduation were you considering college?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did go to college, just so that I could get on that program I was telling you about.  I went to the school that provided that program.
Speaker 1: And that, that was--
Speaker 2: UTSA, University of Texas at San Antonio [San Antonio, Texas].
Speaker 1: Alright, so that, that's right, right after graduation from high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, wait, let me take that back.  I didn't go to that school.  God, I'm wrong.  I went to San Antonio College [San Antonio, Texas].  It was a city college, San Antonio College, SAC.  And I went there for one semester.  And the reason that I quit going there is because the guy that brought me in [at KTSA], Lee Randall, he went to Corpus Christi, Texas, to a station, KEYS and KTFM because they fired him at KTSA.  They had some kind of contest, and the person that won sued the station or something, and so they fired him because of that.  And when the new program director, when he came in, he brought me in his office with his pork chop sideburns, and he, he just, he brought me in there.  And he just sat and looked me straight in the eye, and he's just looking all mean.  And I'm like, "Yeah?"  And he said, "You know, I'm gonna do everything within my power to get your nigger ass out of here."  So you're talking about, you know, I think I was seventeen at the time, and I was sitting there like, uh, okay.  Said, "I just want you to know I don't like you.  I don't like niggers, and I want your ass out of here."  And so I called up Lee [Randall] and I told him what happened.  And he said, "What?"  He said, "What?"  He said, "Get out of there.  Come work for me."  He said, and he said, "I can only get you part-time right now, but I'll help you get another job, but get out of there."  And so he did.  I left there and went down to Corpus Christi [Texas] where he was, and he put me on, on weekends.  And he got me a job at a TV station as a VTR operator, which I was doing early in the morning.
Speaker 1: Video tape recorder (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yep.  And he had me, got me a job at a nightclub on weeknights.  So I DJed at nights 'til two.  Then I had to be at the TV station at five to turn it on the air.  And after being late a few times because I was wore out from the club, they told me, you know, if you do that one more time we're gonna fire you.  And right about that time a full-time position opened up at KTSA [San Antonio, Texas], and so he gave me that.  I was doing six to midnight.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's my--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: This is my, first, first radio gig.
Speaker 1: This is KEYS though, not, not, not, not KTSA. It's KEYS--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: KEYS, KEYS was the number one--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Station in Corpus Christi [Texas].  It was an AM Top 40.  And I did six to midnight when I, my first gig immediately went to number one.
Story_ID: 159206
Speaker 1: I see here your first assignment was to assemble a list of the top one thousand rock songs of all time.
Speaker 2: That was at KTSA [San Antonio, Texas].
Speaker 1: Oh, that's at KTSA.
Speaker 2: I've been a music director or somewhere in programming my whole career.  But Lee [Randall] did this thing where he wanted to do the top one thousand rock 'n' roll hits of all time.  And who got assigned to find all the records and get 'em in order, and if we didn't have 'em order 'em?  It was me, and that's how I learned about all of these artists.  I can hear a song, and I can almost tell you to the year what, when it came out, sometimes the month--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Rock, pop, country because he played all of that, and--
Speaker 1: Well, what--I'd be remiss if I didn't ask you what is the top rock song of all time?
Speaker 2: 'Hey Jude,' The Beatles, that was the one--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --At that time.  It's changed at other stations throughout the years, but it was 'Hey Jude' then.  I remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, but it--so, you're all, all, all night show on KEYS [Corpus Christi, Texas] was, it was like Top 40 too or what?
Speaker 2: Six to midnight, it was Top 40, same thing we did at KTSA 'cause I mean, he's [Lee Randall] the one that did KTSA, and--
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1979, '78 [1978], '79 [1979].  So this is the disco era it started (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It came in around--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --That time, the later part of '70 [1970].  But my biggest song was a rock song called 'Slow Ride' by Foghat or 'Stairway to Heaven' by Led Zeppelin, 'Hotel California' [Eagles].  Those were, you know, like the, the biggest songs, and then disco started to come in.  And you know, then it was Donna Summer all the time, sort of like Rihanna is today.  You know, that's the way Donna Summer was.
Speaker 1: Now you were saying earlier that you don't--I think it was off camera though that you weren't really playing the records that you liked the most but the ones that are the most popular, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they had a system when I first got to KTSA where they would take all of the trades--when I say trades, their magazines that radio stations only get--and they'd look at the charts, and so they'd have all these magazines side by side.  Well, that was number one on Billboard.  It's number two on Radio & Records, you know, and that's how they determined what they play.  What they didn't know at the time, and I found out later, is that most of them records were payola.  It's about who paid for those to be on the charts.  So payola was a big driver of what we played.   And so they basically didn't do any research other than that and request sheets.  Request sheets were the only--from the listeners.  You know, I had to compile those.  You know, this song is most requested, the second most requested blah, blah, blah.  And I'd fudge a little bit sometimes too if it was a song I really liked.  You know, I'd put in a few more requests than it really got (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So, it wasn't exact science.
Speaker 1: Now you got married in '79 [1979], right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: First time that--
Speaker 2: My first wife I met on the phone at KTSA [San Antonio, Texas].  She had called up to ask about an announcement we made regarding rugby.  And we got to talking, and then I met her, and I was like, wow.  You know, it was my first girlfriend, and she was just this beautiful lady.  And she just loved my dirty drawls (laughter), and so we just kind of hit it off.  And her family, even though she was Hispanic, they welcomed me right in, and you know, we had a good rapport.  When I got offered the job [at KEYS] in Corpus Christi [Texas] I asked her to come live with me.  And her family was really against it, but she just left.  They didn't even know where she was for a mon- months.  And finally I made her call 'em and tell 'em where she was.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, but things are going--so, do, do, do you keep that same timeslot the whole time you're at KEYS?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was there.  It, it eventually became seven to midnight, but it started out six to midnight.
Story_ID: 159207
Speaker 1: At some point you get an offer to go to Houston [Texas], right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: This is in 1980?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Tell us about how that happened.
Speaker 2: Me and my wife had split up, mainly because I was messing around a lot, and she found out.  Matter of fact, she caught me in the act, and she, she moved back to her family.  And then she decided she wanted to go out on her own, and so she moved to Houston.  But we had gotten pregnant at that time.  So when I found out and I found out she'd moved to Houston, I said you know, I gotta do the right thing, and, and why don't you come back, and she said, "I'm not going back there.  You embarrassed me.  I'm not going back there.  I'm going to Houston."  And I says, "Well, then I'll quit here, and if I have to I'll get out of radio.  I wanna be with you."  And I started applying at the, the power companies, and you know, trying to get a job over there.  And because I had a first-class license, it wasn't important to radio anymore, but it was important to the power companies, I had a good shot of getting that.  And so anyway, the day that I was moving out, I had left my phone plugged in.  I hadn't turned it off yet.  But after I got everything loaded, I went back up to get my phone and unplug it.  And right before I had unplugged it, it was the radio station in Houston, Majic 102, Bill Travis.  And he told me that the guy that was a consultant [Jerry Clifton] for KEYS [Corpus Christi, Texas] had recommended that he hire me to come to Houston.  And I said, "Well, it just so happens I'm moving there today."  This was on a Friday.  He says, "Really?"  He says, "You're kidding."  I said, "Yeah, I'm actually moving there."  He said, "Well, come by and see me on Monday."  And, and I went in on Monday, and he hired me.
Speaker 1: So this is--
Speaker 2: So I stayed in radio.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is KMJQ.
Speaker 2: Majic 102 [.1].
Speaker 1: And I'm thinking--I don't know if it has anything to do with it or not, but, you know, there's jazz musicians from Houston, Modern Jazz Quartet.  And they use [K]MJQ as their--I don't know--at any rate.  That's (laughter)--I don't know if they have anything to do with it, but--
Speaker 2: You have to understand, that was my first, after six years of being in radio, that was the very first station I ever worked at that played R & B.  I was like, wow, okay, so that was new to me.
Story_ID: 159208
Speaker 1: Okay, so [K]MJQ [Magic 102, Houston, Texas].  So, so, so, so you're the morning man, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: When I went there, he [Bill Travis] says, "Well, I can give you some part time now," and, but that only lasted about two weeks.  And then he gave me six to ten at night on Majic.
Speaker 1: Okay, so were, were you ever the morning man there?
Speaker 2: Never, I was never the morning man there.
Speaker 1: Alright, so we, we can put a line through that on this (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, okay, so you did like six to ten?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this--you're, you're, you're developing a niche for doing the late night--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --show, yeah.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and this as your niche.
Speaker 2: And, and I went to number one every time I did it, you know, so I had great ratings.  I was very lucky I had great ratings everywhere I worked.
Speaker 1: Were you excited to, to be playing a black format, you know?
Speaker 2: I didn't know what to think of it to be honest with you.  In many ways, because I'd worked with the, the white--I say white--the pop, the rock, the country, in many ways I felt like I was going backwards by working for a black music station.  But, at the same time, it was FM, and I had only done AM.  And they were, you know, had a very powerful signal, and they were already number one in the market.  And so I was like, well, maybe it's not a setback.  I, I do remember that I wasn't making much more money there than I was making in Corpus Christi [Texas, at KEYS].  They didn't pay very much at all.
Speaker 1: So, now how did you--so, you were there until '83 [1983], right?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: So it's like, like three years.
Story_ID: 159209
Speaker 1: Tell us about what happened that got you at KDAY [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 2: The gentleman that competed against us at another station there, he had this thing were if, if you were giving him a hard time in the ratings, he would tape your show and send it out to other stations.  So he had taped my show and sent it to Jack Patterson, who was a friend of his at KDAY.  And he also did that with our morning guy, Snowman [Jim Snowden].  So they called Snowman first, you know, "Why don't you come work for us at KDAY?"  And Snowman was telling me about it, and he said, "You know they want you too."  I said, "Really?"  So he toyed around with it, and he decided he wasn't gonna go.  And so then they called me.  Jack [Patterson] called me and he said you know, "You wanna come out here and work?"  I said, "Yeah, well, how much does it pay," you know, 'cause it was an AM.  It was like, okay, I'm going back to AM.  And when he told me the pay, which was two and half times what I was making.  I said, "How quickly do you want me," (laughter) you know?  And so everybody at Majic [102, Houston, Texas] were like, "Ah, don't go to L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  You go to L.A. they'll chew you up and spit you out.  You don't wanna go to L.A."  Yeah, but you know, for that kind of money I need to go to L.A., 'cause you know, it was, it was a struggle living.  And so anyway, you know, I went to L.A.
Speaker 1: Now, before we--
Speaker 2: I didn't know that taxes--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --took out half of my money.  (Laughter) So, California taxes ate my ass up.
Story_ID: 159210
Speaker 1: I forgot to ask you about some of the on air, the celebrities that you were able to bring, bring on air at, in, in Houston [Texas] at [K]MJQ.  So, so you, even though you, you worked from six to ten, you'd be able to, you had access to some of the funk musicians like Charlie Wilson and Roger Troutman and people like that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that story, I had scheduled--you know, we'd have people on my show.  But I had scheduled Charlie to come on.  He was gonna come on before Roger Troutman, and he got there late.  So Roger got there early, and I said "Eh, come on, Roger."  You know, so we get Roger on there.  And of course, everywhere he goes with his interviewer he takes his little talk box.  And so we're on there having fun, you know, playing some, you know, playing 'More Bounce [to the Ounce],' [Zapp] which was the hit then.  Then Charlie finally got there, and instead of telling Charlie to wait, I said, "Eh, just come on with us."  So Charlie came on, and so I was interviewing 'em both at the same time.  And, and you know, Charlie--Roger was doing his little voice box thing, and then Charlie kind of started singing along with it.  And they were like, you know, we ought to do something together.  We ought to do a song together.  And so they said that on the air.  And a month later they, they came out with 'Computer Love,' which became a pretty big record.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that's, that's kind of how that, that started.
Speaker 1: That's interesting, that's, yeah, that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So was, was Roger actually answering the questions?  Was it a wa, wa, with, with, with the--
Speaker 2: No, he would talk.  Roger was always--
Speaker 1: Okay--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --a clown on the air.  He'd have fun.  We'd have fun.  You know, we were--he would, he would bring that to show us that he, you know, could play.  But, no, he would, he would answer normal questions.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Roger was great.  Roger, we'd hang out at the club and blah, blah, blah.  Roger never drank. He never smoked.  I mean he was just a, he wasn't even really, other than, you know, his fans, he wouldn't really talk to women.  You know, he, he was just all professional, I guess is the best way to describe it.  His whole family, I met Lester [Troutman] and Terry or "Zapp" [Terry "Zapp" Troutman].  His whole family was just very professional.  It was a business, but it was family.  And, and they're still that way today.  But you know, I, I, I couldn't say enough nice things about them.  You know, and I got to know the other guys, Confunction, and you know, I got to have dinner with them--
Story_ID: 159211
Speaker 1: You know, it was kind of like I was starting to meet all these people now, and I really started to really fall in love with radio because I was, I, I really got into that.  But I was also the music director at Majic [102, KMJQ, Houston, Texas].  I helped 'em, a lot more research than anything.  That's how I learned the research stuff and started to build up my credentials for what was about to happen in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 2: Okay, so what kind of research are we talking about in terms of--
Speaker 1: Well, I would tally all the requests.  I would call all the record stores and see what was selling and talk to the record companies, see what they were pushing, listen to all of the albums because I always felt like what they're pushing and what we wanna play are two different things, you know.  And so I was trying to see if there are songs that maybe they weren't pushing on the album that might fit.  And most of the time what the record companies did back then is they would put their best sin- they'd leave the best single on the album because they wanted you to go buy the album.  They didn't make any money when you'd go buy the 45 or the 12-inch.  And so they'd leave the best song on there.  And I was always trying to find that best song, you know.  And so, when I went to KDAY [Los Angeles, California] and they asked me to be the music director like within a week, I said sure, and I implemented that, you know.  But we were very in tune to the streets.  I've always felt like if you know the streets, if you're hip to the streets, if you know what people are listening to, that's how you win.  We actually did give the people what they want.  So many stations say more variety, more this, more that, and it's bull, bull crap.  And I actually did.  And so when they asked me to be the music director, they said, "Well, what do you, what do you think?"  I said, "Well, give me a few days."  And basically, when I got here I was living in the heart of South Central L.A., which back then was not probably the most desirable neighborhood.  But you didn't even have to roll your window down.  People were rolling buy, and they were playing Run-DMC, they were playing Kurtis Blow, Sugarhill Gang.  And I'm like, wait a minute.  You know, nobody's really, you know, playing this on the radio.  They had played Sugarhill Gang when I was at KTSA [San Antonio, Texas].  And they looked at it as novelty, you know, just like they did 'Disco Duck' when Rick Dees came out.  So they thought rap was novelty.  And then they played Run-DMC when they came out.  But, again, it was novelty. It was never taken seriously.  And so when I got to L.A., and that's like all that you heard in the streets was rap, and so I told Jack [Patterson] and Ed [Kerby], I said, "Well, here's what we're gonna do, you know.  You guys are gonna allow me to do what I wanna do?"  "Well, yeah."  But the rap stuff they'd only, in the beginning they would only let me play it at night.  They wouldn't let me play it during the day, so I had to do what they called day parting.  And so they started letting me put it on at night.  And the ratings at night just, bam!  And the very first rating book, the very first ninety days KDAY's numbers just jumped.  And they were like--you know, 'cause it was like at that time five black stations.  We weren't competing with the whole market.  We were just competing with the other black stations.  KDAY went from number five to two immediately, so they were very, very happy.  "What, what, what are you doing?  What's going on?"  "It's that rap, man, you know."  And so they started allowing me to put it on throughout the day.
Story_ID: 159212
Speaker 1: And what I also did is I started realizing that if we're gonna succeed and we're gonna go to the next level [at KDAY, Los Angeles, California], you gotta get the Hispanics on board.  You know, there's a lot of Hispanics in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].  So I started exploring and figured out the, the hot Latin promoters.  There was a club called the Casa Camino Real [Los Angeles, California], and I started hanging out down there.  And I figured out that, you know, their dance music in, you know, that, that they like.  And so we started throwing some dance music in there.  And I went to the, the gay clubs to figure out what they like.  And I started, you know, kind of figuring that out, and I started putting, you know, a couple of songs here and there that, that the gay audience loved, which was mostly Grace Jones and Donna Summer of course.  I mean I just tried to figure it all out.  And I started figuring out what the white audience liked, which was basically everything that the blacks liked, but they were afraid to say.  And then we--I said, "Okay, now we need to really tie into the streets."  At that time, there was a big group called Uncle Jamm's Army.  Uncle Jamm's Army could give a dance at the [Los Angeles] Sports Arena and have eight to ten thousand kids in their dancing, not one group performing, just DJs [disc jockeys].  And I said I gotta tie in with Uncle Jamm's Army.  So I went and met with them, and I said, "Hey, dude, let's tie in and do some stuff together with us at KDAY.  You know, we'll come out and promote the station, and we'll, you know, do some kind of cross-promotion."  And, and, and you know, and they said, "Well, we don't need radio," and they said, "'F' KDAY.  We don't need y'all.  Y'all need us.  So, we don't wanna have nothing to do with y'all."  And so me, I'm one of those kind of people that when you tell me something like that, yeah, it's a roadblock--or it's a hurdle. It's not a roadblock.  So I said, "Okay, well, you wanna play it like that," and they were so rude about it.  And so I decided that I was gonna start my own thing.  It was gonna be called Mack Attack Marines.  So we were gonna go to war (laughter), you know.  And so one of the guys, I tried to pull one of their DJs, DJ Bobcat.  And so we were talking about it, and DJ Bobcat said you know, "Nah, don't do that."  He said, "Be yourself, you know.  It'll look like you're biting if you say Marines."  That was the word back then, you don't wanna be biting.  And so he said, "Call it the Mixmasters, the Mack Attack Mixmasters, you know."  And I said, "Ah, okay, cool."  I still couldn't get him to leave (laughter).  So we decided we were gonna be the Mixmasters.
Story_ID: 159213
Speaker 1: And so I was meeting with--'cause every Monday I'd meet with the record people, and Alonzo Williams of the World Class Wreckin' Cru was trying to get his record played.  He had come to me, with me, and I was telling him, I said, "Hey, man, do you know any DJs [disc jockeys]?"  'Cause he owned his own club at the time and doing a club in Compton [California] called Dooto's.  He says, "You know, not really."  He said, "But you can use my DJ till you figure it out."  And I said, "Oh, okay.  You know, who, who's your DJ?"  And he says, "His name is Dr. Dre and him and this guy named DJ Yella."  He said, "You can, you can use them."  I said, "Oh, okay."  Well, you know, I met with 'em and stuff.  They're real nice kids.  Both of them are kind of shy, you know.  I said, "Dude, let's start this little mix thing.  I wanna call it the Traffic Jam."  That was where that started.  There's a Traffic Jam in almost every city now (laughter).  And so I said yeah--
Speaker 2: This, this is Dr. Dre, who's now the second richest person in the hip hop--
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: --Universe.
Speaker 1: Well, after taxes, who knows, but (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Andre Young was his--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Was his given name, and DJ Yella is Antoine Carraby?  Is that--
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm, mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.
Speaker 1: So they became my mixers.  And so they'd do me these mixes at home, in Alonzo's [Alonzo Williams] garage.  And--like--it was like--and even to this day nobody can really do mixes like that.  They'd multitrack 'em.  And they became so popular, and Dre started pressing 'em, selling them at the Roadium Swap Meet [Torrance, California] and started making killer money, you know, Dr. Dre's mixes.  You know, we'd say on the air [KDAY, Los Angeles, California], you can go get 'em at the Roadium and get a copy of it.  Soon as he, soon as we finished playing it he'd go press it up, and he'd put it out there.  He wasn't paying royalties or--(unclear) or nothing--he's, that's street money (laughter), you know.  And so Dre became very popular doing that and started makin a lot of money.  And, and people were loving the Traffic Jam, so I, I decided to continue it even after he didn't have the time to do it anymore.  So I started looking for another DJ.  Dre and Yella were not officially mixmasters.  They were still part of Alonzo's crew.  So I said, "Well, let me go ahead and put my [Mack Attack] Mixmasters thing together."  And there was a rapper named Kid Frost that brought me a guy.  He said, "Ah, you gotta check out this guy.  He's good, man, a little Cuban kid."  And, and I say Cuban because I specifically remember every time I'd say his name, Tony Gonzalez--he called hisself Tony G, 'cause he didn't wanna be known as Gonzalez 'cause he didn't want people to think he was Mexican.  He would get ticked if you'd call him a Mexican.  He'd say, "I'm Cuban.  I'm not a Mexican."  I said, "Well, dude, you should still say Gonzalez so people will relate to you," but he never liked it.  He did it for a while.  But anyway, this kid was like, I'd never seen anybody even to this day that could mix like Tony G.  He'd mix with his elbows.  He would bend the records, like, he'd take the record and bend it up like that and be scratchin'.  And he, he knew how to work every crowd.  Out of all of my DJs that I eventually had, he was the only one that could work every age group.  Some of the DJs that I eventually had could work with teenagers.  Some could work with adults only.  Some could work with Mexican crowd only.  Some could work with the black crowd only.
Speaker 2: Because of the type of music they, they, they mixed--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --(Unclear)--I see, okay.
Speaker 1: He, he could work it all, black, white, Mexican.  You know, Tony was just the dude.  And so me and Tony, he started doing my Traffic Jams, and it went up. The ratings went up.  We started a Saturday night show, which was hard to do because KDAY [Los Angeles, California] wouldn't let me because it didn't make no money, so it didn't make sense.  So we brought in sponsors, Tommy Boy of Warehouse Records [sic, Tommy Boy Records], who sponsored it.  And so they allowed me to do it on Saturday nights.  We had a 22-share of kids on Saturday nights in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].
Story_ID: 159214
Speaker 1: So yeah, online on YouTube I found mixes from K--KDAY [Los Angeles, California] that pe- that fans have put up of, of your show, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I've seen those, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, you were talking about Tony G [Tony Gonzalez], the great mixer, just before we broke for the ratings--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --spike.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we brought on--initially I handpicked a few DJs, Tony G, and then we had a guy named Jammin' Gemini, and then DJ Joe Cooley.  And those were my guys.  That's how, that's kind of how we started.  Each, each one of 'em--I picked Joe because he appealed to the younger set 'cause he liked to battle, a battle DJ, which Tony was good at too.  Every aspect of it he was good at, but Joe was good at battling.  So we wanted somebody so that if any of these DJs wanted to battle, 'cause that was the thing back then, they couldn't get past Joe Cooley.  And we picked Jammin' Gemini because Jammin' Gemini could play to an adult crowd, that twenty-one and over crowd that my other guys--even though Tony could do it, Gemini was better at it.  But Gemini was better at an adult black crowd.  Tony could play an adult black, or Hispanic, or white crowd.  Tony's knowledge of the music was way better.
Story_ID: 159215
Speaker 1: Now tell us about Egyptian Lover's [Greg Broussard] single 'Egypt Egypt.'
Speaker 2: Egyptian Lover was part of Uncle Jamm's Army.  But you know, we had a little battle going on.  It was the [Mack Attack] Mixmasters versus Uncle Jamm's Army.  And to show them that, you know, hey, you can't beat me, I had hookups with the pressing plants, the people that would press everybody's records, and I'm talking about everybody, Prince, everybody.  I used to get Prince's stuff before he got it.  But with Egyptian Lover, I got his whole album.  He had recorded an album.  I got his whole album, started playing it before he even got it.  And so he came running over, "How'd you get my album?"  "Don't worry, I got it."  I never reveal my sources (laughter).  I'm revealing 'em now 'cause it doesn't matter, but you know, I had hookup with the pressing plants.  I had hookups with record companies.  I could get what's called acid tape.  Are you familiar with that?  Acid tape is basically a, a steel disc that they use to press the records.  You know, they'd make the vinyl, and then they'd (sound) psss, they'd stick that acid tape on 'em.  I would get the acid tapes and record it off of there, and I'd have it.  Nobody else would have it.  So we did that with a lot of stuff that came out.  I always like to get stuff first.  That was part of my formula.  We were called, eventually we called the station [KDAY, Los Angeles, California] the "hit breakers" 'cause we broke the hits.  We didn't wait on the, the record companies.  As a matter of fact, I didn't care what the record companies said.  One of the keys to my success is I was playing B-sides, album cuts.  There were certain songs that wouldn't be hits now if I hadn't did that.  When Salt-N-Pepa gave me their single called 'Tramp,' that was the A-side.  I didn't--that's cool.  I played the B-side.  I, I liked it better.  It was a song called 'Push It.'  'Push It' eventually became a major hit for them. J. J. Fad, same thing, their original song was 'Way Out.'  That was the A-side.  The B-side was 'Supersonic,' you know.  Lisa Lisa and Cult Jam 'I Wonder If I Take You Home,' her manager and I had become pretty good friends because he was also managing the group Full Force.  Record company wouldn't put her song out in the United States.  They wanted her to come out overseas, so he leaked me 'I Wonder If I Take You Home.'  He said, "Man, can you start playing this?  Maybe I can get the record company to put it out."  So I played 'I Wonder If I Take You Home,' and about six months later, you know, it was a big record.  So that story goes on, it goes on with so many different artists that I wasn't--radio protocol.  I never took payola.  I was very proud of that.  If you had a good record, you knew, you know, that you could come to the station 'cause if it was good I was gonna play it.  I used to do a thing on my show at night.  It's called the High Five [Countdown], where I invited local high school kids, mostly, but some college, some entertainers to come and count down their five most requested songs.  So the kids at each school, they'd take a survey at the whole school.  What's your five most requested song?  So not only did it help me with research, but sometimes they'd request a song, and many of 'em would request the same song.  And I'm like, "Who is this?"  Prime example of that was this rapper, local rapper named Toddy Tee.  He had a song called 'Batterram,' which was about Chief [of the Los Angeles Police Department, Darryl] Gates battering people's houses down.  And it kept showing up on the High Five.  And I, I couldn't find him.  None of the record companies had him.  And so the kids led me to his car.  He was parked on the street selling cassettes.  I said, "Man, let me have one of them cassettes.  You know, I'm from KDAY, man.  I wanna, I wanna play that song on the air," and he sold me one.  He didn't give me one (laughter).  He's a businessman.  He was selling 'em for five dollars.  So, so I bought one.  I played it.  The next day it's the most requested record.  And you know, we just, we had that rapport.  People eventually figured out that, wow, you can just go up there?  And if you got a good record, Greg will play it, and he don't want nothing?  That goes back to my grandfather [Neelan McMillan (ph.)].  You know, I wasn't, no, I didn't want nothing.  I wanted to help you.  I wanted to help the station, you know, but I wasn't trying to help myself.
Story_ID: 159216
Speaker 1: Then we [KDAY, Los Angeles, California] started doing a, a thing called Friday Night Live, where we'd broadcast live from different areas.  Now, that's where what my friends call I, since I never took payola, they would say oh, you take party-ola (laughter), because if we played your record, and if it was a big success, we wanted you to come out and appear.  But it wasn't about that.  It was about exposing themselves to the people that listen to us.  I would try and get R & B groups to come out and do appearances, but they were too big.  You know, you couldn't get The Gap Band, or Cameo, or The Bar-Kays to go out to a skating rink, but I could get the rappers to.  So we started doing a live broadcast, performance, and music and everything from different locations.  We started basically at Dooto's [Compton, California], where I had New Edition and LL Cool J and all of them come out.  That was the Blood area, and we would do Skateland, which was next door, which was a Blood area.  Then we did World on Wheels, so--
Speaker 2: Blood, you mean the gang, the Bloods, the Bloods--
Speaker 1: Yes, I'm talking gangs.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We did this because we didn't want any particular gang to think that we're going to a certain area because we favor one over the other.  So, and then we did World on Wheels for the Crips.  We did Casa Camino Real for the Latin gangs, and it was also a neutral area, so we would sometimes have Bloods and Crips come there.  And then we did Sherman Square [Skating Rink] for the Valley Hispanic gangs.  And then we did 321 Club in Santa Monica [California] because that was the white place.  The white kids that wanted to go that wouldn't go to any of the other clubs would go to 321 Club 'cause it was a safe area.  So, basically, we tried to reach out and show everybody that, you know, hey, we're down with you.  I did understand gangs.  And I can tell you that I became very close to the gangs to where they would call me and tell me when somebody would get killed, you know.  I'd say about sixty percent of the time, seventy percent they'd call me and tell me, you know, "Well, we had to take so and so out because, you know, he raped homegirl's daughter."  I mean, they had a reason why they would take these people out.  Back then there was a reason.  It became just silly later.  Now, I'm not saying I condone death, but to hear some of the stories.  You're sit--you almost sat there like, well, you know, I guess, I guess that's a good reason (laughter), you know.  But that's how close I became to them.  I became so close to them that I was coming out of the Hollywood Palladium [Hollywood, California] one night, and I was walking to my car.  And I, all of a sudden next thing I know, me and the girl that was with me, we were surrounded by ten gang members just out of nowhere.  They walked up and they surround me.  And so one of the gang members, he looked at me.  He said, "Hey, cuz, that's Greg Mack."  "Greg Mack, who the fuck."  "Greg Mack 1580 KDAY."  "Ah, shit, man," you know.  Excuse my language.  I don't (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But dude was like, "Ah, man, can we get a picture with you?"  Dudes had cameras and stuff, so I took pictures with 'em and--"Sign an autograph, man," you know.  I signed their autographs.  It's like, "Man, we was getting ready to fuck you up."  I said, "Really?" (Laughter) He said, "Yeah, old man. Yo, cuz, you, you need to go on and get on outta here, man, 'fore we change our mind."  I got in my car, and I rolled on out.  You know, that's how powerful it had gotten, to where I got a pass.
Story_ID: 159217
Speaker 1: And even when there were shootings at clubs and stuff--'cause you could hear bullets going by your ear.  And we would take guns.  I had to eventually hire security.  We'd take guns, but we never used them, but we'd just have 'em in case.  But they [Los Angeles gangs] usually left us alone.  They usually left us alone, but it was weird how they'd, they'd have specific reasons as to why they shot somebody up.  It wasn't just as random as people thought, you know.
Speaker 2: But it's interesting that they wanted you to know the reason.
Speaker 1: We had a thing that we used to do, which I eventually did start doing the mornings, and we had this news guy.  His name was King News [Lee Marshall].  "And I come to you this morning with the truth.  Such and such gang bangers shot da, da, da, da."  And so he would break the news down, and it kind of--you know, I guess they'd listen to see if they made the news.  But then they would call me and you know, "Hey, Greg, this is what really went down," and da, da, da, da, da.  There was a particular news reporter here that had that same rapport, Warren Wilson.  He used to be with Channel 5 here [Los Angeles, California], and whenever a gang member wanted to turn hisself in they'd call Warren.  And Warren would bring the cameras out to show them being turned in.  And so I guess I was kind of the, the quiet Warren.  I never made a big deal out of it.  I would just, you know, kind of talk to 'em, whatever.  I never called the cops or say, you know, this is what I heard.  I, I just--you know, I think the terminology now is "no snitching."  I didn't snitch.  I just wanted them to be cool, you know, just understand that, "Hey, I understand."  I said, "I don't agree with what you're doing,"  I said, "but I understand."  I understand gangs.  I understand why these kids end up in gangs 'cause they didn't have a strong man.  You got all these single moms that have to raise these kids, and it's hard, it's hard, and they feel like that's the only family that they got.  So I never condoned any of it, but I understood, you know.  And I just try and tell 'em you need to get out.  Well, I ain't no way to get out.  So anyway, there was a shooting once, and I remember that we, at KDAY [Los Angeles, California], we, we took the music off all day.  We didn't play music for a whole day, which killed them. All the kids were upset.  And all we did was we talked about gang violence, you know.  It was me and everybody at KDAY, all the DJs [disc jockeys], Barry White, Run-DMC.  And so we stopped the music, and we talked about that.  And I think we did that twice, and it usually worked, you know.  I know that one of the times there as a truce with all the gangs, and it held for maybe thirty days before they started back.  But--and that's an interesting story, that if we go back a little bit, when I first got to LA [Los Angeles, California], the very first party I went to, Ray Parker, Jr. had just opened up his new studio, recording studio, called the Ameraycan Studios.  So I go up in there, and I met Ray and Barry White, and I started talking to 'em, still having that Texas twang.  And so, I remember Barry White started laughing, and I said okay.  And he just said, I said--he said, "No, no, I'm not laughing at you, laughing at your accent."  And he said, "And just the way you're talking and the things that you're saying," 'cause I, I, I was just talking about, you know, music and you know, what I plan to do here and stuff.  And Barry, Barry just said, "Man, you're like a breath of fresh air, man."  He said you, "Need to, you need to keep that attitude," in his deep voice.  He said, "Control this city.  Don't let this city control you."  I will always remember what he said.  And he said, "Man, you just keep, you, you stay right where--just stay fresh.  Man, don't let the city--don't get caught up."  And, and I always remembered that.  Me and Barry and, we, we became, I wouldn't say real good friends, but we talked a lot, and he'd give me advice--
Story_ID: 159218
Speaker 1: --I tell people all the time.  They say "Well, what was the highlight of your career?"  The highlight of my career was one night we were at a concert.  We were backstage, me and Barry White and [HM] Isaac Hayes.  And we're sitting back there just talking, I mean, bagging on people, just laughing and joking, just--you know, I grew up admiring those guys, paying to go see them.  And I'm sitting backstage hanging out with Barry White and [HM] Isaac Hayes.  Oh, man, I couldn't believe it.  And we're la--and we're talking and laughing and joking like, you know, we're old friends, you know, like some, some brothers up under a shade tree playing dominoes, you know, that kind of talk (laughter).  And that was the highlight of my career.  And there was so much wisdom that those guys had about the business 'cause they didn't get caught up, you know.  I used to go over to Barry's studio.  He had a studio behind his house.  And we'd sit there, and we'd talk for hours and hours and hours, and he was just so full of knowledge.  He reminded me of my uncle in Texas, just really, you know, deep but genuine, nice.
Story_ID: 159219
Speaker 1: And I got to, you know, meet some of the other entertainers.  What I found out is that eighty percent of 'em I wish I hadn't, had not have met because they're not very good people.  And I got to the point, you know, after years that I, I really don't wanna meet groups, because I'm like, you know, I like you.  I don't wanna meet you 'cause I might not like you, you know--First time I met Diana Ross she got upset with me, and I didn't know why.  And, and it was because I, you know, I went up and I said you know, "Diana, I just love your music."  And she was just so offended.  She looked at me, and she walked away.  So the lady from the record company walked over, and she says, "Don't ever call her Diana.  Whenever you go to her you say Ms. Ross.  You do not say Diana."  I'm like, "Oh, you know, I didn't know." (Laughter)  You know, I really didn't know.  You, you do not call her Diana--
Speaker 2: That's interesting.  I mean you--
Speaker 1: --stuff like that.  And, and so I'm learning all of this the hard way, because I travel, you know, and when I go do stuff like that, I travel by myself most of the time.  I don't bring a big posse.  We would do that when we'd go to clubs or some of the dances.  But it hurt me because I had loved Diana Ross that she got upset with me.  I never did get to apologize.  She wouldn't speak to me ever again (laughter).
Speaker 2: Is it--
Speaker 1: You know.
Speaker 2: Can you easily understand that kind of attitude?
Speaker 1: Some of it I can understand.  Most of it I don't.  You know, even if she felt that way, she should have said, "You know, just address me Ms. Ross."  You know, that would have been the thing to do, but--
Speaker 2: That seems like that, that, that would have been the gracious way to do it, but--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --yeah.
Speaker 1: But no, it was like, you know.  I'm like, "Okay, I'm sorry."  You know, how do you--you know, it's like, you know, this is the lady that you just love to death, and all of a sudden she's mad at you.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean a great performer, but you know, she came from the Brewster [Douglass Housing] Projects in Detroit [Michigan].  I mean she just forgot I guess that--I mean to, to think that there's such a strong line drawn between her and someone else, anybody else that meets her is, seems amazing to me.
Speaker 1: Janet Jackson, I became very close with the Jacksons.  I was one of the few that could call, and Joe [Jackson] would answer.  And I'd say, "You know, it's Greg Mack."  And, "Janet, Janet, get in here, it's Greg," you know.  Me and Joe [Jackson] were cool.  Michael [Jackson], he invited me to--I wanted to listen to one of his albums.  I forget the particular one.  I, I think it was, it might have been 'Thriller.'  It might have been 'Off the Wall.'  But sitting and talking to Michael, you know, what you figured out is, is that Michael's brilliant, and he's just as normal as me and you.  All of that stuff with the, the elephants and the oxygen and--
Speaker 2: Chimpanzees.
Speaker 1: --chimps and, that was a side show that he did to get publicity.  He knew how to get his, keep his name out there.  He knew back then what a lot of these tabloid socialites are learning now, is just keep your name out there.  So, and I think to a degree, Prince does some of that.  But he was a master it, but he was just as normal, just as nice a person as you ever want to meet.  Their, their mother, Katherine [Jackson], same thing.  You know, I think that there are members in the family that, that may be a little bit out there that caught up in the hype, but overall, they're, they're just a regular family.  And I know I'm getting off the subject a little bit, but I, I'm trying to make you understand the, the madness that was going on around me, and I wasn't getting caught up in it.
Story_ID: 159220
Speaker 1: But where it really changed for me is when Dr. Dre, you know, because after he went off and started doing his own thing with the [World Class] Wreckin' Cru--
Speaker 2: This is '84 [1984] he--when he left--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --KDAY [Los Angeles, California], right?
Speaker 1: When he came to me, which was about '85 [1985] or '6 [1986] I think and said, "Hey, you know, Greg, I'm trying to branch out.  You know, I really don't wanna do this electronic thing that we were doing at the Wreckin' Cru.  You know, I really wanna get more into rap, you know, doing some, some different," different style.  "And I got this kid that backed me, and so I decided I'm gonna produce a record on him.  I want you to meet him."  He said you know, this is Eazy-E."  So I looked over at him, a little short guy, you know, jheri curl.  I'm like, "Well, okay, let's go listen to it."  So we walked outside and got in my car.  And we put in the cassette, and it was 'Boyz-n-the-Hood.'  And I says, "Well, you know, it's got potential."  And I wasn't crazy about it when I first heard it, but it was Dre.  And so I'm like, you know, "Dude, just go clean it up," 'cause it was, you know, it was the x-rated version, 'cause they knew that if I was gonna play something, that they needed to--I, I would make them not just turn their words backwards or bleep it out.  I'd make 'em go change what they say so that the kids that listened to it on the radio--because the kids are gonna know if you bleep it or turn it backwards.  I said make it say something else, which parents used to call me and thank me, "Thank you for chan- making him say something else because my kids know what they're, what you're bleeping out."  And so they took about, you know, eighteen hours.  It was less than a day.  They brought me a radio version, as I called it, and we played it.  The next day it was like most requested, and that's kind of how they took off.  And also they called me one day and, and Dre said you know, "Greg, you know, we're over at the studio.  We need your help.  Come over here and--we need a DJ on this record."  I said, "Oh, okay," so I drove over, and he let me hear the song called 'Radio.'  He said you know, "Can you, you know, like say something over this?"  I said, "Well, what do you want me to say?  What do you want me to write out?"  He said, "No, don't write nothin', just pretend you're on the radio," and you know, "just talk about us, talk about Eazy."  And so, I said, "Okay."  I said, "Well, run the track."  And so I ran the track, and I said, and I did something.  And I said okay, "How, which part of that do you like?"  He said, "No, don't change nothing."  It was the first take.  He liked it (laughter).  It became a platinum hit, which I didn't know it would because I never signed anything.  I never got one penny out of that.  I just did it to help 'em.  You know, it would be like you saying, "Hey, Greg, say this for me on tape," and I wouldn't know that you might do something that might make you millions.  And you know, it just, it blew up.  And we did a Christmas song together, me, and Dre, and [DJ] Yella, and the whole Wreckin' Cru.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I heard it online--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --this, this morning, yeah.
Speaker 1: So we did a Christmas song together in the garage.
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--
Speaker 1: We never put that out (laughter).  I don't even know where or who has the master of that.
Speaker 2: But it, it's on YouTube though.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it is.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But it's the poor quality.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, all right--
Story_ID: 159221
Speaker 1: --And so, we just did a lot of stuff together, you know, me and [Dr.] Dre, but not just Dre but Ice Cube, because Ice Cube at that time was trying to get going.  And he had his little group, him and Sir Jinx, and they used to come up to the radio station [KDAY, Los Angeles, California].  And, and what people don't know is that, you know, most everything N.W.A. [Niggaz Wit Attitudes] put out in the beginning, Ice Cube wrote it.  Ice Cube was a brilliant kid.  He went to college, University of Arizona [Phoenix, Arizona].  He's just, he's a genius.  And so him and Jinx had their group.  I, I think I played it, you know, for a few weeks.  It just didn't do that well, you know.  But when him and Dre and him kind of came together, he, you know, he blew up.  And all of those guys--a lot of people don't know this, but everybody in N.W.A. were just the nicest kids.  You would trust having 'em at your house.  They were not gang members.  What they were is they had a lot of friends that were into it, and so they were reflecting what they heard their friends--that's what they were.  They were not gangsters.  However, I did see them fight before, and they could fight like [Mike] Tyson.  Dre can throw, Eazy[-E].  You know, I'm going to tell you this quick story.  I don't even know if you're gonna use it.  But I saw--we, we had a party one night.  It was a release of the N.W.A. album.  And so Dre and Eazy come up, and the security wouldn't let 'em into their own party.  They had rented the place.  And I said, "Dude, these are the people that rented the place for the night."  "Yeah, but you're not coming in dressed liked that.  You gotta go take that jersey off.  You gotta take that hat off."  I said, "Dude, this is their image."  "Nah, nah, we're not gonna do it."  So I'm like, "Just hold on."  So I get in to get Jerry Heller, who's their manager.  And before I could get back, or get Jerry back, 'cause I had already came back.  So, and Dre and Eazy were like, "Man, we're going in.  We'll deal with this later."  And so the dude grabbed Dre's girlfriend at the time and grabbed her by the breast and pushed her back.  And why did he do that.  (Laughter) You know, and then Dre is like, pow, pow, pow.  And then this big tall Italian guy that was security, Eazy comes up and just jumps up on him, 'cause Eazy is real short.  He just--but he's stocky.  You know, he's all, he's like muscle.  So Eazy just jumps up and locks on his head (laughter), and he just starts pounding him.  He had a big ring that had an E on it.  There was E's all over this guy's head.  And finally, the guy fell down to his knees.  And when he fell down to his knees, then Eazy just started wailing on him.  Right about that time Jerry comes up.  But when Jerry comes up, all of a sudden there's cop cars, 'cause this was like in the Beverly Center [Los Angeles, California].  You know, this is, you know, you don't come up in a white area and start doing this.  And so there was cops coming from everywhere.  Needless to say, they had to leave.  They couldn't come into their own party because these guys were being A-holes.  But I got to see 'em in action, and I was just blown away that these guys could fight like that.  But they're just calm kids, you know.  And there was rumors that Eazy got his money from drugs.  And, and I'll be honest with you, I don't know. I really don't know.  He used to laugh about it, said, "Man, you get--did you start this with drug money?"  He'd start laughing, "Man, they making stuff up."  And then sometimes you'd ask him, you know.  "Yeah, I had to do what I had to do."  So, you never knew, and I really didn't care.  It had noth--it didn't affect me one way or the other.
Story_ID: 159222
Speaker 1: But at KDAY [Los Angeles, California] we broke a lot of groups.  [HM] Russell Simmons came to me one time and said, "Hey, Greg, I'm starting this label, Def Jam, and I need your help."  "Sure, Russell, what do you need?" "Man, you know, I got this kid.  He's pretty good, man.  His name is LL Cool J.  His song was called 'I Need A Beat.'"  So I sat and listened to it.  I said, "Alright, cool, let's blow it. You know, let's--I wanna bring him out here, take him to--you know, do promotions with KDAY, with the radio station."  You know, "Whatever you want to do with him."  So we did, and he blew up.  And 'I Need A Beat' became a big hit.  It became so big that Russell ran out of money.  And Russell came to me and said you know, "Hey, this record is breaking me (laughter).  Do you know anybody."  Because what a lot of people don't know with the record company, back then--I'm, I'm sure it's probably still the same--is that you can come out with a hit and go broke, because the distributors are not gonna pay you until you come out with another hit.  So, you may have sold a million records, but you're not gonna get that money until you come out with something else that sells a million records.  Then they'll pay you from the previous record.  Otherwise, they're gonna hold it.  What are you gonna do?  You can't go around to all of 'em and put a gun to their mouth, which is basically what some people did.  And so, I remember at that time Rodger Clayton, who ran Uncle Jamm's Army, and I were, you know, cool then, so we were talking about it.  And we were getting ready to do a show with Run-DMC at a, a club around Santa Monica.  And there was a guy that, that put up the money for that named Lyor Cohen, Lyor Cohen.  And so, we got Lyor and Russell together, and they worked out a deal.  And so, basically, Lyor said, "I'll put up all the money.  I want fifty percent of the company."  Russell said, "Well, you know, that's what I gotta do right now," and that's where Def Jam began.
Speaker 2: So, what, what year is this?  Is this like '80 [1980], what?
Speaker 1: 'I Need A Beat' came out in '80 [1980]--I'm thinking '86 [1986, sic, 1984].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It could be '85 [1985]--
Speaker 2: Okay, that makes sense.
Speaker 1: --somewhere around there.  But these were the kind of stories. These were the kind of things.  I mean I could go on for hours.
Story_ID: 159223
Speaker 1: So KDAY [Los Angeles, California] was like sixty percent rap around '86 [1986] is what I've read.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No, it was about forty, thirty, forty percent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We played a lot of R & B.  We played a lot of Freddie [Jackson], Luther [Vandross], Rick James, Prince, a lot of funk.
Speaker 1: So the rap was it mixed in, or, or was--
Speaker 2: The reason--
Speaker 1: --it mixed in?
Speaker 2: --The reason that it seemed escalated, that it seemed like it was a lot is because we were the only ones doing it, okay.  And I can tell you how it got into the other stations.  But we never--the only time that they went a hundred percent rap or mostly rap is when I left there because they were trying to figure out my formula.  They felt that my formula was rap.  It was not my formula.  My formula was--I didn't give just people just steak and potatoes.  I gave 'em vegetables, and some, some rolls, and, and dessert, nice drink (laughter), you know.  People felt like they were just gonna cut all that out and give 'em meat and potatoes.  And that's when KDAY went all rap, and their numbers dropped too.  I had it well-balanced.  Basically, what I was doing is, is that I'm gonna get all the kids with this, but I'm going to also give their parents something that they can listen to with them.  So I kept it balanced. It was a balance.  We had dance, we had R & B, we had, you know, a little bit of everything, some pop.  We played 'Conga' by Gloria Estefan, Miami Sound Machine.  We played some Wham!, you know.  We were mass appeal.  What we were doing is we were creating what is today called CHR-rhythmic format.  It's the most popular format across the country.  And the reason that it took off--and this is the irony of that.  I have to reach back to Majic [102, Houston, Texas] when I worked at Majic.  Majic was going through a flat spot, and so our consultant, Jerry Clifton, said, "Hey, everybody submit a name.  You know, we're thinking about renaming the station," which they never did, but they were thinking about it.  The name I was submitted, that I had submitted, is I said, "Call it Power.  Switch it to Power 102."  He didn't go with it, but here's what happened, as our history comes around. During a radio convention out here in LA [Los Angeles, California], the Radio and Records Convention, there was a gentleman that was listening to the station that I had met.  His name was Jeff Wyatt.  So Jeff Wyatt was listening to the station.  He called me up.  He said, "Greg, what do you call this that you're doing?"  I said, "Well, I don't really have a name for it."  I said, "It's kind of an urban, but it's a hybrid.  It's, it's not, you know, really urban.  It's not pop."  I said, "It's, it's just, you know, a mixture, you know."  I said, "It's kind of rhythmic," (laughter), you know, and huh.  So anyway, Jeff went back to Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and decided to do it in Philly on 99.1.  And his consultant [Jerry Clifton] was the consultant that I had in Houston [Texas].  So what's the name of that station?  Power 99.  I was like, "I'll be damn."  He took that name that I gave him (laughter) years ago, used it, and he started doing what I was doing out here.  They immediately went to number one.  And then the next thing I know, Jeff ends up being the PD [program director] at Power 106 [Los Angeles, California].  So he comes out here.  He didn't initially start doing what I was doing, but it eventually evolved into that, and then they became Power 106.  So the Power thing kind of took off.  The Traffic Jam, every station in the world was doing Traffic Jam, claiming they started it.  The mix shows, nobody was, was really doing it beyond New York [City].  New York started doing mix shows before L.A.  But all of a sudden there's a mix show in every--I mean people took basically bits and pieces of what we did at KDAY and, and took it in other markets, and it was working everywhere.  But they were not allowing--I'd say ninety percent of the people that were allowed to do it were white programmers.  It was not a lot of black programmers that were continued--or considered good enough to do it.  Even to this day there's very few.  I could--God, I couldn't give you three of 'em that are allowed to do it because the corporations want the, the white boy--and I'm not racist (laughter), not at all.  But it does confuse me as to why, you know, somebody like myself, who created it, is not doing it.  But I, I just figured it out.  It's the corporate, you know, it's the way the corporations work.  So there is, when the, took out the--what is that clause for hiring black people, where you had to hire 'em?
Speaker 1: Affirmative action.
Speaker 2: Yeah, when they eliminated affirm- affirmative action, and they didn't have to hire black people, it has really gone south in radio.  That's why you don't see a lot of big black programmers coming up in the, in the game.
Speaker 1: So they hired black employees because they had to, basically?
Speaker 2: Every, every big station had a token.  We used to call it the token black guy, and it was usually the overnight shift.  It was usually midnight to six, you know, that you heard the token black guy.  Now, it's a little different on the East Coast because there's more blacks there.  But when you're talking about the West [Coast], some of the Bible Belt states, you know, you just had your token black guy.
Story_ID: 159224
Speaker 1: So, in 1991, I mean so, K, KDAY [Los Angeles, California] is doing fine even as a FM station until about 1991 or so?  Is that--
Speaker 2: AM, KDAY was always AM--
Speaker 1: Yeah, but--
Speaker 2: --1580.  Yeah, what had happened--are, are we jumping over to the demise of KDAY?
Speaker 1: Well, we don't have to.
Speaker 2: Is that where you're going?
Speaker 1: I just wanna--I, I, I don't--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: I can tell you that--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --KDAY, when I first got there in '83 [1983] was for sale.  And they couldn't sell it because nobody, you know, would buy it 'cause it was losing money.  And so, basically, they were hoping that I could bring the numbers up so that they could continue the sale, which I did. We got the numbers up.  And what had happened was when Power [106, Los Angeles, California] started playing rap on a regular basis, KDAY's sales went down from, you know, I don't the exact numbers, but it was between six and eight million a year in profit.  And the next thing you know it's down to four, down to three (laughter), you know.  So Power was taking a lot of that money.
Speaker 1: So Power is an FM station, right?
Speaker 2: Power 106, yes, was FM.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So the quality, I mean there, there is a quality issue here in terms of AM and FM in those days.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But AM was still doing well until, you know, probably the, the mid-'80s [1980s].  Then the AMs really started to become a news format.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And music people, if you could hear it on FM, why (laughter), you know.  And so, basically, Power 106 switching to our format caused the station to not make as much money.  And they decided that they'd better sell and get what they could, and that's what they did.  They had asked every one of us, even when I first got here.  They said well, if you stay till the sale, we'll give you a one-year salary when we sell.  So nobody was going anywhere (laughter).
Story_ID: 159225
Speaker 1: So in '90 [1990], KJLH [Los Angeles, California] had offered me a job to do mornings.  And I said well, you know, "I'm not going anywhere 'cause KDAY's [KDAY, Los Angeles, California] gonna give me a full year."  They said, "Well, we'll give you a full year to leave."  "Oh, okay," and so they gave me that, and then they gave me the save, same salary.  And they gave me all these bonus clauses for the ratings, hence, the reason Karen Slate doesn't like me because the guy that brought me in and made me that offer is what made her dislike me (laughter).  And he was like, "You can play whatever you want to play."  I mean he was on me about, you know, I couldn't talk too much.  But the first day I go in the station, Karen says, "I never would have paid you that.  I'm not happy about this.  I mean, but if that's what he wants, it's what we're gonna do."  I mean it was like really mean.  I said, "Okay."  And then the, the very first rating book I tripled the morning show ratings, tripled.  And I hit every bonus clause that they gave me in the very first rating book.  And they got so upset that they took me off of mornings and put me on at night so I wouldn't reach my bonuses anymore.  And that--
Speaker 2: Now who, who, who was upset, the--
Speaker 1: Karen--
Speaker 2: Karen, okay.
Speaker 1: And Stevie [Wonder] I was told.  I don't know.  I, I mean Stevie and I would hang out and talk.  Stevie would come on my show and play characters.
Story_ID: 159226
Speaker 1: What, what kind of characters would Stevie [Wonder] play (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, we'd do different characters, and he'd, he'd pretend like he was somebody.  But he never would want me to tell people it was him.  I mean me and him, we got along great, as far as I thought (laughter).  But once I hit those bonus clauses everything changed, and they took me off of mornings.  And it was at that time when I went into--I said you know what, I'm tired of making everybody else rich.  And that's when I went and bought my first radio station and left the L.A. [Los Angeles, California] market.  But you know, I was also signed to Motown.  I got my first record deal at MCA Records when Jehryl Busby, the late Jehryl Busby, was the president there.  And I went to Jehryl.  I said, "Jehryl, you know what, I got an idea."  I said, "I know how to pick hit records."  I said, "Let me do a, do a compilation, and let me sign some groups."  He said, "Okay."  He said, "I'm gonna give you a $150,000 dollar budget."  And so I'm sitting here like, "I just asked you how did you--(laughter)--no problem," so he gave me a record deal, 150,000, which I thought at that time was like, oh, wow.  I didn't know he was giving, you know, Andre Harrell seven or eight hundred thousand, you know.  So we put out a album, or we put together an album, and they didn't release it 'til like two years later.  So we're over here rapping about dope, and the word is fresh.  Everything we were rapping about was old.  And so Jehryl ended up going to Motown as the president.  I said, "Jehryl that was kind of screwed up, dude.  You sat on my album too long."
Speaker 1: So is this the 'KDAY Mack Attack' album or--
Speaker 2: The MCA album was called 'The Mixmasters.'
Speaker 1: 'Mixmasters,' okay.
Speaker 2: And so he signed me at Motown because he felt bad 'cause he sat on it so long.  And we did another compilation called 'What Does It All Mean?'  And even though he put that one out sooner, it flopped too.  What I figured out is that even though you know how to pick records, picking artists is a whole different thing, and developing them records is a whole different thing.  God blessed me with a golden ear to pick hits, but he didn't give me a golden ear on how to make 'em (laughter), you know.  So--
Speaker 1: So 'What Does It All Mean?' features you.  Is this one that features you?
Speaker 2: I rap a song on there--
Speaker 1: A rap song, yeah.
Speaker 2: --about what does it all mean.  You know, what does it mean to be black in soci- society and the different, you know--I don't even remember the words to be honest with you, but I remember that my tone was about being a black man in today's society.  What does it all mean?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And DJ Pooh, who, you know, produced the original 'Friday' movie and King Tee [rapper] and a lot of other stuff, and I think he had something to do with Grand Master Auto, that, that video game.
Speaker 1: Oh, Grand--
Speaker 2: But anyway, he helped me write it--
Speaker 1: --Grand Theft Auto.
Speaker 2: Grand Theft Auto.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: He helped me write it.  I actually performed it one time, which made me realize that I'm not a performer (laughter).  I, I had four dancers.  I mean we was rockin'.  I had on leather pants.  I did the record thing because like I always tell you, I, I like--you know, I'm not afraid to try.  I'm not afraid to try.  And when I did do that KDAY [Los Angeles, California] suspended me from my music director position both times because I couldn't be an artist and a music director.  It's a conflict.  You know, you could get into that payola thing, especially if you, if I played my own songs.  But it was an experience.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there are several DJs that have tried, you know, tried it.  Sly Stone was a DJ before he, yeah.
Speaker 2: Ludacris, the rapper, was a DJ, you know, I heard James Brown was a DJ.  Stevie even tried it.  There's been a lot of, you know, but they, if you owned a station it's a little different.  You can--
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: --do whatever the hell you want to do (laughter).
Story_ID: 159227
Speaker 1: You established Magnificent Communications, Incorporated in 1999, right?
Speaker 2: Magnificent Communications.  I also did Magnificent Broadcasting.  Both of 'em--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --failed.  I learned that it's one thing to be a good programmer.  It's one thing to be a owner.  I, and when I first ventured out, of course I had great success in the ratings right away, but I didn- I didn't have the experience to turn it into dollars.
Speaker 1: You bought a station in Fresno [California] in the six--2008, right?
Speaker 2: I bought one in--my first one was in Porterville [California].  That's KO--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --JJ [KOJJ-FM].  And I think I bought it for like [$]250,000.  MC Hammer helped me buy it.  MC Hammer, it was also the same year he was going bankrupt.  And so he couldn't even finish helping me buy it, so I had to get somebody to cash him out in order to buy it.  And the people that I brought in, God, was one of the worst decisions I made.  The station immediately went from losing thirty thousand [dollars] a month--the first month we made thirty thousand.  It was a Spanish station.  What I figured out through one of my Spanish friends is that these guys were selling commercials, and they'd read 'em live, so it wasn't on the books.  So once I stopped all of that, and the people had to actually pay the station, thirty thousand the first month.  And so these people that I brought in to buy out Hammer, they saw that, and they were like--'cause we were gonna turn the station rhythmic and increase the signal.  I mean it was a big plan.  And so they came into the station, and they, the two men of the group walked into the station.  Each one of 'em pulled a gun in front of me and .357, I remember it, and they said you, "We don't want you as part of the company anymore."  And I said, "Whoa, you can't exactly do that 'cause it's my company.  How are you gonna kick me out of my company?"  So, one of 'em just twirled his gun around.  That's how.  He didn't say anything.  He just said--he twirled it around.  He said that's how.  And I'm sitting there like, you know, so okay, so I got up and walked out, didn't even have a ride home.  I said, "Will one of y'all give--at least give me a ride home?"  "Nope."  So finally, one of 'em's wife gave me a ride home.  And, 'cause Porterville [California]--I was staying in Fresno [California].  It was like forty-five minutes to an hour drive.  And that's how I lost my first radio station, upon which I sued, and I won.  And then they filed what is called a surety bond, or they appealed it.  And so the judge said, "Okay, both of y'all gotta put up a surety bond, a half a million dollars."  I didn't have a half a million dollars.  I'd put all my money in the radio station, so they won.  They won the station because I couldn't put up a surety bond.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is--(unclear)--so ownership is--
Speaker 2: That's how I learned radio business (laughter).
Story_ID: 159228
Speaker 1: These are the people I dealt with--and oh, oh, and it gets better.  You know, the station that you're talking about in Fresno [California], I ended up losing that one because one of the investors, who put up a small share, mind you, ended up being one of the--got busted--one of the biggest drug dealers in Fresno.  And so, the news people just jumped on us.  It was on the news here in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], saying that, you know, a radio station ran by drug money, you know.  First of all, we checked him out.  He checked out fine.  I checked out everybody I deal with financially.  And you know, come to find out that, you know, there was something there.  But you know, after the feds [FBI, Federal Bureau of Investigation], who called me one day and said, "We're coming out there to shut the station down," and I said you know, "No, you're not.  We didn't do anything," so they came out there, and they talked to me--and you know, my first run-in with the FBI--and after they looked through all our books, looked through our bank account, they said, "Yeah, you're right.  You didn't have nothing to do with it.  We're gonna leave you guys alone.  We're sorry," da, da, da, da.  So they told the news people 'cause the news people were swarming us.  I said, "I wish you'd get on there and tell 'em we had nothing to do with it."  So they did, and the news people ran it one time, and then they never mentioned us again.  But in the meanwhile, all the radio stations had taken these news stories and clippings and blah, blah, blah and sent it to all our advertisers.  And so our advertising went from like eighty thousand a month down to thirty thousand a month within thirty days.  It was just, it was just crazy.  So, that's how I lost one of my stations.  And then I've had other losses in Spokane, Washington, Eureka [California], where I've lost my stations, mainly because--and a, and another one in Fresno--mainly because of partners not, you know, following the blueprint, doing stupid things.  I learned a lot. (Simultaneous) I learned a lot.
Speaker 2: Do you think you'll ever try that station ownership again?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I do. I will (laughter) 'cause I know it all now.  There's not much you can tell me.  But I'd rather go into business for myself because partners, it's a, it's a hard thing.  Especially, one of the, one of the problems I have with radio is the fact that I make it look so easy.  I win so easy.  You're so successful so quick.  You don't understand it, and you're like, I can do that.  What do we need him for?  But they don't understand.  You know, when you're good at what you do, it's supposed to look easy, you know.  I don't think, and this is not me being arrogant or cocky, but I don't think that there's any programmer, given the same signal--I've gotten beat before because he's got a hundred thousand watts, and I got thirty thousand--but given the same signal, I don't think there's a programmer that can beat me.  I could say that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I may never get the opportunity to find out (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Well, let's hope so, but--
Speaker 1: --you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 159229
Speaker 1: Now you joined The WAVE [KTWV, Los Angeles, California] in 2013, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: And this is at the, at the, at the present time you don't own any stations, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have a syndicated show.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We're aired in Lancaster/Palmdale [California], Waco, Texas, San Diego [California], and Bakersfield [California].  And you know, we're getting ready to launch a reality show in 2015, 'The Greg Mack Show.'  And the show is built, built upon us getting into other markets and getting the show in the markets and all the drama that goes on with it.  And you know, I also promote a lot of concerts and some clubs, and--
Speaker 1: Is the reality show a, a radio show or TV--
Speaker 2: It is a takeoff of the radio show.  It's like what goes on behind the scenes at the radio show.
Speaker 1: But it's on the radio, not on TV?
Speaker 2: 'The Greg Mack Show' radio syndicated show is on the radio.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: The reality show will be on TV.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's what I was getting at, yeah, okay.  So it's gon' be behind the scenes--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I was doing the show on the WAVE, 'The Greg Mack Show.'  They took it off when the new program director came in because he said it didn't fit what he was doing, which I understand, because they did kind of change the direction.  But I still wanted to work.  I enjoyed the station.  I hope to be here as long as they'll have me and hopefully get to do more than just weekends, you know.  I, I, I like, you know, every, the vibe here.  Everybody, everybody here is just really cool.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You appeared on an HBO special on the history of hip hop.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that'll be out in 2015.  HBO is doing four--what is it, four?  I think it's four two-hour specials.  It's pretty long, pretty extensive on the history of hip hop.  And I don't how I'm going to end up in that thing.  It's kind of interesting to me that when they do these histories and these documentaries they usually are not accurate.  That's why I'm trying to do, you know, my book to get the accurate story out.  I do want to do a documentary of my version because everybody has a version.  Everybody sees things differently.  Just like, you know, with 1580 KDAY [Los Angeles, California], there could probably be a hundred different movies about it of what it meant to certain people.  I can only do the one about how it, how it happened.  Nobody knows that.  So I'm hoping before I die that I get to do that and tell the real true story because there are so many myths.  There are so many people that have taken claim to what I did, and I've never gotten to--I never really cared to.  I just figured people would know.  You know, you're gonna know.  You know, that was Greg Mack that did that.  But so many people have--the younger people, I can ask them, you know, "What do you know about 15?"  "Oh, yeah, so and so did da, da, da, da."  And I'm like, "So and so wasn't even there."  "Well, he said--"and they're selling 1580 KDAY shirts and you know, and I'm sitting here like, wow.  So I think, I think I need to speak up because the, the history has been changed right in front of me.  And so that's why I'm very vocal now, and I'm just very honest about things.  People need to know, and I'll set the record straight.  And a lot of people will be embarrassed by it, but you know, people need to know.  Even today there's people at other stations that have come to me and said you know, "You started all of this, but yet I've seen them in interviews, and they take claim for it."  It doesn't put any my, money in my pocket if they say that, but at the same time, it distorts history.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And one thing out of place throws the rest of it out of place, you know.  The premise is wrong, everything else is wrong.
Speaker 2: Well, it's given a whole new terminology to the term his story.  That's his story.
Story_ID: 159230
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point in your career, is there anything major that you would redo if you could?  I know there must be, with, with from what you know now about ownership.
Speaker 2: Well, business-wise, yeah, there's a lot I'd do, but a lot of it you just have to learn.  And nobody could have taught me because there was nobody doing it.  Personally, yeah, there's a lot I would have done differently.  I'd probably be still married to my first wife--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: You've been married now what, three--
Speaker 2: Three times--
Speaker 1: --Three--
Speaker 2: Three times.  And I'm, I'm gon' get married again (laughter).  I'm gon' keep doing it till I get it right.  But I think with my first wife was the best situation.  She--you know, I just wasn't ready.  It was my first girlfriend, and I got in this crazy thing called radio.  And, and you know, we have groupies just like rock 'n' roll stars, and I got caught up in that.  I would do that different.  But business-wise, I don't know that, even though I failed, and I had all those oth- those, those failures, I, I don't think that I'd done it any differently. I really don't.
Story_ID: 159231
Speaker 1: When I think about you coming from a rural background, raising hogs at the state fair, and you know, coming to being involved in really a complicated urban, you know, radio market, you know, and I mean it's something to consider.  When you look at everything you've done to this point, again, what today would you consider to be your legacy in the business?
Speaker 2: I always tell people, I said you know, I know that there's been a movie done about it where, you know, country boy comes into town and changes the whole world.  But I was a country boy.  I pulled up to KDAY [Los Angeles, California] in a black pickup with a grey camper shell, and a cowboy hat, and my cowboy boots.  And I walked in the station. The receptionist looks at me like, you know, "Who the hell?"  (Laughter) You know.  And, and then when meeting the, the rappers and the gang members and all of that, I think that the reason that they accepted me, and opened up to me, and allowed me to ride their coattails--that's the way I tell people, people that have said you know, "If it wasn't for you, there'd be no N.W.A. [Niggaz Wit Attitudes]."  I say, "If there was no N.W.A., there'd be no me," because if I'd have played these guys, and they bombed, that means my ratings would have bombed.  So it was because they were successful.  I, I always say that God used me to channel it.  But I, I don't think I'd, I don't, I think, I think my legacy is to be that, you know, that this country guy came in here and you know, kind of shook up things and wasn't afraid of anybody, even when I heard that record companies, 'cause I did hear this on a couple of occasions, that they wanted to break my legs because I wouldn't play their records.  I was over here playing this rap stuff.  The--
Speaker 1: And that was a tense juncture in the business, right?
Speaker 2: It didn't scare me at all that I heard that, you know, people were pissed off, you know, when the record stores wouldn't even carry rap, that, you know, that's novelty stuff.  We're not, we're never gonna do that. That the record companies wouldn't even pick up rap artists.  They were, it was all independent when we, you know, started doing it, that KDAY wouldn't even let me carry my show unless I bought time.  I was KDAY's biggest advertiser for a few years, just to carry the show.  I was, I was just a country boy that just wasn't scared of nothing, not that I could fight.  I can't fight.  I, I just knew what I believed, and we were having fun.  We were having a lot of fun.  We didn't realize we were creating a direction, a movement, a history.  As Jheryl Busby told me one time, he said, "You created a whole new genre."  He said, "You allowed for mom and pop record stores that weren't doing so well, all of a sudden they're making a killing.  These kids that would have ended up in gangs, now they're major stars, millionaires.  You know, radio in general that may have been going through whatever it was going through it created a whole new format.  And you helped save a lot of stations," because once it caught on in every city, everybody would, you know, there'd be some great consultant that would go in there and say, "Hey, I'm gon' start a rhythmic."  And it'd go to number one, and he'd look like a hero.  So yeah, I, I know about, you know, what all I did.  I'd like for that to be my legacy, that people will finally realize that ripple in the ocean that I started.
Story_ID: 159232
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: My hopes and concerns for the black community is that the black community realize that a lot of the movement that we made from the '60s [1960s] from [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] to [HM Reverend] Jesse [Jackson] to, you know, even [HM Reverend] Al [Sharpton] are being pushed back, and that a lot of the liberties that we took for granted, like even voting, is being pushed back.  I hope that the black community will wake up and realize that.  And the only way that they're gonna change that is to vote, even though they're trying to take that too, and understand that [HM] President [Barack] Obama has been fought tooth and nail ever since he became president.  He pissed off a whole bunch of people.  And the Tea Party is a derivative of that.  And I'm not getting into politics 'cause that's--I've lost a few friends talking about that.  But I will say that in my opinion, that is a derivative of him becoming president.  And so it has caused a lot of pushback.  Black people need to realize that we are powerful, but we gotta vote.  You gotta get out and vote.  You gotta know the issues.  I'm not saying go vote because the president is black or go vote because it's a Democrat.  You know, there's been some Republicans that I thought did a good job.  You know, there's been some Independents that I thought would make a good president, but you gotta vote.  You gotta stay active.  And I also wanna say for Christians, quit being so hypocritical. Don't just believe that you go to church on Sunday, that you've made God happy.  Be Christian every day.  And you don't have to tell everybody what you did.  Just do it.  Help people, and even if it's only a couple of people.  You know, try and reach out and help people, and don't sit there and put people down or feel like you're uppity because you go to church.  But if you go to church, live it.
Story_ID: 159233
Speaker 1: What role do you think the black radio stations should play in a, in the community?
Speaker 2: Well, here's the thing, first of all, there's not very many black radio stations left except in the South.  And, and, and you know, even New York [City, New York] has lost its soul.  But, and I think Chicago [Illinois] still has some.  You, you would know that better than me, but it's a dying breed.  I thank God every day for Los Angeles [California] that Stevie's [Stevie Wonder] still around.  Stevie could have made, you know, crazy runaway money by selling that station [KJLH, Los Angeles, California] years ago.  And his feeling was that then the black community would have no voice.  He's rare.  Even though I disliked my, the way my relationship ended over there, I'd, I've admired him from afar.  I don't know at this time if black radio or any radio is gonna be a big difference in about ten years 'cause I think at that time is when Internet radio will be a huge factor.  And you're gonna see terrestrial radio, as we call it, the power of it diminished.  It's diminishing now.  And what you're gonna see is sort of like what ABC [American Broadcasting Company], NBC [National Broadcasting Company], CBS went through when HBO [Home Box Office] came on, and CNN [Cable News Network] came on, and all these other companies.  Everybody was like, "Oh no, they're gonna die," they're gonna--they're still around.  Terrestrial radio will still be around, but it'll be a lot smaller piece of the pie.  You've seen companies, major companies like Clear Channel, this pyramid, this money pyramid that they've built that they keep borrowing Peter, from Peter to pay Paul, borrowing Peter, pay Paul.  Eventually that will crumble.  It can't continue that course, you know.  And I think that when that crumbles, as in anything, like a nightclub when a nightclub is going down, they start allowing black promoters.  You can't get black people into a club until it starts going down.  Then all of a sudden, oh yeah, we want black people, you know.  And you're gonna see that I think when the pyramid falls with all of these corporate owners.  And that's when you'll see some black owners.  Oh, the black people been wanting to buy stations for a long time.  Let's sell 'em some (laughter), you know, but it'll be a diminishing business.  I think you'll see a lot of black stations then, but it'll be kind of irrelevant because Internet radio will be just as powerful.
Story_ID: 159234
Speaker 1: Tell us about your family.  You, you got, I know you have a daughter and a, and a son?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, I--you mean personally?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I have five children.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Okay, I have a daughter and a son, from my first wife.  My second wife and I did not have children.  My third wife, we had a child.  And I had two--well, I had one that I didn't find out about.  It's kind of interesting, someone that I was with when I was in Texas.  And I don't even remember her.  I, it was one of those nights (laughter), but we had a daughter out of that.  And then I have, between my first and second marriage, I had a child with a lady.  So those are my five kids, and I have six grandkids and most likely will have more on the way (laughter) 'cause I think my son's getting ready to get married, so--
Speaker 1: Any of them interested in the, the media at all?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: In, in, any one of them interested in the media?
Speaker 2: In their own way, like my son, he's, you know, wanting to do something different.  He always talk 'cause I say, "Come on, son, get in radio."  "Ah, I don't want to be in radio," but now he DJs at clubs sometimes. He mixes.  My daughter, she's a pastor, and so in her own way, I guess she is a DJ but for the Lord.  My other daughter is a--what do you call it--a psychiatrist, so she went on to become that doctor.  And my daughter that I, I don't really know, 'cause I've only met her once, I'm not sure what she's doing.  But my other daughter is, well, she's eleven years old, so we're gonna see, but she's smart as a button.  And I think she's gonna be bigger than all of 'em.  She was diagnosed with juvenile, juvenile diabetes about two years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what did your parents [Willie Grace McMillan and Monroe Everett] think of your success?  Now, now they were in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], right, when you, when you moved here--
Speaker 2: My parents had moved.  I don't, I don't, you know what, I don't think my family really knew what to think.  When I first started doing it, they were like, oh, wow, that's good.  You know, they weren't really--'cause they didn't, you know, they, they--well, that was in San Antonio [Texas], so I wasn't really on the radio there.  I know that they stayed up that time when I did that one hour.  They were all excited.  And then in Corpus Christi [Texas], you know, we didn't have streaming then, so they couldn't really hear me.  So I didn't really have any family there.  It was only after I got to Houston [Texas] that they were like, oh, wow, and so they started to take notice.  And then when I come to L.A., and they really started to take notice, and--I think that, I, I think that, in fact, I know my mom is, is proud.  She's proud this little shift I do at The WAVE [Los Angeles, California].  She listens online.  She downloaded the app on her phone.  She, you know, I'm sure 'cause she's in Texas now, I'm sure she'll be listening tonight with the family around.  So mom's real proud. Of course my brother [Danny Everett], who I can't say enough about 'cause he's been there, you know, for me through some rough times.  And so my family is real supportive.  I think that they've seen me get stations, lose stations, work here, work there.  They really don't know what to think.  You know, this is a crazy business.  And you know, we'll see.
Story_ID: 159235
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I can't think of anything.  It's been pretty thorough.  I'm sure that there's a lot of things that I haven't touched upon, but that's just particular artists.  But you know, that'll be in the book.  I can't think of anything--
Speaker 1: Okay, so we--
Speaker 2: --Important, like major important.
Speaker 1: --So we're waiting on the book, and so when the book comes out, sign a copy and send it to The HistoryMakers (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, I'll send it HistoryMakers, and then you guys, you know, anything I forgot--
Speaker 1: We'll put it in the archive box with the rest of the material and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it's kind of funny too because I do so many documentaries.  And to tell the story over and over and over, I forget sometimes.  "Okay, well, did I, did I tell him this?  Did I tell him that?  Because I know I did it over here.  Did I do it over here?"  And I, and I've kind of gotten away from that.  I've turned down a lot of people wanting me on documentaries.  A, I started seeing some of 'em, and the quality was terrible.  I'm like, "Oh, man, I can't put my name down on this." B, the, the last one that I did before you guys the guy was trying to tell me, "Nah, you didn't start that guy.  I started that guy, and this is how we did it, and da, da."  I was like, "Dude, you're asking me a question, and you're gonna sit here and try and get me to agree with your history on camera, no."  And so I just said, "Let me just, I'll do my own."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause everybody, like I said, it's amazing, it's amazing how much misinformation there is about the history of what, what went on.
Story_ID: 159236
Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different. It's more personal.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: What I like to be remembered?  You're talking about when I die?
Speaker 1: Yeah, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'll tell you what, here's the thing, when I die, I want people when they get up and they speak about me, they can say you know what, he was, he was a, he was always straight with me.  And he always shot straight whether I wanted to hear it or I didn't hear it.  He helped me whether I offered to help him.  He did everything for the community that was asked of him and then some.  He changed radio and the way that people know it.  Even though there's a bigger, you know, puzzle to radio, he changed a certain piece of that puzzle.  He helped a lot of people in the rap game.  You know, it's quite possible that the rapper--rap game would still be a multibillion dollar business that it is now with him or without him, but he, he was a part of that.  And who knows if it would have went the same way.  I don't know.  I feel like it probably would have, but I just helped it get there quicker.  So I just want people to, you know, if you, if you're speaking at my funeral and y'all are showing this right now (laughter) just know that I always tried to do the right thing.  Yeah, I had weaknesses.  You know, I wasn't the best family man, you know, that I should have been.  But you know, I always had this thing of work hard, play hard that I've grown out of now.  But it took me fifty-somethin' years to grow out of it.  But I just want people to remember that, that, you know, that I always tried to do the right thing.  Whether I did, didn't, I always tried to do the right thing.
