Story_ID: 158702
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My full name is Terry Mason, T-E-R-R-Y, M-A-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: All right.  No middle name?
Speaker 2: No middle name.
Speaker 1: No nicknames?
Speaker 2: No nicknames.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I guess I should say that for my birth certificate, it is actually spelled T-E-R-R-I-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I haven't used that since second grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, can you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is September 13, 1951.  And I was born in Washington, D.C. at Freedmen's Hospital.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, Howard University [Hospital, Washington D.C.], right?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir, that's what it is now.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 1: I am currently the chief medical officer for the Cook County Health and Hospital system.
Speaker 2: And what is today's date?
Speaker 1: Today is April 20, 2012.
Speaker 2: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 1: I'm in the studio at The HistoryMakers.
Story_ID: 158703
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask, and they only require a short answer; they're sort of a warmup.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: Apple pie.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, blue.
Speaker 1: All right.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Somewhere warm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, from a friend of a good friend of mine that i-- "Everything is in divine order."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 158704
Speaker 1: All right, now I'm going to ask about your family history.  And I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but separately.  So, I'll ask about your mother first and then your father.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then we'll get them together so that we don't get them mixed up.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Clarice, C-L-A-R-I-C-E.  And at the time of her death she was Clarice Johnson.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Fortune.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: June 5, 1925.
Speaker 1: And where?
Speaker 2: I think in Arkansas someplace.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?  Can you go all the way back to slavery days?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Can you trace them back that far?
Speaker 2: No, just my grandmother [Grace Perkins], that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what was your grandmother doing for a living, and where was she living?
Speaker 2: My grandmother, when I met her was here in Chicago [Illinois].  And I'm not sure what kind of work she was doing at the time, I was very young.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Grace Fortune.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Grace Perkins, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you're not sure what she was doing.  Well, was she working at all?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was working, but I don't know doing what.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, what about your grandfather?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: What kind of work was he doing?
Speaker 1: Well, what was, what was his name? Where was he from? (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, Moses Fortune. Moses Fortune.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure where he was born.
Speaker 1: But your mother was born in Arkansas somewhere?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Does that put your grandparents in Arkansas, I guess at that point?  Or just your grandmother?
Speaker 2: My grandmother, all I know is that they were there for a while.  I don't know where he was born, but I know they were in Arkansas for a while.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You're not sure if it was Little Rock [Arkansas] or Pine Bluff [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no.  It was a place called--just outside of Conway [Arkansas].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Are there any stories that have passed down?
Speaker 2: About?
Speaker 1: From your grandparents about what was going in Arkansas or in Chicago [Illinois] when they were alive.
Speaker 2: No.  I didn't know, I didn't know my grandfather very well until I was a little older.  And then it was not a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, it doesn't have to be anything profound necessarily, but what side of town they might have lived on, what they were--you know.
Speaker 2: Oh, I know where my grandmother lived.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She lived over on Lafayette [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ninety-fifth, just off of 95th on Lafayette.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And my grandfather, for a time, he actually lived with us when he was here until he later got re-married and he lived I think on the Westside, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Now, these are my biological people you're talking about, right?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But if there's somebody else in your life, too, you know, that's around that's related in some way to your upbringing, then you know, it's good to talk about them, too.  Because we're trying to get your life story, not just a biology, you know.  So--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, if there's somebody else--step people and all that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Cousins or the children of the step--you know--
Speaker 2: Because the grandfather I grew up knowing was my grandmother on my stepfather's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then the other grandfather I knew was my grandmother's husband, who wasn't my grandfather, but it was my, I guess, stepfather, if you want to call it that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, those are the ones I knew growing up.  So, I knew my grandfather on my stepfather's side.  I guess that would be my first stepfather.
Story_ID: 158705
Speaker 1: Now, what were some of these people doing?  And did what they were doing influence you in any way, you know, in terms of what you saw coming up?
Speaker 2: My grandfather on my grandmother's, my maternal grandmother's [Grace Perkins] husband, Mr. Perkins, he was, I mean he was a great guy.  I just, I remember we grew up, this is before the Dan Ryan Expressway [Chicago, Illinois] was built.  And we used to, when I was living there, we would play in what we called the ditch.  Because that's what they were digging, you know, to put the hole for the expressway.  But I think the most fond memories I have is going to work with him.  He worked at a place, he was a janitor at a place called Wurlitzer.  These are the people who make pianos and organs.  And we would have to be there--we would leave I guess 3:30 in the morning, 3 or 4:30 in the morning to get there, because he was the janitor and he had to clean up the place before the store opened.  And he would be cleaning up and I'd be in there, and he'd just let me, I'd play on the organ and play on the piano.  And I guess the most fond memory I have of him is that he always spoke positive words into my life.  He always told me that I was going to be something good one day, and that I was, he always said that I was a blessed child.  That's what he always used to tell me.  And every day we would go, and after, on the weekends when I'd go there we would always leave and go to a place called Burny Brothers.  It was a bakery in Evergreen Park [Chicago, Illinois].  And then we had to--and that was at the time Evergreen Plaza, which is where the store was, in Evergreen Plaza--all of it was open.  It wasn't closed like it is now.  And we would leave there and go to Burny Brothers and pick up the cake.  And then we'd go to the Walgreen's and we'd buy Sealtest ice cream.  And then we had to get, we had to leave, because we couldn't be there too long.  Because the mall, the area at that time was predominantly white, and this was in the '50s [1950s].  And so, we had to leave, you know, we couldn't stay in the mall.  So, we had to get on the bus and come home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you mean you had to leave because it wasn't a very good idea to stay there very long?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't, you know.  Because people--you didn't see, you know, we were tolerated to be there to do the cleaning and that sort of stuff.  But after then, you know, people would look at us strangely, and you could hear them saying things sometimes.  And so he would just, he'd say, "Come on, we've got to go," and we'd get back on--you know, where we lived.  And so, we rode the train.  I'll always remember the streetcar was an electric car.  And sometimes the little electric thing came off of the wire. And the bus guy would have to stop and go out and get that pole and pull it down and get it back on the wire, on the way back home.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was a big, you know, like a connection to an overhead wire?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this an aspect of de facto segregation in Chicago [Illinois], I guess, where it's not exclusively said you can't be someplace, but you kind of know?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  And because you don't feel welcome.  And I would ask him, and he--I would ask him, I'd say, "Why are they staring, and making, you know, faces like that?"  And he would, you know, he wouldn't say anything.  He just said, "Let's go get our, you know, we're just going to get our cake and our ice cream."  Because my grandmother would always have that for us for after dinner on Sunday.  I spent a lot of--when my mom came here, we spent time, I spent a lot of time there, until she married my first stepfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then things changed?
Speaker 2: I, well, I would still go to my grandmother's house even through--you know, when I got old enough to take the bus, I would still go over there sometimes and spend the weekends there.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Because it was just, you know, I was comfortable with it.  I'd been there a lot, and I got to know them quite well.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 158706
Speaker 1: So, did your mother [Clarice Fortune Johnson] share any stories about growing up with you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she grew up with her grandparents.  She grew up with her grandmother, and she always told me about her grandmother always had this apron.  And there was a TV program called 'The Beverly Hillbillies,' I don't know if you remember it.  But she would always tell me that Granny on the 'Beverly Hillbillies' reminded her of her grandmother, because she was a small, wiry woman who was just like that.  And so, that was, that was some of the stuff.  But it was, we lived, actually we lived in an apartment over on 95th and Wentworth [Avenue in Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I remember it was a basement apartment, and the only thing I can remember that happened a lot is I was sick a lot, because it was a concrete floor.  The apartment just had a concrete floor, and it was kind of dusty, and I know I had a respiratory issue.  So, I spent a lot of time in the hospital.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, I'm going to, we're going to ask about your childhood and all that.  I just want to know if your mother had any stories she told you about her growing up, and what it was like for her, and how she got to be who she was.
Speaker 2: Sure she would say how tough it was for them in the South.  They grew up down in Arkansas, you know, and she didn't, couldn't go to school.  She only went to the second grade, and they had to do a lot of work before they could go to even do that.  And they had to walk long distances to school, and how they didn't really learn very much, you know, from her grandmother.  And I never knew why her mother [Grace Perkins] left and came to Chicago [Illinois], how she got here.  We never got a chance to talk about that a lot, but those were the things that I remember.  And I remember that she would talk about her father, my grandfather [Moses Fortune].  He would come home, he would come down there once in a while.  And she said he would see them, but there was a lot of domestic violence between her and between my grandmother and my grandfather.  And so when he was home, he wasn't there long.  And then that was about it.
Speaker 1: Did he drink?  Was that part of it, or--?
Speaker 2: I don't know that he drank.  She didn't, I don't remember her telling me about him being--he just had a very bad temper, she said.
Story_ID: 158707
Speaker 1: So, what did your mother [Clarice Fortune Johnson] do when she came to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Well, she came to Chicago, she came to Chicago really not to visit per se.  I guess when we talk about the children, then I can tell you more about how that came to pass.  But she came basically to kind of save her life (pause). From my father [Jessie Mason (ph.)].
Story_ID: 158708
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  All right, now let's, well, let me go then to your father, your biological father.  And what is his name, and can you spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Jessie, I think it's J-E-S-S, I think it's I-E, I'm not sure.  I never knew him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mason.
Speaker 1: And do you know what his date of birth is?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Was he older than your mother [Clarice Fortune Johnson], you think?
Speaker 2: I guess they were around the same age, I don't know.  I mean, I never knew him.  I never talked to him, I never saw him.  So, the only thing I have is that picture.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I knew, all I knew is that--I didn't come to find out about him until he died.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was, he died when he was about, I think thirty-nine or so-thirty-six, thirty-nine, somewhere around in there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you know where he was born, or where he was from, or where he grew up?
Speaker 2: I think, I think he was from Arkansas.  They all grew up down in that area.  I don't know for sure if he was born in the same place or not.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what did you find out about him later?  I know the photo that we looked at earlier, he was in a [U.S.] Military uniform.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: He was carrying a horn, I think, wasn't he?
Speaker 2: Probably a rifle.
Speaker 1: Oh, a rifle, I'm sorry.  Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I never knew him, I never talked to him.  I didn't know who he was.  The only thing I know about my father was from what my mother told me.  And I didn't know that my first stepfather was not my father.  I learned about my real father because my mother, as I told you, only had a second grade education.  So when she, when she got a letter and she wanted to know what it was, she would bring it to me to read it to her.  So, when the Veterans Administration [VA] sent a letter indicating that my father had died, and that there were survivors' benefits for myself and my two other brothers and my sister, that's when I learned that the man that I thought was my father wasn't, and that I had other brothers and sisters that I never knew.
Speaker 1: So, okay, so Jessie Mason was a veteran of World War II [WWII], I would think, right, in that era?  If your mother was born in '25 [1925], that sounds about right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, about right.
Speaker 1: A World War II vet.  Do you know anything about where he served or anything?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Did you get any communication from the VA about that?
Speaker 2: No, I don't recall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, but you had some benefits that you and your brother were able to--
Speaker 2: My brother, my two brothers and my sister by my father.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, you were able to collect these benefits.
Speaker 2: Well, they were, they were used.  She got survivors' benefits as long as I was in college, up through college.  And, but, more importantly that's when I learned about my other two brothers and sisters.  And then I decided that one day I would want to meet them.
Story_ID: 158709
Speaker 1: And it was about, oh, let's see.  I was just graduating from grammar school when that happened.  So, it was '64 [1964] or '65 [1965] when I went to high school.
Speaker 2: So, you were about thirteen when you found out?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  Okay, so, benefits I guess would include--they used to have the National Defense Student Loan programs, where if you wanted to go to college you would get a student loan based on--
Speaker 1: Well, at the time, by the time I started to go to college, my mother [Clarice Fortune Johnson] had separated from my first stepfather [Thomas Johnson].  So by that time I was in college, and we were--she was working as a person who cleaned the rooms at the hotel, the Hilton Hotel.  She used to do, before then she did what they called day work.  And she would clean the houses of people that lived in what I came to know as the Jackson Park Highlands [Chicago, Illinois].  That's where she cleaned houses.  She went there and cleaned houses, then she'd come back home.  And then by that time, when she separated and we found her again, she was working at the Hilton [Hotel].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, what were you able to--later on, were you able to find out anything about your father [Jessie Mason], or meet any of your siblings?
Speaker 1: Yes, in 19--let's see, I went to college in '69 [1969].  And there was a conference in Washington, D.C.  And so, I started writing my brothers and my sisters and staying in touch, trying to stay in touch and trying to recap.  And we hooked up for the first time when I was about eighteen or nineteen years old.  So, I met them for the first time.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Are you still in touch with them?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, did they tell you anything about your dad?
Speaker 1: No, they grew up in foster homes.  I think they saw him maybe a few more times than I did.  But they were very small when all of that happened.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, did you ever find out anything much about him?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Other than what my uncles that I came to know when I starting going--we decided to put together sort of a reunion.  And so I went down, and my uncles and some of the people that were in Arkansas knew, they knew him obviously.  And they told me, you know, some things, but not very much.  They told me had a nickname and he had a temper.  But not a whole lot, you know, just really not much.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I got to know my cousins, who were his brother's children.  And I got to know some of, I got to know one of my older, one of my uncles, who was still living at that time.  So I got to know him, and I got to know all my cousins, my first cousins that I didn't know existed.  And I got to know some more about other parts of the family, because, you know, that whole half of the family I was disconnected from, because I didn't know.
Speaker 2: So, did they have roots in Arkansas?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, a lot of them did.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I found out there were roots in Arkansas, Tennessee, North Carolina, I mean the Carolinas, you know, just all over the place.  And what I'm trying to do now is reconnect with the Mason side of the family to try and put that back together.  I did get a chance to see the burial plot in Arkansas for my grandfather on my father's side.  And when I came to my grandmother on my father's side, her funeral, and that was the first time that we got a chance to get together.  But I didn't know much about her, I didn't know her at all.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 158710
Speaker 1: So, for years you thought that your first stepfather was your father?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, what, what is his name?
Speaker 2: Thomas Johnson.
Speaker 1: Thomas Johnson.  Now, do you know his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was born in Mississippi.  I don't know exactly where, but in Mississippi.  And he, let me see, he was younger than my mother.  October, when was his birthday?  It's October--I get them all confused.  It was in October, I don't remember the year.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: He worked in the steel mill.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Youngstown Sheet and Tube, I remember that much.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, what was he like, and how did he influence you growing up?
Speaker 2: He was a, he was an okay guy until he drank.  And so, and he, you know, we went fishing, you know, we would do things.  And we would, whenever we would go to the movies--because my mother had four more children by him.  And there were ten of us altogether.  And there's four different fathers in the family.  So, he would, we would go the drive-in, and I'd probably be the only one that would be up watching the movie with him.  And up until the time he drank, he was really a great guy.  And, but when he would drink, which was at least once--he'd drink heavily at least once a week, and then he was a different person.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was he an abusive person?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: When he got drunk?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. He was verbally abusive, and physically abusive at least once or twice a week to my mother [Clarice Fortune Johnson], sometimes requiring hospitalization and things of that nature.  And as I got older, I didn't, you know, we didn't like that, but she would never let us get between him and her.  But, you know, she would always make us go away when that was happening, go down to our bedrooms and stuff.  But it was a very painful situation growing up, having to see that--you know, shotguns, and beating her with pots when she was pregnant, and beating her head with high heel shoes, and blood running down her--I mean it was just all kinds of stuff.
Speaker 1: That sounds like its rough, you know.  So--
Speaker 2: And then I never, I mean, she left, you know, she left him.  But she didn't want to do it until we were old enough to be able to take care of ourselves.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then shortly after that, you know, then some of the abuse turned toward me.  And like I said, when he wasn't drinking, he was a different person.  But it got to a point where he was always drinking.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how old were you when your mother left your stepfather?
Speaker 2: We were still living over on--I was in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, probably, what, sixteen or seventeen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I'll ask about it when he get to that point in the narrative.  But I just wanted to know something about him for now.  Now, you got another stepfather after him, right?  But you were, you were in college by then, right?
Speaker 2: Right, and they never married.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, but, he's the father of my little sister, my last sister.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, your biological father was the father of you and--
Speaker 2: My two brothers and my sister.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it's one, four, four, and one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I have my older sister who is my--all of us have the same mother.  But my older sister has one father, and the next four have one father, and then the next four, and then the last one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, there's four different fathers in the family.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, let's see.  When you think about your, all of the people I guess we talked about--the grandparents, step-grandparents, your stepfather and your mother, you know, grandmother, everybody--who do you think in the family you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I mean, I guess there's traits.  I mean, I didn't know my father [Jessie Mason] enough to know whether I have any of his traits.  So, I don't know.  And my mother, other than perhaps her tenacity, to stick through adversity.  But I really, really don't know, I really don't.
Story_ID: 158711
Speaker 1: Can you name your siblings for us?  And you're the second oldest, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, can you name them all in order, so we can--
Speaker 2: By name?
Speaker 1: No.  Can you name all your brothers and sisters in the order in which they come up?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My oldest sister is Betty [Wilson].  There's Betty, then there is Jesse [Mason], then Connie [Mason], then Donald [Mason], then me, then Georgia [Johnson], then Thomas [Johnson.], Jr., then Mark [Johnson], then Lonnie [Johnson], and then Annette [Johnson.].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're the youngest of your biological father's [Jessie Mason] children?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 158712
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yeah, falling down the steps with my bicycle [sic, tricycle], trying to take my bike after my grandmother told me not to.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a painful memory.
Speaker 2: You don't forget that one.  (Laughter).  And then going--I remember in kindergarten--don't ask me why I remember her name, but I don't know what it was.  But Mrs. Moreland, who was my kindergarten teacher at Gillespie School... I went to Gillespie [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois].  It's still standing over on, was it State Street around 94th?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So that, and playing in the ditch, you know, being careful to go out there.  Because it was all clay, and it was, as I said, they were digging the Dan Ryan [Expressway].
Speaker 1: Now, are these your, is this your earliest memory?  I mean, do you have an earliest memory, or are these just some childhood memories?
Speaker 2: Well, the earliest one is falling down with the bike.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My tricycle, I should say.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: It wasn't a bike, it was my tricycle.
Speaker 1: All right, okay, that makes more sense. All right.
Story_ID: 158713
Speaker 1: We're talking about growing up and one of the questions we always ask is what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?  And I guess we have to put this in context.  Now, you grew up on 95th and Wentworth [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I grew up there, to a point.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then we moved, and then the next move was--yeah, we moved a few times.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, if I thought about--you mean at different points?
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, mostly.  Is there any particular area in Chicago [Illinois] that you really grew up in?
Speaker 2: I was in Englewood.  That's where, you know, most of my pre-teen, teen years were.  We moved to Englewood in '58 [1958].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I lived there from '58 [1958] until almost '67 [1967], around 1967.  And the sights and sounds that were most memorable to me were the sights of, you know, my mother [Clarice Fortune Johnson] being beaten and the sounds of her screaming.  Those were the, I mean, those were the things, if I had to say--that I can sometimes still hear.  Those were, those would be, those would be some of the sounds.  The others, you know, the smell of my stepfather's [Thomas Johnson] cigarettes, or when he would get sick and, you know, not feel well and throw up, the smells of that.  So far, it's nothing pleasant, is it?  And the other, the great, the good smells, though--and the good things would be my mom, my mom was a great cook, and you know, the smells of her German chocolate cake baking, you know, in the oven, or her banana pudding or, you know, the smell of her fried chicken, you know, fried chicken or chicken wings, or trying to make those hamburgers.  In those days--they call them Salisbury steaks today, but they were just hamburgers to us.  And we didn't know she was stretching the hamburgers, you know, stretching it.  Or the smell of, you know, greens, fresh greens being cooked on the oven.  Or the smell of Pine Sol, (laughter) the smell of Pine Sol, as you cleaned up the house.  Or, you know, those are some of the things that I can remember.  Or those air-wicks in the bathroom that had the little thing that you pulled up out the bottle.  It was liquid and you pulled it up.  And the sounds, I think I talked a little bit about some of the sounds.  But some of the more pleasant sounds were the sounds of the brothers standing on the corner in the summertime singing, you know, they're doo-wopping.  And you know, they were older than us, but those were the days you didn't have to worry about anything, you could be out on the porch.  The smell of rags burning to ward off mosquitoes.  And you know, hearing parents call their kids, or kids playing hide and seek, you know, reciting, "Last night, night before, twenty-four robbers at my door," you know, that kind of thing.  And I think those are the, you know, if I had to think about some things it would those things.  And of course, the music.  I worked as a butcher for a while.  I mean, I was doing a lot of things.  But I worked as a, I learned how to do it sort of on the job.  And I can always remember the radio that was back in the meat counter, and of course, it was all Motown sounds in those days.  And our family, one thing my mom did, everybody, they loved music.  And my mother loved to dance, and she loved--so we had every, you know, we didn't have to worry about trying to buy the latest my mother had them all, and she...  (Laughter).  And we always, you know, we finally got our first hi-fi.  You know, at first we just had that box.  I don't know if you remember the box, and you had the little thing in the middle and you had the speaker on the front.  We finally got a floor model.
Speaker 1: Oh, with the two speakers in stereo?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  That was really big stuff then.
Speaker 1: So, you had the forty-fives with the disk that you had to punch in?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, or you bought the adaptor, the fat thing that you put it in, you know, so you could stack them on there and play them.  But those were--and of course, the other smells were those of barbeques, you know, on the holidays where everybody had a grill going.  And it wasn't a grill in those days.  It was a piece of a trash can, you know, a small can they cut in half for one of those Weber grills, the Weber thing that people have.  But that was, you know, those were the sights and smells.  And of course, tasting, having to take your turn turning the ice cream, you know, in that homemade ice cream thing where you had to chop the ice up, and the salt and that sort of stuff, so.
Story_ID: 158714
Speaker 1: So, you grew up in a black community that would be like a middle class household in a sense.  Your father had a job at the steel mill, Youngstown Steel [sic, Youngstown Sheet and Tube].
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't know what kind of class we were in growing up, you know.  We were like everybody else on the block at that time at 69th and Lowe [Avenue in Chicago, Illinois] where most all the houses, most of the houses were single family houses, but a lot of them were two flats.  And everybody worked, I mean in those days.  And on my block, everybody worked, they did something.  And my stepfather [Thomas Johnson] worked at the steel mill, and his brother worked at the steel mill, who eventually lived next door to us.  Then people, there were people were mail carriers and, you know, that sort of stuff.  But everybody was trying to work, they were trying to--I mean, they paid $15,000 for a house in 1958, and took a thirty year mortgage out.  But everybody, and people had pride in their, you know, in the block and the neighborhood.  And I grew up in what people would call the day of the village.  I grew up like that.  I grew up knowing all the people on the block, and all the people on the block knowing you.  I not only knew them, but I knew like especially the neighbors right around us.  I knew not only them and all their kids, but I knew their cousins, I knew their grandmother, I knew their aunts, I knew their uncles, I knew their cars, I knew when they were coming over.  We were all like one big extended family.  My mom [Clarice Fortune Johnson] would always make, whenever she cooked, we always had somebody else over, and we always had to take food over to the old people that lived next door in the basement.  And we'd pick up the plate from the last time and bring it back.  We, you know, everybody watched out for everybody.  The guy that worked at the corner store--and my first job was working in that corner store, going in the grocery store.  And I could, in those days you could leave your bike outside.  You could, you slept outside in the summertime, because we didn't have air conditioning.  So, we'd make a thing outside on the porch and we'd, sometime in the summertime if it wasn't a school night or something like that, we, that's what we did.  We had good times.  I don't mean to characterize my stepfather as somebody that was bad all the time.  When he wasn't drinking, he was a great guy, it's just when he did.  And according to my mom, he was much like my own biological father [Jessie Mason].  My biological father, I found out later through the autopsy report and the death certificate, that he was an alcoholic and died from cirrhosis.  So, you know, the alcohol was a big part of--I was, I didn't realize as I was growing up that there were really two victims.  You know, my mom was a victim, but so was my stepfather, and so was my dad.  And they were all victims of the way they grew up, and not growing up in their own houses with their own parents, and having... and it was just a lot that went on, and you don't realize that.  All you know is the pain of it when you're growing up.  But when you become an adult and you begin to look--and you understand or begin to see what's happening--and the frustration that, you know, not being able to provide exactly as you want to be able to do for your family, and dealing with the craziness that he had to deal with working on the job that he had--I'm not trying to make excuses for him, but it was tough, it had to be tough.  And it had to be really tough, trying to figure out how you express yourself as a man in a society that suppressed everything that you tried to do on your job.  And you were never good enough.  Whatever you tried to do just never was enough.  And so, these frustrations--and I'm not making excuses for him, but I'm just trying to understand it a lot more.  And of course, women in those days didn't have very many options.  And so, her mother had no options.  They came from an uneducated family, coming up from the South like many did at that particular point and time.  It had to be, it must have been very, very tough.  And where were the models?  I mean if I think about my parents and my grandparents, I don't see any of them that ever grew up in the context of a two, a two-parent--well, the biological parents--maybe the grandparents or some extended stuff, but just never in the context of what a real nuclear family was supposed to be like.  So, you never got that model, you never saw it.  And if I fast forward to today really quickly, I think that's what you're seeing now, is that there's, a lot of these young people don't have examples when you've got so many of the homes being led by single moms.  You know, where are the examples of what a family is supposed to be like?  How's a man supposed to know how to treat a woman if there's no man in the house to treat the woman?  I mean, again, so it's not excuses, but I try to look for reasons to try and understand things.  And it's not just black families.  I mean, we have more of an issue.  I think we have more issues because we're still trying to deal with the vestiges of the Transatlantic Slave Trade.  And the way I look at it--which is this whole self-hatred piece--which is, which drives the behavior that we see.  But anyway, I got off the topic.
Speaker 1: No, that is the topic.  This is what this is about.  So, you're not off of it.
Story_ID: 158715
Speaker 1: Back to the narrative, though, or the chronology--so we were talking about the sights and smells and sounds of growing up.  And I think you talked about that.  And I want you to, now you grew up, most of your formative years were spent in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And Englewood has a reputation today as like one of the hells of Chicago [Illinois] in a lot of ways.  But it wasn't like that when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely not, absolutely not.  Englewood at that time, like many neighborhoods, had a lot of small businesses, grocery stores and stuff, two or three little small grocery stores.  And it had its lounges, and it had its hairdressers and its barbershops and the cleaners and the record stores.  They don't have record stores anymore, but they had record stores and the TV repair shops and those kinds of places, which were all black-owned in those days.  And that was really good, because you saw people, you know, you saw examples of people being in business.  And there were places where kids could work sometimes on the weekends sometimes.  And I was always working, as soon as I got old enough to.  I think I started working before I was supposed to work.  I started working when I was in seventh grade.
Speaker 1: So, you were like twelve?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I started working in seventh grade.  And I did that to really--I didn't realize it, but working became a coping mechanism for me.  You know, it became the way I dealt with my own pain, and my not wanting to be home to hear what was going on.  I wanted to be away from it as much as I possibly could.  But at the same time I had really good--at least--you know, I don't know what they were doing at home, but at work the gentleman that I really credit with helping--two gentlemen--one at the work and the other one at school.  There's people that really helped me, I think, to keep me on the right path, you know.
Story_ID: 158716
Speaker 1: Now, when you moved from the 95th area, you were going to Gillespie [Elementary School, Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: I went to Gillespie for kindergarten, and then when we moved over to Wentworth [Avenue], I had to go to Charles Drew [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois], because you know it's in that complex.  There's a public housing complex just behind, just east of Trinity United Church of Christ, Lowden Gardens, I think it is, Lowden Homes.  And we didn't live in the Lowden Homes, but the school is back in that area. That was Charles Drew. (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Okay, where Princeton Park is?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: Near where Princeton Park is, and all that?
Speaker 2: Princeton Park, I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Well that's, it looks like--I think the two things are right next to each other--the projects, and then there's a development called Princeton Park.  They almost look like the projects, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's it, that's it.  It's just, it starts by Wentworth?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And goes west all the way to the railroad tracks.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: But anyway, I went to school at Drew, I went there for a while.  And then I think after I came home from the hospital one of those times, they said that I had to move, that we had to move, because I wasn't going to be able to tolerate living where we were living.  So, I don't remember much of the arguing about that, but then we moved over on Lowe [Avenue].  So, I, so all the time I remember for the most part, in terms of my, those early years--you know, growing up from a little guy to, you know, a teenager, were--except my last two years of high school--
Story_ID: 158717
Speaker 1: Fortunately, my mom [Clarice Fortune Johnson] had decided enough was enough.  And I was older then, and I was like "Mom, why are you--?"  ou know, she said, "Look, I can't leave, but I've got to know that you guys can take care of yourself."  And I was just like, "Why are you taking this from him [Thomas Johnson]?"  You know, I didn't... "You don't want us to do anything."  And I wanted to kill him, and all kinds of stuff, but she was like, "No, no, no, no, no."  She says, "Look," and this is exactly what happened, she said, "Listen, one day you're going to come home, and I'm not going to be here.  And everything is still going to look like it always looked.  I'm not taking anything, I'm not--" and that's exactly what happened.  One day I came home, and she wasn't there, she didn't come back.  And when my stepfather, you know, put out a missing person's thing, but she had told us.  She said, "Just know that I'm not going to be there, but I'm going to be watching you."  And so, through the neighbors and, you know, my other people, God, it's kind of emotional to think about it, though.  She was watching us, and she knew what was going on.  And we didn't know where she was, and none of us knew where she was.  And when my stepfather would drink, that's when he became even more abusive.  And then I was trying do school and manage the house, go to work.  And I was only, you know, like thirteen, fourteen or maybe a little older than that, I was in high school.  So--
Speaker 2: You said about sixteen?
Speaker 1: Fifteen or sixteen, yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, you all--so, when your mother left, she left all of you all there, right?
Speaker 1: Everybody, yeah.
Speaker 2: Everybody, okay.  Stepchildren as well as the biological children?
Speaker 1: Well, all of them were her biological children.
Speaker 2: Yeah, all hers, but not his.
Speaker 1: Not his.  But I was the only one there.  My other three brothers and sisters, they stayed, they were in [Washington] D.C.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Remember, I hadn't seen, I didn't see them until I was nineteen, about nineteen.  But I--
Speaker 2: I'm talking about in your household, growing up there.  When she left, she left everybody.  That was all the children--
Speaker 1: All of his and me.
Speaker 2: And you, okay, all right.  So, you were the only one that wasn't really his?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That was left?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And did this put you in a position of vulnerability?
Speaker 1: Yeah, because I was the oldest one at the house at that time, too.  So, I was trying to make sure that my younger brothers went to school and, you know, did the things they were supposed to do.  It was a lot to do.
Speaker 2: And also, I guess he would have to figure that, I mean, I guess it would show that you kind of resented him being the cause of your mother leaving?
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, you know, but I was careful to manage that.  You know, I was very careful to manage that.  And then when he would, you know, he would be drunk.  And I'd say, well, you know, this brother was doing this or this brother was doing that, and I needed more help to do this or that, and then he would get mad.  And I think it was, you know, many, many times that happened.  But sometimes he was good.  You know, I would--my sister and I did all the cooking, washing, cleaning, we did all of that.  And we made sure that when he worked, that his--we did just like my mama did.  She would make sure his food was--there was no microwave oven in those days, but we put it out so that it could be warmed up when he got home, because he worked different shifts.  And there would be times that--I think the thing that made me--when I had to go--was when he tried to beat me with the crutches.  And I--
Speaker 2: Why did he have crutches?
Speaker 1: Well, he had slipped and done something with his ankle.  And he was sitting there drinking, you know, and we were just talking about some stuff.  And I was telling him how he should--you know, because my other brothers, I found out they weren't going to school like they were supposed to go, and they weren't doing some things they were supposed to do.  And then it got into a big argument and then, you know, "Well, you ain't mine" all that kind of stuff.  But anyway, that wasn't the first time I'd heard that.  I used to hear that every time they would argue, you know, when I'm sleeping.  And that's one of the other sounds, I would hear that, you know.  So, and then he would start swinging at me with the crutch and stuff.  So, I was like, you know what, I've got to go.  So, I called a buddy of mine and I said, "Hey, man, I've got to go."  He said, "Where you going?"  I said, "I don't know, I'm going to my grandmother's [Grace Perkins] house."  So I went to my grandmother's house, and my mother got in touch with my grandmother, and that's how I found out where she was.  And then I went and stayed with her, and I went to high school from--even though I never changed my address, I used it and went to high school at CVS [Chicago Vocational High School, Chicago, Illinois], but I lived way on the north side of the city.  But I left, and still used my stepfather's address.  And so it was a long day getting to school, back and forth every day, but it was okay.
Story_ID: 158718
Speaker 1: I should ask this I guess.  So, your stepfather [Thomas Johnson] was living, you all lived in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] still then?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you were going to CVS [Chicago Vocational High School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I was going to CVS from Englewood, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now CVS would be a special--
Speaker 2: CVS was the Chicago Vocational School.
Speaker 1: Vocational school?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In your district, I guess?
Speaker 2: Well, what happened was I was going to go to Lindblom [Math and Science Academy, Chicago, Illinois], okay.  Because Lindblom was Lindblom Tech [Lindblom Technical High School], and it was college prep.  And so they, you know, that was--and I didn't want to go the neighborhood school, which was Parker [High School, later Robeson High School, Chicago, Illinois].  And I told them I, you know, I wanted to go to Lindblom Tech, and he said, "Well, you can't go."  He said, "You don't need to go there.  You need to go get you a trade."  So, he tore up my paperwork and said, "You go over to CVS."  And so, I went.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a shame.  I mean, you know, you did well, I can't say you didn't turn out right.  But that's, you know, Lindblom was really a special school in those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know--
Speaker 2: And my youngest brother, one of my younger brothers did go to Lindblom, you know, he did go.  But, and it was just--you know, it's hard for me to talk about this, you know.  I mean I know it shouldn't be, but you know, I'm doing the best I can with it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But it's okay, and I need to let that happen.
Speaker 1: What grade school did you go to in Englewood?  I don't think we ever established that.
Speaker 2: I went to D.S. Wentworth [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] first.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which is on assignment.  And then they had this new experiment with the Chicago Public Schools, where they created these upper grade centers.  I guess they called it, now they call it middle school.  So then I left Bond in fifth grade and I went to, I mean, I left D.S. Wentworth in fifth grade, and I went to sixth, seventh and eighth grade at Bond.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Carrie Jacobs Bond Upper Grade Center [Chicago, Illinois], that's what it was called.  It was at 7050 South May [Street].  Don't ask me why I remember the address so well.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I always wondered about the name of that.  Because you've got junior high schools and middle schools.  But upper grade center, what does that mean?  I never knew what that meant.
Speaker 2: Well, that was what they called it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was called an upper grade center.  So, what they did was they took a grammar school and took all the kids that were one through eight out and moved them then someplace else, and then made this school just for sixth, seventh and eighth grades and put different schools together.  It was another one of their experiments.  And they divided the sixth, seventh, and eighth grade kids by reading scores.  So, the first thirty were in 6-1, and the second thirty were in 6-2, and 6--all the way down the road, which wasn't really a--you know, it was a crazy kind of idea.  But that's what they did.  And--
Story_ID: 158719
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about school life for a minute.  Now, did you have a favorite subject in school, in grammar school?  I'm not talking about high school yet.
Speaker 2: In grammar school?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, science.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now, did you have a favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mr. Louis Wright [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was he?
Speaker 2: He was at Bond [Carrie Jacobs Bond Upper Grade Center, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was my sixth grade--sixth, seventh, and eighth grade science teacher.  He was an amazing, amazing man.  He was, sometimes, you know, I told him, I told him, I said, "Man, I wish you were my father."  Because he, you know, in school, he was just, he was a great guy.  We had, at that time we had teachers that, when they saw things in students, like my math teacher, Mrs. Green [ph.].  She became Mrs. Shamikus [ph.], but Mrs. Green.  They used to have classes early in the morning like forty-five minutes or so before regular school started.  And they would teach those classes, those were like the advanced classes.  And they never would show us the books.  As long as we could do the work, they just kept going.  And Mr. Wright and Mrs. Shamikus was like that.  And we were doing--I didn't know it, they never told us--but we were doing college algebra in the seventh grade.  And you know, I mean that's what they did.  And the science that we learned in Mr. Wright's science class was stuff I didn't see again until I got to college.  And he was, we were like his little guys.  It was myself, Kirby, and a guy by the name of Leon Butts [ph.].  And there was another guy, but we were, we always did well in science.  We always helped them set up the experiments.  We always, you know, whatever it was.  And of course, we did the audio-visual stuff, too.  And in those days, you know, you got the film-strip projectors and those sixteen millimeter projectors.  So, it was sort of cool being able to take that stuff out.  And you'd set it up and start the movies and start, you know, whatever it was.  And he was, but he really--and he reinforced--you know, he was just very positively reinforcing.  And during the parent/teacher nights, I would really try to get my mom [Clarice Fortune Johnson]--I said, "Ma, you really--" and I'd make sure she'd go and see Mr. Wright.  I said, "You really need to go and see Mr. Wright," you know.  And he was articulate, and he was, you know, he spoke very well.  And you know, my first stepfather [Thomas Johnson], he was not an educated person.  Mr. Wright was an educated person, and I was drawn to that.  I really, and it was really good that God put that man in my life at that point and time.  Because he started, he kept me on that science foundation.
Story_ID: 158720
Speaker 1: Now, speaking of God, was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was baptized at New Friendship Missionary Baptist Church when it was on 59th and Wentworth [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].  And when we went--and when it moved to 844 West 71st Street, the only thing was, it's that my mom [Clarice Fortune Johnson] was, you know, she was a churchgoer.  And it was interesting, just parenthetically, I didn't realize it then, but I came to know it later that there were a lot of women that were being abused that were coming to church, and it was covered up.  You know, I didn't realize it as much then, but then I remember all the makeup and stuff like that.  I'd lost favor with the church.  I had a good friend, and we would be there for a while, and then we'd sneak out and go to the movies or something.  But I kind of lost, I didn't really, I found myself not getting anything out of church.  Because Reverend [Stroy] Freeman, you know--as was probably the style in those days--he did a lot of screaming and shouting and ranting and raving, and no teaching.  I didn't, I didn't understand anything.  And eventually I left, and I didn't go anywhere.
Story_ID: 158721
Speaker 1: So, in grade school, it was Mr. Louis Wright [ph.]?
Speaker 2: Mr. Louis Wright.
Speaker 1: Who was a mentor?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was one of the mentors.  And we had a couple others.  The first one, I should say the first one that I found out that I was interested in was my sixth grade teacher, who was Mr. Lowery [ph.].  And Mr. Lowery was a big, Irish guy, but just a real jovial sort of guy.  And he helped me see that--he said, "You know, you're pretty good at this."  And he was, and I didn't have him long enough, you know, because then I went on to seventh grade by the time we started this relationship.  And then Mr. Wright picked it up.  And I've kept in touch.  In fact, I'm going to call Mr. Wright when I get home probably.  But he was, and I went to see him all through high school, back from college and medical school, because I tried to keep with him wherever he was.  But he was a great guy.
Story_ID: 158722
Speaker 1: Now, were you involved in other youth activities like Boy Scouts, or the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], or any of that kind of stuff?
Speaker 2: I was involved a little bit with the Boy Scouts.  I was pretty much a workaholic as long as I can remember.  Once I started working--
Speaker 1: You got a job when you were twelve, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I've worked ever since.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I worked across the street.  I remember my first--I didn't get a check in those days, I got paid cash. And basically I'd mop the floors, clean the bathroom, help stock the shelves in the grocery store.  And my first check, I got thirty-five dollars and I thought I was rich.  (Laughter).  I thought I was rich.  But my stepfather [Thomas Johnson] was laid off.  I think they had a big strike or something, but he wasn't working.  And for a while, I had to, when I was twelve or thirteen years old, I was paying the house note.  And the guy I worked for, Mr. Turner, he and his wife, they owned a grocery store.  And they would let us get food, and then they would deduct a little bit out of my check, I mean out of what I made.  And then my stepfather was trying to, you know, work, and he was washing dishes in a restaurant not that far.  And then my mom [Clarice Fortune Johnson] was, my mother was doing her day work.  But that's when I learned what it meant, you know.  My mother was one of those people that--everybody had to work, everybody had to work.  When we got old enough, she started charging us rent to live at the house, to be at the house.
Speaker 1: Well, when you were in school?
Speaker 2: Yes.  If you were working, you had to contribute.  It wasn't much, but she, the point was, she said you have to learn that where you live is not free.  Food is not free, and there are expenses that relate to the house that have to be--like the light bill, you know, the phone bill, and water bills, and gas bills.  So, she wanted us to learn.  It was more symbolic, you know, but it was very, I think very instructive.  And she, she made sure we did that.
Story_ID: 158723
Speaker 1: All right.  So, you paid for your own stuff growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a lot of it, because they didn't have it, you know.  So, there it was.
Speaker 1: At what age, now you mentioned being a butcher--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --back then.  What age was it when you were a butcher?
Speaker 2: That's when I started high school [Chicago Vocational High School, CVS, Chicago, Illinois].  What happened was the grocery store that was across the street from my house, there were two brothers that bought that place.  It was Joseph, Mr. Joseph Bingham [ph.], which is another, who was another mentor person, and his brother and his wife, Bessie [ph.].  And they had the little grocery store on the corner, and that's when I started working for them.  And then to make a longer story short, she, they left and then the store belonged to Mr. Joseph Bingham.  And Mr. Joseph Bingham--I spent more time--because I didn't want to go home until it was late.  And I was tired, but I spent a lot of time in that store.  And he, though he wasn't an educated man, he was a learned man who spoke very well, and I think where I learned the gift of gab from.  He... and how to interact with the public.  Because it was a small grocery store, and we, you were always interacting with the public, even though at first I was cleaning up and stocking the shelves, and doing that sort of stuff.  But I got to learn--it was a small store, so you got to learn everything.  And when our butcher--I used to watch the guy that was the butcher cut the meat.  In those days, the meat would come in in quarters, you know, from the cow, and there'd be hooks inside this big walk-in cooler.  And from that, you cut the round steaks and you cut the roasts and the sirloin.  And, you know, you had to learn how to do all of those sorts of things.  And I'd just watch the guy do it.  And then a couple of times, I said, "Well, can I do that?"  And he said, "Sure, sure."  So, he'd help me guide--he'd show me how to sharpen--you know, they had the knives, a knife sharpener, but every now and then they'd have to put an edge on them.  And he showed me how to do that, and showed me how to use the band saw.  My problem was I was a little skinny kid.  So, I didn't, some of the meats I was trying to pick up--I mean, I couldn't even pick up the quarter pieces because they weighed more than I did.  But he was, Mr. Green [ph.] was his name, and he showed me how to do all that stuff.  So, by the time I was--by the time, before I graduated from high school, I was able to do all that stuff.  I mean I started, actually I started just as I started high school.  By the time I was--when did I leave from around there?  Just about, I left there around '68 [1968] maybe, '68 [1968], I can't remember exactly.  But before I was--by the time I left there, I could do all of that.  I could cut a chicken in thirty seconds, you know.  You'd buy a whole fryer, and they'd say, "We'd like to have it cut up."  Well, we had a butcher block, and I'd cut that chicken up and put it in the little thing and wrap it up.  You know, we had the old scales where you had to pull the thing down and move it from side to side to get the pricing.  I made all the sausage, made the hamburger.  I was able to do all of that.  And then I knew how to manage the store.  I knew all the produce, I mean, and still know it.  I can visualize, I can name it by looking at it.  I don't need a sign to say this is a turnip green, this is mustard, this is kale, this is spinach, this is collard.  I knew how to do all that stuff.  And by that time I was actually--Mr. Bingham was a very aggressive man, and I really, really learned a lot.  And he was a mentor.  He taught me--I would see sometimes that people would come back to the store, and they'd be mad because they said the chicken was spoiled, or something like that.  And I just stood there and watched how he talked to those people.  I'd be listening to what they had to say, and then by the time they left there with a new chicken, they were smiling and happy, and they were back the next day.  So I learned how to deal with people by watching him, and how to talk to people, and how to speak clearly, and how to not--you know, in those days you had to use two languages.  You had your language you used with your friends, and then you had your way that you spoke properly.  And he taught me how to do the speaking properly, but more importantly, how you interact with people, how you disarmed angry people, how you, you know, how you use touch, and how you use other things, too.  And those were skills that I took with me.  I was never an athlete, you know.  I was always skinny, and Maynard Welch [ph.], who was my gym teacher thought I should run track.  But I was never, I was athletically incompetent.  But I was president of three organizations at the time, including the Senior Boys Council and the Student Council.  I was a politician, you know, that gift of gab helped me when I was in school.  And so I mean class president, all of those things, you know, that was me.  And then it was interesting, because I graduated at CVS [Chicago Vocational High School] as class president in the last class that was majority white.  The class of '69 [1969] was the last majority white class.
Story_ID: 158724
Speaker 1: I've heard that South Shore--now, CVS [Chicago Vocational High School, Chicago, Illinois] I think is between South Shore and South Chicago, I guess, the way it's situated.  But I heard that South Shore was white up until about 1972, right, mostly white?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, a lot of those things, a lot of those changed right after King [Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated.  The year King was--the class of '69 [1969] at CVS was about seventy percent white.  The class of '70 [1970] was ninety percent black.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean it changed just that quick.
Speaker 1: In that area, I know South Shore High School [Chicago, Illinois] was mostly Jewish up until--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was 75th and Jeffery [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And CVS was 87th, just east of Jeffery.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And it was a great school, I loved my school.  I was upset with what happened after I graduated.
Speaker 1: You were, so you were in high school when Dr. King was assassinated.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you were like in your junior year?
Speaker 2: Junior year, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you remember the day when you heard about it, and what happened?
Speaker 2: I don't remember the day.  I just remember people were upset and they were crying.  Remember, I was working, so I was, I didn't watch television because I was always at work.  So, I really didn't know a lot about what was going on.  I knew about some of the civil rights pieces, because even when I was at CVS, which at the time I came there in '65 [1965] was like 99 percent white, and most of that was Polish.  I couldn't, we couldn't go--you know, like those stores like where they were talking about Happy Days milk.  They had those malt shops and stuff, but we as blacks couldn't go in there.  And we only could go in the front part of the store, because that's where you could buy your drafting equipment that you needed for your drafting classes, like your T-square and your board and pencils, and stuff like that.  And these would guys would stand up against the opening into the place where you would be able to go to order a burger or sit down.  They'd block that, and they would tell us, "You only got a few minutes.  So, you better get your stuff and get the hell out of here."
Speaker 1: So, this is in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: This is in Chicago.
Speaker 1: This is not Alabama.
Speaker 2: No, sir.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So, this is--now do you remember when you were in high school--I guess you were a freshman when Dr. King lived in Chicago, when he came and lived on the West Side.  Do you remember-
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  I don't remember any of that, you know, I really, really don't.  I read about it later, and I didn't really know a whole lot about what was going on with Dr. King until, you know, the students, some of the students started walking out.  We had the big walkout when he was assassinated.  You know, it was just a big mess during that time.  And so then I started hearing and reading--not reading, but hearing more about Dr. King.
Story_ID: 158725
Speaker 1: Did you have any, did you know anybody on the West Side [of Chicago, Illinois] when the riots were going down?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It was stuff that you just heard about in the news, for the most part?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 2: My parents were not involved in any of that.  Well, obviously, you know, my stepfather [Thomas Johnson] wasn't.  And my mother [Clarice Fortune Johnson] was at that time living on the North Side.  So, we didn't know.  And all I was doing was working, you know.  I'd come out, when I got out of school I came straight from school to work.  And I worked in the grocery store until about 9:00, 8:30 or 9:00.  And then when Mr. [Joseph] Bingham [ph.] took over the laundromat, which was right next door to the store, I went to the laundromat and I worked in the laundromat.  So, I had hired a good friend of mine who was a football player to come in and do all the mopping and the cleaning.  And I cleaned the dryers every day, and I also got to the point-- the guy Nicky, Nicky Zarek [ph.], who was the guy who owned it first--but I used to watch them.  And some of the repair of the actual machines, I learned how to do.  I've always been very mechanically inclined.  But I was too skinny, and not strong enough to lift the motor and the transmission up out of the machines.  So, I'd get it all loose, and have the guy who was a football player yank it out and put it on my workbench.  And then when they were finished, I'd say which it would go in, and he'd put it back.  And I'd go and hook it back up and screw it down and hook up all the hoses and, you know.
Speaker 1: So, you, I just thought it amusing the way you said that you hired the football player.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, you sublet the job out to him from the laundromat?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So, you made yourself a boss in some ways.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because I couldn't do everything.  So, I'd have him come and start stuff.  And he was looking for a job, you know, he was looking for something to do.  And I said, "Okay, Donnie"-- I remember, Donnie Tyler [ph.] is his name.  Donnie would come over, and he was, you know, a very strong, robust young man, you know.  We were the same age, but you'd look at him...  I graduated from college weighing 145 pounds.  So you can tell I was a little guy, always a little guy.  And, but I was, that didn't stop stuff, you know.  But I was mouthy, you know, I didn't mind speaking.  And I didn't care if it was one person or five hundred people, it never, ever bothered me.  And that was, you know, it was, I didn't know it at the time, but it was those leadership qualities that, I think that helped me a lot.
Story_ID: 158726
Speaker 1: Now, CVS [Chicago Vocational High School, Chicago, Illinois], just for the record here, is a huge place, I mean, physically huge.  It was, wasn't it some sort of World War II [WWII] airplane factory?
Speaker 2: It was a [U.S.] Navy training academy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Including, it had an aircraft hangar with a jet engine with a jet in it, F-101, I think it was.  It was a huge school, it was my school.  I was, when I graduated I was happy, but I cried.  That was my school, you know, it was my school.  Even when Reggie Brown [Reginald Brown] came and was the principal, I let him know, "Man, you might be the principal, but this is my school."
Speaker 1: Now, who was Reggie Brown?  Is there a story about him?
Speaker 2: Reggie was the principal who came right after Joseph Bell [ph.].  After the riots and what have you, Joseph Bell was the principal.  And he got replaced by Reggie Brown, who was a black principal.  And I had some great teachers in high school, too, just wonderful, wonderful, people who were also very encouraging and kept me on the straight and narrow.  I mean Mrs. Harwell [ph.] and Mr. Garbertha [ph.] and Mr. Tifilski [ph.], you know, just some great, great people...  Mrs. Kraschen [ph.], my English teacher.  You know, in those days when they would see things in you, they would encourage it, you know, and make you do more work.  But it wasn't really because--they were trying to help you develop.  You know, you might not have seen it that way at the time, but that's really what they were doing.  And I was really very blessed to be able to do that.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you find time for your homework?  How did you--
Speaker 2: Well, for homework, after I started--I used to get to school early in the morning.  Again, I didn't like being at home for all the other reasons.  And I'd go early, and whatever I couldn't do, I did early at school.  Because you could get there early and you could get breakfast in those days.  And so, I would get there and get a lot of the work--but the work...  You know, CVS at that time, by the time you were in your junior year, your senior or junior year, you had to declare a shop.  So, you're in shop four periods, either all morning or all afternoon.  And we had a lot of work to do.  And I could do a lot of my shop work and all of some of the other homework all at the same time.  So when I left school, I didn't have a lot of work to do.  Plus, we had study hall.  So I'd get a lot of work done in school, because I had to learn to manage my time, because I didn't have a lot of time.  Because I had to go home, I had to work.  And when I moved with my mom [Clarice Fortune Johnson], I would--because she lived on the North Side [of Chicago].  So, I would stop in what is now called the [Chicago] Cultural Center.  But that was the old library.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Chicago Public Library.
Speaker 2: So, I would stop, get off the Jeffery six, and before I got on the train I'd stop at the library for two hours, two and a half hours, and get all the rest of the homework that I needed to get done.  And then I'd go home.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had it down.
Speaker 2: Oh, I had a schedule, I had to have it down.
Story_ID: 158727
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how did you, did you go--when you graduated you were president of the, what were you saying?
Speaker 2: The senior class.
Speaker 1: The senior class president.  Did you graduate with honors?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.  I was, you know, I was in the National Honor Society and, you know, all that stuff.  And I was a little disappointed, because when I graduated my class rank was, I was twenty-three out of 591.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you declare like a vocational focus?
Speaker 2: I didn't know.  To be honest with you, college was something that no one in my, I didn't know anybody in my family that went.
Speaker 1: Oh, I was referring to CVS Vocational School [Chicago Vocation High School, Chicago, Illinois].  Did you have a certain trade?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I was in electronics.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Electronics.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And that did well for me, too, because I would build stereo kits that I sold.  I would build, you know--
Speaker 1: So, you were selling stereos kits.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, I liked, I liked audio.  And there used to be, there was a place called Allied.  And you'd go to Allied and you could buy night kits, fisher kits, you could buy heat kits, all these different kits.  So, you could build the whole amplifier and make a zillion pieces.  And, you know, I was an electronics major, so I would bring it to the shop.  And it would double as a project, because I still had to solder all the transistors and wire the power supplies, you know, and all of that stuff.  And I did it as a project.  And then after I did it, we'd hook it up, and we'd be playing it in the shop.  And somebody would say-- and we used to have what we called craftsmen fairs in those days, which were just outstanding.  And they need to come back.  But all the shops--the auto body, fender, welding, machine shop, carpentry--all of those, you had projects that you did.  In the auto mechanic shop they used to--Ford, Chrysler and GM used to come, and they'd have cars that they'd break something on, and then there were teams that would have to figure out what was wrong.  And it was just a lot--we had beautiful things that we made in the woodshops, or beautiful things made in the foundry or the machine shop, and the stuff would be bought.  And in the electronics shop, we, my biggest project was working on putting together a color television.  It was a heat kit, so--
Speaker 1: Now these are the days when color TV's were just becoming--
Speaker 2: Just coming out.
Speaker 1: --affordable, I guess to an average person.  An average person in the black community, at least where I was raised, I just, I started seeing color TVs around '68 [1968], '69 [1969] in people's home.  Because you didn't see them; you saw all black and white before then.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's true.  And actually, you know, when you live on the block, you know when somebody got one.  Because the truck would pull up and they would come out, and all the people would come out and they'd look.  And you'd see the big box, you know, and they would say what was it in.  And of course, everybody would be waiting to go up to Mr. Toole's [ph.] house, I think they had the first one.  And then the problem was there wasn't a lot of colored programming in those days.  Everything was in black and white, so it had a little indicator.  NBC was one of the first ones that I think came out with some color programs.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in the newspaper they would tell you what shows would be broadcast in color.
Speaker 2: Right.  Because that was when they made the peacock, the colored peacock, to show when something was in color.  But I have great memories, other than some of the stuff--but the other people on my block, the other kids, their cousins, I have fond, fond memories of, some fond memories of growing up in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 158728
Speaker 1: So, when you were on the verge of graduating, what did your counselor at CVS [Chicago Vocational High School, Chicago, Illinois] tell you to do?  Did they encourage you to go to college?  Or did they, what did they do?
Speaker 2: They only encouraged the students that were in the numeric top ten to go to a four-year major college.  And if you weren't in the numeric top ten, that is, you weren't one through ten, you didn't get that counseling.  So, they told me, they said, "You know, you're only number twenty-three, and you are, you know, even though you are in the [National] Honor Society and all that stuff, what we recommend, we don't think you could cut it at a major university.  So we recommend that you go to a school called Millikin [University, Decatur, Illinois]."  Was it Millikin or Monmouth [College, Monmouth, Illinois]?  One of those schools, I never heard of them.  But I didn't have anybody to talk to, because I didn't know anything about any other schools.  I didn't know anything about any colleges.  I'd heard something about Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], I'd heard something about schools in the South.  But we were told, "Oh, you don't go to those schools because those are black schools, they're not that good."  And I didn't know, I didn't know.  So, I was at the Chicago Youth Week.  So, we were at a scholarship competition, and I was in the line.  Because I didn't know any better, so I was waiting to talk to the people from Monmouth and Millikin.  But the line was backed up to, the schools were in alphabetical order.  So, the line was backed up to L, so I ended up in front of the guy from Loyola [University, Chicago, Illinois].  So I'm standing there, and he starts talking, and I'm talking to him.  So he asked me about where I was, and he asked me about my grades.  And he asked me about my rank and my SAT scores, and stuff like that.  And he said, "Well, have you ever thought about coming to Loyola?"  I said, "Sir, I don't even know where Loyola is."  You're looking at a kid that didn't know that the 'L' [Chicago elevated train] came back up again.  I thought it went downtown, but I never knew it came back up again, because I never an occasion to go further than that.  So, I understand how people can be locked in.  So, he says, "Well..." to make a long story short, he says, "Well, you should take a look at it."  And he looked, and he says, "And we have a program for African American students, you know, students that--but he says, "You know, bring your transcripts and stuff.  You know, bring your information."  So I brought it, and he met me at Lewis Towers down on Chicago Avenue.  And he says, "You know, you can just be admitted as a regular student.  You don't need to go into any--you know, you meet all of the qualifications to be admitted as a regular student."  I didn't know what that was.  So we went up to Loyola, and I'm driving down Lake Shore Drive.  And I'd never been on Lake Shore Drive before, going north in a car.  So, I'm looking, and I'm like wow, where is this?  (Laughter).  So, and I know this sounds really comical, but I'm telling you, this is true.  We get up to Rogers Park [Chicago, Illinois], we go to Loyola, and he shows me the school.  I had never been to a college. I didn't know, I mean I didn't know what to expect.  So, they had just built Mertz Hall, the new dorm.  So, we went up in that place as well.  And so he says, "Well, would you like to stay on campus, or would you commute?"  And I'm like, "Well, what's that?"  I didn't know any of that.  So, he says--I said, "Well, you mean I can stay here?"  And he said, "Yeah."  And I said, "Well, where would I stay?"  He said, "Well, come on, let me show you."  So he took me up in the room, in Mertz Hall.  Now, you're looking at a guy who never shared a room with less than three other people.  And early on, those three other people, we had two beds.  And when I walked up in Mertz Hall and I saw that there was only two beds, there was carpet on the floor, and there was air-conditioning, I said "I'm coming."  That was how I decided.  I'm telling you, I didn't know anything about academics, I didn't know about none of that.  I said, "I'm coming to your school."
Speaker 1: Just based on the living accommodations.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  I know that sounds crazy, but it's true, it's a true story.
Story_ID: 158729
Speaker 1: Well, you know, I've heard these stories.  So this is, I mean this is--
Speaker 2: And there it was.  And then after I got there, I didn't know what to do.  I was, you know, I walked up to where they were doing registration, and you heard on the loudspeaker, "English 101, Section 120 is now closed."  And I'm like, what does that mean?  So, you know, we'll get to that part.  But college was, that was the best time of my life.  I had a great time in college, I was away from home.  I lived, you know, here I was in Chicago [Illinois] across the street from the 'L [Chicago elevated train] station.  All had to do is get on the 'L' and go home.  I went home less than the people who lived in other parts of the country.  And I guess--
Speaker 1: Your mother [Clarice Fortune Johnson] was on the North Side [of Chicago, Illinois] already, right?
Speaker 2: She was on the North Side by that time.
Speaker 1: So, you didn't really have to go far?
Speaker 2: No, and I didn't go home.  She called and she said, "Are you coming?"  I said, "No."  And I'm like, "I'm fine."  And then some of the financial aid I had to use to help--you know, I was supposed to use for financial aid for this, and I'm using it to help her, you know, because I had to.  And I would go home, you know, once in a while, but not much.  I was having a great time, you know, and you're away from home doing what you want to do, staying out.  You know, it was just great.  And I was fortunate to be with people who were serious about school, too.  And of course, that was when I really got immersed into becoming--you know, the Black Nationalist movements, and all that kind of stuff.  And we had all kinds of wonderful discussions.  I used to come down on Saturdays to the Center for Inner City Studies at Northeastern University [Northeastern Illinois University, Chicago, Illinois].  That's where I met Bobby Wright, Anderson Thompson, [HM] Harold Pates, you know, all those folks.  I took the class with Bobby Wright on 'The Psychology of the Black Experience,' and you know, this was just a whole new world for me.  And we used to have these very--we were reading all this stuff.  We were reading Frantz Fanon, and we were subscribing to the Negro Digest, I mean just all going to the Universal School of Meditation with  Phil Cohran [HM Phil Cohran], and over to the Black People's Topographical Research Center.  And it was just, wow.  And all of a sudden I had, the next thing I know my hair was out like this, and I had my little glasses on.  And that put me on a path to having ended up in the Nation of Islam.
Story_ID: 158730
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this is, you graduated in--
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-nine [1969].
Speaker 1: Sixty-nine [1969].  So, the fall of '69 [1969] you started at Loyola [University, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Loyola, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And what you attended over at Northeastern [Northeastern Illinois University, Chicago, Illinois] was Communiversity, right, on Saturday mornings?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: They just had a reunion last summer.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was there.
Speaker 1: Were you?  Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, you're getting...  Who was teaching on campus then in the black studies department?
Speaker 2: We didn't have it yet.
Speaker 1: You didn't have it yet?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But we joined up with the students from, we had a group called the LUASA, the Loyola University African American Student Association.  And then they had FMO, For Members Only at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois].  And that was when people were trying to get black studies teachers and black studies programs.  And James Turner, I think it was, James Turner came to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois].  And I remember we were trying--and the school didn't want to let us do it.  They didn't want to acquiesce to having a program.  And so if you remember, about somewhere around in there is when colleges were having a lot of trouble.  Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio], Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi], a lot of those things were happening.  Kids got shot on college campuses.  Student movement was very, very, active.
Speaker 1: In the spring of 1970, yeah, that was when Kent State--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, so it was a lot of stuff going on.  And so we then swung into action, and we made our demands during that time, and went up to--and I was really, and I became just radical, okay.  And my job in the meeting with the--we had all of the board of trustees, everybody was sitting in the room.  And of course, you remember at Kent State the students were setting some of the buildings on fire.  So, my job during the meeting was every time they acted like they didn't want to acquiesce to a demand, I'd strike a match.
Speaker 1: Seriously?
Speaker 2: I'd strike a match in the meeting.  I had an ashtray and I had several books of matches in my pocket, and I'd strike a match.  And I'd just sit there and let it burn like this.  And then when they would say, "Absolutely, that's not going to happen," I would light a whole book of matches.  So, you know how it is when you light a whole book of matches?  (Laughter).  And my hair was out like this sometimes, braids.  I mean, I was, it was wild.  And so--
Speaker 1: Well, who was the leader of your student group?  Who was doing the talking while you were doing the lighting?
Speaker 2: At that time, it was a brother by the name of Harry Smotherman [ph.].  He was the chair of the Black Student Union of the LUASA at that time.  And subsequently, when Harry left, I became the president.  And it was a real interesting time, because I saw the times change while I was there.
Story_ID: 158731
Speaker 1: Now, what do you mean?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean you could see that it was beginning to, I mean it wasn't as much activism over time at the college.
Speaker 1: But did you get, first of all did you get your demands?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we got them all.
Speaker 1: You got them all?
Speaker 2: [Nods head, yes.]
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's heady, this is heady stuff, when you get all of your demands--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in college as a college student.  Did you meet with the president of Loyola [University, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: We met with the president, chair of the board, deans.  This was in a big room.  We were in like the boardroom.
Speaker 1: So, to put this in political perspective, here's somebody that comes from the South Side and has never been on Lake Shore Drive before, one year.  (Laughter).  The next year, I mean, two years later you've got an afro a mile high, and you're lighting matches in a meeting with the president of the college.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, yeah.  And then subsequently, I become the president of the organization for several years.  And I decided that the African-= American students needed their own orientation, and the school wouldn't support it.  So, then Herb Kent did the first party for--the first party at CVS [Chicago Vocational High School, Chicago, Illinois] that we ever had that had a black DJ and played Motown music and stuff, was [HM] Herb Kent.  And the name of the party was called 'Special Occasion.'  And so, and it was a very special occasion, because it was the first one, and it was while I was president of the school, I mean, of the class.  But we had--so when they didn't want to give us the money to get the busses and do all the stuff we wanted to do, I said, "Okay, fine."  I said, "This is what we want then.  We want to be able to use these rooms."  And we threw what we called a set, threw a party.  And so I had, I called Herb Kent back up.  I said, "Herb, I need you to do a party for us downtown at Lewis Towers [Loyola University, Chicago, Illinois], and talk about it on the radio and everything."  So we had that party, and there was people lined up all the way around the block, you know.  And we, we must have netted like $1,500 to $2,000, which was a lot of money in those days.  But it wasn't quite enough, because we wanted to a big, big, party, a big thing.  So I said, "Okay, Herb, see if you can get Bill "Butterball" Crane."  And so we did the, there were two rooms in Lewis Towers.  So, we had Bill "Butterball" Crane on one floor, and Herb Kent on the second floor.  And the name of the--every party we had, we had a name for it.  So, this was "Scrape and Struggle, Part 1" and then we had "Scrape and Struggle, Part 1," because that's what we were trying to do, was scraping and struggling to get this money.  And we raised all the money we needed.  We chartered our own busses, we took our students to their own places.  And if the white students wanted to go, you know, that was fine.  You know, we didn't discriminate, but we said we weren't going to be wearing no beanies and carrying on, we weren't doing that.  And we had big picnics.  The school didn't want to give us the money to buy a, you know, you had to use the duplicating center.  And I got mad, and I didn't want to use that anymore.  So, I said "We'll just buy our own machine."  So I went down--you know, from the money that we raised, we bought our own machine, and had we had our own paper and our own ink.  We got our own--all that stuff.  I'm like, we ain't going to ask these folks for nothing that we can do.  And every time we needed to do something, we would have another party and raise some more money, and did what we needed to do.
Story_ID: 158732
Speaker 1: All right.  So these are, these are heady days in college, and you're traveling.  You said you went to the meeting of the Association of African Educators [sic, Association of African-American Educators (AAAE)] in [Washington] D.C.?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was what I was supposed to do, but I knew I was going to go--I'd been writing my brothers and calling them, and I wanted to meet them.  So these are my biological brothers and sisters, that we have the same mom [Clarice Fortune Johnson] and the same dad [Jessie Mason].  And I'd never met them, but I talked to them on the phone, and I decided I was going to meet them.  So we went there for the meeting, and I decided, I told my roommate and another friend of mine that we weren't, I wasn't going to go, that I was going to--that this was what I had to do.  So, that's what I did.  And, you know, it was kind of strange, trying to think about what would I say, you know, what would they look like, or, you know.  And I was trying to find the place myself, and as you know, driving around D.C. is not without challenges.  So, the school, I mean the meeting, I think was over by Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  And, but my brothers were in a place I think in Baltimore [Maryland], not that far.  Anyway, I was trying to find it myself and got lost.  And then my brother, he said, "Look, just stay where you are, and we'll come and get you."  So, they came and got me.  And the first time I talked to my brother, the one next to me, he cursed me out.  (Laughter).  He said, "Man, you had us waiting all this time.  You should have told us, and we'd have come and got you."  And then we, you know, we embraced, and it was, it was amazing.  Talking about two brothers and my sister, we were up all night long trying to catch up for nineteen years.
Speaker 1: Did you find a similarity in--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, my brother and I look almost the same.  We look, I looked at him and we looked almost identical.
Story_ID: 158733
Speaker 1: You know, one thing I neglected to ask you, and I'll kick myself in the head for it now, but why was your mother [Clarice Fortune Johnson] in [Washington] D.C.?  I mean how did your--you were born in D.C., right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now what happened that was your mother was in D.C. anyway with your father?  I mean, what were they, you know, I didn't hear that in the rest of the early narrative.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know, I don't know where they were living.  I guess they were living there together at some point.  And my natural, my biological father [Jessie Mason], was, from my mother telling me about it, was equally as abusive as my first stepfather [Thomas Johnson].  And so, what I learned was that in those days there was no protection for women.  So, she went to jail.  She went and stayed in the jail to be protected from him.  And I was, you know, I was a little arm baby at that time.  And so her mother [Grace Perkins] sent--she asked her mother to send her some money so she could get a bus and come to Chicago [Illinois], and that's how I got here.   And my other brothers and sisters--because after she found out--I guess, you know, I was little, I didn't know.  But after she found out what was going on, she didn't have them come.  So, my other two brothers and my sister grew up in foster homes in Virginia.  And so when we got together, of course, they were all adults, I mean not adults, but they were a little older than me.  But we all got together, and it was one of the most emotional things.  I mean we laughed, we cried, we, you know, we were trying to share stories about...  You know, my sister had one set of foster parents, and my two brothers had a different set of foster parents.  And they grew up in foster homes as welfare kids, and they were telling me about what that was like.  And I was telling them how I grew up.  And you know, we came to the conclusion it was a probably a good idea you guys didn't come, based on where I was, and maybe it would have been better if I had been where you were.  I don't know, but based on what they were telling me...  So it was, it was just one of those very emotional nights, and we were up all night long.  And then the rest is history.  We've been in touch, you know, we've stayed in touch since then.  In fact, I was just out with them not that long ago.  And my sister's coming here.  So, we've become very close since that time, I mean all my brothers and sisters, you know, except my oldest one.  So my oldest sister, like I said, we have the same mom, but my oldest sister has a different dad.  And then there's four, and then there's four, and then there's one.
Story_ID: 158734
Speaker 1: So, college was a big breakout for you in a lot of ways.
Speaker 2: It was.  It really, really was, in more ways than one.  And it was during that time when I was going to Communiversity [Northeastern Illinois University, Chicago, Illinois], and just to get through that I was, I changed my major every semester. I didn't know what the hell I was doing.  I didn't know what the hell I wanted to do; I had no idea, I had no direction.  I liked everything, so the last thing I thought was that I was going to be a political science major.  Because I said I like--I think I want to be a politician, I think I can do that.  So, I said I'll be a political science major.  And I read this book by Richard J. Daley called, 'The Boss' [sic, 'Boss: Richard J. Daley of Chicago']
Speaker 1: About him.
Speaker 2: Yeah, about him, called 'The Boss.'
Speaker 1: Mike Royko.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Mike Royko, but it was about Richard J.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: And then I started running into people and stuff like that.  And I'm like, I don't need to go to school to do this.  (Laughter).  You know, I was like, I don't--so I was about to drop out.  I was like--I could--Then I started meeting people that were State reps [representatives] and what have you.  And they were bus drivers and funeral directors, and I'm like, I can do that.  So, at that time I was also challenging Bobby in his class about the condition of black people, and why we were in this condition, and what the solutions were going to be, and that sort of stuff.  And Bobby kept saying, "Well, I don't know all the answers, I don't know the answers.  I'm not even sure I know all the questions."  But that didn't satisfy me.
Speaker 1: Now, this is significant for those who don't know who Bobby--this is Dr. Bobby Wright.
Speaker 2: This is Dr. Bobby Wright.
Speaker 1: Bobby E. Wright, of the--it was said when he passed away he had a sharp tongue and a sharp mind.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And he could cut you every which way.  You're, as a college student, is challenging Dr. Bobby Wright?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, the founder of the Garfield Park Mental Health Center.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And the world famous, the Association of Black Psychologists, and all of that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, all right.  (Laughter).  Now, go ahead--
Speaker 2: And the BSPA, Black Students Psychological Association.
Speaker 1: Anybody watching this would not know the significance of this unless I raised that.  So, it was--
Speaker 2: Now, these guys were my scholarly mentors--Bobby Wright, Anderson Thompson, and [HM] Harold Pates.  Every Saturday they all taught classes, and I went to each of their classes every Saturday.  So, Bobby, we got to talking about--he had a class where he was talking about black leadership and how it was pyramidial, and how, you know, you could cut off the top.  And he was going through all of that stuff, and so we got into this whole...  But one thing I liked about Bobby is that when I say challenge him, I don't mean that negatively.  I meant academically challenge him like, "Look, Bobby, okay, so we've been spending all this time talking about this, this, and this, so what's the solution?"  And he'd say, "Well, I don't know the solution," which is an honest answer, and I could understand it.  And so, I'm like, "Well, Bobby, there's got to be a solution.  I mean, we're sitting here talking.  Where does this end up?"  So, I was going home, and the brothers, you know how the brothers on the corner sell Muhammad Speaks newspaper?  So I got the Muhammad Speaks newspaper, and I was reading the newspaper.  And they had a section in the newspaper called the progress section.  And the progress section showed--if you remember, they had a bakery, they had the restaurant, they had all this other stuff.  And they were talking about this place they were going to build.  So I said, I need to go check this out.  So, I went over the Mosque at 5335 South Greenwood, I think it was.  And so I walked over there, and Minister [Imam] Yusuf Shah was teaching that night.  Or was it Minister James Shabazz?  It was either Mr. Yusuf or James Shabazz.  Now, I was a--
Speaker 1: This place you're describing, this is the place-- this is before they got the Stony Island place?
Speaker 2: Yes, this is before Stony Island.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Way before Stony Island.
Speaker 1: So, this is on--
Speaker 2: Greenwood [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Greenwood and what?
Speaker 2: I think it's 5335.
Speaker 1: In Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: In Hyde Park.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, I'm going there, and you know, that's a whole other experience.  So, you go in and the brothers meet you.  And you look at these brothers, and they're all sharp, they got suits on.  And they asked me to step forward.  And you had to take everything out your pockets, and they're frisking you and searching you.  And then you go in and you sit down and, you know, I'm hearing stuff that I never heard before.  And I'm like wow, what is this about?  So, I decided to keep going.  So I kept going and then I decide, you know, what these people are doing and what they--and then I would go to the meetings, and I said what these people are doing, this is--it may not be the answer, but it was the answer as far as I was concerned.  I don't want to be part of someone who was sitting around trying to debate ideas and not come up with any concrete solutions.  And I was attracted to the fact that here was a man in America telling us as black people that we have to do for ourselves, that we should stop asking people to do for us what we could do for ourselves.  That was all I needed to hear.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And was doing it.  We were building stores, and we had the bank, and we had all this other stuff that was going on.
Story_ID: 158735
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you worked, you know, your whole life, I mean your young life--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And I can see how that could appeal--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it appealed to me.  It resonated with me.  And not only did it do that, but then I would go back after I wrote my letter.  You know, you couldn't--like, at the church, where you just go up and shake their hand.  You had to write this letter.  I don't know if anybody ever told you how this works.  But you have to write this letter.  There was a letter they gave you, and it was a letter that you wrote to the Honorable Elijah Muhammad requesting, you know, that you bore witness there was no God but Allah, and you also wanted to be in the Nation [of Islam], and what have you.  But you had to write the letter perfectly.  You could not erase, you could not strike over.  You had to write every single word perfectly.  And then the letter would go in and be inspected.  And if it was perfect, then that's how...  And if it was anything, if it was a period missing, or an 'A' or anything was incorrect, it came back.  And it was the first time in your life you had to do something perfectly.  And so, and then brother you saw--what I also saw happening there was the amazing transformation of men.  I mean folk looking wild, like I was looking--hair all over their head and looking all crazy.  And then the next thing you know, you thought these were brothers from another planet, clean-shaven.  I mean but these were the same guys that was gangbanging, or businesspeople, or whomever.  And when he started talking about--when the Honorable Elijah Muhammad was talking about building this Islamic center, first on what was the site of--what became the site of Cole Park [Chicago, Illinois], because the city changed it to a park to keep us from buying it.  Then the South Shore Cultural Center, where we were going to build the center, I said, "Look, this is what I want to do.  I want to be a doctor in this place.  I don't even care if I get paid, I just want to be there to teach and to take care of our people."  That was my motivation--
Story_ID: 158736
Speaker 1: --So, I'm going back to school, went back to Loyola [University, Chicago, Illinois] and changed my major to biology.  And this is in my, end of my second semester.  And now I hadn't taken any--this is the end of the second semester of the first year.  I'm getting ready to go into the summer session.  So, I go back and say, "Okay, what do I need to do to be a graduate in the biology program?"  So, they gave me all these courses, and I'm like, oh, my God.  So, it meant I was going to have to go to school an extra year to get out, and go year round.  In the meantime, my mom [Clarice Fortune Johnson] died in, my mom got sick when I graduated from high school.  No, when I graduated from--I'm just thinking.  Now she died in '75 [1975], so when I graduated from college, that's when she got sick.  She was okay, she got sick when I graduated from college.  But I want to go back to--I have to get this sequence back.  So, I go back now, and I've got to change all of this stuff.  I had to take all these courses.  And I've taken all of the--you know, I've been taking political science, I've taken all the English stuff, all the history, all the speech classes, all that stuff.  So, now I'm looking at twelve to fourteen hours of organic, in-organic chemistry, physics, calculus, you know, and all the biology courses.  And one of the things I've got to say about coming to the Nation of Islam, is that I was truly introduced by the Honorable Elijah Muhammad to the power of God that resided in me.  I felt I knew who that was now.  And I knew that this is what I was supposed to do, and there wasn't anything anybody could tell me anywhere that was going to keep that from happening.
Story_ID: 158737
Speaker 1: Now was that--now, after--now, you were plunged into heavy philosophical waters at Communiversity [Northeastern Illinois University in Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --and the black student movement and all that.  I guess my question is like, was it easy--and you just addressed the theology on some level.  But the Nation of Islam has a history of the world that, you know, a lot of people would have a hard time swallowing, you know.  They have a conception of the world with the white man being a devil.  And a lot of people have a hard time--literally, a devil--swallowing that.  Did you, I mean, I can understand the economic appeal, but how did you overcome those--did you have any doubts?  I mean, I don't--it's just hard to see how you could accept the theology and--
Speaker 2: Well first of all, you had to understand terms.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We had been taught that the devil was some little mystical person that lived under the ground someplace that had a pitchfork and a tail.  And that was--now, if you had any problem accepting anything, you should have a problem accepting that.  You should have a problem accepting the fact that heaven is someplace where people are sitting on a cloud, you know, looking like cherubs and playing harps.  And I mean, you should have difficulty accepting that.  You should have difficulty accepting the fact that you've got to die before you can begin to even think about seeing God.  Those concepts were difficult for me.  I had less of a, less problems accepting the fact that when I looked at the history of black people in this country and read the accounts of what happened to us in this country at the hands of whites, I had less problems realizing that this is a person, these were evil things that were done to us, okay.  So those things, those were not--it was far more concrete than the stuff that I was taught to believe than what I was being taught now.  And then as I got, as I grew an understanding about these things, those were not the drivers.  The drivers were that here we were a people of several million in this country with the wherewithal to do for ourselves, and we were not doing it.  And we weren't doing it for a whole host of reasons.  But it was true, that our names were not ours.  That was true, that wasn't hard to accept.  It was true that we had come through this whole transatlantic slave trade piece.  And when you read the accounts of what happened to us during that time, and the accounts of anything as recent as one of the books that they always, the newspaper accounts written by Mr. Ralph Ginzburg, that accounted what happened at public lynchings.
Speaker 1: Yeah, '100 Years of Lynchings.'
Speaker 2: '100 Years of Lynchings.'  And you read those accounts, and you read the history of what's going on, and you understand how we have been mis-educated, as eloquently stated by Carter G. Woodson.  So, it wasn't hard for me to understand what was being said.  But more importantly, it wasn't about hating anybody, it was about loving self.  It was about us understanding that we had adopted a mental or intellectual framework that was against who we were.  So we had this sort of psychological schizophrenia as witnessed by--in the days that you and I grew up, you had black men taking lye and putting it in their hair to straighten it out.  You had black... I mean you know, we had us doing all these different things, trying to accommodate ourselves in a construct that was not who we were, that was actually anti-who we were.  So if there was anything--if anybody had any difficulty, they shouldn't have any difficulty understanding what we were already doing, not what the Honorable Elijah Muhammad was trying to teach us to do.
Story_ID: 158738
Speaker 1: Okay, but there is the Nation of Islam history of the world, and the--you know, how did they explain that to you at that point in, it was 1971 it would be?
Speaker 2: Seventy, [1970], '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: Okay.  How did they explain, I mean were they still using Yakub and all that?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.  And like everything--so, okay.  So people say--so, you're having difficulty.  So, okay, let's go to the other side.  So, I'm supposed to believe that a woman got pregnant without having sex with a man.  So, you want me to believe that God committed fornication and/or adultery?  Or, you know, you want me to believe that that happened.  You want me to believe all these other things that happened that was part of the Christian liturgy and the Christian lore.  And I was supposed to believe that on faith, and not open my eye or my mind to at least think about or be challenged with a different sort of belief.  All of these things are beliefs.  Many of them you take the belief from faith, but it's just that we have been so acculturated in a Eurocentric way of thinking about it.  Why would I think, why would you make me believe that God and his representative, Jesus Christ, is here on earth?  If he was truly the God of all the peoples, then why would he look like the fewest people on the planet?  Why is that?  Why is it that none of the prophets, none of the great men of God, none of the disciples, none of the great women of God, none of them look like me?  So, you ask me what's more difficult to accept?  I've got to say that's more difficult to accept, to me.
Speaker 1: Well, the only reason why I'm asking you--
Speaker 2: Oh, I know, I know why you're asking me.
Speaker 1: Because in your background--now with the teachers you named like Dr. [Bobby] Wright, and Dr. [Anderson] Thompson, and [HM] Dr. [Harold] Pates and others in that group, they really don't believe the other side, either.  They don't believe the Christian side, either.  So, it's not like one or the other.  To them, they just don't believe that, you know, period.
Speaker 2: And you know, and--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, go ahead.
Speaker 1: And they would probably share a political analysis of the white power structure as an enemy to black people.  They'd probably--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh--
Speaker 1: --you know, share that analysis.  But I guess what I'm thinking... now you correct me if I'm wrong.  But I'm thinking that the core of your attraction is the commitment to do something economically in a self-determining way, the action plan of the Nation of Islam.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The commitment to me--and I used to hold open that progress section of the paper of the Muhammad Speaks newspaper--about here were some people who weren't complaining and moaning and groaning about our condition and trying to analyze it to death.  There was a plan, it made sense, and it was, it connected with me.  It resonated with me in terms of a solution, an approach, to dealing with a problem that we had.  And it was reinforced to me by the difference that I saw in people who began to embrace that, in terms of how it changed their lives--how we took the cigarettes, the alcohol, and the dope--all of those things that were dangerous to us--and made us look like respectable people that would demand respect, and command respect.  And it made us protect--it helped us to--not that men weren't doing that--but not the way we began to see how it was being done in the Nation in terms of honoring and protecting women.  And it even made us better citizens in the context of where we were living.  So, I didn't see, you know, I didn't see any...  And I gave the other examples, because all of that we had, and we didn't have anything.  I shouldn't say anything, but we didn't have as much as we should have had.  So, is any of this perfect?  No.  But for a young, nineteen-year-old man who was frustrated with where I was in my own life, about to drop out of college because I saw no reason to be there, it gave me purpose, it gave me direction, it gave me a foundation for a belief that would allow me to tap into an inner strength that would not let me see or accept defeat.  Now, obviously, that had to be there.  But it was the way that it was enhanced.  And it was because of that that I was able to get through.  And I mean there was a lot of stuff I had to deal with trying to go through school, and even within the Nation, of things that we had to do in order to do the things that we did.  And that's where I met Clyde El-Amin, and I met a bunch of other people during that time.  So, had it not been for that, I wouldn't have gone into medicine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know what I would have done.
Story_ID: 158739
Speaker 1: You say were on the verge of dropping out of school [Loyola University, Chicago, Illinois] because--
Speaker 2: Out of college.
Speaker 1: --college because there was--
Speaker 2: Because I was going to be a political science major.  And I found out, when I read the book, I was like, I don't need to go to college to do this.  And I wasn't learning anything that I saw was consistent with a path that I needed to go down.  I could do what they were talking about outside of that.  I knew how to make relationships; I knew how to begin to play that political game, and would have been very good at it.  And it's not over yet.  So, that is--
Speaker 1: Well, would you say also that the--I guess I hear you saying too that the moral content of the Nation of Islam was very attractive for somebody who had grown up seeing--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I hadn't thought about it that way, but yes.
Speaker 1: And, now did you, were you, when you were in college--and you talk about the hair and all that.  I know that that was the time when a lot of people were smoking a lot of weed and a lot of wine drinking on campus, a lot of stuff like that.  Did you participate in those kinds of things?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  You know, I got introduced to everything decadent that I knew of when I got to college.  (Laughter).  I didn't even know what a, I didn't know what a reefer was.  I didn't, I hadn't ever seen it in high school.  So I got introduced to all of that, and tried most all of it, you know.  But it was, it never, it never caught, you know what I mean.  Because I was like, well, this stuff is dulling my mind and, you know, what is this about?  This is not, I don't see where this is going, this is not doing anything.  So, I was like, no.  And when I went, so when I went to the Nation and they said "Well, you know..."  I said "Fine, that is not a problem for me anyway."  Because we, you know, I mean you know how you are when you're nineteen or twenty years old.  You want it--let's go.  And I actually blocked the formation of the fraternities on campus for a while.  (Laughter).  You know, I never pledged anything, and I was, I thought that was the biggest waste of time that I could ever see.
Story_ID: 158740
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, all this awakening and stuff, and this is--the Nation of Islam really seemed like a, I can just--I think that anybody watching this--and I can understand what the appeal, a lot of the appeal of the Nation of Islam was.
Speaker 2: Well, I think I've been very clear--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --about what that appeal was.  And I think that if they go back and look at the history, and if they don't know where to get it, they can go to CROE, and they can watch it and they can see it.
Speaker 1: Not me, but--
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: Not me when you say Crowe.  My name is Larry Crowe.  But you mean the--
Speaker 2: The Coalition for the Remembrance of [The Honorable] Elijah Muhammad.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The archives for the Nation of Islam.  They can go to the Coalition right there on 71st, just west of Western [Avenue].
Speaker 1: They keep the--
Speaker 2: They have all of, a lot of the--if you want to go hear what the Messenger said himself, if you want to see what the program was, if you want to understand the many, many, ways that he explained those things to people like Irv Kupcinet and other--many, many interviewers that he had.  If you want to see what the attraction was for people like Muhammad Ali--and there were a lots of people, including most all the people that I knew--some of them had been to the mosque.  Some of them had taken on some of the teachings in their own changed way.  And many of them were attracted to Malcolm [X], but they were attracted to Malcolm way before he went to Mecca, and were attracted to the things...  I mean, [HM] Minister [Louis] Farrakhan, when he came to Chicago [Illinois], I worked directly under Minister Farrakhan for several years, because he was brought to Chicago after the Messenger died, to help with the West Side.  And I was the secretary of the West Side mosque.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he built that whole thing over there.
Speaker 1: Now, who was your--I guess was there a mentor or a special person in the Nation that was your like doorway to the Nation of Islam?  Was it any one person that kind of mentored you into it?  Or did you just, was there a number of people or--
Speaker 2: There were a number of people.  You know, we had a para-military structure.  So--
Speaker 1: Yeah, but how did, I mean, tell me your initial entry into it.
Speaker 2: I just--
Speaker 1: Did somebody kind of guide you, or did you just--
Speaker 2: You didn't need that.  They just guided, they guided all of us together.
Speaker 1: But how did you, what was the hook to get you to the first meeting of the Nation of Islam?
Speaker 2: I didn't need a hook, I went looking.  The hook--actually, I should say it wasn't a hook.  And I started having--like I said, I challenged Dr. [Bobby] Wright.  I asked him, "Well, what about this?"  I asked him, "Well, what about the Nation of Islam?" "Well, you know that's still," this, that and the other.  And then we went back to the whole pyramidal leadership structure--it's not going to work, and it's not institutional--this, that and the other.  And then he challenged me.  He said, "Well, if you want to know more, go find out for yourself."  And that's what I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  That's what I did.  And the rest is history.
Story_ID: 158741
Speaker 1: And even though we didn't build our institution the way we were going to do it, the cause for why I went to medical school was still clear, and the reason was still clear, and what I wanted to do was still clear.  So, we didn't have the Islamic Center, but I worked at Provident [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois] as long as we as people had it, both at the old Provident Hospital and I had great folks that I worked with over there--Clyde Phillips and [HM Dr.] Gloria Jackson [Bacon], Morris Prophet, [HM Dr.] James Williams, you know, those sorts of things.  And I looked at where we were, you know.  At least there was a Williams Clinic that these brothers had built over on South Chicago.  And then you had the 200 East Building, where you had all of the black physicians that were there.  You know, we had Palmer, and we had Chauncey Morton, and a bunch of folks that were in that building.  They had a group, and we were trying to do what we could to keep Provident going.  But one of the things that we have to go back and look at history, to talk about re-writing, is the cost of integration, or so-called integration.  Because there was a price, I think, we paid for integration--not just to get it, but what it did to us.
Story_ID: 158742
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All right.  So, the Nation of Islam.  So, it's 1971 or so?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And they inspire you to go to medical school?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: And did, I was asking you, like who in the Nation, you know, was like--who kind of mentored you into the Nation, and that sort of thing, I mean once you came into contact--
Speaker 1: Sure--
Speaker 2: You mentioned Clyde El-Amin.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I met Clyde El-Amin there.  But I tell you, the people that I worked with were my lieutenants.  So--
Speaker 2: Wait a minute.  You had lieutenants already?
Speaker 1: No, not my lieutenants.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: They were lieutenants because, you know, in the FOI [Fruit of Islam], it was a para-military sort of thing, so we were broken up into squads.  And I was with Lieutenant Edward 23X.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: So, Lieutenant Edward, I spent a lot of time with him, you know, and he helped quite a bit.  I spent, you know, I got to know him and his wife.  But I think as we, as time went along, then there was Lieutenant Michael and James.  So, you know, you got to know the brothers really, really well, because we always were working, which I liked.  You know, we were working.  We either had to go-- we had to plant down there on 26th [Street] near Wentworth [Avenue] there, and that was where the newspaper was being printed.  But it was also the processing plant for Good Foods.  And James and Lieutenant, Michael--Michael worked in, he did, they processed all the eggs that came from our farm.  So, they processed the eggs and we got them ready to go to Your Supermarket.  Because remember, there was a Your Supermarket.
Speaker 2: Yes.  In fact, I want you to try to detail all the things the Nation was doing in those days, that we don't see anymore.  I mean, a lot of these we don't see anymore.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But on the South Side, you know, Your Supermarket--and just explain--
Speaker 1: Your Supermarket was right there just south of 83rd [Street] and Cottage Grove [Avenue].  I think there's a Family Dollar there now.  And then--
Speaker 2: Was this a full-sized store?
Speaker 1: Oh, it was a full-sized supermarket.  And right across the street on the corner of 83rd and Cottage Grove on the west side of the street, the southwest corner, was the Salaam Restaurant with a huge, big crescent, a beautiful restaurant.  It used to have jazz, and it was fine dining.  It was just very, very nice.  Then south, a little further south, when the Messenger [The Honorable Elijah Muhammad] negotiated the deal with the fish that I think was coming from, Whiting H & G, I think it was coming from Peru, I'm not sure.
Speaker 2: Peru?
Speaker 1: I think it was coming from Peru.  And we started importing the fish.  And so, we came with another way to deal with the fish.  And we made the fillets, and that's how the snack shop was born.  That evolved into what you see now, what is called Dock's.
Speaker 2: What used to be--well, I think it's out of business now.
Speaker 1: Well, Dock's, it became Dock's.
Speaker 2: It was a chain of--
Speaker 1: It was a chain of Dock's.
Speaker 2: It was bought by some white entrepreneurs at one point.
Speaker 1: And so, but that started as the way--and we introduced the wheat bun.  I mean, black people did not eat wheat bread or wheat buns.  And we introduced that, as well as the Omar on the Nile juice.  That was introduced at that time.  We introduced wheat bread, and we had our own bakery right there at what is now Captain Hard Times [sic, Captain's Hard Time Dining], which was the old site of the bakery, as I remember at the Nation at that time.  We also had another store on 71st Street.  Syed had a store and a small restaurant right next to 71st Street, just east of King Drive.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And we also had the cleaners.  But we had our own printing plant.  We had a food processing plant.  We had thousands of bakers in Pell County, Alabama.  We had our orchard up in Michigan, Cassopolis, Michigan.  We had our own chicken farm up that way.  I can't remember exactly, but it was up in Michigan, too.  Because we would get on the busses--all the brothers in the A Division--that means you're eighteen to thirty-five years old.  And right after fruit class, there'd be detail.  And sometimes the detail, we'd have to go and clean the chicken place, or we'd have to go and help pick the apples or something like that.  And we'd load up on those busses and work clothes, and off we would go.  They'd drive us up to the places.  We'd go in there and clean these places, do what we needed to do.  We've got all these young, energetic help that was actually doing something, they were actually doing something.  And we'd come back and they'd bring us by the restaurant and feed everybody.  And there was such an (unclear) decor that it was just amazing.  I mean it was real, it was really real.  And these are brothers I suppose--and certainly I've not been in a fraternity, so I don't know.  But these are like real brothers.  I mean, you could call them up in the middle of the night.  If you, you know, if my car got a flat or whatever happened, or I was in trouble or something, I could call them up on the phone, and the lieutenant was coming.  You know, and if they needed help, they would bring more folks, and we'd take care of whatever needed to be taken care of.  And it was, it was that kind of thing, and it was just such a rich experience for me.  And I'm just so grateful to God for that experience at that point in my life, because it really helped put me on the path that I believe that God had for me to be on.  And it made-- it was so different.  Because here we were going to our meetings, and I'm used to church and singing and all this other stuff.  But there was none of that.
Story_ID: 158743
Speaker 1: You walked in, you sat down, and you were taught from the minute you, you know, the teaching started.  And then as I worked with [HM] Minister [Louis] Farrakhan when he came--he and the minister before him, there was Kamar Kareem, but Minister Farrakhan began teaching.  And as you know, in my estimation, in terms of delivery and in terms of his speaking ability, I have to say I learned so much from him, just in his delivery.  The message came from Elijah Muhammad.  But the delivery--because Minister Farrakhan had been an entertainer, and he knew how to deliver that.  And I heard the Messenger say out of his own mouth--the Honorable Elijah Muhammad say at the Mosque at 7351 South Stony Island [Avenue]--that this is my best minister.  I heard him say that myself, I was there.  So, there were a lot of things, and I'm not going to say that there weren't other problems.  I mean, we were still having issues.  So there were some brothers that, you know, sometimes it was--especially when you're trying to go to school and do things.  The Messenger made it very clear that he wanted us to go to school.  He wanted us to become doctors, and lawyers, and engineers, and things, because that's what we needed to build what we needed to do.  But you had some people for whom that wasn't something that they wanted to do, and sometimes it created little problems.  But even then, Minister James Shabazz, Supreme Captain Raymond Sharrieff, First Officer Lieutenant Albert (unclear), they made it clear to me.  They said, "Look, this is what you're supposed to do, and that's what you do.  And if anybody comes to you, I don't care who they are, if they come to you and tell you anything different, you come back and see me."  And I never had any other issues after that, because they were really, I mean they were really trying to focus.  We were trying to, you know, we bought our bank.  We had Guaranty Bank, which was right there on 68th [Street] and Stony Island.  We had, it was stuff you could see, feel, and touch.  I mean you could see, we owned tons of property all around.  And there are many, many people that have been touched by the Nation.  Some will admit it, some won't.  But I can tell you that those of us, in my mind, who never denied the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, who never denied what being a part of what he created did in our lives, all of those people that I know have been successful.  Because you never, ever should do that.  And this is a man, in my, during the time I lived here on the planet, I think did a lot for trying to make us as a people realize our potential, of what we could do if we just got up and just did it.  And you know, there's a scripture that says, "If we just turn from our wicked ways."  Well, he turned us from a lot of our wicked ways and humbled ourselves, and sought the face really of God, so that he would hear us and heal the land.  And he did heal the land.  He wasn't anti-Christian, he wasn't anti-white, he was just pro-black.  And anytime you are pro-black, you will always be portrayed as being anti-white, and that's not true.
Speaker 2: Well, the rhetoric in the Nation of Islam would kind of lend itself to--
Speaker 1: Well, but you've got to understand, you have to understand where people were, and where we needed to go.  You know, sometimes if you're going very far to the right, you need to cut real hard to bring yourself back to center.  So, we had to, we needed a message that spoke to us, because we were so far to the right we thought we were center.  But we were really, we were off, man, and we're still off.  And if you look at what's happening to our youth, we are killing more of our own people right now than anybody else is killing.  And why is that going on?  We've got all kinds of meetings.  I mean I've sat and, you know, I've been the commissioner of health.  I've been blessed to be in a number of positions.  And some places I may have been able to go, but I will never, ever deny my association with the Honorable Elijah Muhammad, deny my association in--
Story_ID: 158744
Speaker 1: When I did move back toward a Christian message, it was [HM] Dr. Jeremiah [A.] Wright [Jr.] at Trinity United Church of Christ [Chicago, Illinois] that made Christianity relevant for me again.  Because I was, I didn't see where that was relevant at all.  That was about dying, death.  It didn't talk about building anything, it didn't talk about trying to--you know, you had--the poorer the communities were in the black community, the more churches they had.  So, I didn't see that as trying to do anything.  And so, I'm happy to see that now there are at least people trying to come together to coalesce around--because the church was where a lot of civil rights movements started.  The church was where, I mean, Dr. King [Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and others came out of the church.  I mean, they were part of the church.  So, it's not that the church could not speak to social issues.  It's just that it went off in another direction, and that wasn't the direction I could deal with.  And I didn't support a lot of the direction at that time, because I didn't see us doing anything.
Story_ID: 158745
Speaker 1: Now, when you went back to Loyola [University, Chicago, Illinois] as a member of the Nation of Islam, did that create any--?
Speaker 2: Sure did.  (Laughter).  It created some changes.  Early on, when you come into the knowledge of yourself, you're like a child, you know, and you say and do childish things.  And you want everybody to know that you have learned something new.  And so, I was pretty radical, you know.  I was, but I was respectful.  But one of the, well, I decided, I said well, I was going to try to do this medical thing.  But maybe instead of getting an undergrad degree in one thing, I'd go the nursing route.  So, I'd finish with at least a nursing degree and what I needed to go to medical school.  So I was there, and to make a very long story short, I got expelled from school.  Not just because I would raise--well, we had nutritional classes in school, and when they started talking about pork, I'd stand up and talk about, "No, we shouldn't be eating that."  And I mean, that was sort of that new--
Speaker 1: So, there was an incident like that, where you actually--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I did that, I did that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I absolutely did that.  And I would debate the people, based on what the Honorable Elijah Muhammad was teaching on how to eat to live, and how we should eat, and all that sort of stuff.  Absolutely, I'd debate that.
Speaker 1: Now, were you debating the instructors in terms of what they were teaching, or the other black people in the class as to what they ought to be eating, or what?
Speaker 2: No, I was debating the teachers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, there was one incident where I got, when I got expelled from this college of nursing [Marcella Niehoff School of Nursing] at Loyola University.
Speaker 1: When was that?  What happened?
Speaker 2: Well, we were at Weiss [Memorial] Hospital [Chicago, Illinois], not Weiss, St. Joseph's [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois].  And we were learning how to talk to patients, and learning how to make the bed, and do the things that you first learn how to do.  And I had an instructor who, I don't think he liked me very much as a person, per se, but he tried to make an advance in an inappropriate way, and I rejected that.  And so he then assigned me a patient who could not speak, who had what we call aphasia, from a stroke, to interview.  And I asked him to, I said, "Look, this man can't talk.  How am I supposed to interview him?"  He says, "Well, he can nod his head yes or no, so do that."  And of course, you know, I'm not--I'm young and I'm a hot head.  I mean, I'm not hot-headed, but, you know, it don't take much.  And we get down in the locker room, and I'm trying to understand, you know, why would you do this, and why didn't you make a different sort of decision?  And he wouldn't.  And then the next thing I knew, you know, he said something, and I just snapped, and I hit him, you know.  And of course, I got reported.  And so, I had to go see the dean, and they said that was behavior unbecoming to a student.  And it was, you know.  And I must say as a disclaimer, that's not something that the Nation taught me to do, that was me.  And, but I think the other thing--So, they decided to send me to a psychiatrist.  So, I went to go see the psychiatrist.  And when I went in to see the psychiatrist, he had Parkinson's [disease].  And I didn't know what that was at time.  So, he was, you know, it's uncontrollable tremors.  So he, when I walk in, he's sitting there having these tremors.  And I looked at him, and I said, "Man, they sent me to see you?  You need a doctor your damn self."  And I said it just like that.  So, then I got reported to the dean.  So, I had to go back up to the dean, and then I was summarily expelled.  So--
Speaker 1: So this is, so you're being expelled from Loyola?
Speaker 2: I'm being expelled from the college of nursing at Loyola.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I'm like, "Oh, so what."  So I'm coming down the steps and coming down the elevator in Damen Hall.  And you know, the school was up at the top, and I'm coming down.  And then it started sinking in what just happened.  I'm like, "Oh, my God, what have I done?  You know, I'm expelled from school.  What am I going to do?  How am I going to explain this?"  You know, I'm trying to think now, like, "Okay, you've been a smart butt, so figure this out now."  This ain't what--I can't go back to the mosque and tell them I've been put out of school.  I just can't do that.  So, I get off on the second floor, which is the College of Arts and Sciences.  And I don't know what I'm going to do.  So I go in, and I go to see the dean, because I said I got to get back in school some sort of way.  So, I go to see the Dean of the College of Arts and Sciences, Dean [Elliott J.] Burrell.  And I explain to him what happens, and he lets me in school the same day.  I got kicked out of the college of nursing, and in less than an hour I was enrolled into the College of Arts and Sciences, and the rest is history.  It was smooth sailing after that.
Story_ID: 158746
Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you a question.  You're pursuing, like, a biological path?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Basically, it's a pre-med path?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: To get into medical school.  So you took that path through the college of nursing [Marcella Niehoff School of Nursing, Loyola University, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I started that path with the college of nursing--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --when I started.  And then--
Speaker 1: So I guess there's another path to that?
Speaker 2: So, what happened was when I came out of the college of nursing, I went to the College of Arts and Sciences, and that's when I became a biology major.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where--it got a little out of sequence, but that's why I had to stay in school an extra year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's a, that's an alternative path for the same, to the same goal.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So I got the pre-med, I still got pre-med.  And I tell you, it was really interesting.  We started out with twenty-something, like, black biology majors, and we only graduated two--myself and a sister by the name of Priscilla Zalazar [ph.].  No, three--and Belagio Condie [ph.], Dr. Condie.  But we were the only three that got out of that place.  But I had a great--my chemistry teacher, Dr. Yaselskis [ph.], and Dr. Goldman [ph.] was one of the other chemistry professors.  I had a bump in the road with physics, and the guy told me, "Well, you can kiss your opportunity to go to medical school good-bye."
Speaker 1: This was your instructor?
Speaker 2: That's what he told me.  And I said, "Well, you don't know the God I serve.  So, I understand what you're saying, sir.  And I accept that, based on what you're saying, but I know a different reality."  And I went through, went through--and I mean I went to school year round.  And we had to take quantitative and qualitative analyses during the summer in a building that wasn't air-conditioned at all.  And we had to do these analyses, and a lot of times we had to have Bunsen burners going and heating up crucibles.  So, it was at least ten to fifteen degrees hotter in the classroom than outside.  But it didn't, you know, I just tell you, it just didn't matter to me.  And I couldn't, I didn't know how it was going to end, but I knew that I would get there.  And through the grace of God, you know, I graduated from, I graduated from college in 1974.  That's why--it was '69 [1969] to '74 [1974].  It's five years, that's why it was five years.  My mom [Clarice Fortune Johnson] was at my graduation, and she started having a problem right at the graduation.  She was later diagnosed with cancer, and in a year she was dead.
Story_ID: 158747
Speaker 1: Now, let me just stop you for a second about your mother [Clarice Fortune Johnson].  Did your mother find out about your reunion with your brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, my brothers came.  They subsequently--my brother came, my sister came to Chicago [Illinois] and met their mom for the first time since that time.  The only one who didn't come was my oldest brother, he didn't come.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I thought I'd raise that, because that surely must have been something.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it was very special for all of us.  You know, the same thing, the crying and the why, the question about why?  And so, she told them.  And she laid it all out--why she left them, and why she couldn't bring them.  And why--you know, she just laid it out.  She didn't mince words.  We were, you know, we were not adults, but old enough to understand or at least hear it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just wanted to raise that question.
Speaker 2: Oh, no, that's fine, that's fine.  But I'll tell you the medical school piece.
Story_ID: 158748
Speaker 1: There was a program called Project '75 that was started by Dr. Andy [Andrew Thomas].  And I found out about its successor program, called Medical Opportunities Program that was run by a guy by the name of Tom Dieterich [ph.] and a lady by the name of Carol Catrell [ph.].
Speaker 2: This is, did you know Dr. Thompson's son who became Dr. James?
Speaker 1: I know him.
Speaker 2: I think you're about the same---
Speaker 1: I know him.  I didn't know him then, but I know him.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: He's an allergist, and a good one.  And I, you know, things--because of all these little ups and downs and mishaps and what have you--and my grades were up and down,  and all kind of stuff.  And then my, well, my stepfather [Thomas Johnson] lived, he was still in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], and Englewood had changed.  And my brother, the one brother I was concerned about was--they thought he was in a gang.  Or he was, I don't really know.  But it was a real turbulent time, and I actually got married while I was, well, I got married while I was--when did I get married?  My son was born in '74 [1974], so I got married a year and a half, like eighteen months before that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, I was still in school.
Speaker 2: So did you meet your wife in the Nation?
Speaker 1: No, I knew her from grammar school, I mean from the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 158749
Speaker 1: But it was really kind of interesting, kind of weird what happened.  I was trying to get in school, and I had all these negative things that had happened.  But I was active in this medical opportunities program.  And had students come, had them come and try to talk to other students.  And I was going to school, and still doing all of this other stuff.  And so, what happened was my application got mixed up with somebody else's application.  And there were two Terry Masons, and there was something that happened to that other Terry Mason.  Anyway, the files got all mixed up, and I missed all the deadlines and everything like that.  But Tom Dieterich [ph.], because I had this relationship with him now for a couple of years, talked to the dean of the college of medicine [University of Illinois, Abraham Lincoln School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois], and said, look, you know, call in a favor.  Essentially, call in a favor.  And the favor was not to let me in the school, but just give me a chance to be interviewed.  He said, "If you interview this guy, you're going to let him in the school."  So, I went to Dr. Beckham [ph.] and, you know, I told him, you know, I laid everything on the line.  I didn't pull any punches.  I told him just what had happened.  He asked about my family and my background, and all that kind of stuff.  And he looked at me, and he said--and I remember it like it was yesterday.  He said, "If there's ever a guy who needed a break, it's you, and I'm going to give you one.  I'm going to let you in this school."  And man, I started crying, you know. It was, you know, it was just like everything that I believed, happened.  Because, you know, all of it was being challenged by all these different hiccups in my road.  And then when he told me that, I was like, you know, all I could think about was how great God was, and how he made manifest everything that I had believed that he would, even though I couldn't see it and I didn't know how it was going to happen. But it happened, and I got in school.
Story_ID: 158750
Speaker 1: And when they did all the scoring, my predicted index, in other words, my probability of success in graduating from the school [University of Illinois, Abraham Lincoln School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois] based on the scores and all the other stuff, was only forty-eight percent.  And they typically did not take students, even in the special programs, with scores under the nineties or in that area.  And I was forty-eight.  And so every time that I passed an exam, every time that I hit a milestone, I went back to that man, and I thanked him every single time, Dr. Beckham [ph.].  And I thanked Tom [Dieterich (ph.)], and I thanked, you know, all the people, you know, that were--and obviously, I thanked God.  But I went through all of that, and it was just amazing.  Medical school was--I had one hiccup in medical school.  I did fail the board exam the first time I took it, only because I was scared of it, because they had hyped us so much for it.  But I was fortunate to work with Sister Cynthia Henderson at that time, she worked with me.  She was in the scholar's program, so we studied for the board together over the summer, and my scores went up tremendously.  Not because I learned a whole lot more, but because I was at ease.  And I sailed right through medical school after that, there wasn't any problem.  And I just say this as a footnote before my--I decided my senior year--because I finished early, I decided to take up something I always wanted to be.  If you had asked me what I really wanted to be, I would have told you I wanted to be a pilot.  So I took the, I went over to [City Colleges of Chicago] Olive Harvey [College, Chicago, Illinois] and took the ground school course, and passed and got my--But I couldn't afford--I had a wife and a kid by that time, and I just couldn't afford the air time and everything else to finish the licensure.  But--
Story_ID: 158751
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you went to the University of Illinois [Abraham Lincoln School of Medicine] here in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I never left Chicago for anything.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: I went from grammar school all the way through medical school and residency training right here in Chicago, never left, and I don't plan to.
Speaker 1: I'm asking because it wasn't in my notes.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And the University of Illinois, I figured it was here.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: The University of Illinois College of Medicine.
Speaker 1: And they were calling it the University of Illinois Circle Campus then.
Speaker 2: Well, no, that's Circle.  That was, that's the East campus, that's the undergrad campus.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The medical school is the Abraham Lincoln School of Medicine, that's the West campus.  The West campus is the medical school.  So, the East campus is over by Halsted [Street].  The West campus is over by Damen [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, were there any--well, in terms of your teachers in medical school, were there any role models that you could point to in the community?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Dr., we used to call him Dr. Doctor.  He was an M.D., Ph.D., Dr. Tom Sharad [ph.].  He was the only black faculty member that we had, and he was a great guy.  He taught us pharmacology, and his subject was cardiologic pharmacology.  And so he was, from that point of view, our role model.  But I'll tell you, Dr. Ruth Bentley--I got in medical school and learned--do you know what I learned when I got to medical school?  I didn't know how to read.  We had so much stuff, so much material that we--I didn't know how to do that.  Medical school was like a college final every day, just in terms of the intensity and that kind of stuff.  But I can tell you, the thing that got us through, is that we worked together as a group.  Linda Murray, Steve [Stephen] Keith, Hoyland Ricks, I mean we, the upperclassmen, the class just above us, they mentored us.  And then we mentored the class below that.  And then they mentored--you know, that was the way it was.  We shared books, shared notes, shared everything that we could do to help them make it through.  And that was how we got through, you know.  I walked into medical school and had my bow tie on, and you know, it was really something.  And that was, it was very hard.  That first year was tough, because it was really about studying and memorizing more than I'd ever studied and memorized before.  And we didn't have any tests that counted throughout the year.  We only had one test for two and a half days at the end, over the entire year.  And you had to pass it in order to go to the second year, and we did.  And I was just really blessed to do that.  And I met some great people in school, many of whom are friends still today, that were responsible for helping to not only get us through, but to guide us and to keep us community-focused, and to keep us wanting to stay.  Many of the people--I'll say this and finish.  But Linda Murray just is a recent past president of the American Public Health Association.  Stephen Keith works for the, he had worked for a long time with the National Medical Fellowships.  And Myrtis Sullivan, one of my other classmates, became the director of Maternal [and] Child Services for the State of Illinois.  And I could go on.  Georges Benjamin became the executive director for the American Public Health Association.  And you know, I was blessed, even though I didn't follow in that, do the M.P.H. [degree] when I was in med school.  And I still haven't done it, but I just look at how I've been incredibly blessed.  I mean, I couldn't have asked--there's no way that you could predict, from where I came from, that I would be able, and would have done the things that I've done had it not been for God's favor.  It's just, there's no way, just no way.  It's not that I had special preparation, it was really God seeing this as--I see this as how he chooses to use me.  And that's why I do what I do, not for any other reason.
Story_ID: 673376
Speaker 1: Okay, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: It's Terry Mason [HistoryMaker Dr. Terry Mason], T-E-R-R-Y, M-A-S-O-N, M-D.
Speaker 1: And, right, and what is your--well, your occupation is M.D. (laughter), but you're also a talk, talk show host and author--
Speaker 2: Yeah--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --a talk show host for, for now twenty-seven years on WVON [WVON Radio, Chicago, Illinois], 'Doctor in the House,' and author of my first book called 'Making Love Again' ['Making Love Again: Renewing Intimacy and Helping Your Man Overcome Impotence,' Terry Mason and Valerie Greene Norman].  My second book will be ti--entitled 'Travention: The Intersection Where Plants Meet Health' [ph.].  And, and I've also been doing a lot of television here and there and speaking all over the place.
Speaker 1: And you're Cook County [Chicago] public health commissioner (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: My current job is I'm the, I am the chief operating officer for the Cook County Department of Public Health.
Speaker 1: All right, all right.  And sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is--what is today's date (laughter)?
Speaker 1: May.
Speaker 2: Today is May 2nd; that's right.  It's May 2nd, 2018.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at The HistoryMakers' studio recording this.
Speaker 1: All right, and we are completing the interview--
Speaker 2: 1900 South Michigan [Avenue] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --that we started--right, and we're completing an interview that we started back in 20--the--April the 20th, 2012, actually.  That's when we started.
Story_ID: 673377
Speaker 1: When we left off you were in medical school [University of Illinois at Chicago College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois], and so this is 1978.  You're on the verge of graduation.  You were telling us how--about passing the test, the final test.  And can--we, we can pick up there I guess.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Well, the test we were talking about was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --the board exam, national boards part one.  And it was a test that we had been told about how horrific it was since we were--since we all started there.  And the first time I took it I failed it, because I was really just scared of it.  But over that summertime, I worked with a, a good friend and one of the people in the scholars program, James Scholars Program [James Scholar for Independent Study Program], who is now Dr. Cynthia Henderson-Jackson.  And we worked together, and I was successfully able to pass that test just a couple of months later.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, this is the test you have to pass to receive--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: To proceed on to the--into the second year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's part one of your certification processes.  You take the second part of it in your--in a later time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so we're at a--we're at around 1976 now, maybe?
Speaker 2: This is the end of my freshman year, so I started in August of 1974, and so this is now 1975.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, 1975.
Story_ID: 673378
Speaker 1: We were talking off camera before you started about food and Chicago's--this is 1975, and Chicago [Illinois] was a leader in, in preventative health--I mean black Chicago, in terms of black America, was kind of leading the charge for preventative health.  [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory was touting vegetarianism, all--not only in Chicago, but all over the country speaking on college campuses.  Dr. Al- and he was raising up--raising the profile of Dr. Alvenia Fulton, who had a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --health food store off of 63rd I think--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: 63rd Street, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive], right, right.  So he was promoting her.  And then he had, like, the Institute for Positive Education [Chicago, Illinois] with vegetarians, all their children in the preschool and the--then were, were, were vegetarians.  Then you had Phil Cohran [HistoryMaker Philip Cohran], who had a health food restaurant.
Speaker 2: The uni--the Universal--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --School of Meditation [Universal School of Meditation (ph.)].
Speaker 1: Um-hm, you had the, the original Hebrew Israelites of Jerusalem [African Hebrew Israelite Nation of Jersualem]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --call themselves, they had--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and Soul Vegetarian [Original Soul Vegetarian, Chicago, Illinois] on--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, they were--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --75th Street.
Speaker 1: Right, right, they were starting to--starting that.  And you had, of course, the Nation of Islam.  'How to Eat to Live' was a major work by--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --the Honorable Elijah Muhammad.
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: So a emphasis on and, and a recognition that we need to do something about how we eat and take care of ourselves.  Now as a young medical student, you--you, and you were in the cultural community.
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: So, so you were aware of all this at that time.
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: How, how aware were you?
Speaker 2: Well, we were--we came down--I was at Loyola University [Chicago, Illinois] early on when I started going down to Communiversity but later would come down on the weekends at the, the Center for Inner City Studies [Jacob H. Carruthers Center for Inner City Studies], now, at Northeastern Illinois University [Chicago, Illinois], where we got a chance to interact with all the people you just mentioned, not only that, but people on the pa- there was political consciousness.  As you know, Chicago is also an epicenter for that, and the--you had many, many people that were there.  Dr. Bobby Wright [Bobby E. Wright] was ta- teaching at that time.  There were, there were a number of people, so it was a real epicenter of learning, not just about food, but economy, politics, religion.  Everything was sort of--and of course, you know, Chicago is also the home of gospel music, so, it's a, it's a, it's a, it's a major player in terms of the world.  And many of our world leaders come through this way.
Speaker 1: Right.  So as Chicago is doing alternative politics, alternative music with AACM [Association for the Advancement of Creative Musicians, Chicago, Illinois], and they're doing alternative food.  But a lot of people--now Chicago is the home of a lot of people from Mississippi, Arkansas, Louisiana.  Hey, they, they talk about soul food; lot of soul food restaurants around here and Lem's Bar-B-Q [Chicago, Illinois] and all the--you know, the signs are actually pigs on them and people--you know, I mean, the--you know, this is the food that sustained us through slavery and Reconstruction and the nadir, you know.  And people say, well, why should we stop eating like that?  It got us this far, right?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that that's part of it, but if you really think about it, when I grew up my--both my parents [Clarice Fortune Johnson and Mason's stepfather, Thomas Johnson] were from the South, 'cause you know, that was the upward migration during that time.  But it wasn't just pork.  It wasn't just ribs.  It wasn't just meat.  I mean, the staple of what we ate was still beans.  It was beans.  It was rice.  It was cornbread.  It was--you know, that's, that's what really held us together.  It was a lot of soups that we made from all kind, all kinds of vegetables; you know, it was--there were a number of things.  I mean, fried chicken in our house was something we only had once a week, and that was maybe on a Sunday, and oftentimes that was baked in, in the oven.  So, I, I, I don't--I take issue.  Yes, we had the innards of the, the, the pig that we were given to eat because that was probably what our slave masters threw away, and we ate, we ate that.  But in terms of our indigenous diets, in fact, many people will argue that our indigenous diets prior to being brought to this country were plant based diets.  We were--and as many people are still today, eating starch, root-based diets, whether it's cassava or all of those different root-based things, and rice and peas and beans and peppers.  And when I was in Ghana--I've been to Ghana like eight times, and so I, I see that in terms of what is left of the indigenous way of eating.  So I, I think it's really important for us to understand that our diet was basically, it was far more plant based than there was meat.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  But you, you were aware of all this going on when you were in medical school.  And did at--but as, as we know, a lot of M.Ds. do not connect prevention to health (laughter)--I mean to, to medicine, in those days.  I'm telling you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, well, we didn't--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --in those days it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --we weren't taught.  I was at University of Illinois school of medicine [University of Illinois at Chicago College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois], and in, in the four years that I was there, we had forty minutes of nutrition.  And that nutrition was really based on what we called diseases of deficiency, so it was vitamin C deficiency called scurry--scurvy.  There was vitamin B deficiency.  There was all these deficiencies, iron deficiency, anemia, tho- it was all about the deficiencies.  It was never about the role that the vitamins played in maintaining and actually promoting health or what foods it was.  In fact, that was not even sort of seriously taken, that food had any role, and especially in those days, any role in our--what was happening with us in terms of disease.  At least it was not made widely known.  The industry, much like the tobacco industry knew what cigarette we're smoking, I think that many of the people in the food industry may have known that there was some relationship, but it was not widely made available.
Story_ID: 673379
Speaker 1: You passed your first board certification and moved on.  What was the next phase?
Speaker 2: Next phase we took--the next one we took after graduation [from University of Illinois at Chicago College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois], and that one was, that was easy.  That was no problem at all.  I'd--and once I got past that one--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And graduation was '78 [1978]?
Speaker 2: Seventy-eight [1978].
Speaker 1: Okay, I just had to mark that date--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --so make--okay.
Speaker 2: --the, the next grad, you took, you took it after your graduation, and that was boards part two.  And actually, you took it after your first year of residency, I believe.  I think it was after the first year of postgraduate training.  And that was no problem at all.  I mean, 99.9 percent of everybody that took the test, passed it.  It was, it was really far more functional in terms of the knowledge base than the other one, which was more just a bunch of facts that you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --had to remember.
Speaker 1: All right, all right, so it's more practical information that you would have encountered, you know, actually working.  So, now what--now at this point, do you decide--are you deciding, like, what branch of medicine you're going into, I mean, or what you're gonna specialize in, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No.  You mean in--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --do you think about--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --you mean in, in 1975?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, do think about that at--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, I just--we hadn't started our clerkships yet.  We still had to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --learn how to do a history and a physical exam.  So that was what was taken up in 1975, '76 [1976] time frame.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was learning how to do a history, a physical, how to reinterpret lab results and things of that nature.  So then we started our clerkships, which were the opportunities where we actually were on a surgery service or on a medicine service or on a pediatric service, and we got a chance, in six to eight week rotations, to sort of look up close to these particular major branches of medicine.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and then you can make some kind of decisions about it.
Speaker 2: Then we made a decision.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then we spent some time on after you finish all of those core rotations, medicine, surgery, OB [obstetrics and gynecology], peds [pediatric], internal medicine, once you finish those, then you have an opportunity to take what are called electives, and so I took my electives.  One of them was urology.  I got a little exposure to it on general surgery, but I spent more time with it at the Westside VA [Westside VA Hospital]--it's now called Jesse Brown VA [Jesse Brown VA Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois]--doing a urology rotation.  And, and I really enjoyed urology, and so I decided I would pursue that as a field especially for myself.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was it about urology that attracted you?
Speaker 2: First of all, you could almost see every organ you had to deal with, so you didn't have to guess.  You could--and over time, that even got better because we developed more instruments that allowed us to look, and you could look in the bladder and see if there was something there.  We eventually had instruments where you could look all the way up into the kidney with a scope.  You could look around inside the kidney.  You could do great imaging of the (unclear), you could do great imaging of the genital urinary system by doing special things that we call CAT scans [computerized axial tomography scan] or that were newer coming out at that time, different types of other x-ray modalities and ultrasounds, where we could actually see and know what was going on.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--all right, so, so, what are the--well, there are lot of or uri- you know, problems that people have that have to do with the urinary system, but did you focus on any par--particular problem?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things that was--we were ginning--beginning to see was these--one of the things that we began to really examine were these things called disparities, and disparities were just a difference between diseases and different groups.  And one of the things that was interesting to me is why was there such a big disparity in cancer, and specifically prostate cancer, in African American men, versus everybody else.  So that was very intriguing to try and figure out what was going on that that would be a problem.
Speaker 1: Well, quickly, what is the disparity?  How, how, how wide a gap is there between what happens to African American men in terms of prostrate [sic.]cancer, you know, contracted--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --than in other--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --the death rates from prostate cancer at one time were almost twice that of our white counterparts in some, some studies back at--if I can recall, back at the--that time.  And there wasn't really--there was a lot of things that said that that was a problem, but it didn't say why.
Story_ID: 673380
Speaker 1: And we needed to begin to understand why and got involved with the--I had always been involved with the Student National Medical Association but became much more involved with the National Medical Association.  Actually, while I was a student became--and a resident, I became president of the Student National Medical Association in, in Chicago [Illinois] at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Chicago College of Medicine] chapter and then later the president of the local branch of the National Medical Associations, the Cook County Physicians Association [Chicago, Illinois], taking that mantle over from people like Lucius Earles [Lucius Earles III], Gloria Bacon Jackson [sic. HistoryMaker Gloria Jackson Bacon], I mean, just a number of luminaries in, in our, in our, in our community.
Speaker 2: Right.  I think we've interviewed, well, Gloria Bacon Jackson.  I've--I know I've met Lucius Earles.  I think he's, he's one of our HistoryMakers [sic.].  But tell us about the National Medical Association.  You--and we've, we've heard about it before in The HistoryMakers, but somebody watching this may be only watching this interview, and they won't know what it is.  But what is the National Medical Association?
Speaker 1: Well, the National Medical Association was the national association for African American physicians, because prior to about 1950, black physicians weren't permitted to join the American Medical Association.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: No, I'm sorry.  Nineteen-o-six [1906] I believe it was.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so we started our own organization called the National Medical Association just like--and the corollary organizations, the National Dental Association, the National Bar Association, for the same reasons.
Speaker 2: And national in, in a lot of ways, it stands for Negro (laughter).  People used to say that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you know, the N, you know, National Medical Association.
Speaker 1: But it was a, but it was a national organization.  It had--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a state organization in this--in, in the National Medical Association, nationally.  For the State of Illinois, the state organization was called the Prayer Medical Association [ph.], and the local organization, the local branch of the NMA, was called the Cook County Physicians Association, no reference to Cook County Hospital [John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] at all--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --just the geographic--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --demarcation.
Speaker 2: Like the Cook County Bar Association--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Like the Cook County--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --is the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Bar.
Speaker 2: --is the National Bar Association--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's right.  And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --local.  Now this is, this is serious.  Now people, people watching this in the future may find it hard to believe that people within the lifetimes of, of you and I, you know, were not allowed, as a medical doctor, were not allowed to join the American Medical Association, that, that America was strictly segregated, north and south, along color lines that prevented blacks from becoming members of either the National Bar Association, National Medical Association [sic.], and other professions, you know, pro--professional groups.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, it was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And, and then you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --but I--they, they--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --could be criticized--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --obviously didn't read--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and you don't--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --history.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, right, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean, it's something that I, I think a lot of people just will find that hard to believe today, but that's just something that's a real fact of life.
Story_ID: 673381
Speaker 1: And even though when you came along a black doctor could be a member of American Medical Association--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the--there was still a need for a National Medical Association.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And, and explain why.
Speaker 2: Well, the National Medical Associa- Association was more than just a, an organization to parallel the other white groups.
Speaker 1: Or a reaction.
Speaker 2: Or a reaction to it.  It was--it became the family meeting.  The--it was the, it was a one time where black families from all--it was a--it, it, it's always organized as a family meeting.  There was always a child's program.  There was always an opportunity with the auxiliary, because early on we didn't have a lot of female physicians.  That's changed obviously now, but it's rea--it was, it was that.  The other thing was that it was an opportunity for the scholarship of African American physicians to be showcased, that, that oftentimes we didn't get a chance to do at the majority meetings.  So we--so you had the people like the LaSalle Leffalls [HistoryMaker Dr. LaSalle D. Lefall, Jr.] and you know, all of these people who were just amazing people who were not necessarily getting the recognition at the level they should get it, could come to the National Medical Association meeting and feel--it was you could feel at home.  You didn't have to worry about feeling intimidated or, you know, feeling like you really weren't wanted to be there or that you were the, the, the, the, the minority person sitting in a room and afraid sometimes to even speak.  And so it provided that kind of opportunity, not only for us to come together in terms of the camaraderie and what have you, but also for us to share a very significant academic program.  And a lot of firsts came out of the National Medical Association.  For example, I was involved with the national prostate cancer heredi- national hereditary prostate cancer project.  And that was led by Dr. Isaac Powell out of Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan] at the Karmanos cancer center [Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute] in Detroit [Michigan] and Dr. James Bennett [James K. Bennett], who was in Atlanta [Georgia].  And we had people all over the country that were helping to do this.  And we had, we had just an amazing drive because the--I think it was Harvard [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts], one of the other medicals--one of the other major institutions, really never addressed this issue of, of, of prostate cancer being an hereditary issue in African American men.  So, we took that on, and we, and we brought in then Francis Collins, and his right hand person was--oh, why am I blocking on his name?  I can--John Carpten [John D. Carpten].  John Carpten was actually an African American geneticist or dealt with a lot of the stuff that actually help decode the human genome on the Human Genome Project, working with Georgia Dunston [HistoryMaker Georgia Mae Dunston] and with Rick Kittles out of Howard University [Washington, D.C.] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Howard, right.
Speaker 2: So these things were, these things were things that would--were celebrated at our meeting.  And, and these men were--men and women were given a platform to be able to showcase their work, not just because they were black, but because it was a, a major academic and scientific breakthroughs that were happening.  We recruited more--for example, I think it was Johns Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland] or one of the schools on, on the East Coast that were doing a hereditary prostate cancer study.  And they claimed that they couldn't recruit significant numbers of black men.  Well, then we took that on and recruited more than anyone had ever recruited before, because you had to have four blood-related men in the family who had prostate cancer.  So we recruited out of all the major cities because through our--the urology section of the National Medical Association and many times we had joint meetings with other sections like the internal medicine section, the pediatric section, you know, OB [obstetrics and gynecology] section, where we could pass this message along and actually help--ask for assistance from the other section.  And we did it, and we recruited this--these, and we did that landmark study.
Speaker 1: Now this--that really speaks to the value of the National Medical Association and that kind of a concentrated networking that can--you know, if it weren't for the--a person could say if it wasn't for the--weren't for the National Medical Association focusing on that, it'd been really difficult to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to do (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: It was the National Assoc- Medical Association that provided me with a guide on what I should do; I'm talking about personally because of what happened to me here in the City of Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 673382
Speaker 1: After I fin- I was the first black resident ever trained in the history of Michael Reese Hospital [Michael Reese Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Wow.  Now that, yeah, that's--
Speaker 1: And I started in that program in 19--it was a five year program--'78 [1978].  I did two years of general surgery at--in the metro program, which was Mercy [Mercy Hospital; Mercy Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] and Illinois Masonic [Illinois Masonic Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois], but I spent most of my time at Mercy.  And then I did the last three years of my urology program at Michael Reese, and I was the first black resident ever trained.  They only had one other black attending or surgeon in urology at Michael Reese, and that was Dr. Harvey Whitfield [Harvey J. Whitfield, Sr.].  And Dr. Harvey Whitfield had come there because Dr. Leonidas Berry was there.  And Dr. Leonidas--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Leonidas Berry--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Berry--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --right, right.
Speaker 1: --as you know, was one of the fathers of modern gastroenterology and using--teaching people how to use what we now call the colonoscope and the--the scope to look in your stomach.  But if it not been for the National Medical Association--when I finished my residency in 1983 at Michael Reese Hospital, Dr. Whitfield was the lone African American attending physician, and I worked with Dr. Whitfield.  And they denied Dr. Whitfield and me the opportunity to come on staff at Michael Reese Hospital.
Speaker 2: So they had no African Americans on staff there at all.
Speaker 1: In the urology department--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --except Dr. Whitfield.  And I was working in Dr. Whitfield's office, seeing patients.  He would fer- refer patients to me that needed surgery, because he was in his twilight years even then.  But he was referring all of those other patients to the other urologists that were on the staff at Michael Reese at that time.  But since I was the first one that ever finished--and, and I must say I did a real good job.  You know, I wanted to make us proud, but after I finished I was told by the chief of urology then that I would not be--and he encouraged me not to apply to the attending staff.  In fact, he encouraged--he told me that if I did apply, that I would never pass my boards.
Speaker 2: That's encour- (laughter) that's, that's discouraging.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I mean, well, you got to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --remember it, it was a interesting time.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, sir.
Speaker 1: And when I went back to the--so this is where the National Medical Association came in.  But I went back and I was really sort of upset about it, and I listened to--we had a meeting, talked a lot of the docs at Michael Reese.  They were both black and white, and they were very upset about this.  And--but I didn't know what to do.  And so when I went to the end of May meeting, they, they me, they said, "Is there another hospital that you could--," it was John Norton.  I'll never forget it was John Norton at the end of May, he said, "Is there another hospital you could go to?"  And I said, "Yes, I could go to the hospital across the street, Mercy" 'cause I'd spent a lot of time there and, and had a lot of allies there, Dr. J--J.B. Williams [HistoryMaker Dr. James Williams], who, of the Williams Clinic [Williams Medical Clinic, Chicago, Illinois], a very--you know, those, those brothers did amazing work in, in the physician community, breaking barriers, his brother, Charles [Charles L. Williams, Sr.], and his other brother, Jasper [Jasper F. Williams].  Charles was an internal medicine doctor, and Jasper was a, a OB--Jasper was a OB/Gyne [obstetrics and gynecology].  And so it was, it was really comforting to have that sort of support.  And when I got to the end of May, and I told people what had happened, people said, "Oh, you should sue," or you should do this, you should do that.  And it was one urologist, John Norton from California, and he said--he told me, he said, "Listen, man, don't listen to what those folks are telling you because none of them gonna give you ten--ten dollars to help you with that lawsuit."  He said, "Is there someplace else you could go?"  I said, "Yes.  I could go across the street."  He said, "Then go.  Go there," because you needed at least a year out before you could sit for your board exam.  He said, "Go there, get your boards and then go back and apply, or then go back to Michael Reese."  Well, to make a much longer story very short, I did exactly what he said.  And it was interesting. I, I was doing work in erectile dysfunction, and actually it appeared on the Oprah show ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'].  And when that happened, I mean, the phones lit up; they were calling all over.  And right after that, I got a call from the guys at Michael Reese wanting me to come then and say, look, we'll offer you a full partnership.  You could close your office on the South Side, move downtown with us and all this other stuff.  And I told them no, I'm not doing that.  You didn't want me before.  I don't want you now.  And I can, you know, I can do what I need to do quite nicely where I am, and I did.  And I stayed there, and I worked right at--with Dr. Whitfield in his office, and eventually my own office, and working with the people who were extremely supportive at--at not only at Mercy, but many of the doctors at Michael Reese were also very supportive, sending patients from Michael Reese over to me to be seen in my office.  And I took those patients to Mercy to operate them or do what needed to be done.  So, I know it's a long tangential story, but I thought it was important.
Speaker 2: Oh, it is important.  It is important.
Story_ID: 673383
Speaker 1: Oh I was gonna ask you to maybe just tell us the difference between Mercy [Mercy Hospital; Mercy Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] and Michael Reese [Michael Reese Hospital; Michael Reese Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] in, in terms of they're, you know, they're, they're almost in a similar location, but what's, what's the difference between those two that they--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, Michael Reese was, at that time, was the major medical center.  I mean, it had one of the best internal medicine programs.  It was a nationally recognized training hospital.  I mean, it was much, much bigger than Mercy; Michael Reese had over a thousand beds, and Mercy only had like three hundred at that time, so it was much bigger.  It was much more prestigious.  You had men that were there that had helped move medical science afar.  There was, there was--just they had a, a, a sprawling campus.  Unfortunately, it's not--none of it's there anymore, but it was right across the street in Lake Meadows' development [Lake Meadows Apartments, Chicago, Illinois].  It was right in that area.  And they had other giants, like Don Chatman.  Don Chatman was one of the giants over at, at Michael Reese.  He brought laparoscopic surgery to Michael Reese, and you know, he recently passed on this year.
Speaker 1: Chatman?
Speaker 2: Dr. Donald Chatman [Donald L. Chatman], yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now he's an African American.  Just to make, make sure--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And we had--and that I had--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --wonderful support from the African American physicians that were there and non African Americans physicians, but particularly the African American physicians that were at Michael Reese.  And they, and they trained at Michael Reese, and it was a great training program.  I mean, I trained at Michael Reese.  It was a wonderful training program, and I think I was trained extraordinarily well there.  They did a great job with that.  And so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --Mercy did not have the full array of training programs.  It had internal medicine program; it worked with the U of I [University of Illinois at Chicago College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois] on the surgery program; it had pediatrics and OB [obstetrics and gynecology], but that was about it.  And Illin- and, and, and Reese had just a full spectrum.  It was amazing.  It was a powerhouse.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when, when you said you were the first black resident trained, you were the first black resident in your urology?
Speaker 2: The first black resident in urology trained (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, not, not the whole, the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Not the whole thing, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right, yeah, Michael Reese, okay.  So, which is still amazing because of its proximity to the, where they call a low end of, of the black community down here, the, the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the, the, the traditional black community.
Speaker 2: And Dr. Whitfield had been there--Dr. Whitfield, Harvey J. Whitfield [Harvey J. Whitfield, Sr.], had trained, or helped train, many of the doctors that were--the urologists on the staff at Michael Reese.
Story_ID: 673384
Speaker 1: Okay, so we're in the mid-'80s [1980s], and, and you're at Mercy Hospital [Mercy Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois], which is located right over near Michael Reese, right?
Speaker 2: Right, right, right at 26th--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: 'Cross the--
Speaker 2: --Street, 26th and Michigan [Avenue].
Speaker 1: Yeah, so this is a part of the city where you have Illinois Institute of Technology [Chicago, Illinois], Michael Reese Hospital [Michael Reese Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois], you know, Lake Meadows [Lake Meadows Apartments, Chicago, Illinois] and all this.  So, so, now, it was at Mercy that you developed the erectile dysfunction program--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Program.
Speaker 1: --right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Not only that, but we developed not only the erectile dysfunction program there, but with the help of--Sister Sheila Lyne was a, a very staunch supporter.  She, she--great lady.  She supported me in almost everything we wanted to do at Mercy.  She was the one that help us start a, a, a, a support group for men and women that were, where the men were suffering from erectile dysfunction.  That was the t- title of the first book, was called 'Not By Myself' and it was--I'm sorry--'Making Love Again' ['Making Love Again: Renewing Intimacy and Helping Your Man Overcome Impotence,' Terry Mason and Valerie Greene Norman], 'Making Love Again.'
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And we used that to, to--before then, before having all the solutions that we had, oftentimes, men would blame their wives or their partners for their erectile problems.  And so we really--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --put together a group of the men and the women.  We brought in Dr. Karen Taylor-Crawford, who was a co-therapist.  We actually did ther- sex therapy together at Loyola University [Loyola University Medical Center] in Maywood [Illinois], to help try and get couples to work through that.  And out of those stories came the stories that are in the book.  Sister Sheila also helped us start the prostate cancer support group.  There was not a prostate cancer support--there was one, but it didn't have any--there wasn't anything in the United States that I knew of that significant support for African American men, even though we had more prostate cancer than everyone else.  So we started a support group called Us Too [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It, it, it, it was--there was a, a, a group at Mercy that were patients of mine, and that group now has been meeting--over twenty-five years.  And they still meet very second Saturday of the month at Mercy Hospital.  And Sister Sheila also was the one who allowed me to have that first meeting, a big community meeting, talking about erectile dysfunction (laughter) at a Catholic hospital.  And she was always supportive.  I mean, even when I was a medical student she was always supportive.  And Mercy was--I went there as a medical student and learned how to do physical diagnosis.  I knew most of all the docs there because they were all very supportive.  And when I came back on the attending staff, they were still all very supportive.  So it was a nurturing environment at Mercy, not without its problems, like every place has its problems.  That was my experience there.
Story_ID: 673385
Speaker 1: When you think back at your experiences as a student and in the black community back during the Black Arts Movement and Black Power movement and with Communiversity and the other associations, you--I mean, as a physician, you're handling something in terms of your, your urology.  When you talk about prostate cancer and all that, you're dealing with issues that are deeper than just a physical problem, right?  You're dealing with moral issues and how people get along with each other and psychla- it was almost like what a reverend would deal with maybe, you know, with a--if, if he had a church that had those kind of psychologists, and, and some of them do, you know.  But it's, it's more than just a, a physical problem you're dealing with; it's a cultural--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --problem and a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --you know, it's, it's interesting you say that, because after I, I left practice in about 2010--I don't want to get too far head--but, one of the things I learned after I left for several--after I'd been gone for several years, is what the practice really did, 'cause I started this practice, and ten years later I brought the first associate, and shortly thereafter, I brought on the second associate 'cause we were so busy.  And I brought the first African American woman into that practice, who was the only board certified person in female urology.  That was Dr. Traci Beck [Traci P. Beck].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Traci, she took care of all of the issues, 'cause women had a lot of issues that weren't being properly addressed, and I want to get, gets--wanted to get somebody who was specifically trained to manage those issues for women.  But it was, it--you're, you're right: It was an, it was an interesting time, a very nurturing time, and I'm, I'm just grateful.  But the one thing I did find out when I left, which is where I started with this, is that what the practice did more than anything else, it gave men a sanctuary; it gave us a safe place to talk.  And I mean, when you talk about a man's sexual situation and his not being able to form [sic. perform], I mean he's naked now, and I don't mean physically naked, but he's, he's mentally, spiritually naked, because no man talks about that.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And, and to give a space where folks could feel comfortable talking about it, and some of the issues that were really--'cause men were hurting, and, and still hurting, and there's nowhere--there was nowhere for him to go, nowhere for them to talk to.  I mean, obviously, if they had good relationships with their wives, they had their wives, their families and what have you, but in terms of this professional space--and I mean I saw men of all walks of life, and, and my office would notoriously run two hours late because, I mean, there would be men in a room crying because of just the things they, they were--we were going to--going through.  And it was a safe space they knew that once they walked out of that room, no one would ever know what had, had taken place inside that room, and that was important.  So if anything I miss or, or sort of feel bad about, from one point of view, about not being in practice today, was not having a space like that.  And I'm talking about all men, but especially black men, because you know, we all--and I'm talking about men of all walks of life, all occupations of--you know, from very big guys to very (air quotes) little guys, terms of the perception around their occupation.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so in, in some ways urology becomes like, has to have a ministry attached to it in some ways to make it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I think that--well, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --it was a ministry for me.  It was a ministry, and in fact, it continued on in the things that I'm doing even today.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You know, we interviewed [HistoryMaker] Dr. Rogsbert Phillips, black woman in Atlanta [Georgia] that has a similar program for women with breast cancer.  And they, they get together and they meet, and some of them who don't have it anymore are still meeting and talking about their concerns and problems.  And it created a sisterhood, you know, but it's--what is it about physical illness that can create a community outside of that illness?
Speaker 2: Because it gives somebody a common starting point to have a conversation.  And you got to remember, now, this is, this is, this is way back, when people didn't talk about cancer.  I mean, cancer is the scourge like AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] became, from one point of view.  People didn't want to sit next to people that they thought had cancer.  People didn't wanna--I mean, it was--we had these crazy ideas that you could catch cancer.  I mean, it was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --crazy.  We didn't know any better, and, and so, really begin to talk about this more.  And, and I was blessed to do just--I work with Val Norman [HistoryMaker Valerie Norman-Gammon], who at that time was a producer at Channel 2 [WBBM-TV, Chicago, Illinois] doing the show called 'The Lee Phillips Show' [sic. 'The Lee Phillip Show'].  And Val--we really started doing much more public awareness kinds of things.  And she booked me--got me booked on a lot of different shows talking at the 'Common Ground' and mai- mainly the shows that aired on CBS, but really to start this conversation at a much larger level to the point now where people talk about these things like they're nothing.  But that was not the case in the early '80s [1980s].
Story_ID: 673386
Speaker 1: How has the treatment changed for prostrate [sic. prostate] cancer from when you started to today?
Speaker 2: It hasn't changed a lot.  I mean from the, the big groupings; I mean, we still are doing radiation, and we may have modified and improved that technique.  We're still doing surgery, where instead of making an incision necessarily and taking the prostate out that way, they're using what--I hate to use this term, but it's called a robot.  But basically, all it is, is they put some things in, and these are little instruments that we used to do--that we use when we did laparoscopic surgery, same things, only now you put a device on top of that, that you can sit over in a console someplace with this and, and move the same things you used to move with your hands when you were right over the table.  So we've improved it in that way, but it's still basically radiation, surgery; we got rodi- proton beam radiation; we got brachytherapy actually--I went over to George Moran [George G. Moran Sr.], who was doing brachytherapy way in Westmont [Illinois].  And nobody was doing bra- brachytherapy in the city, and I was sending my patients way out to Westmont.  And I'm like, why don't I just learn how to do this so I don't have to send the patients way out to Westmont?  So I went up there and, and learned how to do brachytherapy and then went out and did some other work and was started the first--one of the first people to do brachytherapy or putting in the seeds here in the City of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Now, now what is brachytherapy (laughter), sorry?  That's just--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay brachyther- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --so there is, there is radiation therapy.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: There's a thing called a linear accelerator that accelerates electrons, and it's a big machine, and it shoots a radiation beam.  And they carefully map it so that it concentrates its energy on the organ that we're trying to target.  There's another way to deliver radiation, and it's with a radioactive pellet.  And this is radioactive--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: --iodine.  And these little pellets then have to be placed into the prostate, okay, and they have to be placed in with certain relationships to one another.  And you do it with an ultrasound machine, under guidance so you can see exactly where the cells--where the XE pellets are going.  These radioactive iodine pellets then emit this radiation for a certain period of time, with the idea that it now can deliver a slightly higher dose from one point of view all at one time, rather than have to go for external beam radiation once you had--where you had to go every day for six weeks.
Speaker 1: And the radiation destroys cancer cells or--
Speaker 2: That's the theory.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: That's the theory.  And so, you had a choice of going for six weeks or having this radiation therapy implanted in about forty minutes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then you could go home, and you didn't have to get--now sometimes, depending on how bad the cancer was, some people actually did what was called sandwich therapy.  In other words, they gave the combination of brachytherapy and radiation therapy together to sort of imp- amplify the amount of ri- radiation the person received.  That wasn't without complications.  Then we used to freeze the prostate.  We did all kinds of things to the prostate.
Speaker 1: Well, prostrate cancer is preventable, from what I understand.  I, I guess it has a high, it's a high pra- pra- probabil- -bility of being prevented if found early enough, right?  Is that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --that true?
Speaker 2: --I--there, there's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's, that's a, that's a common thing that people say.
Speaker 2: Well, it's--we don't--and that's, that's another part of this, this saga.  But prevention is different than early detection.  So all the things that we have been told are preventative are really early detection--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --modalities.  So a PSA, getting a PSA, a prostate-specific antigen blood test, won't prevent you from having prostate cancer.  It may signal that there may be a problem, just like a mammogram won't prevent you from having breast cancer.  It helps us find an abnormality--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --abnormality earlier; or a colonoscopy, it doesn't prevent--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --colon cancer.  It just helps you find it earl--these are early detection modalities.  And that's real important that that distinction be made, because I've been spending the last fifteen years of my life or more really talking about what is real prevention, primary prevention, what that is.  And that's what I've been doing and, and, and going to dedicate the rest of my life to doing.
Story_ID: 673387
Speaker 1: So y- you worked on that project how--into the '90s [1990s] or--
Speaker 2: Which project?
Speaker 1: The, the, the urology project with the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --the cancer project.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I, I, I left--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Prostate cancer and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --practice in 2006.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And yeah, up in--yeah, I left shortly after I was named commissioner [of the Chicago Department of Public Health] out for the City of Chicago [Illinois].  So--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and up until that time, we continued with discussions.  And, and as I began to learn what we learned with erectile dysfunction, because I also was doing more penile implant surgery and had the largest erectile--one of the largest erectile dysfunction practices in the city of Chicago, particularly among black men, and so I was doing penile implants, which were surgical devices that we actually put inside the penis for men that had no other options in terms of trying to remedy their problem of erectile dysfunction.  I was doing more of those than probably many people in the city of Chicago.  I, I saw tons and tons of men with, with this erectile dysfunction problem.  And the, and the idea was we wanted to make certain that African American men had--were availed the same opportunity as everyone else, to try and have the full spectrum of treatments for erectile dysfunction.  And it was there that we learned that the problem of erectile dysfunction wasn't just a problem of erectile dysfunction.  It was the canary in the coal mine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And what I'm--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It's a symptom of something a lot--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: A lot worse.
Speaker 1: --worse.  All right.
Speaker 2: And so there was a study published in the Journal of the American Medical Association, I think in about 2009, that took men that had heart attacks, strokes, that had chest pain, that have all these other things, and they asked them about whether they had erectile dysfunction.  And surprisingly, the overwhelming majority of men who ended up with a heart attack had erectile dysfunction first, who ended up with a stroke, had erectile dysfunction first, who ended with abnormal heart rhythms, had erectile dysfunction first.  So what was that link?  Why was that the case?
Story_ID: 673388
Speaker 1: Well, what we learned and what Dr. Caldwell Esselstyn talked about in his book ['Prevent and Reverse Heart Disease: The Revolutionary, Scientifically Proven, Nutrition-Base Cure,' Caldwell B. Esselstyn, Jr.] and in the movie I was fortunate to be in called 'Forks Over Knives,' that was a movie that, that we did.  I have to remember the date, but it was, it came out, oh, let's see.  I was at Soul Vegetarian [Original Soul Vegetarian, Chicago, Illinois] restaurant; that was 2006 or seven [2007].  And what I'd ask the mayor [Richard M. Daley] permission to do was to ask the entire City of Chicago to not eat meat for thirty days.  And that was from January 1st, coming out of what I call the season of gluttony, which starts on Thanksgiving Day and goes all the way to January 1st.  So coming out of the season of gluttony, I asked for everybody to give their digestive systems a break and not any meat, and just eat vegetables and fruit and drink water for thirty days.
Speaker 2: Thirty days, that's, you know, that's--hey, this is a town of Moo and Oink [Chicago, Illinois], you know.
Speaker 1: No, I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --so--
Speaker 1: --I understand, but it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I had to ask.  And the reason was because now--and we had a number of people that came out.  We went to different restaurants.  I took people to different restaurants all over this--the Chicagoland metropolitan area.  We had classes on why we were doing this.  And the reason was, we could take the data that we learned from why this was a problem causing strokes and heart attacks and all the other things, and we could show that the, the foods that we were eating was causing inflammation in our blood vessels.  And it was destroying the inside lining of our blood vessels where we had what were called the endothelial cells, and the endothelial cells made the chemical nitric oxide.  And nitric oxide was important to make the blood vessels expand when you exercise.  It kept the blood flowing through so that it didn't get sticky.  But what was happening is that the standard American diet was killing our endothelial cells.  It was damaging our endothelial cells.
Speaker 2: Was meat the prime cul- culprit?
Speaker 1: It was saturated fats-- Okay.
Speaker 2: --that were predominantly found in animal based products.  Okay?
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And it was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So hamburgers and--
Speaker 2: All of these--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --that sort--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --animal-based--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --products, not just meat, cheese, eggs.  All of these, these thing were creating this pras- problem.  In fact, there is good data now from doctors like Dean Ornish, and what have you, that show that men who have prostate cancer should not be eating dairy or eggs, because that increases the lethality of their prostate cancer.  And they've shown with men who they've put on a vegetarian or vegan diet, when they drip their blood on the prostate cancer cells, the ones that are on the vegan diet kill about 70 percent of the prostate cancer cells.  The ones that are eating meat only killed about nine percent of the prostate cancer cells.  So we know--there's no question about this--we know that this is what's important.  And this has been--and the reason that this is important, why I talk about this, is we know that this damage to our endothelial cells that causes problems for our blood vessels is not just in the penis.  It's in the vessels that feed the eyes, the heart, the brain.  So if you have blood vessel problems anywhere, you have it everywhere.  It just doesn't happen in the heart.  And when--and so we've been talking a lot about why symptoms are really the bad way to think about a disease, 'cause by the time you have a symptom, that's not early; that's late.  When you're having a symptom, when you got chest pain and shortness of breath, that, that, that said, well, that's a early sign.  No, that's late.  The early sign that you're gonna have a problem with your heart that may end up in a heart attack or a stroke or erectile dysfunction or all--even inflammation--now this inflammation is being linked to diabetes, cancer.  A third of--cancers are all linked to what we eat.  And, and we showed in our studies that when you char meat and get that black mark on it, when you char meat beyond 375 degrees, you release certain chemicals that are direct toxins or potential toxins that may be responsible for development of cancer.
Story_ID: 673389
Speaker 1: So this was all happening to me as I was going through this urology training program, coming out.  Now we're going from--I finished the program in '83 [1983], came out and practiced in 1983.  And from 1983 to 2006 or seven [2007], I was doing this kind of work.  And then when I got the call from the mayor's [Richard M. Daley] office--well, I should stop because I, I don't want you to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I just wanted to ask you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --ask you a question.
Speaker 2: --a little bit about what you were saying about what we eat and the--I know I, years ago, had the--fifteen years ago I heard piece on public radio [National Public Radio] about people who like their meat blackened on--you know, and that was really--you know, blackened meat is really not a, you know, healthy (laughter), you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No, because it's a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --that when you char- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --polyaromatic--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --char meat--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --hydrocarb- carbons--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --that get formed.
Speaker 2: Yeah, recently, there was an article about coffee being over--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: From the acrylamides.
Speaker 2: --roasted, you know, yeah, as, as being bad for you, you know.  But that information, was that coming through the medical profession, or were you doing research on your own, or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No.  That information was coming through physicians like myself who took--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --up the time to do the research--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay, so your own--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to, to, to put this out.  And then, I learned a lot of this back during--when we were doing work on erectile dysfunction, before the drugs came out, because all the drugs did--see the body made that nitric oxide, and that made the blood vessels dilate.  Blood came in, and you got an erection.  And then after a time, that chemical would go away, or we'd move that chemical, would go away, and then the nitric oxide production would go down, and then the erection would go away.  Well, what happened was the drugs, all the drugs did--and actually they were not originally designed to do this.  This was a side effect.  They were developing the drug for something else, and the guys began to notice that they had better erections.  And it was because those drugs just blocked the chemical that broke down the nitric oxide and made it stang- stay around longer.  That's all it did.
Story_ID: 673390
Speaker 1: And what you're suggesting too I think in what you just--what you said a little while ago was that the--we should stop looking at the body like--the body parts as characters in a play or something (laughter), you know, where you, you know, you take a medicine that will heal your nose or your ears or your, your brain, your penis or what--or feet, instead of look at the whole thing.  So if the whole thing--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --is healthy, then chances are everything in it will be healthier, you know, because of the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And I think the major message is that we have to stop--we've been given a way to think about disease that in my mind is totally wrong.  And what I've been doing over the last twenty-five years and more is really going to everyone who would listen to talk about--I do it on my radio show.  I do it--I mean, I've--I can't tell you how many talks I've given at churches and organizations and groups and things of this nature and trying to reach men to let them know that this stuff that we call a manly diet will take your manhood.  You know, all this, the meat and steaks and, and, and sausages and things of that nature, that will rob you of your manhood over time because those things are where those chemicals, those saturated fats and other things live that can create a problem with the, the blood vessels and, and the chemicals that create a problem.  For example, we know that in eggs and meat, including shellfish and poultry, when we, we eat these, and the bacteria in our gut have been changed.  And so the bacteria in our gut changes--have been changed because of the way we've been eating.  And when we eat those things it produces a chemical called TMAO, trimethylamine N-oxide, and it does that in, in help--with help from the liver.  And when that goes into your bloodstream, it helps--I don't care if you're black, white, green, or orange.  It goes into your bloodstream, and it helps to destroy the inside lining of your blood vessels, and early on you don't know that that's happening.  You don't know until it's caused enough blockage to seriously enough impede the flow to a vital part of your body.  And if it happens to a part of your brain that controls your ambulation, then you won't walk or you won't talk.  You follow what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: It, it, it's really, it's really important that this--so this is what I've dedicated--That's why I left practice, because I was in practice until that time, and it wasn't until I got the word and call from the mayor's [Richard M. Daley] office--which actually that's a whole 'nother story.  I tried to tell them I didn't want to do this job (laughter), but it turned out to be one of the best things I ever did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, but, okay, so the reason why you left practicing was to be, be able to tell this.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Do more--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --first I have to say--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --more--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --that I, I didn't believe that what I was doing in practice was curing anybody--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that I felt that I needed to do, do something that could not only help, but prevent the disease from happening.  Why cure something?  That's working on the wrong end of the spectrum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What you need to do is prevent it from happening, and you don't have to worry about curing it.  And it's easier to prevent it than it is to try and fix it once it's--the cat's out of the barn.  You following it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I hear what you're saying.
Story_ID: 673391
Speaker 1: A lot of people think about it in terms of our problem with young black males going to jail.  You wait until they're in jail, then trying to get them out.  I mean, if you try (laughter) to prevent them from going in that might be more effective than trying to prevent them from being abused once they're in jail or being arrested after they commit a crime rather than trying to keep them from being involved in the crimes, or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I would back that up even further.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, to society--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I would say that, that what we--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --need to do is do--first of all, if I could digress for a moment, first of all, I think that the problem that we see today with gun violence happened with the destruction of the family forty, fifty years ago.  That was systematic--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Actually--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --that the well--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --we can go back further than that (laughter)--
Speaker 2: And probably forty--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and maybe more--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --to four hundred years.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But I grew up in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois], and, and I would say all the people that I knew on that block had two parents in their house.  And the parents worked, and they, and they did what they needed to do to make sure the children had what they needed.  I don't know--you know, there was redlining.  We know about what redlining is and, and, and making sure that blacks couldn't buy homes in different areas, so folks were concentrated in certain areas.  We know about these--and then so you put people in these really untenable situations.  You build these cages called projects that you put people in, and you wonder why that they--you, you could, you could do that with mice and you would see the behaviors would change.  This is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: --this is, this is, this is a real problem.  And then you build a social system that says we're gonna give you money if you have children, but you can't have a man in the house.  So, what does that do?  That helps to foster breaking up the family.  I mean, I remember, because we had, in my own family, people who get down on their luck.  And at, at first the housing projects were folks that just got down on luck and needed an opportunity to stay in a decent place until they could do better, but that's what eventually happened.  What eventually happened is that this became a way--because our cousins, some of our cousins, whenever the caseworker was gonna come, we had to go over there and take everything that belonged to my uncle out.  We had to make sure that they didn't see any semblance of any activity that there was a man living there at all, even though those were his kids, and he was trying to do--to take care of his kids (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 673392
Speaker 1: So this whole thing about what's happened now, we can't look at this today and say this is what's happening today.  But once you do that, and you destroy--begin to destroy the family structure, and you remember the ability for a man to be a man in the house--and I'm not trying to blame anybody.  I'm just looking at it sociologically.  Well, when you do that, you know--and that happened with the change in federal policy.  Many people I knew were steel workers, black and white.  I mean, it happened all over the United States.  When they changed the policy and made it cheaper for steel to be imported from someplace else than to be made in the United States, all those factory workers in, in, in, in Youngstown Sheet and Tube [Youngstown Iron Sheet and Tube Company, Youngstown, Ohio] and U.S. Steel [United States Steel Corporation] and all these, these places, those men and women lost those jobs.  When you lose the job and there's no income, the family dies.  If the family dies, the community dies.  And then what you do, if there's no opportunity, there's the influx.  And we know drugs came into the commun- were brought into the community.  That whole economy started an entirely different sort of thing.  And when I talk about violence, you, you can't talk about it today.  You've got to go back forty, fifty years and see how we got to today.  And when we look at the social structures that went away, the, the, the investment in public--I went to public school.  I went to public school in Englewood.  We had teachers at those days, black and white, that took pride in doing things with the, with the kids and--when I was early on it was predominantly white, and then it changed, but still, the teaches were there, and they took pride.  They started early.  My science teacher started early.  I mentioned his name, Dr. Louis Wright [ph.], and Mrs., Mrs. Green [ph.] that did a math class, and they, they, they encouraged us.  They didn't even tell us what books they were getting stuff out of.  We were doing college level work in sixth grade.  And you don't--I mean, nowadays, I, I, I feel for teachers because they, they have a difficult time.  And unfortunately, to get that kind of education you've got to put your child in a private school, where the tuition in a private schools for kindergarten are almost as much as they are for college, and that's not--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --right.  We should have good public education.  But it's not being funded right, and the, the, the, the neighborhoods that these--the kids are coming from--how do you have a school that has a 90 percent graduation rate and a zero percent number of students that are college ready?  How do you do that?  How do you--how do--where, where are those students supposed to go?  I was sitting on the board of directors of Hales Franciscan High School [Chicago, Illinois].  We were taking students with a 2.5 GPA [grade point average] coming out of Chicago Public Schools and, and maybe some of the Catholic schools.  But a 2.5 GPA from eighth grade is meaning that you're probably reading around fifth grade.  How is that student--you know, you, you look at students come into these places, and you've got to now bring them (gestures)--you got to spend all this time bringing them up to where they should have been when they walked in the door.
Story_ID: 673393
Speaker 1: Now I'll answer your questions.  Now I'm sorry, so we can--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, that was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --get done.
Speaker 2: --that was the answer now.  So, so you, you decided--you were thinking--now did--were you, were you offered a job by the cit- the city before you stopped practicing as a physician, or, or did you stop first, because you know, you, you said you wanna get at the root of what was going on?  Did you see the--did you have a plan for how to do it before you were offered a job by the city, or did you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No.  I, I--the gee--the job with the city, I was still in practice.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And actually, when they called me, I said, "What the hell are you calling me for?"  You know, "I'm, I'm, I'm already doing what I want to do, you know, from one point of view."  And they were persistent.  And you know, I hadn't interviewed for anything for many years; I mean, I've been self employed.  And they kept bugging me, kept calling me, kept calling me, kept calling me, so I started talking to folks about, well, should I go and deal with this?  So, my attorney then was Don Hubert [Donald Hubert].  I don't know if you inter- got a chance to interview Don.  Don Hubert was a, an attorney.  We met at Loyola [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] in undergrad.  And Don said to me, "You should talk--there are some people you should talk to."  So I talk to--and he sent me to see [HistoryMaker] Valerie Jarrett, who I knew, who was running at that time.  She was running--had run ComEd [Commonwealth Edison Company].  She'd done a lot of stuff with the cit- city; [HistoryMaker] Sharon Gist Gilliam, who was a budget director--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Under Harold Washington--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --under Harold--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --right.
Speaker 1: --Washington.  He sent me to people like that, and, and Mike Scott [HistoryMaker Michael Scott, Sr.] and other folks and asked them to talk to me about service like that.
Speaker 2: Now I don't know what you were thinking at the time, but I know I remember 2001.  Well, the--Richard M. Daley was the mayor.
Speaker 1: Um-hm (nods head), was the mayor.
Speaker 2: And there was still in the black community, because of the conflicts with the, with the Democratic Party in the city and how blacks have been treated, there was still a little distrust there, you know.  People were still smartin' from Harold Washington passing away twelve years earlier, you know, in some way.  So were you--what, what did you think about the city then and what it was trying to do?
Speaker 1: Well, I was like, I was like, why you--I, I'm not interested; stop wasting my time; don't call me.  And eventually I went down for an interview, just--so I said--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: "Well, I'm gonna come down for an interview so you guys will stop calling me."  So I met and I, and I, I talked with the people.  I hadn't interviewed for anything in I don't know how long 'cause I'd been self employed.  I didn't even--I looked on website for what to say.  I didn't even know we had a health department.  I didn't even know what it did.  So I went down and I talked with them, and they said, "Hey, well, somebody else we'd like for you to meet.  Could you come back again?"  I'm like, for what?  I'm sure I'm doing all the wrong things, but--so I, I go back and I meet with Ron Huberman, who was at that time the chief of staff for Mayor Daley.  So I meet with Ron, who was a bright guy, I mean, just really bright and really thinking about trying to do something different and energetic.  And, and so I start thinking about it.  So I went back and talked to Sister Sheila [Sheila Lyne], who had been health commissioner and then came back to Mercy.  So I asked Sister about this, and I decided that what I would do to help make a decision is I'd asked people only who had something to lose--that didn't have anything to lose or maybe had something major to lose, to tell, to tell me about this job.  And at that time I was very busy at Mercy, bringing a lot of money into Mercy Hospital [Mercy Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] and what have you.
Story_ID: 673394
Speaker 1: I guess I, I'd failed to mention that you, you had started 'Doctor in the House' already at this point.
Speaker 2: 'Doctor in the House' was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Two.
Speaker 2: --nineteen ninety-one [1991].
Speaker 1: Ninety-one [1991], okay.  And you'd already, you, you, you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That was a fluke.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, well, you want to talk, talk about that story, and then we'll get, we'll get to--now this happened--you, you go to the city in 2005?
Speaker 2: Two thousand--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --six [2006], yeah.
Speaker 1: So we want to, we want to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Let's backtrack a little bit--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: All right, I, I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --like--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --should keep it all the chronology--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: 'Doctor--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I apolo--
Speaker 1: --in the House'--
Speaker 2: 'Doctor in the House,' I went to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --ninety-one [1991]?
Speaker 2: 'Doctor in the House'--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--okay.
Speaker 2: --I went down to do a--I was invited to come on as a guest of Deborah Crable.  And so I went down and we started talking, and we had a good time.  She said, "Well, can you come back again?"  So I said, okay, I'll come back again, so I came back.  She said, "Well, can you come back again?"  And so the last time I went to go down to see--to do the show Deborah wasn't there anymore, but I went, and I didn't know that.  So then the, the--Courtney--I think Courtney Scott [Courtney R. Scott] was the producer.  She said, "Well, I'll tell you what: just do this at this time.  You gotta take a break at this time," and that--and that's how I ended up on 'Doctor in the House.'  And it became known as 'Doctor in the House.'  That was--that happened in '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so this is almost like--it's almost reminds me of Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] and Dr. Phil [Phil McGraw] or something (laughter), bring--kind of mentions him on--brings him on, and then he finally, he, he spends off; he's his own--he's got his own show.  And people like hearing professionals on--I mean doctors especially, you know, give advice.  Everybody's got health concerns.  The public radio had Dr. Quentin Young, who just passed away I think a couple of years ago.  But he was really--you know, had a great show and lot of people liked him for his political point of view and as--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --well as his--you know.  So here you are, you're on VON [WVON Radio, Chicago, Illinois].  This is a voice of, of black Chicago, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --basically.
Speaker 2: --voice of the Negro that became--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --voice of the nation.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--yes, sir, yes, sir, right.  So they--you're on the, on the primary instrument for getting information to the black community.
Speaker 2: And been doing it every week.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I'm doing a weekly show now since then.
Story_ID: 673395
Speaker 1: Since we're talking about the show ['Doctor in the House'], have the--any stories from the show you can share with us about the callers who called in and surprising--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --calls or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --think one that sort of typifies why I do this show, is to give people information in the way that they understand it.  I talk to the folks on the radio like I'm talking to my [maternal] grandmother [Grace Perkins], you know.  I don't want them to feel bad 'cause they can't pronounce the names of things and don't understand what it is.  And just to give you an example of one, I had a lady that called the show one time.  She said, "Dr. Mason [HistoryMaker Dr. Terry Mason]."  She said, "I've listened to you, but I couldn't listen to you the other day because I had to go to the hospital."  I said, "What?"  And I said, "Why you had to go to the hospital?"  She said, "Well, I fell out."  I said, "Fell out?  Girl, what happened?"  She said, "I--you know, Dr. Mason, you know, I don't trust these little doctors, so I went to one little doctor, and he gave me a bag of medicine.  And so somebody said there was another little doctor I could go see, so I went to see the second doctor, and so he gave me a bag of medicine.  I didn't tell him about the other doctor I went to.  So all the medicine that was different, I took, but the stuff that was the same, I didn't take."  And so she said, "Then I decide, some of my girlfriends told me I should go to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]."  So she went to the University of Chicago, and she didn't tell the doctors at the University of Chicago about the other two doctors that she'd already seen 'cause she wanted to see what they were gonna say.  So she--and they gave her, she said, a bag of medicine.  So all the medicines that were different, she took, but all the medicines that were the same, she didn't take.  And so she said, "And one day, I just was walking around, and I just fell out on the floor, and the paramedics had to come and get me."  And I said, "Well, what were you taking?"  And she says, "I don't know."  I said, "Look, I'll tell you what: there's, a break is coming.  You go get your medicine, and when I come back from the break, you bring them and don't worry you can't pronounce them.  You just spell them out."  So I took a lot of time.  I had this lady spell out all the names of the medicine that she was taking.  Turns out she was taking three of the same medicines, but they had different names.  And they were all beta blockers, and the beta blockers are used to slow your heart rate down and to bring your blood pressure down.  So she'd taken three times as much of this medicine than she needed to take, and that's why she passed out.  So the message there was, "Darling, you should always take the medicine with you," but it was her way.  Because she didn't trust people she didn't--and they didn't inure that trust with her, that they--she didn't feel that this was the on--she felt that this was the only way she could validate what they were saying, which means that that's a different kind of problem, that there's a communication issue here among the patient and the physician, because the first thing I would have asked a lady her age, knowing the problems that she had, that she had to be seeing somebody else, that she had to have been taking something, and I would have pressed her on trying to figure out what else she was doing.  But she might have told--I, I don't know what she told him, what she didn't tell him.  But that's one of the--I think that's a classic story from what happened with VON [WVON Radio, Chicago, Illinois].  And, and a lot of the things that I do on that show in--is, is really just trying to make stuff real plain and simple--
Speaker 1: Well, there are so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --for people.
Speaker 1: --many complicated issues that come out of that story--
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: --first of all, that--I mean, I'm amazed that she--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: She didn't die.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that you could go to three different doctors and nobody knows what the other one is doing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And you could get--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --possible.
Speaker 1: --you can get treated.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Her distrust issue--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --which is typical of the black community (unclear) all--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --levels.  Very few people trust an M.D., and there's--I mean, I, I think that probably goes across the country, that, that M.D.s are--people go to them 'cause they have to, but then in general conversation they, they always say they don't distrust them or they're--lot of people are afraid to go to the doctor when something's wrong with them.  I mean, that's a typical story.  And you--if you go to the health food store, you hear M.Ds. are not praised in health food stores.  People stand around and talk about everything that, that could possibly help them except going to the doctor, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I think that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Which is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And you're right, but that's what I said.  That typifies why I do the show.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  And yeah, her having the wiliness to think of a method where she could control her--the administration of medicine to herself.  You know, that's, that's another--
Speaker 2: That's a whole 'nother story.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I mean, this is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But that's why I said, that's the--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: This is really--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That is the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --that's the story that says where we are--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --and what--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --we have to do, and what's missing?  And what's missing is trust; that's what's missing, and the ability to communicate, because a couple of the doctors she said that where she couldn't understand what they were saying, not--some there was a language issue, and others, that the doctors just used language she didn't understand.
Story_ID: 673396
Speaker 1: It's been a issue for a while, this understanding what a doctor is saying.  There's--so many doctors are trained here in Chicago [Illinois].  I know you have doctors of all nationalities in hospitals, and people are--it--I've heard black and white people talk about how they don't know, they, they, they don't know if they can trust a foreign doctor, you know.  I mean, you know, I don't know.  But they do that.  They, you know--the fellow is from the Philippines or if he's from India or if he's from--you know, there, there is a communication difference when you're talking to an African American doctor and you're African American and you're talking to someone from another--not only someone who's not African American, but somebody from another country altogether.  It's--creates some, some fear--more fear in a situation.  Yeah, that's something that's been going on for a while.  Well--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, there's studies that show that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --when you have what are called homoracial experiences, not homosexual, but homoracial, same race, that the communication is usually better.  But I think that all physicians need--and, and a lot of times when people don't understand something, a lot of times people just say it louder and slower, but they say the same thing (laughter), and that's not communication, that's not.  And I will talk to folks, you know, in a very folksy sort of way, "Girl, darling, what you do that for?" you know, I mean, because there has, there has to be some emotion.  There's a bridge that that trust gets built over, okay.  And it's gotta--and, and what they got to feel is that you care about me.  You're not just trying to get, get me out to get to the next patient, that you are not just trying to write me a bunch of prescriptions.  And doctor--and a lot of people think that the doctors make money on the prescriptions.  The doctors don't make any money on the prescriptions.  And then--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, you hear--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --the other thing--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --that kind of--that's kind of talk you hear in the beauty shop and the barber shop.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: People say, "Ah, he's just writing that so he can make some money."
Speaker 2: Doctors don't make--they ta- they--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Or, "He's just giving you this test so he can make more money."
Speaker 2: Well, but the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: They just--you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but those are the things that happen that people don't really understand.
Story_ID: 673397
Speaker 1: And then the other part that's happened in medicine, which was the other thing I did not like, was what I call the corporatization of medicine.  And in the old days, the primary care doctor owned that patient, and he could--he or she could direct where that patient went.  Now, the company, the, the sponsoring company, owns that patient, and that patient goes where that company tells them to go--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you're talking about the advent of H- HMOs [health maintenance organization], which--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: HMOs--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --which--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --all of the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --those--that, that movement or that, that phase of medicine was happening as you became a doctor.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I remember I--in, in '75 [1975], when you're in medical school [University of Illinois at Chicago College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois], I had a, a doctor in Dayton, Ohio, Dr. G.S.A. Ogdegbolie [ph.].  He was from Ghana.  That was my doctor.  But you know, several years later, in--I, I walked into a wall at the university of--Sangamon State University [Sangamon State University; University of Illinois at Springfield] in (laughter) Springfield [Illinois].  I actually walked through a--to a plate glass.  And I thought it was a way out, and (laughter) I hit the glass and tore my eye open.  They took me a H- to an HMO.  It's first, first visit to a HMO in my life.  Humana [Humana Inc.], you know, they were--and people were saying, "You never been to an H- HMO before?  You don't know about these?"  I said "No."  I really didn't; I didn't know.  I hadn't, hadn't been to a doctor in years.  And I was stitched up.  But that's when--pretty much after that it's everywhere, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.  And the corporations became the ones who were practicing medicine.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And they become--they became vertically integrated organizations.  And now you see the outgrowth of this is these huge sprawling systems, hospital systems and what have you, all vying for patients either in a prepaid environment, like an HMO, or you, you're in another plan where you are in an employer--sponsored plan, but you still have a set of doctors you go to, a set of clinics you go to.  There are rules of how you have to get certain tests done, what you have approvals you have to get in order to get these things done.  And I'm not sure that--as Chris Kosmos [ph.] used to say, "I'm not sure the juice is worth the squeeze."
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I don't know--as it--has the H- HMO system made it--the medicine more affordable for people, do you think, or has it--how has it, has it--who is it benefitting?
Speaker 1: Well, I think the problem with the, the HMOs and, and especially with some of the--maybe some of the government or state sponsored ones, if you don't fix the payment system, it doesn't matter.  So you could be in a, a state sponsored program, but if the state doesn't pay the bills, then you're still--where are you?  You're still in the situation where people don't want to see you because they know they're not gonna get paid.  And who, who would want to do that?  Who would want to put in all the work all the time in seeing you and not be paid?  Especially as a physician, now all of your expenses have gone up, because now you've got to maintain this electronic medical records; you've got to main--you've got to do all these quality things.  These are things that are good, no doubt, but they all cost.  And so that means if I'm not collecting what I need in order to offset the cost of my operation, it's very difficult for me to stay in business.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So as a H and O- MO, you have a more collective management of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, you have that medical--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --medicine.
Speaker 1: --groups.  You have that in another group.  The health maintenance organization, the whole theory behind it was let's pay the doctors to keep people healthy.  Well, the problem is doctors have never, ever been in the business of keeping people healthy.  You only came to the doctor when you were sick.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And then when you came to the doctor to get your test, your checkup, it was--it, it, it's an archaic way of trying to figure out about if you have a problem.  Yes, we do blood tests and things of that nature, but if we really had a health care system, at the cornerstone of that system would be how we would help people eat the right things and be engaged in the right activities.
Story_ID: 673398
Speaker 1: And our system, a true health care system, would make all the good food cheap and widely available; that's what it would do.  It wouldn't make all the bad food cheap and wildly avail- widely available.  It wouldn't subsidize corn and the production of high fructose corn syrup.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It wouldn't subsidize gr- the, the, the, the corn, the--and some of the things that are used, soy that is used to create animal feed.  None of the--and, and these--a lot of the foods that we're eating today, the idea of something grown locally is, is, is, is something that people are looking for and want to come back.  But you may be eating a tomato that came from Peru or grapes that came from Argentina.  And you don't know when those were picked, and you don't know what happened to them to get from there all the way--I mean your food may travel ten thousand miles.
Speaker 2: And who sprayed what on it there, you know?
Speaker 1: Well, you got to keep it to look fresh by the time it gets--or you pick it before it's, it's so, it's so young you don't even have--it's not ripened in any sort of way.  Just quickly, one of the guys that came to one of our food summits I could talk about later, talked about what we really ought to have on our food is a picked date, not a other date.
Speaker 2: Yeah, ex- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --expiration (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it should say when it was picked--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so you could really have something that would tell you about the food.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But the other thing is, you don't--you, you, you can't have watermelon in January because that's not in season, for--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Not around here--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --the most part--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --anyway.
Speaker 1: Not around here.  It's not--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It's got to come from someplace else.
Speaker 1: It's gotta come--so those, those are the things that we have to balance.  That's all I'm saying.
Story_ID: 673399
Speaker 1: So 'Doctor in the House' is established.  And--
Speaker 2: In '91 [1991]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --you gave us a good ex- ex- excellent example of, of why that's a valuable program.  Two thousand two [2002] you established the Center for New Life [Chicago, Illinois].  Now what, what was that, that--
Speaker 2: That--well, the Center for New Life was--I was at the office, and I was beginning to read about the role of endothelial cell dysfunction, as we talked about earlier.  And, and looking at the role, people were beginning to publish, like Dr. Giovannucci [Edward Giovannucci] and others around the role that exercise and diet and meditation--Dean Ornish was beginning to publish in terms of really treating the entire patient.  So we started--I took out of a lease for another thirty-two hundred square feet right over at 2850 South Wabash [Avenue] and put in what looks like a, look like a gym.  And there was also data that shows that men who have prostate cancer who were taking these drugs to try and treat their metastatic prostate cancer, that weight bearing exercise actually helped to strengthen their bones that the medicine was making weak.  So I said we should do that.  That makes sense.  And then what are we--I was learning is that food--where I was beginning to learn about the role of food.  So we--I had it--hi- not hired, but partnered with a vegan chef to provide meals for the patients.  And so people could come in.  They--and we had a, a trainer that with a master's trained degree--had a degree in exercise physiology and kinesiology to design exercise programs.  We had a wonderful stretch class.  We had all of these things.  And we had a big press conference, and everybody came.  And, and actually, I still have footage of that.  But, what happened was, was that it wasn't paid for well enough by--I mean I couldn't figure out how to make it work financially as well as I'd like to.  I was--my heart was there, and I subsidize it with several tens of thousand dollars of my own money because I believed in it, but it came to a point where I just couldn't do it anymore, and I had to let it go.  But the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Where were you lo- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --concept was right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Where, where were you located?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: 2850 South Wabash.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was--it was right in the--it was in the same building where the urologic practice wa--was.  In fact, people could go out the back door of the urologic practice into this--into the center.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So it, so it lasted from 2002 until--
Speaker 2: God, it was about 2000--just before I left.
Speaker 1: Okay, about 2005 or so?
Speaker 2: Two thousand six [2006].
Story_ID: 673400
Speaker 1: Two thousand four [2004] you launched the Restar for health campaign.
Speaker 2: Restart, Restart.
Speaker 1: Restart, start with a T?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, Restart--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Restart--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --for Health--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --for health.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was--remember when I asked the--I told you I asked the mayor [Richard M. Daley] for the permission to take everybody and put them on--had them not eat for a month?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So we started that right at Soul Vegetarian [Original Soul Vegetarian, Chicago, Illinois] restaurant, and we started lectures right there at Soul Veg.  And we had (burps) excuse me--had cooking classes right at Soul Veg on 75th Street.  And, and actually, the Restart, then we moved it.  It grew so big, that we had to go out of Soul Veg, and I talked to Pastor Moss [Otis Moss III], and we moved it to Trinity [Trinity United Church of Christ, Chicago, Illinois].  And we moved it to Trinity, and I did it there for probably another ten years.
Speaker 1: Now, in terms of Soul Veg, I know they, they use meat substitutes that are, are essentially made of gluten.  Are--I guess they're--are they okay unless you have a gluten problem or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, most--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --or allergy or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --all of, most all of the--I call that a transitional diet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, what happened was--and I went to actually--Prince Asiel I went to 'cause when I told him I couldn't operate on another guy anymore, I went--he sent me to his home in Israel.  So I went to Israel, and I had my spiritual immersion then, and that was quite fascinating.  I mean, I went to everywhere.  I went to--I walked in the Garden of Gethsemane.  I was in Galilee [Israel].  I was in--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: So you're the guest of Prince Asiel Ben Israel of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: In his--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --the original--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Hebrew Israelite [African Hebrew Israelites of Jerusalem]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Hebrew Israelites, okay.
Speaker 2: I met Ben Ammi [Ben Ammi Ben-Israel].  I went there and I met Ben Ammi.  I saw guys sixty--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Who's from Chicago [Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I met guys sixty-five years old playing basketball in the hot sun with kids forty years younger than them, and without any problem.  I saw the studies that had been done by Howard University [Washington, D.C.] showing that they had lower cholesterol, and blood pressures were low and things of that nature.  So this diet that they cr- put together that you saw so--see--still see it, Soul Veg was meant to be a transitional diet.  In other words, it had the same tastes and textures that we were accustomed to eating.
Speaker 1: Soul food, the, the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But it had--
Speaker 1: --Soul Veg, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so what was to happen is that it was really to put you on a path really to eating just vegetables.  But a lot of us get, get stuck right in, in the middle, 'cause we like those tastes and those textures.  But that's not what it was intended to do, so--and we wanted the same kinds of foods, so they came up with a vegan version of macaroni and cheese; they came up with a vegan version of all these other things, but, but it, it's not ideal.  It's better than eating the other, but it's not ideal.  And you're right: A lot of the products are made of, of wheat flour.  And obviously there's gluten, and if you have a gluten insensitivity [sic.], you shouldn't be eating it because it'll, it'll cause a problem.  But what is, what's good there is the, the things that you can always eat from the other side, which called the live side, which is the--where you get the fresh vegetables, where you can get the salads, where you can get the hummus, where you can get some of the other--the bean curd, things of that nature that you can, can eat where you don't have that, that same sort of propensity to have that large load of gluten.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, all right, that's a good, good explanation.
Story_ID: 673401
Speaker 1: The Restart for health campaign, how did that work?  How did you get anybody to give up meat for a month (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Oh, I had people giving--I had pe- people that gave up mut- been given up meat now for over ten years--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --in that, in that program.  And actually, people are asking--we, we moved it to Trinity [Trinity United Church of Christ, Chicago, Illinois].  I stopped it at Trinity because the pastor [Otis Moss III] wanted to do some other things, but I'm gonna have to restart it because I get so many people that want that information.  And we've had--we have probably an average of maybe about a hundred people that used to come to the class.  And for special things, like when we wanna do our, our big restart, which is the ten day fast, we had sixteen hundred people show up.  I mean, people want this; they just don't know how to do it.  And when you're bombarded with television ads and radio ads and all this other stuff to eat just the opposite way, it's hard.  And you're taste buds have been engineered for this salty, crunchy, oily sort of taste, and sweet.  Those are the tastes that you crave.  And now, you know, I tell people that, look, why do you call it--why do you think they call the television programming?  Why do you think they call it programming?  'Cause it's programming you, and it's programming me to do what they want us to do.  And so that's why when you have an hour TV show, you're probably only have about forty minutes when you deduct out all the time for the commercials.  So, and the commercials--the programming, the TV programming, is there for you to watch the commercials.  That's what it's designed for.  That's how they find out the ratings, based on what gets sold, at what time and, and all this sort of stuff.  So, we're still--and I'm, I'm looking to restart the Restart program under a--in a different sort of way.  I want to create more tools and more things for people, and I want to make sure that we have a way to involve children.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I don't know if we mentioned this before.  I think we might have.  But, but just to go over it again, there, there are certain health problems that affect black people more, and I know diabetes is one; I mean, heart disease, think breast cancer is more aggressive with black women, studies have shown, though I don't think the incidence of breast cancer is higher with black women.  Prostrate [sic.] cancer does, you know, goes un- undetected with black men and kills a lot more black men than, than white.  What, what are the other health--
Speaker 2: Colon cancer.
Speaker 1: Colon cancer too, okay.  That's something I did not know about that.  What else?  Anything else?  We--
Speaker 2: Well, all of these things, although we have different names for them, they're really not different.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If you look at them--see, we name the disease by the complication it causes--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --not from the thing that causes it.  If we looked at it from a causal--a point of view of causality, then we would have very few diseases.  But we--what we have--I always say, and I'm saying in my book, that we don't have a bunch of different diseases; we have different manifestations of one disease, and the disease that we have in America is malnutrition.
Story_ID: 673402
Speaker 1: You said it's like one thing, and it's malnutrition.  You said that was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and let me explain what I mean by that.  There's a study that, that looks at about fourteen hundred women, almost fifteen hundred women, and they found that women who have fewer than three bowel movements a week, had almost a five times greater chance of developing breast cancer, okay--
Speaker 1: Yeah, now this is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --something, this is something, you know, I read about as a youth that made sense to me, was that, I mean, I was astonished when I met people that didn't go to the bathroom every day, 'cause I go, like, several times a day.  But you know, I, I thought everybody did.  But there are some people that use it once every--three times a week--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know.  To me that doesn't make any sense, but, if that happened to me I would be very concerned.  I'd be going to the doctor to find out what's wrong.  But this is--
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--that is not surprising--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So there--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --to--
Speaker 2: --there's a study that showed this.  This is white women, and they showed this relationship, and they didn't see that relationship in women who have bowel movements every day.  But the ones that only had it two to three days a week, fa- almost five times greater chance of developing breast cancer.  And there's also success--suggestion that they had an increased risk of colon cancer.  And part of that was because the--your stool stays in contact with the colon longer; things get absorbed.  In this case we're talking about bowel acids get taken up in the breast, and those things cau- become nu- mutagenic, in other words, cancer causing.  So, what I used to say a lot when we were doing these talks is that it's not that these diseases necessarily are familial, and only, only 5 to 10 percent of all can- of cancers are genetic.  Ninety-five--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --ninety to 95 percent of the cancers have nothing to do with your family history, at all, okay.  So, what I think gets passed down, my, my own--the Terry Mason [HistoryMaker Dr. Terry Mason] idea is that what gets passed down is your dietary pattern.
Speaker 1: How you eat, yeah, how you eat--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: How you eat gets passed down from generation to generation.  And if that's a, a thing that creates those diseases, that is if it's full of fat and it's full of, you know, these things--
Story_ID: 673403
Speaker 1: There's another study that we just--actually, last year I was with a group of people from the Physicians Committee on Responsible Medicine [sic. Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine] that went down to the AMA [American Medical Association].  We're gonna be going down to the AMA again this year.  But the World Health Organization just released a study last year or so that said that processed meats have been now put in the category one of those things that definitely cause cancer, processed meats.  So what's pra- if it's smoked, cured, or in this sort of thing.  So they--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So there, there--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --said that four strips of bacon or one hot dog can increase your colo cap- colorectal cancer risk by 18 percent.
Speaker 2: And we live in an age where commercials are on television for wrapping bacon around everything, even (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I'm--
Speaker 2: --donuts now.  There is a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --bakery in Cincinnati [Ohio] that will sell you a donut wrapped in bacon.
Speaker 1: I'm just say--this is the data.  So this was--and this is not refuted.  We went to the meeting with the, with the Physicians Committee on Responsible Medicine.  And we testified before the AMA and had the AMA, AMA adopt a resolution to ask all hospitals to ban the sale of hot dogs and bacon across the country, because the git- gastroenterologists are saying how can we be people who are trying to treat colon cancer and all this other kind of stuff and support, support having our patients eat this when we have data now that proves that it's true?  So that's why I said it's about the food.  And black people get more right sided colon problems than left sided.  In other words--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: What's the difference?
Speaker 1: Well, the colon's about eight feet or so.  And so, it comes out of your small intestine.  It goes into the right side of the colon, and that's where your appendix is located.  And it goes up, so we call that the ascending cau- colon.  It goes across, called the transverse colon.  Then it goes down, but it's all, it's all just colon.  It's more liquid on the right side, and it gets harder on the left side, because the longer it stays in contact with the colon the more of the fluids and what have you it pulls out.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And we don't know why we get more right sided lesions.  I'm not sure, but I know that we have the colon cancer, because if you think about what we're eating, we're eating those things that help cause these problems.  That's why I say it, it's not a bunch of different diseases, and not the, the, the--the thing with the bowel movements and, and women, if you--if you're not eating fiber and you're not drinking water--I'm not talking about fiber in a can or something.  I'm talking about fiber from, from greens and from beans and from carrots and from bell peppers and, and all these kinds of things.  If there's no fiber, then the water just continuously gets pulled--things get pulled out, and it creates a condition known as constipation 'cause the stool is hard and it's dry.  And it also make sure that--and then in addition to that, there are different types of bacteria.  Like, there are great back--tons--trillions of bacteria in our colon.  And those--they're meant--they're, they're to help us because some of them make vitamins for us.  Some of them do all kinds of other things.  But when we put these kinds of things in, creating this problem, it alters the bacteria that's in our colon.  And when that happens, that changes the character of the things that we now may have been protected from that we're no longer protected from, and so we end up with these other problems.  And we're gonna learn--you mark my word--we're gonna learn--they call it the microbiome, and we're gonna learn over the next ten or fifteen years, the role that the col--that the bacteria and the colon play.  And one of the things that also destroys your colon bacteria is antibiotics.  And now we're getting a lot of antibiotics in the meat that we eat because we're--the, the chicken farmers and a lot of the people are giving antibiotics, and the pig farmers and the cow people are giving antibiotics to the, the--they're mixing it in the feed.  So we're, we're taking in that meat that has those antibiotics, and we're beginning to see resistance to a lot of the antibiotics that used to kill organisms that we had that don't do it anymore.  When you give children antibiotics, you destroy--whenever any--and even adult--when you take these antibiotics.  It destroys the good bacteria that you have, and it could take a long time for those bacteria to regrow, if we don't give it--if we don't put back in the system those things that are friendly to those bacteria growing.  And one of the things is making sure that we drink water and that we eat--that there's a reason why you have this cornucopia of colors in, in--because those things are those pigments.  And those pigments actually are--they have properties, antioxidant properties, all kinds of other properties, and those things are chemo-protective force.  So rather than try to go to a lab and extract that out and then put it in a pill, it's better just to eat the thing, eat the pepper, eat the green, eat the th- and the good thing about all of the green things, the vegetables, is they all can be eaten raw.  You don't have to cook them.  We call that a salad.  So, but if you do cook them, it's recommended that you don't cook them to death, you know, put them on and boil them all day long, because now you've got nothing.
Story_ID: 673404
Speaker 1: That's why I say that we have one disease.  And mal just means bad.  When we say malnutrition many people think of the kid with the swollen belly (gesture)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and the flies, no; with the kwashiorkor, no.  Mal just means bad nutrition.  And the further we get away from our food being in its natural state, the less beneficial it is to us.  And obviously if it's sprayed with pesticides and herbicides and all that stuff, that's not good either.  And that's why we've been really--that's why most of your major religious organizations grow their own food.  They grow their own food.  Why?  Because that's the only way they know--what they're getting.  They grow their own chickens, just like the Amish not far from here, and they grow other crops.  And when you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, Seventh Day Advent- Adventists have--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: The Seventh Day Adventists.  I just did a talk for the Seventh Day Adventists.  And there's a study that shows that the black Seventh Day Adventists aren't enjoying the same longevity in life as the white Seventh Day Adventists.  And so we tried to--and when you look at it, it's--they're not adhering to the Seventh Day Adventists' diet.  And we get stuck on those, those mid--those things in the middle, those fake--the fake foods, rather than--I shouldn't say fake, but those artificial, those transitional foods that, that are made that are highly processed.
Speaker 2: Yeah, like--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --like, like soy burgers and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, those are the things that are highly processed.  What we really need to do is, is move as close to the other spectrum of eating things as naturally as we possibly can.  And that's why we have multiple gardens that we're doing as part of the Cook County Department of Public Health.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  One of the diseases we were listing a few moments ago, hypertension is the one I was trying to think of and couldn't think of.  And this is, black people crave salt or have--you know, is still cra- craving salt, so this is a, a truth.  And I--and what does--what is hypertension, and what is--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Hypertension--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --how does it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --hyper just means above, hyper.  Hypo means below, so hypertension is blood pressure that's elevated, and it could be elevated for any number of reasons.  And we do have hypertension, and ma- mas- much of it may be due to what we eat and perhaps what we're not eating.  And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and so, these are the things.  But we know, we know that when we put people on whole food, plant-based ways of eating, the blood pressure goes down.  When we move people away from processed foods, the blood pressure goes down; salted and cured meats, the blood pressure goes down; the greasy foods--and if you think about it, everything now that comes out of a ba- we don't even eat real food.  Even our potato chips aren't real hardly anymore.  They're a potato chip product.  And we're eating more--I mean we're eating far more cheese.  We're eating almost thirty pounds of cheese per person in America.  We're eating almost twenty-eight hundred calories of food more than we need in America.  We've seen obesity rates skyrocket over the last few years.  We're looking at diabetes rates, which follow that.  We're talking about a point when we've got almost 30 percent of the population is going to be diabetic.  Adult--when I was in medical school [University of Illinois at Chicago College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois], adult onset diabetes--that's what we used to call it--you didn't see it 'til people were in their fifties and sixties.  Now we see it in five and seven year olds.  And it's not adult onset diabetes; it's, it's due to the fact that the diet--the, the sugar that--I'm sorry--the insulin that we make does not work because we've become so big that the--it, it just, it just is not effective.  The insulin that we're making is not effective.  So, most--all people--most people with type 2 diabetes, it's not that they don't have enough insulin.  Their levels are very high.  It's just that the ins- the keys don't work anymore for the insulin to do what it's supposed to do.  That's what the resistance piece is.
Story_ID: 673405
Speaker 1: Now let me get you to the city here.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It's 2005.  We were telling the story.  You were resisting it, but you were consulting with people like--
Speaker 2: Valerie and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, [HistoryMaker] Valerie Jarrett and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: All those people that (unclear), those other--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Sharon Gist--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --many of them went to the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Gilliam [HistoryMaker Sharon Gist Gilliam] and others.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And they were telling you should go on and try it.  And why--I mean, so they were aggressively recruiting you it seems.  They really wanted you to be the one.  And do, do you have a reason why, in retrospect when you look back it, why did they see you as the one?
Speaker 2: In your practice--when you practicing medicine you're taking care of persons one on one.  In public health you have a chance to affect entire populations.  And, and I was doing public health and didn't know it, because my radio show was public health, and I didn't know.  I mean, I, I didn't think of it that way.  And I--and it, and it--and I was ready to make a change, but I didn't know God had that change in store for me.  You know what I mean?  And so I prayed about it, and I, I consulted lots of people.  I, I consulted other people who had something to lose by me taking the job, and they all encouraged me.  So, and it was hard 'cause I had spent all this time doing this, but I was also caught in this conundrum because I didn't feel like I was--what I was really doing what I was put here to do.  And so I just trusted God, and I, I left, and I, and I took it on.  And I'm gonna tell you something: it was one of the best things I ever did.  I, I, I got a chance to see a whole 'nother way of looking at things, be engaged with--I had about fifteen hundred employees.
Speaker 1: Now who, who did you succeed, and who did you have to report to?
Speaker 2: I reported to--the, the direct report for all the commissioners is the mayor [Richard M. Daley], but you work directly with their chief of staff.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Ron Huberman was the chief of staff at that time, and he was extremely supportive of everything.  We shut down the department [Chicago Department of Public Health] and did all employee and--all employee days, and we, we did a lot of things to enrich people.  We--to get to your other question, I, I followed--let's see, there was Sister Sheila [Sheila Lyne]; then after Sister Sheila, there was John Wilhelm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I succeeded John Wilhelm.
Speaker 1: And these are all M, M.Ds.?
Speaker 2: No.  Sister Sheila was a nun.  She ran--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Mercy Hospital [Mercy Hospital; Mercy Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois].  John--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Wilhelm wasn't in--I think John--Dr. Wilhelm was an M.D., think he was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: 'Cause I wondered--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --an M.D.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --if that was a qualification for being the commissioner of public health or a health related profession or--I guess--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I think the, the major thing is being appointed by the mayor (laughter), if you ask my, my--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There are credentials, and I--
Story_ID: 673406
Speaker 1: And so I just have to tell you a little story about that real quick.  When I came to the Department of Public Health [Chicago Department of Public Health], usually people have an infectious disease background, or they have some--may have some background in, in that, but not always, or, or a degree in public health.  I had none of it.  So when I--and I brought--I came in.  I had sixteen hundred people.  And of course, in the age of Google, people could find out exactly what you--where you've been or how you've been educated.  So I pulled together all my senior team, and I said, "Look, let's just cut to the chase here.  You know that I don't know hardly anything, from one point of view, about public health, so let's just deal with that and get it out the way."  But, what I told them is, "I'm a quick study, and if you guys will agree to teach me what I need to know, I promise you that I'll be a very, very fast study."  And I took--they, they took me up on that, and I'm telling you I became--I knew more about the mating habits of mosquitoes from our entomologist, John-Paul Mutebi.  I went out on inspections with all of our, our environmental people, crawling around in grocery stores and, and inspecting all kinds of restaurants in terms of that.  I've went and became--actually I became the, the emergency preparedness commissioner.  I did more stuff in emergency preparedness than probably any commissioner they had.  I went out with our nurses on, on well--on visits to the children.  I, I really--and you know what?  It was so enriching to see what, what these people did and to let them know how I felt privileged to work with them and that we were a team.  And every year we had a big appreciation--I shut down the whole department, and we had a big appreciation thing for everybody.  We had a--we put a talent show together.  We had mandatory education parts of--it was all day.  We used to go to Lane Tech [Lane Technical College Preparatory High School, Chicago, Illinois] and take all day to do that sort of thing.  And we--I started a choir and a band, and you know, I got people to look at some of the other things and gave them a venue to pr- pr- and we, we honored people for their years of service or anything they did special in the department.  I had happen to me some of the worst things that probably ever happened in the health department.  I had the salmonella outbreak at the Taste of Chicago, where we had, sixteen hundred people got sick from tahini that came from Pars Cove [Pars Cove Restaurant, Chicago, Illinois] that was served at the Taste of Chicago, and managed that.  And that was, that was, that was something.
Speaker 2: So what, what year was that--(unclear), the salmonella outbreak?  Do you remember?
Speaker 1: Let's see, that was still when the Taste was one--the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Was the biggest--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --thing.
Speaker 1: --it was still pretty big then.  Let's see, I came in 2006.  I think it was '07 [2007], may have been--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --two thousand and seven [2007]--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: --or so.  I don't re- recall, but we could--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Should be in the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Google that to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --papers though--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --find that out.
Speaker 2: Yeah, anybody--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It'll be in the paper--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --watching this can--could follow up on that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --at least.
Speaker 1: --it was the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --it was the biggest foodborne outbreak that we, that we had, and we managed that and got through that, and, and just a number of things.  And I had a number of things that we, we did.  We did--everybody--the department was so big we spread out in different buildings all over the place.  So one of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, were there--how was it broken down?  I mean, were there--'cause you mentioned I guess the control of mosquitoes and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --I guess you, you do a ver- like, like, rodents too and, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No.  We were mosquitoes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The city did mice.  And the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: --Department of Streets and Sanitation [City of Chicago Department of Streets and Sanitation], they did mice.
Speaker 2: But you did the health--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: We did mosquitoes--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --inspections on restaurants and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: We did inspections on--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --the restaurants--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and--
Speaker 1: --daycares--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --any place where they serve food on a commercial basis, grocery stores, all though things, well water if there were wells or septic issues or any of those kinds of things.  I have a lot more of that now because I'm in suburban Cook County [Chicago, Illinois] than I did in the city, 'cause we don't really have those systems in the city--but any time--of contamination, any kind of--anythi- any mass outbreak of disease.  We've had, had a few of those from food that was served at different hotels and things of that nature.
Story_ID: 673407
Speaker 1: I remember, what, '94 [1994]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had--
Speaker 1: --ninety-five [1995], I think, the temperature rose to 105 or '6 [106]--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that, I wasn't there then.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I know you weren't--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --around, but, but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But that was a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --would, would--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --major problem--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --that have been considered a public health crisis?
Speaker 2: Well, we would have been working with a lot of our partners on that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that, we've--that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: A lot of et- et- elderly people passed away.  They couldn't stand it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's when--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: They didn't have--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --they started the Office of Emergency Management and Communications [City of Chicago Office of Emergency Management and Communications], started all the reverse 9-1-1 calls, wellbeing checks.  Department of Human Services [Illinois Department of Human Services] was involved with that, got a chance to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So you coordinate with other cities.
Speaker 2: We coordinated with oth- there were forty commissioners, from aviation to public health and, and human services.  Sharon Gill--Sharon McGill--not Sharon--Sheryl McGill was the commissioner for human resources; they had Department of Aging [Illinois Department on Aging], and we all worked together.  Wherever we could complement each other, we all worked together to try and, and solve problems.  And it was really--I think the mayor [Richard M. Daley] then, you know, shortly after, after, after I left, didn't run for mayor anymore, and then Rahm [Rahm Emanuel] came in.  But I, I think that what Sharon [HistoryMaker Sharon Gist Gilliam] and Mike [HistoryMaker Michael Scott, Sr.] and Terry Peterson and all the rest of them telling me is that, you do this job well, and it will--I mean, and I, and I got a chance to do things I never did before.  There are a lot of things that the mayor would send me to go and represent him, with heads of states and I mean just all kinds of stuff, people from other countries, just--you know, I, I, I, I got a chance to meet a number of delegations who wanted to come and learn about what we did and how we did it, and it was a fascinating, it was a fascinating time.  I got a chance to bring in a new executive team, and I hired a number--I've--I had the first--for the first time we really had a number of African Americans in senior positions.  So I gave folks an opportunity, not that I demoted anybody or took people out, but we--you know, I was fair and equitable in terms of who and how we were represented at different places.  And we did some great things.  We did some really, really, really great things.  I'm very proud that I had that opportunity.  And from that, I went on to the county [Cook County Health and Hospital System].
Speaker 1: Okay, so how, how long were you with, with the city?
Speaker 2: I was in the city from 2006 to 2009.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: 'Cause I came to the, I came to the city on Pearl Harbor Day in 2006, and I came to the county on Pearl Harbor Day in 2009.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now this--is there--now, when you were here was, was Cook County Hospital [John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] still open when you were--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, when you were head of the Department of Public Health [Chicago Department of Public Health].  I think it was, yeah.  I was thinking it was and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Yeah, it was still open.  They had a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --what--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --they had a problem some time ago before the new building was built.  They lost accreditation because the old building was just--it, it couldn't pass.  It didn't meet any of the codes (laughter).  It didn't--the it--and so when they got the new building, I think they moved to the new building in 2010.
Story_ID: 673408
Speaker 1: So the old Cook County [Cook County Hospital; John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] was still open--and was Provident [Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] open when you were--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Provident is--was open, and actually when I came out of training, I actually was on the met--on the attending staff at Provident, and I did surgeries at Provident.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Actually, I did a Daniel Hale Williams at Provident.
Speaker 1: Really?  All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I opened a chest in the emergency room and put a--a guy had got shot, and I put a stitch through just like Daniel Hales Williams did.
Speaker 1: --a pioneer black doctor who's always featured during Black History Month.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --people around the country--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --same thing, and a guy, and a guy--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --but he's a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --the guy made it.  We got him up to the operating room, and he, he lived.  He later died from pneumonia.  So--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, this is big history here with--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, but I mean I did that same thing that Dan--I mean--
Speaker 1: Okay, you did the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --I opened--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --same thing--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --the chest--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in the emergency room.
Speaker 1: And did the same procedure--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And, and, and put all--stitched through the hole in the heart that the bullet made.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause he's famous for the first open heart--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Open heart surgery--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --surgery, Daniel Hale Williams, Dr. Daniel Hale Williams (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 673409
Speaker 1: You're with the city [Chicago Department of Public Health] until you go to the county [Cook County Health and Hospital System].  You go to the--over to the county in 2009?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, so for four years you're with the city.  And what is the--how did you make the transition, and what is the difference between the two jobs and the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Ah, they're huge.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I was at the city, I was in charge of the Department of Public Health.  When I went to the county, I went as his chief medical officer--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for the system.  And at that time we had three hospitals, we had Oak Forest, Provident [Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois], and Stroger [John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois], or the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Cook County [Cook County Hospital].  And so I was over all of the physicians.  So I had seven hundred or so physicians that reported, and they had--I had other people, department chairs and all the other stuff.  And we were just getting ready to start with billing and all this others--coding, and there was a lot of stuff that was, that was happening.  And in the same time we were shutting down Oak Forest Hospital [Oak Forest Hospital of Cook County, Oak Forest, Illinois], so I was part of all of that, so we, you know, we had massive layoffs.  Because we were shutting down the hospital, we had to come up with ways to move--where all our patients were gonna go?  And so it was, it was a very challenging, challenging job and, and really trying to bring the medical staff of Cook County [Illinois] into the 20th century, because they had not done any of the things that we in private practice had to do.  They just focused on taking care of people.  But all that billing, all the stuff we were talking about earlier, the billing, coding and all that stuff, they had (unclear) doing that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, fortunately, I went through that in my private practice, so I understood it and tried to help them understand it.  But it was met with a lot of resistance 'cause they're like, "Ah, we don't want to be bothered with that.  We just want to see the patients."  I said, "Yeah, but, guys, if we don't do this and bill and code for it and collect for it, you won't have a job to--see anybody."
Speaker 1: Yeah.  The county hospital system, would you say--I know a lot of black people go through the county system, but do more--well, more poor people go through the county system than any other system.  Am I correct?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because the county has a thing that they'll see you regardless of your ability to pay.  You may wait.  You may do--and you got to remember that for a long time, pri- see, that--people don't understand what the real significance of the passage of Obamacare [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010] was.  See, you couldn't get a medicai- medical card, unless you were aged, blind, or disabled, if you were not a parent of a child.  So a woman could get--a woman with a child could get a medical card for those children, but a single mom--a single woman could not get a medical card unless she was aged, blind, or disabled.  A single man couldn't get a medical card unless they were aged, blind, or disabled.  So a lot of people who had high blood pressure, who had problems with--until those things created complications, they'd show up at the county.  If they didn't have anything else, many times they wouldn't be seen by anybody else 'cause they couldn't get any money for them, so they came to the county.  And that's what happened.
Story_ID: 673410
Speaker 1: And when Obamacare [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010] came, for the first time you could get insurance because you were poor.  And most people don't realize that.  There were almost 800,000 people that got insurance in the state of Illinois that didn't ever have it before, single men, single women.  So single women who had fibroids that were bleeding and, and never could get in to get their, their, their, their services could now get those services, single men.  I mean, we had a bunch of men, especially African American men, young African American men and Hispanics and everybody else, who never had their blood pressure taken care of, and so now their kidneys were shot, or their diabetes was out of control, or they had both.  And now they--their, their kidneys were shot; they needed to be on dialysis.  And once you go on dialysis you got Medicare, but you had to be on dialysis.  And so you had all these people, these men, and that was the beauty of what happened with ma--the reform with the Affordable Care Act.  And so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --the county, the county [Cook County, Illinois] used to run probably about 55, 60 percent of its patients had no insurance at all.  And now we're at about 55, 60 percent that are insured with, with Medicaid, thanks to the expansion under the o--under the Obamacare.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is something that's trying to be wrested away from--it's being wrested--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --away from the people at this very hour.  So, now did you play any role in the, I guess in--I mean--well, you, you clearly think there's a benefit from the Affordable Care Act.  Had, had you--if, if you had your--if you could make a wish and have exactly what you wanted, what would you have in terms of health care as a system in this country?
Speaker 1: I'd do it like they do in other countries.  We make it available to everybody, but we have a standard about what that would be.  And it would be equitable for both the patients and the providers so that it would provide a baseline sys--a way of being able to survive for the people who work in it and the people who need it.  But it's, it's got to be ru--we've got to also then work with our other partners to--because the biggest determinants of health are not those diseases; it's where you live.  The biggest determinant of where--how long you live is your zip code.  There's a twenty year delta between people living downtown and people living on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois] in some fifteen year delta in, in life expectancy.  So we've got to--if we want to do a--gonna have the real health care system, we've got to close those gaps.  We've got to ensure not only that people have access to medical care--that's not health--health care is not what happens in hospitals and clinics.  That's not health care.  That's medical care.  Health care is living in an affordable house, in a safe neighborhood, having access and eating the foods that you need to eat, good schools for your children, to good public schools for your children to go to.  That's health care--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --not the other stuff.
Story_ID: 673411
Speaker 1: So we don't lose track of it, I just wanted you to talk about the statue of Daniel Hale Williams.  I didn't know it existed in the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, there's a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Chicagoland area.
Speaker 2: --a bust of Daniel Hale Williams at Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois] in the Feinberg School of Medicine, and the auditorium [Daniel Hale Williams Auditorium, Evanston, Illinois] I believe is named after him as well.  We've had--I didn't know that 'til we had a lecture over there.  So he's memorialized there and obviously at Provident [Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois].  But he, he was an amazing guy.  And we've had a lot of giants.  That's one of the things that we did.  I was president of the Cook County Physicians Association, and we brought back W. Montague Cobb, who was the anatomist at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] that taught a lot of folks.  And we bought back--
Speaker 1: So you brought in the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --LaSalle Leffall.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, Dr. Le- we interviewed Dr. LaSalle Leffall [HistoryMaker Dr. LaSalle D. Leffall, Jr.].
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and of course--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And we've heard many stories of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --David Satcher [HistoryMaker Dr. David Satcher] and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: David Satcher, yeah, he--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I heard him speak here when he was surgeon general.  He was, he was pushing that we should have a keener interest and more courage about mental health.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, that's, that's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: He was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --always--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --that was his mantra then.
Speaker 2: He was my mentor, and David and I--David was the director of the National Black Leadership Initiative on Cancer, and I was its regional director for this region.  So we did a lot of education on cervical, prostate, breast, colorectal cancer all over the region, so--
Speaker 1: Yeah, a lot of, lot of history here.
Speaker 2: Lots.
Speaker 1: Now W. Montague Cobb, does he have--what is his connection with Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I don't know that he has a connection--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, does, does he--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --with Chicago--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was at Howard.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But he taught--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --that's, that's what we hear about him.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he taught anatomy up, up, up there.  And we--and I actually found the video, and actually just--'cause I had a lecture of W. Montague Cobb giving a lecture at one of what we called the Daniel Hale Williams lectures that we used to--Cook County Physicians used to hold, and we held it at Provident Hospital--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: --when I was chairman.  I, I, I was president of Cook County Physicians for about four terms, and, and I worked a lot with trying to, to do this.
Speaker 1: So you, you showed the video of him, or did you actually have him?
Speaker 2: No.  We had him, and we--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Had him, okay--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and recorded it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, that's what I was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's when they had the big machine that was about this long for the slides, and the slides were about this big.  And Dr. Cobb was--and then we had him introduced by Dr. Leonidas Berry.
Speaker 1: Yes.  We used to sell his book ['I Wouldn't Take Nothin' for My Journey: Two Centuries of an Afro-American Minister's Family,' Leonidas H. Berry] at Third World Press [Chicago, Illinois], Dr.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Leonidas Berry's book.  I, I met him once.  He came--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --in the store.
Speaker 2: --yeah.
Speaker 1: W. Montague Cobb, we've had so many--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Is Third World still--
Speaker 1: Third World Press is still in existence--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --right.  [HistoryMaker] Haki Madhubuti is still presiding over it.  And, and they, they're over in the rectory that used to be associated with the Catholic school that the New Concept Development Center [New Concept School, Chicago, Illinois] occupies now.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The Betty Shabazz Charter School [Betty Shabazz International Charter School, Chicago, Illinois] opie- ah, ah--occupies a--what used to be St. Francis DePaul Catholic School [Chicago, Illinois] on--in Grand Crossing Park [Chicago, Illinois]--next to Grand Crossing Park on 76th [Street] and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, it's right over--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: 'Cause I'm thinking about where I'm gonna publish the next book, and I want to probably talk to Haki about it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  So we're, we're rolling here.  We're talking like we're not even (laughter)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, go ahead--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --camera.  But, but that's--yeah, but W. Mont- Montague Cobb, we--he's had--I think he had the largest bone collection.  [HistoryMaker] Michael Blakey, the, the archeologist--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --ant- the ant- ant- anthropologist rather, was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Anthropologist, yeah.
Speaker 1: --telling us--the one that covered the bones of the African burial ground was telling us about how Montague Cobb was his professor at Howard, and he had the largest collection of bones in the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, I did--now he--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --in the world--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --didn't mention that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He was also the head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] at one time, the national--
Speaker 2: And they started--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --president--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --the, the--several lectures after him, at--in his honor.
Speaker 1: Yeah, George Cleveland Hall, oh, we have a library named after him [George Cleveland Hall Branch, Chicago, Illinois].  He was one of the founders of the Association for the Study of African American Life and History, another pra- Provident doctor.  But there's a lot, lot of history here.  And there, there used to be a, a Provident historical association.  I don't know if I'm giving it a--the name exactly right, but there was a, a Provident Hospital Historical Association [ph.] that actually was in the bank building in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois].  They had an office in the bank building.  And we interviewed the founder of that way back when we fir--when I first started in 2002.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The, the--then interviewed Dr. John Coleman [HistoryMaker Dr. John W. Coleman, Sr.], who was a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, he was a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --anesthesiologist--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --radiologist--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --tall guy.  Yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --I remember John--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Coleman.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: A lot of those guys helped get us started.  When I say us, Thomas Britt and myself, 'cause John was a radiologist, and Thomas was a radiologist.  I was a urologist.  So, a lot of those guys--I remember coming to the end of May meetings and going to the CCPA meetings, and boy, that was--those are the days CCPA used to have some mat- major galas, Maurice Rabb [HistoryMaker Dr. Maurice F. Rabb] and his wife [HistoryMaker Madeline Murphy Rabb], Don and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right, right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Lilla Perry--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --right.
Speaker 2: --all those docs.  Well, anyway, I could go on about that stuff, man--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Story_ID: 673412
Speaker 1: And you mentioned [HistoryMaker] Valerie Jarrett.  You know, her grandfather [sic. uncle] was Dr. Eugene Dibble [Eugene Dibble, Jr.] at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], that ran the clinic at Tuskegee.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and her, her brother--was Bobby, was Bobby her brother, Bobby Jarrett, Robert Jarrett [William Jarrett]?
Speaker 1: Oh no.  That's her brother-in-law.  That's, that's her--well, that's her former hus- Bob--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Former husband--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Jarrett--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --that's it, yeah--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --yeah.
Speaker 1: --who was at Michael Reese [Michael Reese Hospital; Michael Reese Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he delivered my daughter.
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, boy, it's a small world.
Speaker 1: So it is a small world, but, but it's a, well, it's a strong history here, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and I was--plus, I'm just so grateful that I had the time to live--that I lived in this time, 'cause it was a, it was a magnificent time.  I was right at that cusp where I still had--we still had that connection with our, with our elders and, and then had a chance to work (burps) 'scuse me--still work with a lot of young people.  We got our gala for the urban health--fortieth year at the Urban Health Program coming up, which came out of the Project 75 [ph.], which was led by, you know, Dr.--oh, what was his name?  He was at Provident [Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] too.  But Tom Diederich and Carol Cottrell [ph.] took it over after, after, after he was--Thomas, Andrew Thomas [Andrew L. Thomas]--Dr. Andrew--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Thomas.  And then Sy Pernell [ph.] and a bunch--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Sy, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --of other people--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Parnell, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --that helped get--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --students in college and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yes, right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and, and get through.  And then we had folks with the, with the CAHMCP program [Chicago Area Health and Medical Careers Program].
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: With--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That was my--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --John Bradley.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and my neighbor, my downstairs neighbor--what did--ah, gosh, I don't know why I'm blocking on his name.  He, he was my neighbor.  Anyway, he's, he, he's passed now.  He just passed away, but they did a--he helped more black doctors get to school than anybody in the country.  I mean, he was--
Speaker 2: Where did he live?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in South Shore [Chicago, Illinois].  I mean, he moved to the suburbs before he passed, but living in sha- South Shore--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Anderson Thompson?
Speaker 1: No, no, no, not Anderson Tom- Thompson.  This is doc--it'll--it's--I don't know why I'm blocking on his name.  But he--'cause we--he declined to be interviewed by HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But he started the CAHMCP program.  He was the one that started it, doctor, doctor, doctor, doctor, doctor, doctor--
Speaker 2: It'll come to you.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it'll, it'll come to me before we, we finish this.  I don't why I would block his name.  He did a study in Congo of--there was a, a, a white American doctor who had a clinic in Congo where he was experimenting on, on a cure for AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome].  He was using the population of Congo as guinea pigs, which is--and so he went over there for World Health Organization to find out what was going on.  He appeared on Conrad Worrill's [HistoryMaker Conrad Walter Worrill] radio show on VO1 to talk--I mean VON [WVON Radio, Chicago, Illinois], to talk about it.
Speaker 2: Dr. Sebi [Alfredo Bowman]?
Speaker 1: No, no--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --no, no (laughter).  Yeah, well, I'll think of it before we--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --(unclear)--you, and you'll know exactly who I'm talk, talking about too.
Story_ID: 673413
Speaker 1: At any rate, so, with the county [Cook County Health and Hospital System], you're still with--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I'm still with the county--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --still with the county.
Speaker 2: I, I've had three jobs at the county.  So I came there as its chief medical officer, and I did that for several months.  And the--then I--the chief executive officer left.  So for six months I was the interim chief executive officer for the entire system, and I had to put together our budget and all that sort of stuff.  And then after that--and I also applied to be the permanent chief officer, but they selected Dr. Raju [Ram Raju].  And then, so then I went to run the Department of Public Health [Cook County Department of Public Health].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where I've been ever since.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, seem like I missed one though.  There's--you, you were chief medical officer.
Speaker 2: At county.
Speaker 1: At county, yeah, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And then I was chief executive officer for six months.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right, all right.
Speaker 2: That, and that was the job of running the entire county system, the entire health system.
Speaker 1: And that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That was interesting--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --because then I had sixty-six hundred employees, eight, seven hundred and some doctors and all these other--I mean, it was--we had union negoti--we had twenty-six different labor unions.  We--uh, it's--I mean, labor locals and, and negotiating the labor agreements.  And you know, it was a lot to do in six months and put together the budget, and you know, just try to get the doctors in line for doing what we needed to do and negotiate with the nurses.  And it was a lot in six months.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the person I was trying to think of Dr. Regnal Jones.
Speaker 2: Oh, Reggie Jones.  Yeah, I know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Reggie Jones, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Reggie Jones, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was, he was something--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they said they had a huge ceremony for him at Chica- what's the University of Chicago's--
Speaker 2: Oh, in the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --chapel [Rockefeller Memorial Chapel, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in the chapel.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, was a huge turnout of people who he had shepherded through medical school and from their teenage days all the way through.  So this is--(unclear)--good--(unclear)--in a record.  I don't why I feel bad for not remembering his name.  He was my neighbor, yeah, Dr. Regnal Jones, so, okay, R-E-G-N-A-L, Jones.
Story_ID: 673414
Speaker 1: What are the major challenges of being a--being the commissioner of the Department of Public Health [Cook County Department of Public Health] here in the county?
Speaker 2: They don't call it commissioner.  They called it a COO--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --of the Department of Public Health.  And I'd say the major challenge, if I could do it by saying the differences between that similar job for the City of Chicago [Illinois], so in the City of Chicago I had one mayor, one police chief, one school chief, one fire chief; you know, we had one council, city council, to deal with.  In suburban Cook County [Illinois], I have a 136 different municipalities, all with their own mayors, all with their own councils; I have ninety different school districts in suburban Cook County.  So you can see the complexity, and then it's distributed over about four or five hundred square miles.  It's, it's a, it's a, it's a massive geographic situation, and there is no one persons you can go to.  So everything you do, you've got to create coalitions.  You've got to--and we don't have authority, with the, the exception in certain areas, for all these different municipalities.  So for the City of Chicago, if we close a restaurant, we close a restaurant.  And if I went to go to Barrington [Illinois] and close a restaurant, well, because all of those towns have home rule, then it's a different sort of situation.  So I have to have--we can inspect it.  We have a contract to inspect it, but we have to get (background noise)--should I let that pass (pause)?
Speaker 1: Probably, probably all right now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so we can inspect it, and we can recommend it closure.  And unless we found ss--evidence that someone got sick from there, we would still have to go through the local township to execute a, an, a closure order.  One of the things that we--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So if somebody gets sick there, how did that--how does that change the game--I mean this--yeah, I mean--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Was the complaint--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --legally how does that work (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --versus somebody actually getting sick?
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: So somebody can complaint, oh, the place is dirty or something like that, so we, we--and we have a contract with about--with a number of the municipalities within suburban Cook County.  So it's a, it's a far more complex jurisdiction, even though the population is about the same.  About half the population of Cook County lives in the city, and the other half of it lives suburban Cook County.  The two things we have control over for all of the county is, is lead abatement, and that's in identifying--'cause we have so much housing stock in Cook County that was built before 1978, and that all was painted with lead paint.  And then the other part that we, that we have control for is TB [tuberculosis].  We have to make sure that there's adequate TB control for all of suburban Cook County.  The city--the CDPH [Chicago Department of Public Health], my old job does it all for the City of Chicago, but we do it--and then we have responsibility for our nurses going out and at two, four, six, eight, twelve, and twenty-four months.  All the children that we get from the state that have been born with a defect of some sort, we have to go and see all those children.  And we have to manage--help manage to make sure that those children are getting what they need and getting the appropriate referrals that they need.  We have all the lead issues across the county that we, that we have to monitor.  So if a child has an elevated lead level that comes to us.  We've recently changed the level.  It used to be it had to be ten, but there's really no safe lead levels, so we convinced our board to drop it to five.  So now we're seeing a whole lot more kids, obviously, but we feel strongly that we need to--we needed to do that.  I--my reporting relationship is a little different in the city than it was in the city.  In the city it was clear.  I reported to the mayor, and when it was budget time I had to go before the city council.  At this county, even though our authority comes out of the Cook County Board of Commissioners, and our--the President Preckwinkle [HistoryMaker Toni Preckwinkle] is the president of the Cook County board of health--just like the city has board of health that's appointed by the mayor--this one now is the elected officials.  Operationally, I report up through the health and hospital system [Cook County Health and Hospital System].  But ordinally, the ordinance that establishes us--by the way, there is no ordinance that establishes the hospital, but there is an ordinance that established the public health department in 1945.  So that's--those are the things, so it's a--we do a lot of--I have a much, much smaller staff, little under two hundred people.
Speaker 1: To cover all--more territory and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, little under two hundred people to do--now the, the, the, the difference, too, is that we've cut back a lot of programs.  We, we've cut back our STI program; we've cut back our WIC [Women, Infants, and Children] program; we've cut back anoth- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: What's STI and--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Sexually transmitted infections.  And that's the big thing that I'm working on now.  We have among the highest number in Cook County--when I say Cook County, I'm talking about the city and the, the suburban Cook County--among the highest number of people that are infected with gonorrhea and chlamydia in the United States.
Story_ID: 673415
Speaker 1: Our big plan now is to engage all of the stakeholders, particularly the schools.  And we just had a meeting with, like, two hundred and some odd teachers from all over Cook [Cook County, Chicago, Illinois], suburban Cook to come up with--help us come up with ideas for how we're gonna deal with this.  And the issue is today, because of technology and these phones and tablets, these kids are getting exposed to stuff at, at ages--I mean, I, I, I was talking to one of the principals.  And she was talking about there's a little girl that was on her knees behind some building, and she--I think she was maybe eleven, and she was performing oral sex on a--like, four different boys, that the teachers are telling me that they're seeing cases of oral gonorrhea.  You know, it, it, it--and we've got, you know, we've got some horrific issues.  That, that, that's the one that I'm really trying to spend what time I have left in the county in addition to the food thing.  And I'll tell you about the Food Summit in a minute, but one of the things that we've, we've done is try to--is, is to deal with those problems.  The other thing on the food side, we've been involved in a lot of the food issues.  We've heard--this will be our third Food Summit coming up that we do in the last week of September.  And this year's Food Summit is gonna be--we're gonna take a child born on the day of the summit, which is September 28th, 2018.  We're gonna plot that lifeline out for forty years, to 2058.  And given what we know about all the diseases, all the issues that are going on, what does that look like for that child if he, if he lives, or she lives to be forty years old?  What are the things they're gonna be faced with?  And we're--we've got all of the, we've got all the statistical things that we could talk about in terms of what, what happens if that child grows up in Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] versus this place, assuming that the trends that we see endure for another forty years.  No one has a crystal ball.  Now we could look forty years back, and we can see where we are today.  But I want to look forty years going forward because that's what we're responsible for.  We're responsible for the environment that our children and our grandchildren are going to grow up.  And I have to do the best job I can do to make sure that we do everything we can do from a policy systems and environmental point of view to give those children the best possible environment for a healthy opportunity to live.
Story_ID: 673416
Speaker 1: Does the county [Cook County Health and Hospital System] have responsibility for vaccinations for--
Speaker 2: No, not really.  Most of that's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --done through the health system, the cat- and most vaccinations are done by the providers of the people.
Speaker 1: Now just, for instance, if I'm a parent and I say why--I don't believe in giving my children vaccinations.  What authority could compel me to do it, or is there any authority that--
Speaker 2: Well, you have the right to be an object--conscientious objector.  You will have to sign some--but it's usually gonna be enforced by your school districts--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --because they will be the ones that will have rules on whether or not your child would be admitted to go to school--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --if you choose not to inoculate them.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I just wondered how that worked.
Speaker 2: Yeah--(unclear)--it starts--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: How the enforcement--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --in the schools, 'cause--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --those things start with the pediatricians, starting at just a few months old with the vaccinations.
Speaker 1: So I would suffer like a--yeah, the, the rules of the school system would a, affect me, and I wouldn't be able to send my child to public school if they did not have the inoculation.  I could do whatever I wanted, but I couldn't send them to school (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, you could say that, you could say that you have a religious exemption.  And you just have to document your religious absa- exempt--your religious objection, and that would suffice.  But you do--there is a step that you have to take--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --if you choose not to have your child vaccinated.
Speaker 1: All right, all right.  And I hear more discussion about that kind of thing in the community than I used to.  So what are the dangers of not doing that, in having your child in--
Speaker 2: Well, it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --inoculated--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --nowadays, if you don't have your child vaccinated, and you see all the stuff that's coming out, that your child will probably be at high risk for contacting those things.  I would say though, that to me even a bigger risk than vaccination or non-vaccination is what we're exposing our kids to in terms of what they're eating, I mean what we're feeding them in these pre-K [preschool] sch- programs, what we're feeding them when they get to school, what we're feeding them in the high--in the grammar schools and in the high schools.  I'm, I'm, I'm concerned about that.  I'm also concerned about the social conditions.  I've heard that there's a significant percentage of kids that go to Chicago Public Schools that are homeless.  We have a lot of issues around our children in terms of what--I mean, they're seeing things and being exposed to things in their homes if--you know, assuming they have a home, 'cause many of the people are un--unstably housed.  They're over here; then they're over; then they're over there.  And we're doing a study right now, looking at our children that we are required to see that determine over the time that we followed them for the two years how many times they move.  So we've got--I mean, when we've got homelessness issues with children, that to me is a real sign that we're in trouble, big trouble.
Story_ID: 673417
Speaker 1: What's the status today with the--I mean what's the county's health, health status today?  How would you describe it?  How--where are we today?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't have the county health rankings.  I could send them to you.  But I could send you the rankings by county in the State of Illinois, the county health rankings.  I can tell you we're not at the top (laughter), we're not.  And the county is complex because it has a city together with suburban Cook County [Illinois].  And we've got some real challenges.  We got some real challenges.  Our challenges are un- are not unlike many other counties where you have a big urbanized community.  I mean.  Just gun violence alone, in--if you look at Cook County (gestures), even though most of the gun violence is driven by Chicago [Illinois], that's a real problem.  That's a real health problem.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know there, there was a move before I left town, before I moved from Chicago, to make gun violence a public health issue, to see it as a public health issue more than it's a, a crime issue.
Speaker 2: Well, it is a public health issue.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And that's the--that--but the public health part of it is you got to look at it's not something that you can give to the Public Health Department [Chicago Department of Public Health] and say fix it.  No.  What you need to look at are what are the condit- when you talk about a public health issue, you have to look at what are the conditions that created this problem.  And that usually requires a historical look at policies and systems that were put in place that either weren't good policies or went awry or are no longer funded.  But just like around public education, look at the disintegration of public education in our city.  I mean, all you got to do is go to the Illinois report card, put in District 299 [City of Chicago School District 299].  That's Chicago.  And you can get the report cards for every single school in the City of Chicago.  And you see schools where they're--if you look at what's called the PARCC [Partnership for Assessment of Readiness for College and Careers] scores, which is the ability to have what they need to go to the next grade, and you'll see that those scores are abysmal.  Overall, the state of Illinois has a general graduation rate of about 50 percent, 55 percent.  Over--I mean, it, it's, it's abysmal.  And because the, the funding structure, which is one way they fund these schools is one thing which creates an issue, but the other part is with not--and, and if there's no intact family, then it doesn't matter what you're, from one point of view, what you're doing in the schools.  Well, it may matter, but it matters more.  My--we come--poverty is not a reason why people don't do well.  We grew up poor, okay, but my mother [Clarice Fortune Johnson] and my, my stepfather [Thomas Johnson], they knew--even though my mother couldn't read; she couldn't write, she knew that I was supposed to have something when I came home from school, that I should be sitting and writing or doing a reading or doing something.  And there was time that was put aside for us to do that and that alone, in addition to teaching us responsibility with chores that we had to do in the house, and understand the authority that adults have, that that authority started in the home.  We didn't argue with parents.  And nowadays, you look at what's going on in the schools and what the teachers have to try and spend time doing and what the students are permitted to do and say and things of that nature, it's, it's, it's no wonder that we're, we're, we're have--we're having the problems that we're having.  And of course, in many circles, not all, but in many circles the emphasis on education is not in those homes like it was--you know, my parents--my mother had second grade education.  My stepfather got to like, eleventh grade, but they knew that if we were gonna do better, we had to do better; we had to have a better education; and we had to learn.  And they had a very simple axiom.  Number one, the teachers don't lie on you.  So if there's a lie told, you told it.  Number two, you're job is to go there and learn.  You don't argue with the teachers.  You don't--you just go and learn.  That's what you do.  And they were in lock step with the teachers.  When you--if they ever had to get--go up to the school or what have you, my mother had a very simple axiom, that you've got more of a reason to lie on a teacher than the teacher does lie on you.  So, if it's a lie to be told, you told it.  That was just the fundamentals.  And, and as a result, and we all--there was a community.  In the morning, we had the, the--we had neighborhood schools, so that the same kids that you played with, the same kids that you saw all the time, were the people you went to school with.  And so, and the, and the parents were the same parents that were the people that--the parents you went to school with.  So, there are a number of things that I think have eroded the social fabric of what's happened that is creating the problems we have.  And throwing just some money in it is not--if we don't take the time to restore that social fabric, it's not gonna happen.
Story_ID: 673418
Speaker 1: You've almost answered fully one of the regular questions we ask, and that is what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: That's it.
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: And the other, the other thing I would say, and that comes pretty much out of my exposure in the Nation of Islam, is that we got to do for ourselves.  We need to stop begging people to do for us what we should do for ourselves.  You can't continue to say because of this, because of this.  No, at some point it's your fault.  And we, we should demand what our tax dollars say we should get.  We should put the demands on ourselves to keep our neighborhoods clean and orderly.  We should demand that we, we do--oh, that we monitor our children and make sure that there are safe spaces for them.  All these people that are doing stuff, they're somebody's child.  And we should also demand that, that our elected officials, that we should be talking with on a regular basis, are doing the things that help maintain what we need in our communities.  And at the same times, we as individuals in the communities, have a responsibility to support the com--the businesses in our communities that, particularly those businesses where you have people that are trying to do something to help--I--every job I got, everything that I had when started in high, when I started working, I got from the local business in my community, whether it was mopping the floor, cleaning the toilets if--initially, what--whatever it was, those opportunities I learned there.  I even learned how to be a butcher, 'cause I worked in the grocery store so much, and I watched the guy, and then he would let me do this and let me do that.  So those are the things that we need to do, but there can be communi- there could be no, there could be no community without family.  If we don't have fon- strong--if we don't re-strengthen our families, we're doomed, and if we don't re-strengthen our communities and circulate the blood of that community, which is the money in that community, in that community, will never be able to support the activities that our children need in those communities.  That's what we need to do.  Now I agree that there's big box stores and what have you, but to the extent they're a part of our community, they need to participate too.
Story_ID: 673419
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'll just ad- ask you this question I thought of off camera, and that, that is, like, who are the--some of the top health--or, or the, the health pr- professionals that you see as, like, crucial to, you know, bettering the health conditions in the black community today?  What, what African American officials are, are out here, or, or doctors or, or peep--people in the health profession?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that the Urban Health Program at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], that was more from a number of other programs (gesture).  We need these programs to make certain that we can restore or replenish the pipeline.  But in addition to that, we need to make certain that our schools are training students in a way that they're academically prepared for the rigors of a medical profession--professional education.  We need to make certain that what medical professionals we have out there, and--Dr. Greg Primus [Gregory Primus] is--who I think is a outstanding orthopedic surgeon, and we have a number of people that I've had, I've have--I have on my show that are engaged--'caused what's--who is outstanding to me are the people that are engaged with students.  If you're not engaged with students--I mean, my, my mentors, like Lowell Zollar and Billie Wright Adams [HistoryMaker Dr. Billie Wright Adams] and, and those people who, when I didn't have money they paid my rent--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: --they helped me with that.  They were my mentors.  When I--it looked like it was just too dark to get through, they were there.  So we, we want to turn--and, and that's what my job has been.  We've got a number of people in my generation that are doing that, and we're now trying to pass that down to the next generation so they continue the mentoring opportunity, they're continuring--continuing to work with the organizations that help us create pipelines in our, in our grammar schools and high schools and colleges.  There's a lot, there's a lot of difficulty these days.  And I'm really worried about where, where we're going.  And with the influx of all the foreign medical schools, the off shore medical schools, and, and the poor performance out of our public school system for the most part, except in the special schools, whether we'll have the talent pool--we're seeing an--a number of African American men drop in almost every profession, including medicine.  We see, we see people now coming from other countries that are taking many of those--many of those spots for opportunities for training.  So we need to make certain that we do our best and I do my best in working with people to make certain that these opportunities--because we still have to advocate.  No matter what, we have to advocate and, and to get the young people more engaged politically because they have to understand the relationship that the politics plays in, in all of this.  So, you know, looking at who's coming behind Danny Davis [HistoryMaker Danny K. Davis] and, and [HistoryMaker] Bobby Rush, and who's this next generation--
Story_ID: 673420
Speaker 1: We've got to groom and make sure that we're on top of grooming the next generation.  The next--I'm grooming the next generation of people for my show.  I've already started.  I've--instead of it being what I say every week, what I do is I've segmented the show, so the first Sunday of the month, I have the young professionals and a, a research--a brilliant researcher, young guy from University of Illinois Cancer Center [Chicago, Illinois], Dr. Rob Winn [Robert Winn], and Dr. Karriem Watson [Karriem S. Watson], who are doing some fabulous things over at the University of Illinois Cancer Center, to, to, to really talk about that and, and, and give them exposure.  On the second Sunday, on the second Sunday, I talk about community health, and I actually have my son and my daughter co-host that show with me, to talk about the whole issue around the issues that we're facing in the community.  And we're going to be talking about the second Sunday of, of this month, we're going to be talking about the sexually transmitted infection issue and problem.  The third Sunday of the month, I have Dr. Gregory Primus.  Dr. Gregory Primus is very involved, very talented orthopedic surgeon.  He just bought and opened up the old Hyde Park Tennis Club [ph.] over on 47th Street, and he's got a number of doctors that they're gonna put in there.
Speaker 2: Wow, that, that's the old Hyde Park--I, I mean, I left town ten years ago it was still (laughter)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, well--(unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --a place to--(unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(unclear)--well, you know, on--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Now it's the old--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --on 47th Street?
Speaker 2: Yeah, now--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --yeah.
Speaker 2: --now it's considered the old, and, and it's closed, and it's now--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, now he's reopen--
Speaker 2: --something else--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --he's o- reopening part--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --and part of it's for tennis and basketball, but he's also--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay, so he's gonna--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --putting a clinic in there--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and so it's act- actually going to be a health--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, so he's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --with, with a clinic in it as well.
Speaker 1: But with a--and they're gonna put an urgent care in there, so people won't have to go--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Wow (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: He's putting an urgent care so there's something in the neighborhood that people can go to.  So that's why I--he's, he's the host every third Sunday.  And I try and bring on a host of other young docs, like Pete Thomas and other people that I know.  And then on the fourth Sunday, we bring in--I've been asking Joe Caldwell, Jr. [Joseph Caldwell, Jr.]. His father, Joe Caldwell, Sr. [Joseph Caldwell, Sr.], established TailoRite cleaners [TailoRite Complete Clothing Care Company, Chicago, Illinois].  And I've been asking him to get all of the--first of all, we started with all the second and third generation businesses.  So we want to get the Joey Luster [ph.]--(unclear)--and the Spencer Leaks [sic. HistoryMaker Spencer Leak, Sr.] and the Raynors [ph.] and all those people because my challenge to them is, yeah, it's nice that you got this, and your parents have done this.  But if, if they're making mill--a few million dollars, then your job ought to be, how do you take that from a million dollar business to a billion dollar business?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Short of that, you're doing nothing.  You're just enjoying the spoils of what your parents did.  So you bought your cars, your boats and all that stuff, but it means nothing to me, unless you're talking about how you scaled this business, because we're losing more businesses in our community than we've, than we've put in.  So that's, that.  And the fifth Sunday--and Joe--so Joe brings on guests we're gonna be--and I want to hook those people up with other entrepreneurs who have been very successful or people that have been in business that have been very successful, to help them work on that scaling issue.
Story_ID: 673421
Speaker 1: So, I look at, I look at health in everything.  So the 'Doctor in the House' has now spread out into these other areas because it's all health, economic health is health; business health is health, au--you know, everything is, is health.  And so, on the fifth Sunday is what I call a wildcard Sunday.  This past Sunday, I had the people from Vernon Park Church of God [Lynwood, Illinois] on because I gave a talk out at Vernon Park, where Reverend Januel--January [Jerald January, Sr.] is the pastor.  And they have bought seventy-six acres out there, and they've got twenty-five of those that they're put aside as Mother Carr's Farm.  So I've been encouraging people to buy shares in the farm, because then you get two--you get a box or bags of food every two weeks, between--when stuff starts to be harvested, it's picked on Friday; you pick it up Saturday.  You can't get any fresher than that.  It's all organically grown, no pesticides, none, none, no herbicides, none of that, right here in Lansing [Illinois].  And so, what we're trying to do, is we need to create our own local food systems, because now there's an F--an opportunity for locally grown foods, and to the extent that we can do that, we need to put together the people that are interested in, in this and then support--I'm, I'm glad to see so many more vegetarian and vegan-oriented restaurants opening up in our community.  Some now are so crowded you can't even get in there, which I think is spectacular.  So we need to figure out how we begin to control all the dollars, from the raw greens that come into these--the raw kale greens that come into these restaurants.  We need to be manu- we need to be growing those and selling those.  We need to be distrib- be--become more of the distributors of, of food and growers of food, not only here, but all over.  So, those are the things that, that, that I find exciting and that I look at as where I'd like to be remembered for having at least in some way played some role in making sure that these things continue.
Story_ID: 673422
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there anything that you do differently if you could go back and change something?
Speaker 2: No, I wouldn't change anything because everything that I did helped me get to where I am, you know, and so I wouldn't, I wouldn't change, I wouldn't change anything.  They're--some of it I wish I had of done sooner (laughter), but, but we always got, we always got that.  And--the major things in my life that I think were real game changers were when I went in Nation of Islam.  That was a major game changer for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Be--
Speaker 1: Are you looking towards--what, what's your--well, this, yeah, it just occurred to me.  What's your relationship now with the Nation of Islam?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's--I've--you know, when Minister Farrakhan was--after the Messenger [Elijah Muhammad] died and Minister Farrakhan [HistoryMaker Minister Louis Farrakhan] was brought to Chicago [Illinois], I worked directly with him.  And I've had a relationship with Minister Farrakhan that spans back over since I was in college, 'cause I used to bring the young Minister Farrakhan on the college campus at that time, goes back to--working close with him since, like, '75 [1975].  So you can see that's been a--no, back further than that 'cause I brought him when I was at Loyola [Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  So, so we've, we've had a relationship for some time, and I got to know his family.  I've traveled with them.  And, and I've learned a lot from him.  I listened to people like him and Pastor Moss [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Otis Moss, Jr.] and Pastor Jeremiah Wright [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Jeremiah A. Wright, Jr.]--these are all men--Jeremiah Wright, what a profound effect, because I'd never would have thought I would go back to a Christian church.  Then I saw, "Free South Africa," on the side of Trinity [Trinity United Church of Christ, Chicago, Illinois] and began to he--and I heard this man--actually I met him at a wedding in, in Jamaica, and we struck up a conversation--a brilliant man.  I think that these are people that have had pivotal roles.  I mentioned Mr. Joseph Bingham [ph.] earlier, but these are men that have pivotal roles in my life.  And from women I would say Sister Sheila, Sister Sheila Lyne, who was the president of Mercy Hospital [Mercy Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois].  We had our ups and downs, but I always respected her, and she always, in my mind, always tried to do what I thought was helpful to me--and of course the other people that I've come to meet.  So I'm grateful for all the--and I'm grateful for Julieanna, for, for this, because this is probably, of all the things, probably the most important, because without what you're doing, without what Julieanna Richardson and you're doing right here, right now, nobody would ever know, ten years ago, twenty--I mean twenty years from now or ten years from now that we ever were here or what we ever did or whatever contribution we made.  And we would stuck and thinking that we, we're always reinventing the wheel.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.
Speaker 2: And we, we weren't.  So, it's, it's critical to me that these stories are told, and they're told in a way that people can understand them, and they're told from the persons that did it, as opposed by a narrator or somebody else.  So I think this is, this is critical, and I, and I wouldn't change any of it.  I mean, my life has been what it's been because of what I've done and because of what I've had to go through.  And it's all made me who I am today, and I'm grateful to God for that.
Story_ID: 673423
Speaker 1: Do you have a dream position or a project that you want to complete in the future?  I mean, you're, you're close to, I guess, age of retirement at--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'll be sixty--I'm sixty-six.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --one of--the next thing I want to do is, I want to do a national, maybe an international gospel tour to--abound [sic. around] health for our communities and the churches.
Speaker 1: Okay, well--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And that's where--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --no, no, no, wait a minute now, you're--'cause you're gonna--this seems like the clash of cultures 'cause-when you think of a golsp- a gospel tour, you think of the gospel bird and the dinners that go along with it.  So, now I'm being facetious, but, but still, you know, there is a--
Speaker 2: No, I mean, I, I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So, so you're, you're, you're combining a gospel tour with--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the tour is a, is a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --a healthy--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --lecture and some other stuff that we--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --that we wanna do nationally, because that's, you know, that's where our people are.  It's one place where you can still find them.  I mean, and I don't really care what the denomination is.  I don't really care if--I mean obviously I'm--African Americans have--we have a, a real rough time on the health side, but it's not just us; it's everybody.  And I think the message is, is, is what it needs to be for everybody because we're not being told the truth about what's really making us sick.  And it doesn't matter if you're white, black, Hispan- it doesn't matter.  It's the same thing that's making all of us sick.  And we will never, ever, ever be able to fix that in a hospital, though important; hospitals are important; medicines are important, but they don't fix anything.  They manage disease.  They manage your high blood pressure.  They manage your, your, your diabetes.  And I wanna say that we know how we can eliminate these things.
Story_ID: 673424
Speaker 1: Is there a projection, I mean, or has there been a study of people who have, you know, lived life as a vegan, you know, from the beginning?  I mean, I, and I've been a vegetarian, a vegetarian--though I eat cheese and whatnot--since 1974.  And I feel, in terms of--I don't have any arthritis or anything like that, but I know, know about it.  I feel I can still move around.  I'm not necessarily the, the healthiest person in the world, but is, is there a study about how, say the, the, the children that start off New Concept Development Center [New Concept School, Chicago, Illinois] eating, you know, a semi-vegan diet, you know, going forward and you know, how they're faring health-wise now, as opposed to those who just ate--were omnivorous and ate everything?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that what we need to do is a study on the children from the, the original Hebrew Israelite Nation [African Hebrew Israelites of Jerusalem]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because there's a whole group of them--when I was in Israel in December, and there's a whole group of them that we need to study, 'cause these are kids that have never had--in fact, many of their mothers never even had--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --animal based--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right, that's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --products--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --that's absolutely.
Speaker 2: So that's if I--we ever study anybody, that's the other group I work--I'd like to work with prints, to really study and to do--and we--and I've asked them to start cataloging what has gone on.  And, and when I was there, I didn't see any of them that were obese, none of them.
Speaker 1: That's something to say today, yeah.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I can see--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's something--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --not--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --to say today.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't see any of them, so, and-(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: A typical Chicago [Illinois]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --we, and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --bus ride, I used to count the number of women who were not obese.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That was one of my--I'd sit on the back of the bus of the Jeffery Express [Jeffery Jump] going downtown.  And I'd think, like, how many women are not--black women--are not--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --obese?
Speaker 2: And what we've done--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And there maybe three--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --is readjusted--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --on every bus trip.
Speaker 2: We've readjusted what is--looks healthy.  You know, we call it thick.  We call--but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Big boned and all that, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, ask me if I've seen a fat skeleton (laughter).  So there's no such thing as big boned.  But the one thing that--and that's one of the things why the church--why do I want to do some churches?  Number one, because they're automatically places where people go to.  Number two, people that at least try to go have some sort of inclination, and I think that we need do a better job in educating them.  And I've seen that happen at, at Trinity [Trinity United Church of Christ, Chicago, Illinois].  Number three, this is a universal message.  It doesn't matter whether you're Baptist, Christ- or Catholic, or Jewish or whatever.  It, it really doesn't matter, and we're all being affected.  And when I say what we eat, I mean what we eat--I'm gonna focus on what we eat physically, but we're also gonna have people that are gonna focus on what we're eating mentally.  And we also need to have the pastors work with us on what they're feeding people spiritually, because it's, it's that--those things together that drive behavior.  People don't oftentimes operate off of what they know; they operate off of what they believe, and, and they're not always the same.  And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so when I, I was at--in Columbus, Ohio, this weekend with the Seventh Day Adventist, you know, I challenged them.  I said, "Look, you guys are sick because you've made a choice to be, not because you have to be.  You have--you be--you say you belong to a faith, and this is the dietary plan of that faith.  And your counterparts in this faith are doing better than you because they're being more obedient than you.  So we need to find out why you not obedient to what you already know.  And what do we--and how do we help you get past the noise that you hear from the TV and the radio and all the other stuff and this whole noise about being busy?"  My mother [Clarice Fortune Johnson] had--there were ten of us.  My mother did day work.  She cleaned houses for the Jewish people that lived over in the Highlands [Jackson Park Highlands, Chicago, Illinois], and yet our house was always clean.  She always cooked.  I mean, I don't want to hear it.  It can be done.
Story_ID: 673425
Speaker 1: Tell us about your children.  Are, are you married now, or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, I'm not.  I have two children.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I'm not married.  I'm divorced.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: I have two children.  My oldest is forty-three, and my youngest is thirty-nine, a daughter, a son and a daughter; and I have four grandchildren and one great-grandchild.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What are your children doing--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Both of my children are both master's trained.  My daught- both are have--both of them have M.B.As., and my son has an additional master's in human resources management.  We trying to work with him to do more entrepreneurship because that's his real spirit and strength.  He's right now very much engaged with a ment- a--not mentoring, but a rites of passage.  He's been--he works with the Boys and Girls Clubs [Boys and Girls Clubs of America].  That's what he does now, and he works with the young boys.  He's a mentor to many of them, and that's what he really loves doing.  My, my daughter is in banking and, and finance, and really wants to think about how we begin to rethink how we use our money, now we can create wealth in a way that we haven't done before.  And many of it's been done by our parents.  We just don't remember that.  But that's what we need to do.  And the other piece that both, both my kids, we've been work on is really trying to think about what the message is regarding education, because we don't need people to go to college just to say they went to college.  We need people to go specifically for things.
Story_ID: 673426
Speaker 1: If you were in high school today and you wanted to be a doctor, what path would you take?  Would you, you know, would you send somebody to the CAHMCP program [Chicago Area Health and Medical Careers Program], or would go through the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I'd, I'd send them to any of those programs--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Urban Health--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --that would provide--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Program [Urban Health Program] and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --support.  Yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I'd send them any of those--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --programs that offered support because they need support.  The difference is the indebtedness now, the amount of money it cost is what's really limiting a lot of people from, from trying to do things.  And a tremend--and, and then now that when they come out, a lot of these people, I mean, they won't make as much money as they think they're going to make, and they're gonna have tremendous amounts of indebtedness.  I used to have a program at my house every year where I invited all the medical students to come.  And I used to bring financial planners and, and different people, even auto brokers, because I said, "Guys, I know you want a new car, but you might want to think about buying one that's a couple of years old or something like that as opposed to going out and spending all this money."  We need more discussions around money management, and we need more discussions about--and I told them, I said, "Guys, I, I know you might want to go to, to, to be a, a physician, but let me tell you what--where these things are on the pay scale so that you will go in with your, wide--eyes wide open, not that I'm trying to discourage you, but you just need to know.  And if you've got--," you know, many of these kids are several hundred thousand dollars in debt.  And when you--and so what I did at the class, I had finance people say well, if you owe $300,000 at this interest rate, at this term, this is what your monthly payment is going to be.  You need to know that as you're factoring in what it is you're going to do.  You might decide that maybe I don't want to be--I don't want to do that, that line of medical practice.  I want to do something else that is going to pay more, because you got to pay that, and you still got a mortgage, and you still got your own kids to send to school if you have children.  And you still got all this other stuff, so I--it's--I call it my realities in medicine sort of course that we, we do.  And I liked it, and I liked to expose the students as best I can to many different things as we--and that's why we have them work with Dr. Primus [Gregory Primus] and work with all these other people to see what it's really like.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now the last two questions, unless I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --haven't--have I missed any--miss, missed something?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay, or, or we, we--have we not covered everything that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know what--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --we need to--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --everything is, but I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, but--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --know we covered a lot.
Speaker 1: All right, all right, well, there's probably something we'll think of--
Story_ID: 673427
Speaker 1: But the last two are very similar.  What today would you consider to be your legacy, and how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be--and I'll put them both together--I'd like my legacy and I'd like to be remembered as a guy that, you know, came out of, of a place called Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] and had some amazing opportunities that I got an opportunity to take advantage of.  And I shared the fruits of those opportunities with our community and tried to do what I could to lift our entire community up, particularly as it relates to the--what we, what we do in medicine, but more importantly, what they can do to keep themselves healthy and around particularly what we're eating in those three dimensions, mentally, physically, and spiritually, but most, most importantly, what we're eating physically.  That's what I would like to be remembered, as somebody that really worked hard in that area.
