Story_ID: 464898
Speaker 1: My name is Jacques Lesure, and I'm the interviewer.  Matthew Hickey is the veo- videographer today, and Mr. Walter Mason [HistoryMaker Walter Mason, Jr.] is our subject.  Mr. Mason, could you state your whole name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Walter, W-A-L-T-E-R, Mason, M-A-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And could you please give us your date of birth and your location of birth?
Speaker 2: January 26, 1926, Detroit, Michigan.
Speaker 1: And today's date, Mr. Mason?
Speaker 2: Is October 31, 2007.
Speaker 1: And where are we conducting this interview currently?  Where are we?
Speaker 2: We're at the West Las Vegas Library theater at 947 West Lake Mead Boulevard [Las Vegas, Nevada].
Speaker 1: And your current occupation?
Speaker 2: I am retired, but also director of the theater and drama department of the West Las Vegas Arts Center and theater [Las Vegas, Nevada].
Story_ID: 464899
Speaker 1: Thank you.  We're going to ask you a few, what we call People magazine type questions.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And we'd like to get some, some direct answers for these, some very good answers.  Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Ice cream.
Speaker 1: What flavor?
Speaker 2: Butter pecan.
Speaker 1: And your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall and springtime.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Tahiti.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying, if you have one?
Speaker 2: Make it happen.
Story_ID: 464900
Speaker 1: Now we want to go a little bit into your background, starting with your parents.  Could you tell me about your mother, and what was her name?
Speaker 2: My mother, Joanna Columbus Mason, married to my dad, Walter Mason, Sr., both out of Mississippi, later moving to Louisiana, my father to Arkansas.  And my mother was a schoolteacher with some limited credentials, as we know them today.
Speaker 1: Let's go back.  Now, where was she born exactly?
Speaker 2: I don't know the exact place of her birth.  But she moved to Mangham Louisiana, and that's where I knew of, knew of that.
Speaker 1: She grew up in Mangham, Louisiana?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And what do you know about her background growing up?
Speaker 2: She was very tenacious to her church and helpfulness to people.  And after she married my dad, she came to live in Detroit [Michigan] in 1924.
Speaker 1: Now how would you describe your mother as a person, her personality?
Speaker 2: She was extremely tenacious to her belief, a religious person who steadfastly believed in what she believed in, and tried to maintain her children in that fashion.
Speaker 1: Did she share any stories about her childhood with you that you can recall today?
Speaker 2: The desire to believe in yourself, believe in the power behind you, and always to speak clearly and enunciate, because she felt that that opened the doors, if you were able to do that.
Story_ID: 464901
Speaker 1: Now your father's name was what again please?
Speaker 2: Walter Mason, Sr.
Speaker 1: And where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was also, according to my birth certificate, was born in Mississippi and lived in Dermott, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: So he grew up in Dermott, Arkansas?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And now, what do you know about his background and his childhood growing up?
Speaker 2: He was a laborer, according to his, my birth certificate.  And, but was more than just a laborer; he was a very skilled person who had talents in the building trade.
Speaker 1: How would you describe him as a person, his personality?
Speaker 2: Quiet, or at least quieter than my mother [Joanna Columbus Mason], a very humorous type of person, and subtle in his remarks that would make you laugh much afterwards.
Speaker 1: Did he share any stories about his childhood with you?
Speaker 2: Not too much, not what we might consider some of the literature that came out of that period.  But he would never comment on what was really happening because would leave it up to the children to be exposed to what was happening, and to be aware.
Speaker 1: Now when you say what was happening, do you mean as far as some of the racism and things were concerned?
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Story_ID: 464902
Speaker 1: Now how far back can you go with your ancestors?  How far can you trace your, you heritage back?  Can you go pa- can you go back two or three sets of grandparents?  Or how far back can you go?
Speaker 2: My grandparents on my mother's [Joanna Columbus Mason] side, her mother was Ms. Ginny Haynes [ph.].  Beyond that, I cannot.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now your grandparents on your mother's side, your mother was Ginny Haynes?
Speaker 2: Correct (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Do you recall her husband, your grandfather?  Do you recall him?
Speaker 2: No, I do not.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you recall Ms. Haynes?  Can you tell us a bit about her?
Speaker 2: I have her picture in my home.  That is my only relationship to my great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay now she was your great-grandmother?
Speaker 2: I mean my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you recall your great-grandmother also?  Do you have anything?
Speaker 2: No, I do not.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How about your, your paternal grandparents?
Speaker 2: I knew of my grandfather, John Mason.  And he was living in Dermott [Arkansas], but that is--I have never met him.  But that was the time that he was portrayed to me as being my grandfather.
Story_ID: 464903
Speaker 1: Mr. Mason [HistoryMaker Walter Mason, Jr.], what is your earliest memory growing up that you can recall?
Speaker 2: My earliest memory was largely found with the church activities at--w- it was that force that really kept me in check at the point of my earliest memory of growth.
Speaker 1: Now how old would you say you were at this time?
Speaker 2: Five years old.
Speaker 1: Were you in Detroit [Michigan] at this time?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was born in Detroit.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were there in Detroit.  And what church was that?
Speaker 2: That was Hartford Avenue Baptist Church [Hartford Memorial Baptist Church].
Speaker 1: In northwest Detroit, Michigan?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What were some of the other memories you have?  Like, can you describe what family life was like, and how holidays were during that time period?  This would have been somewhere around 1931?
Speaker 2: That was centered around our family home on Vancourt [Street] in Detroit.  And going to Hartford Church is right down Milford Avenue [sic. Milford Street].  And playing at Sampson [William T. Sampson Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan] schoolground right in front of the house or in the backyard.  And I later found out that this was an oasis there because the leadership of many people which grew out of the church were around that, the near west side they called it.
Speaker 1: Do you have any brothers or sisters?
Speaker 2: I had two sisters.
Speaker 1: Could you name their names in chronological order, inclu- include yourself in the chain?
Speaker 2: Janie [Janie Mason], the oldest.  I was in the middle, between my younger sister, Eunice [Eunice Mason].
Speaker 1: And are they still with us now, or--?
Speaker 2: No, they're not; both have passed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 464904
Speaker 1: What street did you live on in--you said Vancourt [Vancourt Street, Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Vancourt.
Speaker 1: Can you describe how Vancourt was?  Your block--just take your one block you lived in.
Speaker 2: Everybody knew one another.  It was--when we first lived there it was an integrated neighborhood.  Later, most of the white families moved away.  But I was able to see the transition taking place, and the origin of the white families were mainly mixed.  There were Jewish families as well as other European-type families.  But the--I knew no difference in people, whether they were Jewish or not.
Speaker 1: Do you recall anybody in particular, any neighbors or any friends that you knew exactly on your block on Vancourt?  Anybody in particular that was your buddy or your friend?
Speaker 2: Yes.  There was the Allen [ph.] family, the Henry [ph.] family that lived down the street.  They went to Northwestern High School [Detroit, Michigan].  And there was the Utterbach [ph.] family who went to Chadsey [Chadsey High School, Detroit, Michigan], and I went to Chadsey.  And the Fair [ph.] family.  And the Wright family, he was an aeronautical engineer who lived down the street from me.
Speaker 1: He was an African American at this point?
Speaker 2: African American.
Speaker 1: Do you recall his first name?
Speaker 2: Linwood [Linwood C. Wright, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Linwood Wright?
Speaker 2: Linwood Wright.
Speaker 1: And, and, or this would be in the early or mid, late '30s [1930s] he was an aeronautical engineer?
Speaker 2: No, he was--that was in '30 [1930].  I was five, six years old.  But the--his family, we always knew that he would make a mark somewhere, and he did as an aeronautical engineer.
Speaker 1: Okay, later.
Speaker 2: Later on.  [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards lived down the street from me, who made his mark in the direction of 'Raisin in the Sun' ['A Raisin in the Sun,' Lorraine Hansberry] as a, a theatrical director.
Speaker 1: And we're going to definitely come back to Lloyd Richards as we go through this interview.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 464905
Speaker 1: Could you tell me what some of the sights, sounds, and the smells that you, or the community growing up, every city has its own little thing.  Would you tell us what you can recall about Detroit [Michigan] at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, I discovered that the neighborhood had many different sights and sounds.  Milford Avenue [sic. Milford Street] was the main thoroughfare.  And on that avenue there were--owned by black people, stores, ice cream parlors, drugstores, chicken--not prepared chicken, but live chickens.  Not--
Speaker 1: Poultry markets.
Speaker 2: Poultry markets, right.  And for, going to the store meant, at best two blocks away.  And there was a camaraderie that was there, a knowledge of friends and family that was always surrounding you.  And if you did wrong, somebody would call your parents and tell them where they saw you doing wrong.  And so you got two whippings: one by your parents and one by the ones who saw you.
Story_ID: 464906
Speaker 1: What was the other, the other racial climate going on outside of your neighborhood in Detroit [Michigan]?  Was Detroit segregated at that point?
Speaker 2: Yes and no.  The--we lived in the neighborhood where on, of--one block away was Tireman Avenue.  And right across Tireman, blacks were not allowed to integrate into that area.  And that was where the Sipes versus McGhee [McGhee v. Sipes, 1948] case started. And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell us about the Sipes and McGhee case, tell us about that.
Speaker 2: That was an affiliate of the--that was an area where the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] advanced the case of the McGhee family, who were trying to buy a house on Seebaldt [Street], which is right across Tireman Avenue, one block from Milford Avenue [sic. Milford Street], which I mentioned.  And they were not allowed to do that because--on the basis of a covenant that was running with the land.  That was held to be a legal structure of the law.  They found that that was illegal and could not be done, and the McGhee family did move into the residence on Seebaldt Avenue.
Speaker 1: Approximately, about what year would that have been, approximately?
Speaker 2: That would have been when I was about ten or twelve years old.
Speaker 1: So, that would have been (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, that was '36 [1936].
Speaker 1: --thirty-six [1936], '37 [1937], around that way?
Speaker 2: Correct [sic.].
Story_ID: 464907
Speaker 1: What elementary school did you attend, Mr. Mason [HistoryMaker Walter Mason, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Sampson [William T. Sampson Elementary School, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Sampson Elementary.  Were there any teachers there that really influenced you?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was involved in the impact that the literature teachers made upon me, Mrs. Martin [ph.] was her name.  And my parents [Joanna Columbus Mason and Walter Mason, Sr.] saw to it that I would memorize certain pieces of literature of Robert Louis Stevenson, 'A Good Boy,' and other pieces of literature that I became involved with.  Later, as I was growing up, I extended this appreciation to the reciting of literature at Hartford Baptist Church [Hartford Avenue Baptist Church; Hartford Memorial Baptist Church, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: So Mrs. Martin was one of the first who put you on that path?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you, Mr. Mason?
Speaker 2: A good student and a multi-talented student, largely because my parents saw to it that I took piano lessons.  And I--well, all--everyone in my family did as well.
Speaker 1: Now, aside from your, your academics and your studiousness, what kind of child were you?  Were you mischievous?  Were you well behaved?  How would you describe your behavior as a small child?
Speaker 2: A child that was sometimes led, easily led.  Well, not so easily led, but I was a good child, and my experience with being a good child was not heeded by many of my compatriots.  They would say, "Well, he doesn't want to--he has to go home and study his music."  Or, "He has to do this and do that, or go to his church."  And I had a very forceful set of parents who said, "You're not the Walls' [ph.] child; you're our child, and therefore we expect something different from you."
Speaker 1: So peer pressure wasn't a problem?
Speaker 2: No, only one time.  It was when I was selling newspapers.  One of the fellows, who was not a gang member, but close to it, came up and popped me in the face for no reason that I could surmise, but he did.  That was the only confrontation that I can remember that I ever had as a child growing up.
Speaker 1: How did you respond to it?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Stunned, stunned, and just let it go.
Speaker 1: As a young child during those time periods, did you have any special dreams or aspirations for your life at that point?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was very interested in aeronautical engineering.  And aircraft and space travel seemed to be very vital to an avenue that I'd like to pursue.
Speaker 1: Now were those discussions in the early '30s [1930s] or '40s [1940s] really--especially with space travel--how were they taken when you were discussing such--because at that time space travel wasn't really talked about, or very--I don't even think there was a NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] at that time, was there?
Speaker 2: Well, there was not a NASA.  However, there was in the funny papers Buck Rogers, and there was radio.  And these different excursions into space were prominent.
Story_ID: 464908
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned that your family, family attended church.  What were your experiences like at Hartford [Hartford Avenue Baptist Church; Hartford Memorial Baptist Church, Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: I think that because of my parents [Joanna Columbus Mason and Walter Mason, Sr.] there were certain licenses given to me, or at least allowed to me, to express myself at church poetically.  And I think that that's nurtured my involvement in the presentation of plays and in the theater.
Speaker 1: Now, where did you go to junior high school?
Speaker 2: I went to Mc--Munger [Munger Junior High School; Munger Middle School, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Who were some of your friends there?
Speaker 2: The Odie Utterbach [ph.] and Francis Utterbach [ph.] who--Odie is passed.  He became a physician, and he passed.  His sister lives between Detroit [Michigan] and Las Vegas [Nevada], Francis Utterbach.
Speaker 1: Now you're in junior high school.  Who are your influences then as a person?  Who was becoming a mark in your life now?
Speaker 2: I had no real relations in intermediate school, largely because I was living in an area that I should have gone to Northwestern High School [Detroit, Michigan], and gone to McMichael [McMichael Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan].  And I was traveling some distance away to go to Munger, and then later to Chadsey [Chadsey High School, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: So you went to, you went to Munger--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --for junior high school, and then you went to Chadsey High School?
Speaker 2: For my first year.  And then the walls came apart, and--so I thought, and they were demanding that I go to a school that I would ordinarily be assigned to, which would be Northwestern.
Speaker 1: So, you're at, you're at Munger, and then you go to Chadsey your first year.  Who are your teachers at Chadsey that first year of high school?  Do you recall anybody in particular?
Speaker 2: Not particularly.  No, I was--I didn't have that great an interest really in--I was there because of-- my parents have just kind of--saw to it that I would go to a school like Chadsey.
Speaker 1: What year would that have been approximately you entered Chadsey?
Speaker 2: That would be my tenth--my tenth, the end of my--no, end of my ninth and tenth year.  And then I had to transfer to Northwestern.
Speaker 1: So that would have been about 1940-something?
Speaker 2: F- yes, 1941 or '2 [1942].
Story_ID: 464909
Speaker 1: So you stayed at Chadsey [Chadsey High School, Detroit, Michigan] for a year?
Speaker 2: For a year.
Speaker 1: And what happened that allowed you to go to Northwestern [Northwestern High School, Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Well, it was like some edict got handed down and said that you had to go--because you're living in an improper district--to go to this school.  You must go to Northwestern.
Speaker 1: Was Chadsey considered a better school than Northwestern?
Speaker 2: I think it was.  It was a more liberal school, and the students there were mainly Polish students.  And Northwestern at that time became more black in its--
Speaker 1: So, what would you say the racial makeup was at Chadsey at that point, when you were there that first year?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's--
Speaker 1: Blacks to whites?
Speaker 2: I would say 5 percent black, 95 percent white.
Speaker 1: So, you all knew each other pretty good at Chadsey?
Speaker 2: Oh, very much so.
Speaker 1: So around '42 [1942]--we'll say '42 [1942], '43 [1943], you go to Northwestern?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: How was that experience for you, having come from that one school?  Now you're around everybody else that you know, probably from the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So how is this experience now?
Speaker 2: Well, because they knew that I had gone to Chadsey, and now I'm competing in some areas with the track team members that I knew from the neighborhood.  But I only knew of their reputations.  I didn't know them as being great track artists, or, not so good of a track artist.  But I was running track, and our talents were put on the same plane, and I could measure myself and my own ability in relationship to them.
Speaker 1: Were there any influential teachers at Northwestern?
Speaker 2: Yes, a Latin teacher, Ms.--I can't think of her name.  She was highly influential as a speaker.  And to acquaint me with Latin, which I knew very little of, she was able and capable of doing that.
Story_ID: 464910
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned your Latin teacher.  And was that rare for you to be so involved in Latin, as a young African American male?  The fact that you really liked Latin, were you chided?  Or were you thought to be different because you enjoyed Latin so much?
Speaker 2: Well, no, because it was one of the college preparatory requirements.  And my folks [Joanna Columbus Mason and Walter Mason, Sr.] sought to have me in a college preparatory class, and, rather than at the time being shuffled off and pla- placed in practical arts, which meant you would be working as a janitor or some occasion that would be demeaning, they thought, to you, to me.
Speaker 1: So, along with your studies at Northwestern [Northwestern High School, Detroit, Michigan], how else did you spend your time, you know, your extracurricular or your curricular activities besides--
Speaker 2: Well, my time, my area of enjoyment was spent in building airplanes.  I still had that germ of an idea to be knowledgeable about all aircraft that was being flown by the United States, as well as German and French aircraft as well.
Speaker 1: Of course, of course there, there was war going on at this time.
Speaker 2: There was the beginning of a war [World War II, WWII] going on, yes.
Speaker 1: So you, you figured the plane job, they would fly?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, you said building them.  Did you make models from--?
Speaker 2: Model airplanes.  And the access of my interest in model airplanes, from the neighborhood as well as the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], which was downtown [Detroit, Michigan].  There was a black man who was involved in aircraft who had made quite a name for himself, and even underwent some accidents that he was involved in in an aircraft.
Story_ID: 464911
Speaker 1: So you graduated from Northwestern [Northwestern High School, Detroit, Michigan] in what year?
Speaker 2: Forty-three [1943].
Speaker 1: Forty-three [1943].  Now, were you thinking, prior to graduation, what it is you wanted to do as far as your career, or going to college?  Or what were your thoughts around, just before you graduated?
Speaker 2: My thoughts were to, oh, go to college, and at that time, influences caused by the minister of our church [Hartford Avenue Baptist Church; Hartford Memorial Baptist Church, Detroit, Michigan], Reverend Charles Hill [Charles A. Hill], who was really a very strong personality in terms of making certain social solutions in, not only in our neighborhood, but in the area not far from our house called Sojourner Truth [Sojourner Truth Homes, Detroit, Michigan].  That's a housing area that was built, and then they would not allow blacks to move in, and he sought to make that happen.  And he would have certain leaders at the church such as, oh, Paul Robeson, who had an extreme impression upon me, and several others such as the gentleman who wrote the--oh, can't think of his name right now--'The Souls of Black Folks' [sic. 'The Souls of Black Folk'], W.E.B. Du Bois, whom I later met.  And was sent to New York [New York] to meet him again, and to see what plays he had.  But that's jumping quite a bit.  I had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We'll go forward with that in a moment.  But tell us about--now you were in high school when you saw Paul Robeson?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You saw him at the church?  Explain that--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --experience to us, and how you felt, and how that influenced you.
Speaker 2: Well, it was my first awareness of the second class citizenship that we were undergoing.  And it was all around us, but we were skirted from it by our parents [Joanna Columbus Mason and Walter Mason, Sr.], so you didn't have to get in confrontation with it. Until one day my mother took the three children [Mason and his sisters, Janie Mason and Eunice Mason] to the Granada Theater, which is on Warren Avenue [Detroit, Michigan].  And my mother being as forceful, religiously as well as sociologically, said, "We want to sit downstairs."  And they said, "No, you must sit upstairs."  My mother says, "We don't want to sit upstairs.  We will sit downstairs, or give us our money back."  And that was the real confrontation with my coming to grips with the second class citizens that we had become.
Speaker 1: So Paul Robeson came to your church and spoke about that?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  And Reverend Hill later became the president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Do you recall what Paul Robeson talked about in particular?  Do you recall the talk that day?
Speaker 2: It was in his singing, instrumentally.  I mean with--his singing presence, sprinkled with the fact that he had been around the world and sang to many different origins of people.  And felt put upon to be denied his access to traveling wherever he wished to travel because he was thought of as a Communist.
Story_ID: 464912
Speaker 1: So the war [World War II, WWII] is beginning to start now?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Were there any signs of you being drafted, or anything of that nature?  Were you old enough for that?  Or how did that work for you?
Speaker 2: Well, because of my interest in aircraft, again, and being slightly influenced by Linwood Wright [Linwood C. Wright, Sr.], which we spoke about, and [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards which we spoke about--they were going in as air cadets [sic. U.S. Army Air Forces; U.S. Air Force].  And I had graduated from high school in June from Northwestern [Northwestern High School, Detroit, Michigan], and was accepted as an aeronautical--or at least an air cadet, in March of the following year.
Speaker 1: So, March of '44 [1944]?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: No, March of '43 [1943] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, March of '43 [1943], okay.  So, you graduated from high school.  Did you go straight to the air cadets?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And how long did you stay there?
Speaker 2: Twenty-six months.
Speaker 1: Twenty-six.  Tell us about that experience.  Because now you're basically in the service, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Explain that to me.
Speaker 2: Well, my--I was aware that I could be going to, or had aspirations of going to become one of the Tuskegee Airmen, as many of the upper classmen.  And Lloyd was in that category, and several others.  Bill Whitaker [ph.] and others would go to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Army Airfield; Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama] and became flyers or navigators.  And lo and behold, the war came to an end before I was selected.  So, there were a whole group of us who were just like, were mavericks (laughter).  And they didn't know what to do with us, so they put us in what they called section C.  And that meant--just what that C meant (laughter).  And they were cleaners of--not cleaners of the barracks, but in details for menial work, which was not challenging to the minds of the young men who were--
Speaker 1: So does C stand for section colored?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, it was never said that, but usually on a base they were--section C were all colored troops.
Speaker 1: So you stayed there for twenty-six months.  And you got out around '45 [1945], or something like that?
Speaker 2: Forty-six [1946].
Speaker 1: Forty-six [1946].  And then what did you do, Mr. Mason [HistoryMaker Walter Mason, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Well, I continued my education at Wayne University [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan] and had--my aspirations went to involvement in theater.
Story_ID: 464913
Speaker 1: Did you face any racism in the air cadets [sic. U.S. Army Air Forces; U.S. Air Force]?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Could you explain that a little bit more for us, and how that was?  Because basically you were sheltered all your life away from it.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now you're in a, in a federal, national organization where there is no shelter.  Could you explain that to us, please?
Speaker 2: And traveling around the country in various locales such as Dyersburg, Tennessee; Biloxi [Mississippi]; Lou- a field in Louisiana, you got a real dose of, of racial prejudice, and it had its effect on, on you.  You ask questions, how can a bus driver take somebody a mile beyond their stop before he lets them off the bus?  And that happened at Shreveport, Louisiana.  And came into a major church there and slapped a woman's face, and came back and got on, in his bus seat and drove off, and nothing was done.  Or in Shreveport, the allowance of soldiers to be told that they couldn't come to town with a Captain Crockett [ph.] of--who was in leadership in the police department.  And he would have an ability to have the soldiers stick their head--, "Look at this piece of paper I have in my hand.  Now, draw yourself in and come and look at this paper."  And he'd draw, he'd have the soldier to look at the paper, and he'd roll up the window.  And once he rolled the window up, catching him between the neck and the window, he'd--, "Didn't I tell you not to come into town?  And don't let me catch you in this town."  It was this kind of activity that you--whoa.
Speaker 1: Did this occur particularly with you, or did you see this happening?
Speaker 2: This, there was a situation where I had a .45 on, going to Texarkana to get a prisoner.  And there was an older gentleman who came up to me and said, "You got business here, boy?"  I said, "Yes, I've come to this town to take a prisoner back."  "All right, boy, but don't let me see you getting into any mischief."  And took his foot and kicked me.  Now, I could have turned around as a militant soldier, but I didn't.  I knew enough to measure my losses and to step away.  And for that, I am grateful.
Speaker 1: So there was definitely a lot of--not just inside of the, itself--you--in your travels and your duties, even just even doing your duties, there were problems with racism?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  For example, there was a situation where it came to--I began writing for one of the military newspapers.  And they had a habit of on Fridays draining the pool.  They would allow the black soldiers to go into the pool--this was in Dyersburg, Tennessee.  And they could swim on that Friday, but they would drain the pool as the soldiers were in the pool.  And I wrote in my article that it was not on a Friday, you with your Purple Heart, got shuffled around.  It was not on a Friday that Bill [ph.], you, with, in your transition from the European sector to the Asian sector, got strapped with an event like this.  So, why should it be in the home of the brave and the land of the free that you're not allowed to go swimming?  And the commander called me into his office and said, "Do you want us to print this?"  I said, "Well, I wrote it in truth, and I expect you to print it in truth."  Another week I received my papers to go to, I think it was--no, this was in Coffeyville, not Dyersburg.  This is in Coffeyville, Kansas, to go to, to be transferred out.  And the war [World War II, WWII] ended, and so that got wrapped up and nothing more was heard of it.
Story_ID: 464914
Speaker 1: So you got out of the air cadets [sic. U.S. Army Air Forces; U.S. Air Force].  And the air cadets was basically the Air Force, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now you go back to Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And you get, you go to Wayne State [Wayne University; Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you've got a lot of experiences now with--outside of Detroit.  You go to Wayne State, and how long did you stay there?
Speaker 2: Stayed there for three years.
Speaker 1: Now what happened at Wayne State to change your direction?  You said you started out to want to go from aeronautics into theater.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Explain the transition.
Speaker 2: Well I wanted to be involved in the theater program.  And much to my dismay, found out that here at this liberal institution, that I was not allowed to participate in a vehicle that I thought was worthy of my talents.  And because I had also addressed further preparation as an actor with a private coach, because I didn't see an avenue within the structure where I could become a talented--or not a talented actor, but a well-prepared actor.  And I was addressed to the department head, Leonard Leone, to request my direction into what I should do.  And he says, "Well, you'll have to study more."  Well, in the meantime, my private coach, Bertha Bright Knapp, from London [England], was training me into poetry reading and dramatic literature.
Speaker 1: Bertha Bright Knapp?
Speaker 2: Yes, K-N-A-P-P.
Speaker 1: And she was from England?
Speaker 2: She was from England, and she taught at the Wurlitzer Building in Detroit.  And she had another student, a girl who was a singer, a soprano.  And we came upon the idea of making a presentation, which I call 'Literature That Lives.'  And it turned out to be a very successful adventure that I could mirror what I could do with the press that I received from the Detroit Press [Detroit Free Press], and also to see what they were doing at the university.
Speaker 1: So, during that time was there anybody else that was helping you, you know, to forge your career, anybody else in the arts in the City of Detroit that may have been helping you or was instrumental in helping you in giving you direction?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards, on occasion.
Speaker 1: Lloyd Richards was in your neighborhood also, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Explain who Mr. Richards was.
Speaker 2: He was a student at Wayne State University. Also, he ran the elevator at Wayne State in Old Main, the building there.  And he was a gentleman, gentleman, who went to St. Cyprian Episcopal Church [St. Cyprian's Episcopal Church], which is right down Milford Avenue [sic. Milford Street, Detroit, Michigan], which we spoke about earlier, and a friend that I could talk to.  And he could talk to me, and we could share aspirations there.
Speaker 1: Was he a little bit older than you, or was he (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And so he was kind of a confidant, or a mentor, you would say?
Speaker 2: I would definitely say mentor.
Speaker 1: So, forty--you graduate from Wayne State in about forty-what now?
Speaker 2: That's '50 [1950]--I didn't go continuously, because I took up ac- or acting jobs with World Stage, where I did 'Native Son' [Paul Green and Richard Wright] and some other plays, and finally involved myself again in theater at Wayne and did finally do 'Othello' [William Shakespeare].
Story_ID: 464915
Speaker 1: You mentioned 'Literature That Lives.'  We'll come back to the 'Othello' [William Shakespeare].  But was that, what was unique about that program?
Speaker 2: It was taking literature and fusing it with music of correlative themes and making a presentation with the music that Margaret, I think her name was Tanner [Margaret Tanner (ph.)], who was the fellow student at Bertha Bright Knapp's tutelage.
Speaker 1: So you're in your mid-twenties now.  You have this, this is almost like multimedia before it was even popular. You had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --two things going at one time--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --before we had that term.  And how, how was that received?
Speaker 2: Very well.  And I was able to get the talents of another soprano singer, Mar- Martin [ph.], her last name was, and then later with the same young lady that sang Bess in 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin] opposite Leontyne Price on the Russian excursion of 'Porgy and Bess.'
Speaker 1: Where was this held, Mr. Mason [HistoryMaker Walter Mason, Jr.]?  Where did you do this?
Speaker 2: At the, the Detroit Institute of Arts [Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: A very prestigious--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --place there.  So you did that through--you did that for a couple of years?  You ran that for a few years?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: And was Mr. Richards [HistoryMaker Lloyd Richards] involved with you in all of this?  Did he give you any help in this?
Speaker 2: N- well, yes.  He--matter of fact, he came to see one of my presentations, and then coached me on it.  That was when I did 'Emperor Jones' ['The Emperor Jones,' Eugene O'Neill], and got some very worthwhile press from that.
Speaker 1: Now, there seems to be a trend here.  You're directing, but at the same time you're acting.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Because in '52 [1952], right after doing 'Literature That Lives,' you said you did, you played Bigger Thomas [in 'Native Son,' Paul Green and Richard Wright]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Was it rare for a person to be--we'll say be behind the scenes, a techie, and an actor?
Speaker 2: It wasn't rare, but you had to do what you had to do in order to--and Bigger Thomas, I was only, I was an actor only.  However in, there were some pieces that I did.  I was a director--
Speaker 1: Inside the same (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and an, and an, and an actor because there were limited accesses to having certain plays done.
Story_ID: 464916
Speaker 1: There was also one gentleman that I think my parents [Joanna Columbus Mason and Walter Mason, Sr.] had a great deal to do, particularly my mother, was a Mr. Holt [ph.].  And he was a reader of literature, a dramatic reader.  And that was a very influential person in my presentation of different pieces of literature.
Speaker 2: What year did you meet Mr. Holt?
Speaker 1: In the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: Was it even after the Bigger Thomas role [in 'Native Son,' Paul Green and Richard Wright]?
Speaker 1: Yes, or sometime--yes, some- but he was performing always in the Detroit [Michigan] area.  And I took some encouragement from him, as well as some techniques.
Speaker 2: So you did Bigger Thomas at the World Stage?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Then this is a very interesting thing.  In '53 [1953], you brought--twenty-eight, you do 'Othello' [William Shakespeare] at Wayne State [Wayne University; Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: In a place where you were kind of ostracized before?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Tell us about that.
Speaker 1: Well, it came from a counselor there who told me that, "You want to be an actor?"  He said, "You'll never be an actor."  So, I had that impetus to show him I could be an actor.  And got involved and went back to Wayne and auditioned for 'Othello,' and discovered that they had put an entire season together to include my work as 'Othello,' 'Emperor Jones' ['The Emperor Jones,' Eugene O'Neill], and another place--a play that dealt with--not a s-, a s- not 'A Soldier's Play' [Charles Fuller], but a play involving a young man who comes from the [U.S. military] service.
Story_ID: 464917
Speaker 1: So you went back to Wayne State [Wayne University; Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan] and you did 'Othello' [William Shakespeare].  Was this counselor aware that you'd be doing this series of plays now?  Was he aware?  Did you see him again?
Speaker 2: No, I never saw him again.
Speaker 1: And how was your 'Othello' run?  How was that?  That year was '53 [1953].  How was that?
Speaker 2: Excellent.  It was, at the time that I was doing it, I was having to work at Ford's foundry [Ford Motor Company, Dearborn, Michigan] at the same time, and use that time to increase my projection, my abilities to speak.  And within the Ford foundry there was din and loudness, so I could call and shout to my, you know, heart's desire.
Speaker 1: For those who don't know--you know, in Detroit [Michigan], the factory, the foundry--you're very right.  It's been loud for years.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so you practiced your projection in the foundry?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: So you worked full-time and then went to school in the evenings?  Or did you do your plays in the evening?
Speaker 2: No, I--this would be in the summer, in the off year.  I mean, not off year, but this would be between the school semesters, I would always have need for a job.
Speaker 1: What were your parents [Joanna Columbus Mason and Walter Mason, Sr.] saying about you being in 'Othello'?  How were they feeling?  Because they kind of guided you into this path.
Speaker 2: Well, they guided me into the path, but they kind of gave me, were liberal enough to allow me to do what I desired to do, and still with a watchful eye.
Speaker 1: So you did 'Othello,' you did 'Emperor Jones' ['The Emperor Jones, Eugene O'Neill].  So you had, you had a run of plays--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in which you were the lead character--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --over a couple of year period possibly there.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 464918
Speaker 1: You continue to do your own, your own piece, the 'Literature That Lives' through the '50s [1950s], through the mid-'50s [1950s]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And as you moved toward--in the middle of--now, your technical side is coming up again because you are a set designer and a technical direc- technical director for the Panorama of Progress at the fair.  Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Yes.  That was the, the biggest job that I had, a paid-for job, sponsored by Mr. Charles Diggs, Sr., who was a make it happen man.  And he had, he offered this to get all of the automobile industries on one page to come up with the funds to help defray the cost of this.
Speaker 1: Was Charles Diggs also the funeral home--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The funeral home owner (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Owner.
Speaker 1: --and mortician?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And later went on into politics, or some of his--
Speaker 2: No, his son.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: His son went into poli- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Jr. [Charles Diggs].
Speaker 2: Jr. was not the man that his dad was.  And he saw what I could do technically after getting a full, well-rounded education in theater.
Speaker 1: Had he seen your plays or something?  Had he seen your performances?
Speaker 2: Well, by that time there was knowledge of my activity in the theater, published by the newspapers, the both black and white.  So, many people knew of me and what my interests were in the City of Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: So that would have been the Chronicle [Michigan Chronicle] and the Free Press [Detroit Free Press]?
Speaker 2: The Chronicle, the Tribune [Detroit Tribune], the Free Press, and the News [Detroit News].
Speaker 1: So all four of the major papers.  Now, you just mentioned the paper that I wasn't aware of.  There were two black papers, there was The Chronicle (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were three.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier], the Detroit Tribune, and the Michigan Chronicle.
Speaker 1: I call recall the Michigan Chronicle being a green tinge to it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --they were on green stock paper.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you--so, so Mr. Diggs was very instrumental in putting this program together, or getting the automakers to put the funds up?
Speaker 2: Right.  And he got resistance from a very unlikely organization.  That was the Cadillac organization [Cadillac Motor Car Division].  He being a funeral director set out to change the use of Cadillac's funeral, funeral cars with Chrysler funeral cars.  That did occur for a short period with many of the organizations that he had an, an acquaintance with, but it didn't last forever.
Speaker 1: So you're saying because of the opposition, he said okay, we'll stop using Cadillac cars and we'll use Chrysler hearses?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Which I don't think anybody has ever even seen a Chrysler hearse before (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right (laughter).  It was very temporary.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he, but for this presentation we had Mahalia Jackson; Duke Ellington; Count Basie; Philippa, Philippa Schuyler, a pianist; W.E.B. Du Bois; and many other well-known artists of the day.
Speaker 1: So, it was Panorama of Progress.  So it was showcasing talent from all areas?
Speaker 2: All areas.  Gladys Knight sang 'A Greater Tomorrow.'
Speaker 1: How old was she at that point?
Speaker 2: Twelve years, a little over twelve years old.
Speaker 1: Wow.  And this is in '56 [1956] at the Michigan State Fair?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: So that ran all summer, or--?
Speaker 2: No, a section.  It ran about two weeks.
Story_ID: 464919
Speaker 1: So now also you were a multitasker, it seems like--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) because at that time not only were you technical director and a set designer for that [Panorama of Progress], you were also producing and directing a radio, a radio series.
Speaker 2: Right, on WXY--
Speaker 1: On WJR [WJR Radio, Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: WJR first came out of my 'Literature That Lives,' which is--however it was confined to only doing stories from the Bible.  And as a matter of fact, I went back to Detroit [Michigan] fifty years afterwards to give some of the same readings that I did at that church [Hartford Avenue Baptist Church; Hartford Memorial Baptist Church, Detroit, Michigan], which is now under Pastor Adams [Charles G. Adams].
Speaker 1: Charles Adams.
Speaker 2: Charles Adams' direction.
Speaker 1: They moved to the other area of town.
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, 'The Good Book Sings' [ph.] was the name of this project, right?
Speaker 2: 'The Good Book Sings.'
Speaker 1: Explain that a little bit more in detail.
Speaker 2: Well, it's stories from the Bible with correlative themes of music.  So you do a story of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, and then musical literature of the same ilk.
Speaker 1: Did you use any of the sacred pieces from Duke Ellington that went along with it?  Because he had written pieces about Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.  Did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I didn't.  I did, I had some, I put a collection of all the people who were singers, which included, oh, Dorothy Ashby, and many of the--Tom Pruitt [ph.], (unclear), all of the singers that I knew, which was an aggregation of about sixteen singers.  But they're each solo singers, and I didn't realize that you've got to have some people (laughter) who are not soloists, but just good singers--
Speaker 1: For harmony purposes?
Speaker 2: --for harmony purposes.
Speaker 1: Did you--now that went on--this was kind of like--it's funny, because that would have been years before this new project that's out called the Bible, where they've been reading from that and getting all the different celebrities to do it.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But yours had music with it--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --which is a very different slant on it.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 464920
Speaker 1: Now, as if that wasn't enough for you, in '56 [1956], what year did you decide that you're going to go to the Detroit College of Law [Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Well I (laughter) I still had the haunting desire, mainly of my mother [Joanna Columbus Mason] wanting me to be something professional.  That's why she could never really get involved in my interest in the theater.  And she wanted me to be a pharmacist, or a lawyer, or something that--
Speaker 1: Stable.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And I recall going to one young lady's house, and her father said, "You want to be a what?"  "Oh, I'm an actor."  "My daughter is not for you."  (Laughter) So I had that resistance, but nevertheless I made my way.  And at the time, I was doing work in the theater at Mercy College of [Mercy College of Detroit; University of Detroit Mercy, Detroit, Michigan]--as an instructor in technical theater.
Speaker 1: So, you say you went to the Detroit College of Law?
Speaker 2: Correct (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How long did you stay there?  What year was that, by the way, and how long did you stay there?
Speaker 2: It was under the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] so, I was there for about a year.
Speaker 1: So somewhere around '56 [1956], somewhere around there?
Speaker 2: Fifty-six [1956], '7 [1957], fifty--yeah, was I--as I best recall.
Speaker 1: Mr. Mason [HistoryMaker Walter Mason, Jr.], around this time all across the country now there's been--we've had--Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] has occurred.  And the civil rights thing is starting to heat up a little bit now.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: So now you're in law school, or going in that direction.  How are things racially?  What's going on now in your world with regards to this?  Are you starting to feel the pressure to get involved?
Speaker 2: It wasn't so much of a pressure, but I had--many of my friends were outstanding attorneys, and they looked up to me as an actor, and they would come to see me in the various adventures that I did in the theater.  And so Hobart Taylor [Hobart Taylor, Jr.], who later went to Washington [D.C.] along with Kermit Bailer, it was during the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] years that they were there, and they encouraged me.  And at the same time, at Mercy, where I was working as a technical director in the theater, they introduced me to Arnold Moss.  Arnold Moss was looking for somebody to audition for Caliban, and he was doing 'The Tempest' [William Shakespeare].  And so I went to New York [New York] with the encouragement of Mercy College and auditioned for Mr. Moss, and got the part--
Story_ID: 464921
Speaker 1: Now prior to that you had done 'A Streetcar Named Desire' [Tennessee Williams].
Speaker 2: Yes, [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards directed that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's go back to that just a bit before we go to the, before we go to the D.C. [Washington, D.C.] experience.  So, you were still doing 'Literature That Lives' around '57 [1957]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But you're also the master of ceremonies for WXYZ [WXYZ-TV, Detroit, Michigan] television series?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: What was the name of that show?
Speaker 2: 'Studio C' [ph.].
Speaker 1: 'Studio C.'
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's the jazz--not necessarily jazz because we had people like, oh, great soul singers like Wilson--
Speaker 1: Wilson Pickett?
Speaker 2: Not Wilson Pickett, but of that same--
Speaker 1: Jackie Wilson?
Speaker 2: Jackie Wilson, and Della Reese [HistoryMaker Della Reese-Lett], and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They were all in Detroit [Michigan], too, at that time.
Speaker 2: All in--but they would be coming to Detroit, and they would play at the Flame Show Bar [Detroit, Michigan].  And then they would, they would use this show as a promotion for their arrival in town.
Speaker 1: Della Reese w- is also a native Detroiter.
Speaker 2: Yes, she is.
Speaker 1: Now the Flame Show Bar was--now this is--you're a young man now.  So, I'm sure you're going out sometimes and you're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --and going to hear good music and see people during this time also?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So who were you seeing and coming in contact with, you know, and talking to during this time?  Because you're in the arts yourself.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: So, who were you running into now of note, that we might know?
Speaker 2: Ziggy Johnson [Joseph "Ziggy" Johnson], who was the emcee at the Flame Show Bar; Maurice King, who was the musical director at the Show Bar, as well as--who was later very instrumental in the music for Motown [Motown Records]--and [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy, was the cameraman at the Flame Show Bar.
Speaker 1: He ran the camera?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And how about people coming in from New York [New York] and places, like big name stars?  Who did you see there?
Speaker 2: Oh, they had, it was on, not the top level circuit, but they had very well-known names like--but they had some talents right in Detroit who would--like, oh, her name was Lav- LaVern Baker.  And Ziggy would take the Four Tops, and they would have them up at Idlewild, Michigan.  And that's where I discovered freedom.  I really involved myself with--this was paradise.
Speaker 1: Idlewild.  Could you explain what that was, for those who don't know?  It was a black resort, so to speak (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a black resort, and this is where you felt a sense of freedom.  You would--the timespan would be--you'd go to see a show or two shows at night, and end up with going dancing after the show was over, and then going to sleep on the beach.
Speaker 1: Those were the first, some of the first, would you say--not timeshares, but property--vacation properties that some of the professionals owned and things.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  The, and many of the people who owned establishments were people right in my neighborhood, like the Stinsons, and--
Speaker 1: Funeral directors also.
Speaker 2: Funeral directors, right.  Because that was one way of getting a toehold, interest, because people will die and they have to be buried.  My mother [Joanna Columbus Mason] who was, organized all of the beauticians, and later became the president of the state board of cosmetology--
Speaker 1: In Michigan?
Speaker 2: --in Michigan.  So, there are certain avenues where you would solidify your involvement by getting a toehold, or getting some kind of control because you refrain from having your head hit the invisible, invisible ceiling.  So you always got, you knew to get into a way that enabled you to get a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To have an unlimited, unlimited career.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Story_ID: 464922
Speaker 1: So, okay, you played, you played in 'A Streetcar Named Desire' [Tennessee Williams] at the Northland Playhouse [Southfield, Michigan].
Speaker 2: Correct, that [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards was the director of.
Speaker 1: Now, you and Mr. Richards, now--he's now really, really putting you into stuff.  Now explain how it's going for you and your relationship with him, and your mentor- your protege-ship under his mentorship.
Speaker 2: Well, you never, ever, led yourself to take advantage of Mr. Richards.  You would always want to find out, is there some way that I can be of help?  Like, I put his whole lighting system in when--in New York [New York], when I eventually went to New York.  And he understood that there was--he's a quiet, perceptive man, or was.  And he would think not too kindly of me if I were more obvious in my desires.
Speaker 1: So, it was best to let him come to you?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So let's go forward a little bit to '57 [1957] when you played, when you played Caliban in Shakespeare's [William Shakespeare] 'The Tempest'--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --at the Library of Congress in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, this is what we call a big gig.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Explain it to me now, how that worked for you.
Speaker 2: Well, without the regalia of costumes, it was like a reader's, more like a reader's theater, where Arnold Moss played the part of the lead, Prospero.  And William Ball, who was the director of the theater [American Conservatory Theater] in San Francisco [California], and who was a highly seasoned Shakespearean actors--American Shakespearean actor. And here was this neophyte playing the part of Caliban.  And the newspapers came out after the performance and said, "However, the hit of the evening was Walter Mason [HistoryMaker Walter Mason, Jr.] as Caliban."  So that was really, truly, a feather in my cap.
Speaker 1: At that point.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what did your parents [Joanna Columbus Mason and Walter Mason, Sr.] say when they read that?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't even know whether they ever saw that (laughter).  But my theater aspirations and desires were kind of on the backburners.  My mother was highly involved in her career as a beautician, having a beauty shop in Detroit [Michigan] as well as going to Lansing [Michigan] taking care of her abilities as the--
Speaker 1: Board of cosmetology?
Speaker 2: Board of cosmetology, and was there under the appointment of G. Mennen Williams, who told me at her funeral that my mother was one of the most, was the person who had more integrity than anybody that he had ever met.
Speaker 1: And what did Mr. Richards say at this time about your reviews when he saw them?
Speaker 2: Well, he, he counseled me before, and went to see him afterwards.  And then in later years, I went back to Washington at this Library of Congress, Gertrude Whittall [Gertrude Clarke Whittall] memorial, and did another presentation of 'The Tempest,' as well as another piece called '1863: The Year that Trembled' [sic. 'The Year That Trembled: 1865 - A Centennial Observance in Words and Music'].
Story_ID: 464923
Speaker 1: You said your aspirations had kind of been put on backburner, but things are heating up now.  Fifty-eight [1958]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you play Brutus Jones in 'Emperor Jo-' in 'Emperor Jones' ['The Emperor Jones,' Eugene O'Neill] again.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) back in summer stock in Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And then you became musical and production manager in '59 [1959] of a, of program called the 'Jazz Train.'  What was the 'Jazz Train'?
Speaker 2: The 'Jazz Train' was a production that came out of New York [New York].  Very--it took jazz and showed its development from the variety artists through the styles of singing, like "Bob Bailey, Won't You Please Come Home," and right on up to-date.
Speaker 1: So, it came through all the assortment--the blues era, the vaudeville era.
Speaker 2: Vaudeville--
Speaker 1: The blues, the swing era, all the way to the bebop singing that was coming up?
Speaker 2: Well, it did not quite reach the bebop area--era.  But it did have that--at least through vaudeville.
Speaker 1: Did it go all the way to people like Al Hibbler, and, and Mr. Five by Five, they used to call him?
Speaker 2: Mr. Five by Five, that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Those kinds of blues singers?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, it went that far?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you're doing that.  So, you're known now.  If you need a production done, or if you need some management, stage management, set design, Mr. Mason [HistoryMaker Walter Mason, Jr.] is the man you'd get now in the Detroit and New York area, right?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Story_ID: 464924
Speaker 1: Now 1960 hits, and there's a big thing that occurs.  Mr. Richards [HistoryMaker Lloyd Richards], your mentor, is getting ready to do 'A Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry].
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: He sent me a letter that I never got.  My sister was going through some difficulties sociologically--I mean, psychologically.  And for one reason or another, she withheld giving me that letter.
Speaker 1: What did the letter say?
Speaker 2: Inviting me to come to New York [New York] (laughter) to do, he wanted me to read for the character of--
Speaker 1: Walter Lee [Walter Lee Younger], or--?
Speaker 2: No, no, not Walter Lee.  The African--
Speaker 1: Bobo?
Speaker 2: No, not Bobo.  The African who met, who later took a, had a love interest for Diana Sands at the time.
Speaker 1: And his sister?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I never, never got that letter.  I later discovered it, and he wondered why I didn't respond to it.  That was an opportunity that I missed.  However, I later--after the Broadway production, as it ended, I got a call from--because I had adjusted my acquaintance with Lloyd, and he cast me as production manager, understudy of Walter Lee, and I went on the road with the national company with Claudia McNeil.
Speaker 1: So, so, did you adjust it with your sister, too, your relationship at that point (laughter)?  Or were you a little bit--
Speaker 2: She was, she was troubled.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was troubled, so you, you learn to not--to let sleeping dogs lie.  And that's what I did.
Speaker 1: As Louis Armstrong would say, leave it all behind you.
Speaker 2: Leave it all behind.
Story_ID: 464925
Speaker 1: So you went on, you were there.  It's 1960, things are a little bit different now racially.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Things are heating up; it's getting hot now.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It's been hot for a moment.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And it's really hot now.  And you're in New York [New York] at this time?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And it seems like each year things are getting more and more advanced for you in your career.  You go into '61 [1961], and you meet Alvin Ailey.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well, we were at the Y [Young Men's Christian Association] on 8th Avenue.  And he was in the theater, had his dance company [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater].  And involved rehearsals there with them, and I was involved in the theater program there, and did my second presentation of 'Othello' [William Shakespeare] there.  And we had many mutual friends, and he was also a very busy man.
Speaker 1: What kind of person was Mr. Ailey, off, you know, off the set, out of work?  Was he--?
Speaker 2: He was all dance, all dance, and very businesslike.  But also he had special friends that he would endear himself to.
Speaker 1: It's been said a lot of people that were--these artists like Duke Ellington, I also heard that he was all music.  That these people were very (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All music, yes.
Speaker 1: --that these people were very devoted to what it is they were doing, almost as if they had a mission.  Do you think they knew their greatness at that time?  Or do you think that they felt they were doing something that really--to go forward--
Speaker 2: Well, their greatness--I don't think necessarily it was music under Duke Ellington's aegis.  But I think that his ability was to read through people, to recognize the skills and talents that they had, even if they didn't, and then to put them all together into a rendering situation to expose their talent.
Story_ID: 464926
Speaker 1: Mr. Mason [HistoryMaker Walter Mason, Jr.], so, in the early '60s [1960s] now, between '60 [1960] and '61 [1961], you met Alvin Ailey.  You've performed, understudy as Walter Lee [Walter Lee Younger] in 'Raisin in the Sun' ['A Raisin in the Sun,' Lorraine Hansberry].  You stage manager--you were a stage manager for 'Raisin in the Sun,' and you did 'Othello' [William Shakespeare] again at the Clark Center [Clark Center for the Performing Arts; Clark Center NYC, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Were you doing anything else, in television or radio at that time?
Speaker 2: Several commercials for Feen-A-Mint chews, many pharmaceuticals, and a couple of beer commercials that were Class A national commercials, largely because I did voiceovers rather than expose my face to an audience, which allowed you to do many different kinds as long as you did not become identified with the product.
Speaker 1: So as they say nowadays, you didn't miss a beat.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I sure didn't.
Speaker 1: So in '63 [1963], you did a show, which is of particular interest to jazz fans.  It was called 'Free Sound '63' [sic. 'Free Sounds of '63'].  Explain that to us.
Speaker 2: That was a show that was created by [HistoryMaker] John Levy, who was the agent for Cannonball Adderley, [HistoryMaker] Ramsey Lewis, [HistoryMaker] Nancy Wilson, and a group called the Tommy Johnson Dancers.  And he wanted somebody to direct it and put it together.
Speaker 1: He's still around.
Speaker 2: Yes, he is.
Speaker 1: He's--I don't think he's really managing anymore, but he's consulting.
Speaker 2: He's consulting.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: John, he was an, he was a musician originally with the blind pianist from England.
Speaker 1: George Shearing?
Speaker 2: George Shearing.  But, John had an ability to get into crevices in the entertainment control business, and sometimes more successfully than others.  And would get in there to place his acts in, and to give innovative presentation methods, which he did.  And he just gave me the reins of putting together the show.
Story_ID: 464927
Speaker 1: So whatever Cannonball [Cannonball Adderley] had going, I would--record-wise--I would put that in the show ['Free Sounds of '63'], set up a scen- a scenario that they could operate around, taking into consideration that there were limitations as actors, but they could act themselves.  So I set the scene in a studio, recording studio, with Nat Adderley walking around saying, "What ti- oh, my goodness, Cannonball ain't here, we got to run the tune down."
Speaker 2: And those are real scenarios for the--?
Speaker 1: Oh yes.  And he'd take the music, and he said, go over to Joe Zawinul and say, "Joe, maybe you'd better take a look at this."  And Joe would take the music, turn it right-side up, and play, (singing) "Someday, our chance will come."  (Laughter) And that would get an applause from the audience.  Then he'd go over to Yusef Lateef, and he'd say, "Yusef, I think you better, we better run the tune down.  Cannonball is not here, and we're running out of time."  Yusef would stand up, and I'd have his bald head shining with the spotlight hitting it right on the top of his head.  And that would bring about laughter.  Then they'd go to Sam Jones and the other musicians, and he'd say, "Well, fellows, let's run the tune down.  Cannonball's not here."  Ha, ha, ha, ha, boom.  And on the downbeat, they'd begin with Cannonball coming into the door playing 'Jive Samba.'
Speaker 2: So you actually took jazz musicians and let them act with--and do their thing?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: The same thing with [HistoryMaker] Nancy Wilson who was on the show?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Nancy sang 'Guess Who I Saw Today,' (singing) "Guess who I saw today" (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was singing around that?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So you staged the scene?
Speaker 1: Right.  And then he'd have them--no applause, I mean, no emcee.  But everything would segue into one another.  Like when Nancy Wilson sang 'Guess Who I Saw Today,' (singing) "Guess who I saw today?  I saw you" (gesture).  And this high-back white chair would swing around, and Oscar Brown [HistoryMaker Oscar Brown, Jr.] would jump up, "You saw me?  But I was cool" (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right, oh, exactly.  So you would take whatever was out at that time--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and put it together for them?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And those were big hits, 'I Was Cool' ['But I Was Cool'] and 'Guess Who I Saw Today.'
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And 'Jive Samba.'
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: All those things were their hits?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: And you put them into a production?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Wow.  So that was '63 [1963].  How long did that last?  How long was that show?
Speaker 1: That was for a week at the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York].
Story_ID: 464928
Speaker 1: You were also doing 'The Year that Trembled' ['The Year That Trembled: 1865 - A Centennial Observance in Words and Music'] that year [sic.], so you had that show ['Free Sounds of '63'] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: So you had to, you had to direct and stage manage, and then know your own lines from other things, and do commercials?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: You had a lot going on at one, at one time, all the time.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now '63 [1963], also, it's almost as if it had twenty months in it, but somehow you managed to become Reverend Purlie [Purlie Victorious Judson].
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well, that was centered around the Hedgerow Theatre in Philadelphia [sic. Rose Valley, Pennsylvania].  And I played the part of Reverend Purlie with some neo- some producers that were--Raymond League was one of the main producers, and another gentleman, and, who wanted to do this piece ['Purlie Victorious,' Ossie Davis] and cast me as Reverend Purlie.  Esther Rolle played Missy in the piece.
Speaker 1: Esther Rolle, of 'Good Times' fame?
Speaker 2: Of 'Good Times' fan--fame.  And Al Fann, a fellow from Karamu [Karamu House, Cleveland, Ohio], played the part of Gitlow [Gitlow Judson].  And I just had fun with it, and got excellent reviews.
Speaker 1: Now, that play was written by [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How was that play accepted?  I've seen, I've had the pleasure of being in it myself, in the orchestra and stuff over the years, in different, different arrangements of it.  How was that play received back in 1963 when you did it?
Speaker 2: Very well, very well.  And were doing, we did it in the Washington [D.C.], Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] area.
Speaker 1: And the people accepted it, on both races, and said, hey (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Because it was very, it's a very--we'll say there were pungent lines are in there--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --regarding racism in America.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And were people getting the message, you think?
Speaker 2: I think they did.  And I think that was what Ossie intended.
Speaker 1: And did you know Ossie Davis, did you meet him?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: What kind of person was he, and possibly his wife, [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee?
Speaker 2: Well, Ossie came along at a time you had to be very ambitious.  And he, his ambitiousness was clouded a little bit by characters, like the need to get to certain positions in the theater.  I didn't want to be a star; I wanted to enjoy just being.  And I figured if I got there and I was very prepared, I would get a job.  And I know that I worked--out of fifty years--almost as much as anybody in the business.
Story_ID: 464929
Speaker 1: What were salaries like during those times for actors, especially a black actor yourself coming up?  What were the general s- because we hear people now talk about money, and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was it all about the money all the time, or was it more that you enjoyed what you were doing?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed what I was doing, and I always had a feeling that the money would come, and it did.  And I latched onto the fact of my ability to pick up a script and to read it and digest it, and make it delivered with some meaning to it, which came from my interpretative reading of journeys.  So, that always gave me an avenue in.
Speaker 1: Did you see yourself kind of like the jazz musicians that were so well-prepared?  They could come in at any point and play like a Cannonball [Cannonball Adderley], who we knew was a master.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And his mentors were Bird [Charlie Parker] and people like that.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So your--so is it fair to say that your Birds were [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards and people like that?  Those were your Birds?
Speaker 2: Right, and involvement with people like Kenny Burrell.  Kenny Burrell had me doing the Bible on a stage down off of 125th Street.  And--
Speaker 1: In Harlem [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: In Harlem.
Speaker 1: So, Kenny Burrell was also--at that time the jazz artists were aware of other cultural heroes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yes.
Speaker 1: --of other creative forms, be it art- I remember you saying [HistoryMaker] Sonny Rollins would do art openings, jazz and art.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, he did.
Speaker 1: He'd go around and play a horn in front of a picture, or--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, and those kind of things.  So it was an intertwining of artists, correct?
Speaker 2: Of the artists, yes.
Story_ID: 464930
Speaker 1: So, you move into the--in--now, you're doing 'Othello' [William Shakespeare] a lot of different places over, in the '60s [1960s].  So that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Correct.
Speaker 1: So that's becoming something, something that you're known for--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to be able to do that.  And then you're managing--you're in the '60s [1960s].  Now, explain to me what the Eugene O'Neill Foundation [Eugene O'Neill Memorial Theater Foundation; Eugene O'Neill Theater Center, Waterford, Connecticut] was.
Speaker 2: That was the need to develop writers for the theater because television had eaten up all of--so many of the writers so fast because--and the quality of writing went down.  So, in order to rejuvenate writers, [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards and John White [sic. George C. White], David Hays set up the Eugene O'Neill Foundation for the creation of pieces to be presented before an audience, which included dramaturgists and critics, as well as the general audience.  And would have plays presented in different forms, either a reader's theater or a full-blown theatrical adventure, which later could be taken to Broadway.  And this is, was the germ for Lloyd's later development of artists, like August Wilson that he nurtured, worked with, and helped develop through the Eugene O'Neill Foundation, Yale drama school [Yale School of Drama, New Haven, Connecticut], and Broadway.
Speaker 1: With that kind of impetus to do that, do you think today there's a need for a foundation like this?  Because do you think the writing today needs some help, too, for the things that are going on, from what you can tell in the theater?
Speaker 2: I think the loss of August Wilson is so, it just shows more and more the depriv- depravity of the theater.  The entire arts world is going to hell in a hand basket.
Speaker 1: There're plays out there, but they won't be what Wilson had (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, no.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.  We understand.  We'll get more into that later on.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And we want to hear you talk candidly about it because it's very important that you do, having done all these things.
Story_ID: 464931
Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964], you play Pepper White in 'Golden Boy' [Clifford Odets and William Gibson].  Now tell us about 'Golden Boy.'  What was very significant about that?
Speaker 2: Well, that's the Sammy Davis, Jr. show (laughter).  'Golden Boy,' written by, eventually written by Bill Gibson, was the piece that was earlier presented with John Garfield as a movie.  And Sammy had an ability to take on this project and take on the abilities of a fighter, a boxer and a singer, with new lyrics by Strouse [Charles Strouse] and Adams [Lee Adams].  And I had just joined Sammy, and he offered me this opportunity, but first as just an actor to play Pepper White.  I did not sign a run of the play contract.  I signed it just as a regular actor.  Run of the play, you get, as long as the play runs, you--
Speaker 1: You're in it.
Speaker 2: You're in it.  Well, the writers selected that they write out the part of Pepper White.  And that's part of, of creativity of the theater.  So, they wrote the part of Pepper Adams out.
Speaker 1: Pepper White?
Speaker 2: Pepper White.  And so then I was out of that, but I didn't worry about being out of the play.  I just went my merry way.  And later, it came to be that they were auditioning for a production manager, and they called me.  And so I went back as a production manager, which is a higher rate of pay, and--
Speaker 1: Than the actor was (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Right.  So, I came in that way.  And when you're in with a superstar like Sammy Davis, you get to know him pretty well, and he gets to know you pretty well.  And I think Sammy was one of the most misunderstood individuals in show business.
Speaker 1: Please explain.  I was going to ask you, what was he like, what was his personality?  But explain it from your perspective.
Speaker 2: Well, Sammy was a genuine giver.  And I can understand why he had as many difficulties with people like the IRS [Internal Revenue Service], and so forth because he took on the belief, or disbelief, that money was money.  It's all to be here to enjoy.  We're here for such a short time.  Get it, give it, enjoy it.  That was his mantra.  And don't worry about saving or doing other things.  See somebody who needs--who has been wronged, help that person.  [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou was singing in 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin] in her earlier years.  They couldn't get a pair of shoes to fit her.  Have some made.  If the boat--the boat does not leave the dock unless it is first class.  And that was Sammy's attitude toward everything.  And I think that he had great appreciation for me, because he felt that he ran into somebody that was intellectually challenging.
Story_ID: 464932
Speaker 1: It's been said that a lot of artists like that were the same way.  We heard, we've heard that s- that Louis Armstrong was the same way.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: They said that he would, we were told that he would call and find out what his friends needed when he would go into town.  "Get all your bills together, I'm going to come through there and take care of them."
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And Sammy [Sammy Davis, Jr.] was the same way, you're saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was.
Speaker 1: Now you say he was misunderstood.  You know, he traveled in the Rat Pack with the Dean Martins and the Frank Sinatras.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Why do you think he was misunderstood?
Speaker 2: Well I think he was misunderstood because that was a very tight rope, you know.  Mr. Sinatra wanted to be Sinatra; could not have a Sammy Davis singing as well or better than him.  So there is the suppression of that kind of talent when it comes along.  Misunderstood: the public generally felt annoyed at Sammy when he stepped off of the stage and grabbed Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon].  Sammy didn't hug Nixon, he hugged the president.  But he couldn't explain that.
Speaker 1: So, you think there was a moniker of Uncle Tom that folks didn't quite understand?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Is that what you think it was?
Speaker 2: I'm positive.
Speaker 1: But it wasn't that way?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: He knew what he was doing?
Speaker 2: He knew what he was doing.  And he, he stayed at the White House [Washington, D.C.] under Nixon as well as Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy].  He knew how to be a first class individual.
Speaker 1: Do you think that was the same thing, a lot of artists like Louis Armstrong and those people were all part of that?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Because they saw a part of the world.  They understood what the world was.  And I can trace that back to let's say Robeson [Paul Robeson], Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois], Rich- not Richard Wright--
Speaker 1: Ralph Ellison?
Speaker 2: Not Ralph Ellison, but--James Baldwin, that this money part of, aspect of life, is not the be all and the end all.  The be all and the end all is what you feel in your heart.  But we don't always feel that way.  We don't always live up to that persuasion.
Speaker 1: So you think that Sammy's giving was sometimes construed with uppity-ness and being Uncle Tom-ness and those kinds of things--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) because he wanted to go first class?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did he feel like--did he possibly feel like it wasn't for white folks, it was for whoever could get it?  We can afford it?
Speaker 2: Right, and he was in a position to get it.  And all over the world, in traveling with him, we found that in England he was recognized next to the queen, or you know, whatever his persuasions led him to.
Speaker 1: Do you have any particular funny stories or anything he shared with you, or anything in particular that you still laugh about now?
Speaker 2: Well, they wanted to give me a Ph.D. at Wayne [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan] to tell (laughter) some of the idiosyncrasies of Sammy Davis, and how he became the great entertainer that he was, his preparedness, preparedness.  Sometimes you would go into his suite and look for maybe some broad that he would have there.  And he'd be in the room with his Encyclopedia Britannica.
Speaker 1: Reading up on his craft?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So he was an intellectual as well as an artist?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes.
Speaker 1: You mentioned that you think that was the connection with you and him, because you all had some intellectual--you had conversations about things?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Story_ID: 464933
Speaker 1: Sixty-four [1964], you're with Sammy [Sammy Davis, Jr.], and you're doing, you're doing some recurring roles.  You're doing things like the Caliban [in 'The Tempest,' William Shakespeare] in different places.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so, I don't think that--each one was different.  I'm sure they were all well-received.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But I want to touch on the newer things, like 'The Amen Corner' [James Baldwin] that came out in '65 [1965] with Claudia McNeil.  Explain that one.
Speaker 2: Well that was directed by [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards.  And the presentation ended up with a run on the West End, which is the same correlation as Broadway in the United States.  And it was produced by the--what's his name?  He was the manager of The Beatles [Brian Epstein].  I'll think of his name in a moment.
Speaker 1: Not Spec--?
Speaker 2: No, it was--he drugged himself out of the business and died.  But nevertheless, we had that tour of Europe with 'Amen Corner,' and then brought it in to the West End in London [England].
Speaker 1: And you won something when it got to London, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You were the director [sic. stage manager].  And what did you win?
Speaker 2: Well you--it was just accolades of, you know.  It was a--
Speaker 1: I did some research, and it said it was best, that somebody won the best actress award.  Did she win best actress (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, definitely.  She was, she was like Sammy.  She was bigger than an actress, she was Mother Earth.  They would refer to her as Mother Earth at reviews that we had in all of the European theaters.  And, but, the coming with that is she needed to have recognition at home, and she did not get it.  With all of the rave reviews that she got, she couldn't get accepted back in her home.
Speaker 1: A prophet is not known in their own land.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So, she got the accolades overseas.  But (unclear), was it that way for many--I've heard--well, I've seen it with my own eyes with the jazz musicians when we go to Europe or go somewhere.  It's a much different accolade than it is bestowed upon (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --than here.
Speaker 2: They're, they are, they understand what it means, and what you've had to put into it to get out what you get out of it.  And you don't get that here because of very simple--and you hate to say this today--because of racism.  And many people don't realize that they are racist because they define what they are as Christian.  And at the same time, you can come in, you know, just don't come too close.
Story_ID: 464934
Speaker 1: So as you go through, you've been to Europe and you've seen the difference.  You come back and you do things on Broadway with Mr. Richards [HistoryMaker Lloyd Richards].  You all have a great allegiance now, where, where you're his assistant director for 'The Yearling' [Herbert Martin and Lore Noto]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you're also doing a lot of production management.  In '67 [1967], now things are starting to change up now that the voters right act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] has been passed, and certain things.  So there's more freedoms now, supposedly.
Speaker 2: Supposedly.
Speaker 1: In '67 [1967], you got a chance to do the 'Black New World,' YMHA [92nd Street Young Men's Hebrew Association; 92nd Street Young Men's and Young Women's Hebrew Association] in New York City [New York, New York] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then you got to do 'Emperor Jones' ['The Emperor Jones,' Eugene O'Neill] as a production manager.  But this time, you weren't in it as an actor, but [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones was.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Explain that to us.  And how was he as a person?
Speaker 2: Well, we were taking 'Black New World' and 'Emperor Jones' in, to have two productions going to Europe at the same time.  And it--both were great pieces, in terms of the presentation.  But they were not met with the accolades and the assurances of Equity [Actors' Equity Association], they were--Actors' Equity.  They condemned James Earl Jones and myself and other actors who went to Europe with this presentation by Storber [ph.] and I forget the other man's name, a black man, who was a co-producer of this piece, because we didn't go through the sanction of the Actors' Equity.  My position was that we couldn't get into every production in the U.S., so why not go and--where we can present it and was accepted by the audiences in Europe?
Story_ID: 464935
Speaker 1: You were saying that the Equity union [Actors' Equity Association], or the union wanted to cause some grief because you went to Europe without their sanctioning?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And you felt that you couldn't--in order to be an Equity actor, for those who don't know, you have to be in so many plays per season.  And even if you get there, there's sanctioning, correct?
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: So, you felt that that wasn't going to happen anyway with the Equity--with, with Equity, so you went on and went around them and you all went to Europe?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And for the same remuneration.  That's Hazlitt [ph.] and Storber [ph.] made sure that we were getting the same compensation as we would have gotten had we been under an Equity auspices.  We thought that was fair, and so we made arrangements to do that by contract.  And they eventually found out and then brought us up on charges, and we all had to pay to Equity the amount that they felt was due them.
Speaker 1: And this included [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones also?  He--
Speaker 2: Including James Earl Jones also.
Speaker 1: How was James--how was James Earl Jones as a person?  What was his--?
Speaker 2: James Earl Jones is doing what he has to do as an actor to become successful as an actor, and also to artistically be correct.
Story_ID: 464936
Speaker 1: So you went on in '67 [1967], you did s- the Offski Theatre [Stowe, Vermont].  Now, this was for some playwrights, John Guare and Israel Horovitz?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And what did you do for them exactly?
Speaker 2: I was the managing director of that theater.  And one thing that I learned up there in the snow of Vermont is that skiers don't go to theater (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, was the house not well packed all the time?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, indeed.
Speaker 1: A lot of dark nights, huh?
Speaker 2: A lot of dark nights.
Speaker 1: So, '68 [1968], you're forty-two years old.  Sammy [Sammy Davis, Jr.] is doing a Broadway pro- version of 'Golden Boy' [Clifford Odets and William Gibson]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --at the Chicago Palladium [sic. Auditorium Theatre, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: This is the same year that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Was this before or after this event, or during?
Speaker 2: This was during, and we would take a hiatus and go to Dr. King's funeral.  Sammy would have his plane to pick us up and take us to Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Now when you say we, was it the whole cast?  Everybody went?
Speaker 2: No, just certain selected people.  Joe Grant, Shirley Rhodes, George Rhodes [George A. Rhodes], Sammy, Murphy Bennett.
Speaker 1: So, you went to--and what was Sammy's attitude?  What was the attitude on that plane as you all--what was the attitude in general when you found out this had happened?
Speaker 2: Very somber and very collective in spirit regarding that because Sammy Davis was one of the major contributors to the NAACP Freedom Fund Dinner [Fight for Freedom Fund Dinner] in Detroit [Michigan].  Had gone back under the auspices and request of Damon Keith [HistoryMaker Damon J. Keith] who (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Judge Damon Keith?
Speaker 2: Judge Damon Keith.  And he'd gone back several times as the main entertainer at the Freedom Fund Dinner, and he was one of the lifetime members of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 1: And I don't think most people realize that, or even knew that.
Speaker 2: Very true.
Speaker 1: So you did, so you all went to Dr. King's funeral.  How was that experience?
Speaker 2: That was a feeling of mixed feelings.  Everybody was in despair over the senseless murder of Dr. King.  But being there, we heard oppositions to Dr. King with some people at the distance, but were in earshot of what was going on with the attitudes of certain people, and that were in a different camp than Dr. King.
Speaker 1: Was there an angry feeling, a subliminal angry feeling that was around, that enough had been enough?  Or--?
Speaker 2: Well, for what he had been through, the air was kind of charged with his spirit of deliverance and what he had requested, that we all be respectful, both in times of grief and times of--of good times.
Speaker 1: Do you recall Sammy Davis, Jr. saying anything in particular about all of this?  Did he have anything to say about this at all?
Speaker 2: Well, Sammy was very quiet, and usually in events of this nature.  He does not one of preaching, or telling somebody what to do.  But he, within his own sphere, dealt with it, and expected--he expected you to deal with it.
Speaker 1: Also Malcolm [Malcolm X] had died in '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: People might not have necessarily agreed with Malcolm, but was there the support and kind of, the same kind of feeling that happened when he was assassinated (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When they--yes.  And when Robert Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] died and when John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] died, the same kind of respect.  Because the toleration of killing is not an acceptable way.
Speaker 1: And that was less than, that was about a five year period of assassination, within five years between John Kennedy and his brother.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: And Dr. King.  Only five years.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 464937
Speaker 1: So in '68 [1968], you become the theatrical director and production manager for the Sammy Davis, Jr. show.  What was that show?  Was that his main show that traveled (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) His main show that traveled.
Speaker 1: And how large was that show?
Speaker 2: Well, it varied.  But he was always the principal, but would carry the nucleus of the orchestra and then fill out the rest of the orchestra at the venue that we would be playing in.
Speaker 1: Did the guys--a lot of times the musicians and people who feel that sometimes they are the taskmasters for a boss--how was the attitude between Sammy and--did he respect the other musicians and other people?
Speaker 2: Very much so, very much so.  And I think he drew a lot of that from Frank Sinatra.  He was respectful for musicians, but also he had George Rhodes [George A. Rhodes], who was the musical conductor, to deal with the musicians.  And if, if he had any problems, he would go through George to that musician.
Speaker 1: Directly?
Speaker 2: Directly.
Speaker 1: So he didn't necessarily lambast them himself?
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He had a situation in place that gave, that garnered respect for the musicians?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: If you were to cut into his part or whatever, it was George's job to let him know?
Speaker 2: Right.  And then there were times when the drummer--when we lost Silver [Michael Silver], who had been with Sammy for quite a while.  And he got emotionally smi- smitten by a young lady in London [England], and decided to stay there.  And so, we were open for a drummer.  Well, getting a drummer to fill the needs of Sammy Davis is quite a challenge.
Speaker 1: Because he was actually a drummer himself, also.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  He, he, knew enough about drumming to know that--where the beat comes in, and where, how it's sustained.  And before that he had Johnny Mendoza, who had the Cuban sense and spice of the congas and the bongo drums in his act.
Speaker 1: Because it was very important for his dance routines--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --and things of that nature.
Speaker 2: And his book was generally--the drum book was, it looked black, you know, because it had all the notes and the rhythm changes.  And it was a challenge to any musician who picked that book up.  And there were musicians we later found who could do that, and play it right off.  Chubby--not Chubby Checker--but the son of the bass player, Checker [ph.].  Oh, he's playing drums now down in Florida.  And he was able to pick that book up and play it, just bap, bap, bap.
Speaker 1: I have a friend that got a chance to play for him toward the end, Clayton Cameron.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Clayton Cameron (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) First rate.
Speaker 1: Clayton Cameron.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: We called him C.C.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know C.C.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: A good friend.  He was part of that, part of that lineage.  Because he said that book was not an easy book to read.
Speaker 2: No, it is not.
Speaker 1: So, you're doing his show in '68 [1968].  In '71 [1971], Sammy had a, there was a new show called 'Sammy Davis Presents' at, it's now The Grove in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: So, was there, did he buy a building?  Or--
Speaker 2: No, he didn't.  He came in, not as a buy-in, but as a--that was his agency.  I mean not his agency, but his manager's outfit, which hired, he was hired by Sammy Davis to expose him to actually managing Sammy Davis.  And--
Speaker 1: So how long did you stay there with that?
Speaker 2: Oh, was with Sammy nine, close to nine years.
Speaker 1: And I read somewhere that you also became his drama coach.  You were his drama coach, also?
Speaker 2: Yes, well because he was doing multitasks such as film work and movies.
Story_ID: 464938
Speaker 1: So in '71 [1971], you're forty-five.  You're still working, you're still moving.  You've been doing it for a minute now, for over twenty years already (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Right.
Speaker 1: Twenty years plus, and you're still a young man, forty-five.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So now for the next five years--I mean you said it was about ten years.  Seventy-six [1976] is bicentennial year.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What happens then?
Speaker 2: Well, I had been conversing with the, with the hierarchy of the Detroit [Michigan]--like Coleman Young and the--
Speaker 1: The mayor of Detroit--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Coleman Young?
Speaker 2: And so they were persuaded because of my involvement with show business to come there and to produce the bicentennial shows [Bicentennial Homecoming Festival].  That would mean thirteen shows with a different type of show in the same facility.
Speaker 1: So you had your work cut out for you (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  So, I tried to put together the thirteen shows that would--because Detroit and its environs was highly involved in the spirituality of different sects of people.  And so I started it off with a Judaic approach and opened it with a shofar, to give credence and involvement to the Jewish, Hebrew lineage, and carried it historically up to-date through the interest and--of the Judeo-Christian ethic, on up to-date.  And that's with the Detroit Symphony [Detroit Symphony Orchestra].  Then there was one that was called 'The Power and the Glory.'
Speaker 1: Was Paul Freeman [HistoryMaker Paul Douglas Freeman] the conductor of the symphony at that point?
Speaker 2: No, he wasn't.  But he was--he was not the director at that time.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) he was--he became the conductor of the first--one of the first--the first Detroit black--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --conductor--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --with the Detroit Symphony Orchestra.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But he was not the conductor then?
Speaker 2: No.  And then I invited [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards to speak at the--and to participate in that performance.
Speaker 1: So you had Lloyd Richards, you had--who else did you have?  You said you had all kinds of different people.  Who else did you have (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I had all of the musicians.
Speaker 1: For instance?
Speaker 2: For instance, oh, Kenny Burrell, Roland Hanna.  There must have been twenty to thirty musicians that had come to Detroit and had gone on.
Speaker 1: Pepper Adams?
Speaker 2: Pepper Adams; all of them were there.
Speaker 1: Wow.  Joe Henderson?
Speaker 2: I don't know whether Joe Henderson was there.
Speaker 1: Jones brothers [Elvin Jones, Hank Jones, and Thad Jones], did you have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The Jones brothers, yeah, Alvin [Alvin Ailey] and--they were definitely there.
Speaker 1: How about Tommy Flanagan?
Speaker 2: Flanagan, yes, he was--
Speaker 1: So, you had all the heavyweights?
Speaker 2: All of them.
Speaker 1: Barry Harris?
Speaker 2: Barry Harris, yeah.  And they, it was just a--share in the experience down at Masonic Temple [Detroit Masonic Temple, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Masonic temple, yeah.  As a kid I remember going to the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --(laughter) Masonic Temple for just about everything.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was this the--had the ethnic festivals started then?  Had they started doing the ethnic festival in Detroit?  Or were you part of that?
Speaker 2: No, that wasn't ethnic festivals at the time, but--
Speaker 1: Because Hart Plaza [Philip A. Hart Plaza, Detroit, Michigan] wasn't there yet.  Seventy-six [1976], was Hart Plaza open?
Speaker 2: I do believe, but not on the scale that it's opened now, you know.
Speaker 1: So you, so that series went well.  And that was for the--and it also celebrated the 275th birthday of the--
Speaker 2: The City of Detroit.
Speaker 1: --of Detroit.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And I wanted to do--I think everything during that period should have a historic significance.  My interest was to take every industry and do a historic growth scenario of that particular industry as it happened in Detroit.
Speaker 1: So, you took the automotive industry?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I was limited in where I could go with that because of--my aspirations were not the same as others who were involved.
Speaker 1: The music industry, you had the Motown situation (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: I'm thinking of a lot of big companies like Vernors.
Speaker 2: Vernors.  There were many other--
Speaker 1: --soft drink- Sanders [Fred Sanders Company; Morley Candy Company].
Speaker 2: Sanders, that's candy making industry, yes.
Speaker 1: So now people don't--so Detroit was actually seventy-five years older than the rest of the--what the country was celebrating?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And you were celebrating your fiftieth birthday that year, too (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: So there was a lot of celebration going on.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 464939
Speaker 1: So you continued to do that.  And also, as if that wasn't enough, you did 'Selma' [ph.].  You were doing lights and production management for 'Selma' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --which was as you tried to do these thirteen shows [for the Bicentennial Homecoming Festival] at the same time?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: How was this possible?
Speaker 2: Well, because you're--you had a range of activities that you are participating in, all throughout that time.  And one thing leads several people to have knowledge of you doing that.  And they agree with you and your sense of persuasion, and they involve themselves.
Speaker 1: And they also agree to agree with your timeframe of how you're going to do stuff obviously.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How was your private life, your personal life?  You had so much stuff going on.  How was your personal life going on at this time?
Speaker 2: You don't really think that much of a personal life because your personal life has turned out to be what you're doing presentation-wise.  Excuse me.
Speaker 1: So you, so you continued through '76 [1976], and then in '77 [1977] you're still doing 'Othello' [William Shakespeare] as a guest artist at Wayne State [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And you're, like you're in your fifties now.  So you still, you've been doing at this time 'Othello' for over twenty-five years (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That is correct.  And one of the things that--I had opened a facility in downtown Detroit [Michigan].  Because you look at Detroit, and it's much changed.  That's when I opened the restaurant, LaCav [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us about that.  You opened the restaurant.  Now, where was it located in Detroit, for all the Detroiters who are watching?
Speaker 2: On Elizabeth [Street] and Park Avenue, right downtown.  And I--my thinking, businesswise, was this would be an opportunity for a--(cough) excuse me--relatively for a man without the great means that it would require.  And I think today, look at where Elizabeth and Park is in terms of, new baseball diamond.  It's right at the seat of all of that.  But my interest in it was--well, the few years that it lasted--a very good and interesting one because the population needed a place downtown where they could go and dine and listen to jazz and dance afterwards, and they did.
Speaker 1: So it was a hot spot.  And what years were this, were you there?
Speaker 2: That was right after the--
Speaker 1: The bicentennial?
Speaker 2: --bicentennial ended.  And I immediately got involved in traveling back to California from Detroit to take care of my duties with Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis, Jr.].
Speaker 1: So you had, so you were being almost bi-coastal, back and forth, you were--almost (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --because you weren't going as far as New York [New York], but you were going to Detroit--
Speaker 2: Detroit.
Speaker 1: --it got you close enough--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and back to L.A. [Los Angeles, California].
Story_ID: 464940
Speaker 1: You were artistic director for the festival for the performing arts in Detroit, Michigan.  You did that.  You did 'Chattel' for the Langston Hughes Theatre [Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's '79 [1979], I mean, this is stuff in '80 [1980].  Each year for the festival for performing arts, all the way up to the fourth one, I see, you were the artistic director for that.  Then in 1980 you also did the, you were the artistic director for the Creative Express Theater Company.  Explain that to me.  What was that about?
Speaker 2: That was a group of, a company that was--the actors were--and the creators of Creative Express were restless, wanting some place to voice their disenchantment with what was going on culturally.  And I threw in with them and began to share some of the experiences that I have had in this theater business.
Speaker 1: And what were some of their concerns?  What were some of their concerns that they had?
Speaker 2: Well they were very dramatic in their re- needs, and a little bit more avant-garde than I would feel comfortable in doing.  And I was trying to persuade their growth to be in other directions that would become practical, and there would be an audience out here for them.  And we found a middle ground and a place for them to go.
Speaker 1: Wasn't there a thing going on at the same time with the jazz musicians at the Griot Galaxy?  And they were--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --playing, playing kind of, we'll, as we say, they were playing out--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --(laughter) at the same time?
Speaker 2: Yes, there was that restlessness that was in need for expression.
Story_ID: 464941
Speaker 1: So through the '80s [1980s] you continued to do--to, to co-produce and direct.  And you were still doing--as an artistic director you weren't doing as much acting now, were you, through the '80s [1980s]?  You were doing more (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --more--
Speaker 2: More directing and producing.
Speaker 1: --more direction, directing and producing.
Speaker 2: Producing.
Speaker 1: Now in about '85 [1985], you hook up with, we'll say the Michigan Bell [Michigan Bell Telephone Company]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Explain that, the Array of Stars [ph.].  What was that about?
Speaker 2: That was an in-house in the--I was doing a lot of coaching for groups within Michigan Bell staff of just how to conduct meetings; how to speak at meetings; how to communicate.  And from that, I discovered another avenue for people to present themselves to the public through theatrical presentations.  And they asked me would I put together a project, and that I did.
Speaker 1: So that was a corporate sponsorship before corporate sponsorships were popular?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You had already done--because nowadays a lot of shows and things are corporately underwritten.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But you had this going back in 1980-something.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Eighty- '85 [1985], you're doing it?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Do you think it, do you think that your inroads into that kind of led to what's going on now, that people saw this as a model?
Speaker 2: I think partially it was because--and also the need for them to go somewhere.  They had to go somewhere.  They had to get this unrestfulness vented and out, so that they became more communicable with each other.  And Michigan Bell did a great deal to bring that about.
Speaker 1: So, you (unclear)--now what was the Array of Stars exactly?  What was that?  What was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was taking the talent within the Michigan Bell system and putting it in a performing arena with some of the techniques and highlights of production.
Speaker 1: So, it's almost like a corporate talent show?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: But it was on a level that they would--it wasn't just something they'd put on in the cafeteria?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: They put on a serious show?
Speaker 2: Right.  It was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And what, what were the CEOs saying when they saw this, saw their people being creative?
Speaker 2: Well, they, I think they recognized it.  They never came back to me and told me personally, but they did hire me to do some other work for them, that involved me having them address some of the artistic methods of communication.
Speaker 1: Do you think that today in Corporate America things like this are needed, where people are there who have creative aspirations, but they're actually there because they think they need this job, and they're being stifled?  Do you think that this, these corporate offices are full of people who need to express themselves?  Do you believe it's not enough just in the corporate arena?  Do you think that these kinds of programs could work now for people?
Speaker 2: Well, they do.  As a matter of fact I've later used them when I was, as you will see later, employed by the Hilton corporation [Hilton Worldwide] in Las Vegas [Nevada].  I put all of their participants, the different echelons of those who are hired by them--because the top management and middle management, they don't see these people who function as maids, butlers, laundry personnel with having anything to do--like what they can do.  And when they're able to see that this man is a singer.  This man is a dancer.  This man is--
Speaker 1: An orator.
Speaker 2: --orator.  And the audience, they'll s- will see this as well.  And they'll say, "I never knew you could do that."
Story_ID: 464942
Speaker 1: So as we were saying, so now people see these, we'll call them menial workers, supposedly.
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They see them in these other gr- other, other idioms now.  Now there's Mary from housekeeping, but Mary is an operatic singer?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So do you think that shows a different light on Mary now, which will affect her in her, in her career advancement?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: And you had the vision to see that.  And do, do you have any stories in which it actually happened to a person?  Any of your--the people that were--where they actually advanced their careers because of that?
Speaker 2: Well, it all depends on what you mean by advancing a career (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Within the company.
Speaker 2: Within the company.  There was an advancement of communication, and a respect that is paid to these individuals who were previously thought as housewares.  Now they're thought of as a person, and that's all that this person was looking for, is to be accepted to be a person.
Speaker 1: So now here you are, Mr. Mason [HistoryMaker Walter Mason, Jr.], at fifty-nine years old doing all of this.  You have what we call a day job now with Michigan Bell [Michigan Bell Telephone Company].
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: You're still doing workshops.  And you also, it says that you went into, you decided to do some more commercials?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: For Michigan Lottery, Ford Motor Company [Dearborn, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So I guess you had to hone your acting some more, huh, pull the actor's bag out?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  You never lose that.
Speaker 1: So now was this voiceover, or was this an actual film commercial?  Was this both, or--?
Speaker 2: Both.
Speaker 1: And then in 1986, something happened that brought you out to Las Vegas [Nevada] where we are now.
Speaker 2: I got a call.
Speaker 1: Okay, so who called you?
Speaker 2: Joe Guercio, who was the former musical director for Avis- for Elvis Presley.  And he was taking over the job of the musical director of the theater department of the Las Vegas Hilton [Westgate Las Vegas Resort and Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada].
Speaker 1: At that time there were still shows that were going on?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, major shows.  And they sent for me to come out and to talk to Mr. Guercio and the president of the Hilton.  And so I came out, met them.  They liked what I had to say, and they hired me.
Speaker 1: So you packed your bag, and you're on your way to Vegas?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 464943
Speaker 1: And you came out--now how--what challenges did you face when you got here, when you got out in '86 [1986] in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada]?
Speaker 2: Well, they were--this town was known as the Mississippi of the West.
Speaker 1: Still, even in '83 [1983], huh?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes.  And much to my surprise, there were many people of color who were high in show business, could not stay at the Hilton [Las Vegas Hilton; Westgate Las Vegas Resort and Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada].  My belief is that the top management of the hotel did not know this was going on, this, these attitudes were taking place.  But, there was a very popular television personality, black, who came here and stuck a hundred dollar bill in my jacket pocket and says, "I need to get a room."  I said, "You don't need this to get a room.  You just go to the desk and register."  And I took him to the desk and he got a room.  That changed immensely the attitude of this hotel with this town.
Speaker 1: Well now in '86 [1986], Mr. Mason [HistoryMaker Walter Mason, Jr.], outright discrimination was against the law, so to speak.  How were they doing it to these people?  Just being full, and just couldn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) If you're down so long that getting up never crossed your mind, you'd still be down, if all of the, you know, Emancipation Proclamations had been given to you on a silver platter.  But people did not believe, and that's part of the enslavement of people--they don't believe.  And until they can believe and stick out their chest, but not too far--but still be in the spirit of giving.  This is why I think that what Mandela [Nelson Mandela] did was so--not to have any adverse effect on him, but we must accept a brother to brother relationship.
Speaker 1: So you came out and you started changing the face of things by saying, look, it's not that way anymore.  Go ahead and go to the desk and get yourself a room.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And how was it being a director, as far as you bringing in talent?  Was there, was there any opposition to what you were doing and how you were doing it?  Because you were highly skilled.
Speaker 2: Well, there was a need for that, to listen to the Tops [Four Tops] and The Temps [The Temptations] and Gladys Knight [Gladys Knight and the Pips] and all of the entertainers, as well as many of the white entertainers who had philosophically a more liberal point of view, as well as the country and western singers and dancers.
Speaker 1: So you were bringing in various artists.  Have you seen a shift?  Or back when you were bringing in the artists, did you see--would you say a talent difference between artists then and artists now?  Was there a difference in dedication to their craft?  Or was it the same kind of I'm a star mentality that we see today so prevalent?
Speaker 2: No, it's not--it was a older linage of skills that were developed over a period of time.  Many of the acts today do not have that.  They have the window dressing, the extrinsics, not the internal development.
Speaker 1: As we say, pay the dues.
Speaker 2: Paid the dues, yes.
Story_ID: 464944
Speaker 1: So you stayed there until, how long did you stay at the Hilton [Las Vegas Hilton; Westgate Las Vegas Resort and Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada], Mr. Mason [HistoryMaker Walter Mason, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: 'Til '99 [1999].
Speaker 1: And did- what happened that caused you to leave?  Because you're still kicking strong now.
Speaker 2: I retired (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I came, I said where can I put what I know into being?  I said it's with young people at the art center on the west side [West Las Vegas Arts Center, Las Vegas, Nevada]--of, of library theater [West Las Vegas Library, Las Vegas, Nevada].
Speaker 1: So, was this already here when you decided to do that?  Or was this all your doing and creation, in going to the city?
Speaker 2: No.  Well, this was, had--the buil- the grounds were broken, and there was just the art center that stood.  Here, an attorney friend of mine called me and said, "Is this facility up to a standard that you would welcome it?"  Comparatively speaking, I said that it was not, and what it needed in order to get there.  And the response was, well, they're not going to use this anyway.  I said, "That's not true."  And they said--
Speaker 1: Who is they?
Speaker 2: The they?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: They mean you people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, were not going to use it.  Is--they were proven wrong because of one year at least--it might have been twelve months or thirteen months, or fourteen, I don't know, was all of the bus- all of the building stopped, we stopped it, because they wanted to give short shrift to what was needed in terms of the theater space, the dressing rooms, and other accoutrements that are definitely needed in a theater.  So after they had this time to think about it and wait, and see that no, nothing was done, they changed their minds and came in with the improvements that were necessary.
Speaker 1: And you've been here since what now?  How many years have you been here?
Speaker 2: Oh, at least eight, seven or eight.
Speaker 1: And is there a full program that goes on as far as education for the arts and everything that goes on?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And I've developed Ira Aldridge Theater [Washington, D.C.], which has produced plays like 'Raisin in the Sun' ['A Raisin in the Sun,' Lorraine Hansberry], 'Amen Corner' ['The Amen Corner,' James Baldwin], 'Emperor Jones' ['The Emperor Jones,' Eugene O'Neill].
Speaker 1: Ira Aldridge being--?
Speaker 2: Ira Aldridge being the namesake of a historical name.  Ira Aldridge did Othello [in 'Othello,' William Shakespeare] in the 1890s all over Europe.  There's a chair at the Royal Shakespeare Academy in London [sic. Royal Shakespeare Theatre, Stratford-upon-Avon, England] named after him.  He was a black man out of New York [New York], originally.
Speaker 1: Ira Aldridge?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Who did Othello in 1890?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 464945
Speaker 1: So now is there anything else that you want to add that I didn't ask you anything about, about your career in particular, that we've missed?
Speaker 2: No.  I think that I must say that my career was helped by s- an indirect assistance of the UAW [United Auto Workers; United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America], by being in Detroit [Michigan], who used to hire me to come go out and speak on interpretative readings of literary pieces such as 'Prejudice' by Carl Sandburg, or Langston Hughes, or other pieces that would be germane to their particular insight.  And I think that that has kept my feet on the ground.
Speaker 1: So it's fair to say--would it be fair to say that you were doing diversity training through the arts many years ago?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you a question.  Why did you want to tell your story?
Speaker 2: Well because it's not--it's in a way--not to tell my story.  My story was being told to me, and through me.  And I was interested what The HistoryMakers was saying in their philosophical approach.  And I think that every day is history.
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way that you've lived your life?  And what is really important to you?
Speaker 2: Well, I've stuck to most of the basics, and just held on and given my God-given talents, have used it to express myself in a way that I can be happy looking at the mirror.
Story_ID: 464946
Speaker 1: For those young people going into the theater, theatrical arts, do you have any suggestions that you can give them?
Speaker 2: Stay grounded, be persistent in your abilities and the elevation of your abilities, and don't be easily led.  But stick to a phi- get a philosophy and stick by that philosophy as long as you see it seems befitting to what you are about.  And just be honest.
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you've done, Mr. Mason [HistoryMaker Walter Mason, Jr.], that you've done already that you would like, that you would have done differently?  Any regrets about anything possibly?
Speaker 2: Well, that's something that you cannot change.  You, you, you--as August Wilson says, "You got to take the crooked with the straights" ['Fences'].
Story_ID: 464947
Speaker 1: What are your concerns and your hopes for the African American community?
Speaker 2: Accept yourselves, accept yourselves.  Don't let anybody tell you what--who you are, what you are, or how far you can go.  Go as far as you want to go, but know how far that is.  And if you pay the price, go get it.
Speaker 1: Is there a value that you consider very important to a person?
Speaker 2: To thine own self be true.  Do not be dependent upon anybody, any- anything.  To your own self, be true.  And so live your life that it relishes that truthfulness.
Speaker 1: That truthfulness being your own inner truth.
Speaker 2: Your own inner truth.  You know when you're honest, you know when you're not.  And it will rear back its ugly head and bite you in the butt.
Speaker 1: Every time.
Story_ID: 464948
Speaker 1: How do you want to be, to be remembered?  Or your legacy, what do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: I'll be gone (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) So are you saying that it doesn't matter?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'll be glad--it doesn't matter.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, let's leave a message for your children and your grandchildren and other people's grandchildren in the world.  What message would you have, that you haven't already given?  What can you say to all the children coming up, to our young people?
Speaker 2: Well, I would say is that, that brightness, that revelation that you give to me as children--keep that with you.  Keep sharing that, and then when you get to be an adult, give some of it back.  Give some of it back, to enable somebody else to grow up and share and understand some of the same beliefs that you've had, and benefits that you've had.
Story_ID: 464949
Speaker 1: Do you have any ideas about artistic opportunities nowadays, you know, with today's multimedia situations that we have?  We talked earlier about the way plays are now, and things are given.  Do you have any ideas about what direction you think the whole entertainment industry is going, and what we can do to bring it back to its core again?  Any ideas about that?
Speaker 2: Well, I think we will enable ourselves and others to seek new ground.  The greatest symphony has not been written.  The greatest play has not been written.  The greatest poetry has not been written as yet.  But we can gain something from looking at the past and absorbing some of the needs in the present, to give us the guidelines for in the future.  But, be able to pick up that gauntlet and take it into the future.
Speaker 1: So the gauntlet is very important that we go back and study.  Would you say the education, the importance of historical education, do you think that's important?  Not just education, but knowing the history of what it is for dancers, singers and musicians?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Because today there're a lot of people out there now that claim to be these things--
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) musicians, playwrights, all these things.  But the depth of their work, what do you feel about that?
Speaker 2: I feel that they need to go back to the woodshed, dig a little deeper.  Because I have not seen anything that I have ever done to be as good as it could have been.  And I think that if all of the writers, all of the playwrights, all of the actors dig a little bit deeper, a little bit deeper, they might see a revelation of oh, my god, that's would it could be.
Speaker 1: Dig deeper?
Speaker 2: Dig deeper.
Speaker 1: And as you said earlier, make it happen.
Speaker 2: Make it happen.
Speaker 1: I want to thank you for your interview.  You've been gracious, you've been great.  We've learned a lot today, we want to thank you for being with us, with The HistoryMakers.  Thank you very much for this interview, Mr. Mason [HistoryMaker Walter Mason, Jr.].
Speaker 2: Thank you, Jacques [Jacques Lesure].
Story_ID: 464950
Speaker 1: That is a performance of 'Othello' [William Shakespeare], with Othello in the center and Brabanzio, the father, next to Othello, and Desdemona.  And he says to her, "I give thee what I, in essence, what I deny you."  And there standing all around him are the council members and the Duke of Venice.
Speaker 2: Do we know who the principal actors are?
Speaker 1: There's Walter [HistoryMaker Walter Mason, Jr.] in the lead.  And I don't know who, facing the young lady, who that Desdemona was.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was directed by William Spier.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is Mr. Mason as Purlie Victorious [Purlie Victorious Judson in 'Purlie Victorious,' Ossie Davis].  And that is Janet League, the young lady that was playing the part of--let's see, what's her name?  Well, Lutiebelle, Lutiebelle Gussie Mae Jenkins.
Speaker 2: Okay, and appro- do you know when that happened?
Speaker 1: That was in 1964.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And once again, that's you?
Speaker 1: Yes, as Reverend Purlie.
Speaker 2: Okay, next one.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, that was taken the, at the Diplomat Hotel in Florida [Hollywood, Florida], with left to right, Walter Mason and Bobby Tucker, the musical director for Billy Eckstine, who is standing.
Speaker 1: That is the late [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards, who was my mentor and a great dramatic director of the world class theater.
Speaker 2: Okay, now when was that?  Were you working on a show together, or--?
Speaker 1: This at the Eugene O'Neill Foundation [Eugene O'Neill Memorial Theater Foundation; Eugene O'Neill Theater Center, Waterford, Connecticut] in the 1960s.
Speaker 2: This is a scene from 'A Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry]. It was held right here in this theater [at the West Las Vegas Library, Las Vegas, Nevada].  And the central figures are Mama [Lena Younger] and Walter Lee [Walter Lee Younger] at the right.  And there's Ruth [Ruth Younger], the wife of Walter Lee, and Travis Younger, standing behind Mama.
Speaker 1: Next.
Speaker 2: Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Now is there a reason--did he give this to you at a show?  (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: No, I had several pictures of him.  That's--
Speaker 1: That was Duke Ellington--or, Ella Fitzgerald, Duke Ellington, Walter Mason.  That was at the now Grove [The Grove] in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's Walter Mason, Dorothy Lamour, and Rudy [Rudy Vallee], and Rudy--I don't remember his last name.
Speaker 2: Okay, was that from a specific show?
Speaker 1: That was at the now Grove when I was the production manager there.
