Story_ID: 228412
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker Dr.] Linda Rae Murray, L-I-N-D-A, R-A-E is my middle name, and Murray, M-U-R-R-A-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August 25th, 1948, Cleveland, Ohio.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: A physician.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: August 30th, 2004.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In Chicago, Illinois, you need the exact address?  No, you just trying to get a sound level (laughter)?
Speaker 1: No, no, we're just--this is a historical document.
Speaker 2: This is historical, okay.  We're at 1900 South Michigan [Avenue] in Chicago, Illinois.
Story_ID: 228413
Speaker 1: We ask five non-consequential, brief questions that only require a brief answer.  Kind of a warm up.  The first one is ma'am, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Sweet potato pie.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue is my favorite color.
Speaker 1: All right.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, home (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  Now the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Not really, no.
Story_ID: 228414
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your family history.  I want to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Raymond Murray] side of the family.  But we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Ruth Marie Childress is her maiden name.  I assume that's what you wanted.  R-U-T-H, Marie, M-A-R-I-E, Childress, C-H-I-L-D-R-E-S-S.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Well, she'll be seventy-seven this year, in the fall, and she was born on Columbus Day which I think is October 11th, 10th, something like that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, twelfth, 12th it may be.
Speaker 2: Twelfth may be.  It was the real Columbus Day.
Speaker 1: All right, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: Cleveland, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Cleveland, okay.  Now how far back can you trace the ancestors on her side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well the ones that I actually met, I've actually met and spent time with my great-grandmother, my maternal great-grandmother.  But her father's family, I've read about.  So that her grandfather, R. C. Childress, was actually president or had some high level position [professor and secretary of the faculty], in one of the historically black colleges [Philander Smith College] in Little Rock, Arkansas.  I'm gonna forget which one, but--and-
Speaker 1: It was in Little Rock?
Speaker 2: In, in Little Rock, so it could only be one, right?  So, so I--so actually there's some historical documents about him that I've been able to read in the family history.  And, and then I know about him, we actually have a photograph of I believe his grandfather who illegally married his grandmother.  His grandfather was a white man, I actually have this photograph of him that one of my aunts gave me.  So that's about as far back as I can go in his family, in that family.  My great-grandmother who I actually knew.  That, that's my mother's maternal grandmother, was from the East Coast, one of the Carolinas.
Speaker 1: Now, now can you give us the names of some of these people?
Speaker 2: Logan. Her--
Speaker 1: Okay, now the grandfather, yeah R. C. Childress, okay, and the great-grandmother is Logan?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the--that--Childress is my mother's grandfather.  So that would be one of my greats.  Her maternal grandmother I met, we called her Mama, and I only know her married name, which was Logan.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she was born right after the emancipation of the slaves.  And so I actually have a lot of stories--actually she shaped a lot of my notion of the world.  She lived with us for a number of years and told us stories.  So I have a lot of memories of her.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 228415
Speaker 1: Well, tell us some stories, do you remember some stories she told you?
Speaker 2: Oh sure, she [Murray's maternal great-grandmother] had lots of stories.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was born a year after slavery ended, and she, she would always call us in.  We lived in the projects in Cleveland [Ohio] when she lived with us.  And around lunchtime she would always call us children in from the--outside and say, "Come on in before you get black".  And we would always be mad 'cause--we're already black, we want to stay out and play.  But she made us come in and fed us and we would have to sit quietly for an hour.  We were too old for naps then.  And she would tell us about the world, and she told us a lot about her family.  So her family from what I can gather now and it wasn't clear to me exactly when I was a child.  She was relatively light skinned, she couldn't pass.  But she told us a number of her family members passed, and passed on over she said, you know they passed out.
Speaker 1: Now, now you say she's from the Carolinas?
Speaker 2: I believe so, from the East, from the eastern--one of those.  I think it was the Carolinas, yeah.  She wasn't from Arkansas or from Mississippi.  She was from the East Coast.  And she--and her uncles and father had some land.  So when she was a child growing up, they had some land that they owned.  And they really could pass because she would delight in telling how white folks would come up on their horses and they would want to water their horses.  And they assumed that her father and uncles were white, which they weren't.  And they didn't like white folks, so they'd never let them water their horses.  They'd chase them off the land.  So she, she always told that story.  She had another story that I liked.  She worked as a domestic in, certainly in her later years.  And there was one family she worked for and that she was a cook.  So she worked in the kitchen.  In, in holiday times when they would have a big part, a wedding or something, they would have to get extra help.  So she would tell the story that you know as her daughter grew up, Wynetta [Childress (ph.)], my grandmother, they would say, "Have Wynetta come and help.  How's Wynetta doing?  Have her come and help."  And she would have Wynetta come and she would have her daughter come and help and they would cook the food.  And then as my aunt grew a little older, they'd say, "How old, how old is Lorraine [ph.] now?"  Such-and-such an age.  "Have her come and help, have her come and help with the kitchen, have her come on in for the Christmas."  And she would have her come in.  And then my mother [Ruth Childress Murray], who was the youngest daughter, they would say well, "How, how old is little Ruthie now?  How old is she?"  Fifteen, sixteen.  "Have Ruthie come on in and help."  And my grandmother would say "Just a minute.  The reason I've worked here all these years is so Ruthie would never have to come in this kitchen and help."  So that's where she drew the line with my mother in terms of having the family come in and help. And you know her, her point was each generation should go farther.  She would say never, never let your children do exactly what you do.  Each time have them go a little farther.
Story_ID: 228416
Speaker 1: The last story I remember, which really--and actually I often use it in speeches because it really made an impression on me.  She [Murray's maternal great-grandmother]--this is a woman I think typical for her generation.  She really spent a lot of time talking about, black people can't do this, black people can't do that, we can't be united, we're always on each other.  She was really quite negative about black people.  She was, she was not happy about dark skinned people.  We were all darker skinned than herself, but you know that was there, she didn't dwell on it that much.  But you could tell it was there.  But she also really didn't like white folks and spent a lot of time explaining how white folks thought and what they did and how you operated around them.  But I remember she used to tell us frequently, this wasn't even a story so much as a saying with her.  She would say the world ain't fair and black people are on the bottom.  That's the way it's been.  It's going to be that way for a long time.  And she told me, she said, "Girl, you only got two choices.  You can stay down there in the mud and have the white man have his foot on your neck, or you can keep trying to stand up and fight.  And he's going to knock you down.  You just have to keep trying to stand up, you just keep standing up 'til it's, 'til you, 'til it's done.  'Til you can stand up for sure."  She wasn't very optimistic about the future of black people.  I think she would be surprised at the progress we've made.  She was alive during some of the early parts of the Civil Rights Movement.  I know that impacted her greatly.  I, I remember her talking about that.  She never thought she'd see the day when black people would be marching.  But she's the one that really in my mind, put in my little brain just keep standing up 'cause you're going to be in the mud anyway.  So you either stay down there in the mud and give up, or keep standing up out the mud.  So she really had a big impact I think on all of us children.
Story_ID: 228417
Speaker 1: Now any other stories from, you know about--I mean this is a grandparent [Murray's maternal great-grandmother] you actually met and interacted with.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Big impact.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: But any stories about ancestors or anything?
Speaker 2: You know there were, there were always family stories.  My, my mother's [Ruth Childress Murray] family was renowned for being a little crazy and a number of the uncles, some of whom I met, were around the house and they would tell stories about their brothers and the like.  But it's, it's these stories--there's one, one uncle that supposedly rode his bicycle from Arkansas to Florida 'cause he broke up with some woman and he rode it there to yell at her 'cause they broke up, or you know funny stories.  But it's those stories that gave us--'cause we all--my parents and obviously all of us were born and raised in Cleveland [Ohio].  And we didn't go back home.  You know we didn't, we didn't spend summers in the South or anything.  So it's these stories about that generation that grew up in the South that gave us some flavor for what the segregated South was like.  And there would be stories about segregation stories.  If an uncle was--said something uppity to somebody, they'd have to leave town.  Nothing--you know nobody was hurt or anything, but that, that gave us a flavor for what the South was like.  But my grandparents had moved to Cleveland and, and so we really didn't have a reason particularly to go south and we, and we didn't.  I was grown before I went into the South.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now the, the uncle, I mean the great, great-great-grandfather in Arkansas who illegally married a black woman, is there any, are there any stories about him and, and what happened with that situation?
Speaker 2: They just said he was crazy.  And that's what, that's what the family always said.  He was so crazy, he married her.  That's, that's what they said.  And I really don't know very much more about him.  I have a, I have a picture of him and a--and I can say that he's the, he's--in, in my mother's family there's very bushy eyebrows that people have and I could see 'em in him, so I was convinced we were really related.  But we--I never really know any stories about him.  I, I know that he did marry this black woman that he lived with and, and that, that we're descended from.
Speaker 1: That, that his offspring is R. C. Childress?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Who was the president [sic. professor and secretary of the faculty] of the college [Philander Smith College, Little Rock, Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: I think I know what college you're talking about.  I can't think of the name of it, but I'll, I'll--
Speaker 2: It's in Little Rock [Arkansas].  It's in Little Rock.
Speaker 1: It's not still there is it?  Or is it?
Speaker 2: It, it is still there.  It's open and there's a dorm named after him or something.  It's a historically black school [HBCU].
Story_ID: 228418
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Ruth Childress Murray] talk about growing up and, and what it was like for her to grow up in Cleveland [Ohio]?  Or what did you observe or, or hear about her growing up (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--I--as children, we spent more time with my mother's family than my father's [Raymond Murray] family, though we spent some time with both.  And they had a small family.  She had one sister and one brother.  Her, her mother, my, my grandmother [Wynetta Childress (ph.)], worked as a, a practical nurse and worked in people's homes as a, as a day care giver and a little bit as a cook.  And her father worked as a janitor in one of the downtown department stores, jewelry stores.  So my mother had tuberculosis when she was a child.  So she spent a year or two in the Cleveland area, but still in a hospital.  And she was always seen as studious, she liked to read.  She didn't like to run around in the streets and she was always sort of seen as fragile, reading.  My grandmother used to tell me she wouldn't, she didn't--well to this day my mother doesn't like to eat.  She didn't like to eat.  And so here you have this child that is out of the TB san [sanatorium], is fragile, you're trying to keep their strength up.  And she used to sneak money to the local drug store, ice cream parlor man, and send my mother down there and he would sneak an egg in her milkshake, she liked milkshakes.  So he would--my grandmother would pay him and he would sneak an extra egg or two in her milkshakes, and this is how they sort of kept her, kept her up.  But she was very different than my aunt, who I also knew, had the pleasure of knowing, who was very outgoing, sort of a party girl.  You know very friendly.  So they were sort of seen as, sort of opposites.  My mother was very quiet and very much the bookworm.  My aunt was very social and outgoing and you know Cleveland's a small place.  You know, was sort of into the Cleveland scene.  So my--my mother and father met when they were in high school and then they both dropped out of high school to get married.  They tell me that my mother was slated to be valedictorian of her class.  She was, she was going to a school, Glenville High School [Cleveland, Ohio], which at that time in Cleveland was predominantly Jewish, was a predominantly Jewish high school.
Speaker 1: What's the name of it again?
Speaker 2: I think it's, I think it's Glenville.  Hope I have that right.  But she dropped out to get married.  And again, I, you know I don't--some of this is reflective.  That when--as we were being raised, it was always assumed we would go to college.  I think it's very interesting that they both dropped out, got married, then my father went into the [U.S. military] service, my mother got a job.  I think that it speaks to what her notion of her future might be.  And how limited she might have seen it, or maybe she just fell in love.  I'm, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Did--has she ever talked about why, why she'd have to drop out to get married, or--
Speaker 2: Well, I, I--they wanted to get married.  And I think that, I don't think in that time period you could get married and stay in high school.  They wanted to get married and they got married and, and they had me like two years, a year and a half, almost two years after they got married.  They had their three children about eighteen months apart.  And then she spent the next bunch of years working and going back--and going to college, actually.  So throughout most of my time growing up, both of my parents were taking college courses.
Story_ID: 228419
Speaker 1: But it did, as you said speak to her [Murray's mother, Ruth Childress Murray] notion of what she's going to do next, she didn't have an idea--
Speaker 2: I think so.  I, I think, I think it, I think that it really does speak to that.  I know there are a number of relatives of her generation, maybe a little older than her.  A number of my uncles, you know you look at them and you can see how intelligent they were, they were well read, they were literate.  One uncle I know, one of my more favorite uncles by marriage, was an alcoholic, but he was one of the most brilliant men I knew.  And he, he read everything.  And he worked his whole life as a porter at the, at the airport.  So I think that again, their notion of what was possible, what kind of--what was a good job, you know.  He was considered to have had a good job for his generation.  But I think he was very frustrated, you know, you know go there and you carry people's bags, et cetera.  And he really was one of the best educated men I've ever met.  Self-educated, but still.  So you know I can't, I can't really say she, she clearly went on to school and, and actually, eventually got a master's [degree] in mathematics.  But I just think it's interesting that she didn't consider herself able to go straight from, straight from high school [Glenville High School, Cleveland, Ohio].  Her mother had done one or two years at college, sort of--in one of these vocational kind of programs.  I think that's where she became a licensed, practical nurse.  She went to Central State [College; Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio] in Ohio for a year or two.  So the concept of going to college wasn't foreign, but I, I just think the reality of going to college was difficult.
Speaker 1: Okay, and maybe also that the high school didn't have the same kind of social meaning that it had, has to other people.  She was in a school that was predominantly white.  I mean I don't, I don't know if--do you, you think that she had a lot of friends in high school, a lot of social standing in high school or--
Speaker 2: She's very.  You know my impression is that she was a very shy, quiet woman anyway.  My father [Raymond Murray] went to East Tech High School [East Technical High School, Cleveland, Ohio] like the, you know the ghetto school, the, you know.  So he was you know, he was well connected socially and stuff.  And that, that may be true.  I've actually never asked her, you know why, why she didn't go to college.  But I know they got married, they moved in with her sister.  And he went into the [U.S. military] service.  So--and this, this was at the end of the war [World War II, WWII].
Speaker 1: Towards the end of World War II?
Speaker 2: Well I was born in 1948, so I--they must have got married in what, '46 [1946] or something like that, '45 [1945].  So it was, you know it was toward the end of the World War II.  World War II had a big impact on her, I do know that.  And unknowingly had a big impact therefore on shaping my political notions--
Story_ID: 228420
Speaker 1: --In what sense did it [World War II, WWII] have a big impact on her?
Speaker 2: Well when we were growing up, I was--I'm the first born.  I was a good little girl and I was a good student.  And therefore I was quite patriotic.  And my mother [Ruth Childress Murray], now this is in, during the '50s [1950s], and my mother says later she was very worried about me.  I, I was so extreme.  I was a baseball fan and like if the baseball game was on television, I would try to--I would stand up during the National Anthem and I would try to get my brother [Randall Murray (ph.)] and sister [Ellen Murray (ph.)] to stand up.  They thought I was crazy.  You know this is on the television, you know.  And actually it wasn't--this was one of my few epiphanies in life.  We lived in the projects [in Cleveland, Ohio] and around in the third grade I was put into an academically tract, academically talented program which required me to travel far away to the white folks' neighborhood.  And they had an assembly for Flag Day or July 4th or something, some kind of--Veteran's Day, some patriotic day.  And they had a nice, young marine, 'cause I remember him to this day, in a dress uniform.  He came and he talked to us kids and he said you know you can't just be saying the Pledge of Allegiance real fast, running through it like it's a race.  You don't--you kids have to study it, think about what it means and, and I'm sitting up there, that's right, we just race through it.  So you know, so he--let me just stand up.  We're going to say the pledge.  Well you know being a diligent student, I said I'm not even going to say it.  I'm just going to, I'm just going to stand here and just contemplate the words, you know and I think I mouthed it.  But I was--I concentrated on it.  That's the last time, that's the last time ever I said the Pledge of Allegiance.  I was dumbfounded.  I said my God, this is a lie.  This is a complete lie, it was the fourth grade [at Boulevard Elementary School, Cleveland Heights, Ohio].  This was a--and never again.  All through high school [Collinwood High School, Cleveland, Ohio], all through school assemblies, I would stand up 'cause I wouldn't want to get my ass beat.  I would stand up.  I might even put my hand over my heart.  I never said it again.  So she--her--what she told us when we were growing up, she said during the World War II, during the war, there are a couple of things she said that, that made--that I remember.  She said first if it wasn't for Russia [Soviet Union], we might have lost.  She said, never forget that.  Twenty million Russians died.  If they hadn't fought and opened up that other front, we could have lost.  Secondly, if America had lost the war, we would have been in the gas chambers right after the Jews.  And then she talked a lot about that.  She said whatever you do, never walk quietly into a gas chamber.  The Jews did it.  Never do it.  That was her mantra.  Never walk quietly.  That's what she took from the war.  So here's a, here's a adolescent, young black woman growing up in America seeing this on the newsreels at the movies.  And that's the lesson she got.  This could be us.  Never walk quietly into the gas chambers.  And she was worried.  She didn't tell me this, but she told some graduate student later when I was in college.  She was actually worried about when--whether I was going to wake up and understand that the United States was not the way I thought it was.  So the fourth grade was the beginning of that wake up.
Speaker 1: (Noise)
Story_ID: 228421
Speaker 1: Your experience is different, different from a lot of experiences we've heard--people tell about--their parents seem to have this optimistic, almost innocent view of America and the kids figure out what's going on.
Speaker 2: No, both of my, both of my parents [Ruth Childress Murray and Raymond Murray], they both--I mean this was the height of the Cold War.  My father would chime in and, and I mean they, they were never, they were never politically active.  They did not belong to any organizations, you know.  My father worked.  I mean he belonged to his, his--the UAW [United Auto Workers; United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America].  He belonged to--but he wasn't a union activist.  You know he belonged to a union on his job.  They were just observers of, of world events.  And so when the evening news would come on or something would come on about how Russia [Soviet Union] was doing this, they would just say, you know if it wasn't for them, we would have lost.  You know they bled, they--you know when, when the War [World War II, WWII] was going on, they were our allies.  You know they bled on the fields.  And then they would ask things.  They would say well what do you think socialism is?  What's so bad about socialism?  You know they--and I mean I consider myself a socialist and a Marxist now.  So you know looking back, they were not ideologues, they were just natural social--he said what is so bad about doing things for the common good?  So they really took a stand and they said the principles, at least the principles that Russia seems to be about sounds good.  I mean that, that was their position.  We know America is not particular--does not live up to its principles.  And what you can see is they discriminate against us, okay.  So they weren't political active as, as we grew up and we--I was the oldest, but all three of us children were politically act--we were in student CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], we were very politically active.
Speaker 1: So you don't know if your, if your parents had any political education in, in college or any, or took courses where they might discuss these things?
Speaker 2: No, I know they didn't because by the time they were in college, I was a child.  I knew what courses they took.  You know in fact I used to help them study for their--you know I used to help quiz 'em on their courses.  No they didn't--this is something that they got I think as teenagers, I think the war.  The war made a big impression on them.  And they remember what was said during the wartime and the thought that, you know five years later all of a sudden these people that were your allies in this glorious fight against fascism, all of a sudden become devils.  They just couldn't accept.  They didn't accept it.  And they, and they spoke out.  And their position was that the things Russia said, everyone that worked should have access to, you know, food, clothing and shelter.  I mean just the basic principles.  You could al-they were not--my parents are not religious either.  And it may very well be if they were, they would have talked, some people would call 'em Christian principles.  These are sort of basic--what your grandmother taught you, you know, principles.  You shouldn't have your neighbors starve just because they were working for, you know, a quarter an hour and you, you know.  So they were not trained ideologues.  They, they were educated--they were well read, self-educated folks who were older and so remembered that history of the war.
Story_ID: 228422
Speaker 1: I--I know they [Murray's parents, Ruth Childress Murray and Raymond Murray] were influenced also on--about the wave, again just from the news, of the fights against colonialism.  So it, you know it's at that point that you begin to see countries in Africa and Asia throwing off the yokes of colonialism.  To them this was--this just made sense.  And if you--you may not remember, I don't remember, I--you know.  But the--Russia [Soviet Union] was always on that side.  You know so again that, that's what they would say.  Well you know the United States wants to keep Africa as colonies.  Russia--we don't know about the Russians, but we know they want Africa to be free, or they want Asia to be free.  And so to them that made sense and that resonated with them.  They were never politically active.  One of the--in fact I really didn't become politically active until--it's because my brother [Randall Murray (ph.)] who's, who's younger than me.  Who is, who is more adventurous, you know again, I'm the first child, so you know I'm always--I'm like more conservative.  He was always more adventurous.  In our family this was an adventure.  He actually--we were worried about him.  He went to some churches, you know our family didn't go to church.  We thought that was a little odd and I remember one day he came home, he had been to a student CORE meeting, Congress of Racial Equality.  So in Cleveland [Ohio] there was a student chapter, again, largely white suburban kids whose parents were active in the Civil Rights Movement at some level.  And he came back and he said, "Oh, you ought to come to this meeting, you ought to come to this meeting."  I said, "I don't have time, I don't have time to go."  So one day he did the dishes for me, you know, we had to do--he, he was a boy, he never had to do dishes, but my sister [Ellen Murray (ph.)] and I split the dishes.  One day I wanted to do something after school and stuff.  He said, "I'll do the dishes for you, [HistoryMaker Dr.] Linda [Rae Murray], if you come with me to this, to this Student CORE meeting."  So that sounded like a good deal to me, I said, "Cool, okay."  So I came to the meeting and there was a black woman who was a young black college student, who was like the, I don't know, the leader for this student group.  And it's at that point that I became politically active.  'Cause I said this, this makes sense; this is something--I mean I knew about the, the movement in the South.  I said this is something we can do here in the North.  And, and the thing we worked on was, was school desegregation in Cleveland.
Speaker 2: About what year was this?
Speaker 1: Now let me see, I graduated in 1966, well [Reverend] Bruce Klunder was killed, I knew him.  So it was like a year before he was killed.
Speaker 2: Bruce who?
Speaker 1: Bruce Klunder, Reverend Bruce Klunder.  He's on--his name is on the, on the memorial, the Civil Rights Memorial [Montgomery, Alabama], the one with the water that comes down and it's in a big circle.
Speaker 2: How do you spell his name?
Speaker 1: I think it's K-L-U-N-D-E-R.  He was a young, white minister, had a wife [Joanne Lehman] and a, a little child.  And in Cleveland, the battle was really around school desegregation.
Story_ID: 228423
Speaker 1: So we were talking about political consciousness, but we need to go back a little bit because we've jumped ahead of ourselves.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But can you tell us your, give us your father's full name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: Raymond James Murray.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was he born and when?
Speaker 2: He was born in Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 1: All right.  And around--he and your mother [Ruth Childress Murray] are about the same age?
Speaker 2: Yes, they're both, they're just less than a year apart.  He's seventy-seven, his birthday is February 15th.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you know about his side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Much less, much, much less.  I have a cousin, a first cousin who is a little older than me, who's made a study of tracing that family and I, I don't have that information.  In fact he and I have tried to promise to exchange information, so I really don't have that.  He had a large family.  He was the second youngest child.  There was one uncle, one brother younger than him who actually was not raised in Cleveland.  So in the Cleveland family, Raymond was the--really the baby.  The younger brother was sent to some relatives and raised in Buffalo, New York.  And all of my father's siblings are dead now.  But as I was growing up, I knew the aunts and uncles, but I did not have that much contact with my cousins.  There were a few cousins, one cousin, Pedro [ph.] we called him, would be--was our babysitter frequently.  But those--all of those families were larger than ours and so we were almost never left there, you know for babysitting.  We were always at my maternal grandmother [Wynetta Childress (ph.)] or my maternal aunt.  My maternal aunt had one child.  So if you have three kids, you're gonna dump 'em somewhere, you usually don't dump 'em on someone that already has four or five kids.  The--my father's fam--my mother's family did not live in the projects, in public housing.  But my father's family lived in a set of older projects that were near us, but they weren't the same set of housing projects we lived in.  So even now there are cousins that I really, really don't know that well.  I do know a couple of things.  I know that I was only the sec--and I, I was relatively young.  There are a number of my first cousins on my father's side that are older than me.  So when I graduated from high school [Collinwood High School, Cleveland, Ohio], I was only the second set of my father's kind of family cousins and stuff, to graduate from high school.  And obviously one of the first to go to college when I went to college.  I--my mother, my grandmother, my father's mother, died when I was ten, eleven, twelve.  I remember going to her funeral.  And then that also meant less visits to, to that side of that family after she died.  As I got older, and especially after our family moved to Chicago [Illinois], I got really to know my aunts and uncles much better because they would come to visit, minus their children.  You know they would come to visit and so as they were grown, as I was grown, they--I, I really spent more time with them and really enjoyed them.  So, so all of my, all of my aunts and most of my uncles on my father's side I did get to know.  They all had bad high blood pressure and they all died prematurely.  And so really my father is the only survivor at this point of all of his siblings.  As is my mother the only survivor of all of her siblings.
Story_ID: 228424
Speaker 1: Now as far as you know, they don't, they never talked about a origin in the South or anything like that?
Speaker 2: I don't--I've never heard my father [Raymond Murray] speak about my, about his father at all.  I've never seen pictures of his father.  As I said, I remember his mother of course.  And when I was young I never particularly asked, but I've never heard any of the family speak about, about him.  So I really, I really don't know.  Like I said, I do know one cousin, Clifford Murray [ph.], may have some information that is archival in nature.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right so that, that side of the family is kind of mysterious (unclear)--
Speaker 2: It is mysterious, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Did you all live in the--did he live in the same neighborhood as your mother [Ruth Childress Murray] when they were growing up?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.  I really don't know how they met, you know but I--well I mean the same neighborhood.  Cleveland's [Cleveland, Ohio] small and the black community was ghetto-ized, so it wasn't that far.  But I mean I think within the context of the Cleveland neighborhood, they weren't--they didn't live like a block or two from each other.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Would your mother have gone to East Tech [East Technical High School, Cleveland, Ohio]?  Had she gone to--not been in a special school [Glenville High School, Cleveland, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was within the boundaries of East Tech neighborhood, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 228425
Speaker 1: Did your father [Raymond Murray] talk about growing up at all and what it was like for him?
Speaker 2: He mostly just told funny stories.  He did tell a number of stories.  You know he talked about scuffles with his brothers and stuff.  He talked about how he used to--his oldest brother, Clifford [ph.], one of my more favorite uncles, was, was much older than my father.  He must have been at last ten years older or so than my father.  And so he, he was working when my father was coming of age and still living at home and my father would tell, talk about stealing pop.  They had these quart bottles of pop.  So my father would steal his pop.  You know he would, he would be working and he would, you know, drink some of the pop and he'd put it in, he'd put a little mark on the bottle.  And my father would drink the pop and fill it up with water to the mark.  So he always thought that was very clever of him.  I'm sure Uncle Clifford knew what was going on, but anyway, my father always thought that was very clever.  But there is one thing that I--that again, helped me think about school.  This is what my father would talk about when we talked about, you know, the expectation that we would all go to college.  He went to East Tech High School [East Technical High School, Cleveland, Ohio], the black high school in Cleveland [Ohio].  If you were black, that's where you went.  And he, he's an intelligent man.  I don't know what his grades were like.  I could imagine his grades might be spotty, but he was clearly intelligent and, and literate.  Liked to read, liked to spend time in the library.  And he always told me his counselor, he would go to his high school counselor.  I think when he first went to high school, and you know, well what do you think you want to do?  And he wanted to do something that required college education.  And the high school counselor said, "Boy, all you going to ever do is shine shoes.  Just finish high school.  All you going to do is shine shoes."  Now that stuck in my father's mind.
Speaker 1: Now that's different from the model we, we think of what a counselor's supposed to do.
Speaker 2: It is different, but that's what--and you know I don't know that--I don't know if that coun--that counselor may have very well have been white.  I can't remember.  But I do remember it was a counselor.
Speaker 1: I would guess he probably would be white.
Speaker 2: It was an off--it was the official high school counselor.  But I could imagine you didn't want to graduate with that kind of attitude.  And I know my father used to tell me he used to cut school and go to the library.  So he would cut class and he would go to the--Cleveland had good libraries, much better than Chicago [Illinois] libraries, Cleveland had good public libraries.  So he would cut class and he would go to the library and he would read in the library.  Now he never actually graduated from college.  He, he, he got married, he went in the [U.S. military] service.  When we were young with my mother [Ruth Childress Murray] he would take college courses.  But he just--he, you know he didn't do--it took my mother ten years or something to get her bachelor's degree, but he just didn't--he never finished.  But he, he's a, like I said, a learned, reads all the time, well-educated, self-educated man.  So again, that's just an example of what happens I think.  I think the northern segregated schools I think often had a profound different kind of impact than the South.  If you had a, if you had a faculty that was African American and that had this progressive vision, then I think in some ways those schools could be very nurturing.  From what I can tell, DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois], some of the schools here in Chicago, but East Tech evidently didn't have that impact on my father.  And, and it often just takes one counselor or somebody to just, you know, and that's what the counselor always said, "No, you're going to shine shoes.  You're going to shine shoes."  And so he, he had some hopes when he was young and he tried to run some trucking business, but he, he basically worked as an industrial worker.  He, he worked for UPS [United Parcel Service], he worked for--his longest stay in one time period was a--ten years as an auto worker in UAW [United Auto Workers; United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America] plants.  He worked as a bus driver.  So he was really an industrial worker.
Story_ID: 228426
Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My absolute earliest childhood memory is when my little sister [Ellen Murray (ph.)] came home from the hospital.  So I had to be three 'cause we're about eighteen months apart.  So I had to be three, three and a half.  And I remember we lived on the third floor in the public housing projects [in Cleveland, Ohio].  And I remember looking out from that porch down, waiting for my mother [Ruth Childress Murray] to come home.  And I don't remember my brother [Randall Murray (ph.)]; he had to be there with me.  But--and I remember her being wheeled up in a stretcher, you know up, up the sidewalk with my baby sister--this new baby with her.  So that's really my earliest memory.  And I, and I can see that picture clearly in my mind.  I was so excited that I was--I didn't care about my baby--I was excited 'cause my mother was coming home.  So, so that's my earliest memory.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 228427
Speaker 1: And what was the neighborhood like and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well when we were young, we considered ourselves rich, which we were.  So this, this is the oldest ghetto in Cleveland [Ohio].  In fact, the--well when I was a tiny, tiny baby, I don't remember anything and I was living--we were living with my aunt.  But when my parents [Ruth Childress Murray and Raymond Murray] moved on their own, they moved into public housing on Cleveland, on Cedar [Avenue].  And this was one--this was some of the first public housing in the, in the country.  And around the public housing were shacks, okay.  So after my sister [Ellen Murray (ph.)] was born, we then moved right across the street into a new housing, newer proj--part of the same development, but a newer addition.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the development?
Speaker 2: I think they just called it the Cedar Apartments, or the Cedar housing projects or something like that.  We just--we, now you know in the hood, we just called it the projects on Cedar, and then on Scovill [Avenue].  Scovill was such a notorious street that they changed the name of it, it doesn't exist anymore in Cleveland.  But, but the new--when we moved to, to row housing in public housing.  So then we had like a, a first floor and a second floor as opposed to just an apartment, high rises.
Speaker 1: And what was the neighborhood called, did it have a name?
Speaker 2: Scovill.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know this was, this was down in the hood.  And, and we used to play.  We would leave the projects and go across an alley or a street and there would be shacks.  Some of the shacks had outhouses still.  Just frame houses falling apart that people lived in.  So in our neighborhood if you, if you were able to live in public housing, you were rich.
Story_ID: 228428
Speaker 1: Public housing had more restrictions then.  I know my parents [Ruth Childress Murray and Raymond Murray] lie, you know you had--'cause it was according to your income.  So they all--my mother always worked, but they always lied and said she didn't work.  Okay, so then they paid less, lesser amount.  I, I don't want to say this for sure, but there--I think there may have been a preference to married couples to get into public housing.  So in public housing there were some kind of rules that I'm not sure about all the details.  But I think being married helped you get into public housing as opposed to not being married.  So when I was growing up we would--now by the time we moved from the projects [Cedar Apartments, Cleveland, Ohio], most of those shacks had been knocked down.  But as a young child, we would run and play.  Those, those areas had older trees.  They had unkempt yards, you know.  So we, we would say, we would pretend we were out in the wilds, you know.  Some of those places were abandoned, some of those shacks were abandoned.  Not all of them, but some were.  So you might have some winos in 'em or something.  And we would run through the house and, you know, kick the winos and wake 'em up.  This was an area of adventure and danger.  So actually we spent a lot of time in that kind of area--but the contrasts were great.  And I know my younger sister [Ellen Murray (ph.)] thought we were rich.  Now I was aware, 'cause I was older, that the projects were considered poor to, you know like if we went to my aunt's house who had a single family home, I was conscious of the fact that that neighborhood looked down on us 'cause we lived in the projects.  I think my younger sister didn't quite get that.  And, but in our neighborhood, we were rich 'cause we didn't live in the shacks while the shacks were there.  So we were within walking distance of--well Cleveland [Ohio] is small and we walked a lot.  We were within walking distance of downtown.  So we could--we would in the summertime we would get some mason jars, fill them full of water and like we would be gone all day.  My brother [Randall Murray (ph.)] and myself.  Not so much my little sister, and kids our age, we would just go exploring.  We would go--we would walk downtown and go to the library and go in the department stores.  We lived like at 26th Street.  Well the university, Case Western [Reserve] University [Case School of Applied Science, Cleveland, Ohio] is like at 105th.  We would walk up there.  And there were some museums along the way.  There was a museum, a science museum that wasn't quite on cam--so we would go to these museums.  We would go to the art institute [Cleveland Museum of Art, Cleveland, Ohio].  Not, not because--I mean it's not so much that the art institute was a destination, it's just that it was in a park [Wade Park, Cleveland, Ohio].  So if we went out for a day adventure, we would look at the ducks and we would--but there was a museum there.  So we would go into the art museum and the art museum I remember had the, you know, the knights in armor or some kind of display that we liked.  I don't know if we spent that much time staring at art pictures.  But you know it had enough in there that--so we really, we really felt that--we didn't feel hemmed in.  We really could walk.  We were--we didn't have money for the bus and it would--we would have to walk a long way.  But we really explored the city.  And, and really felt like Cleveland was our city.
Story_ID: 228429
Speaker 1: Now we didn't spend a lot of time on the lake [Lake Erie] 'cause it was pretty disgusting.  So you know we didn't, you know--and I couldn't swim.  So we didn't go hang out on the lake or anything.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's an interesting aspect. Cleveland [Ohio] is a more cultural city than people would think.  Now they would call it the Rust Belt and all that, but there's a lot of culture in Cleveland.
Speaker 1: There is a lot, and--
Speaker 2: But the lake was not developed, which was a horrible thing--aspect.
Speaker 1: No it was not, it was not developed.  I remember the West Side of Cleveland where the white folks lived, which we did not go into.  There were a few beaches on the West Side.  You know I remember if we went on a picnic or something with our parents [Ruth Childress Murray and Raymond Murray] and drove.  So I--we were aware that existed.  When I was growing up, one of my uncles, one of my mother's uncles, actually I guess one of my great-uncles, worked as a janitor in the symphony hall [Severance Hall, Cleveland, Ohio].  And so we had a few extra tickets to that, and of course our schools went to Symphony Hall.
Speaker 2: Now the Cleveland Symphony [Cleveland Orchestra] is one of the greatest in the world.
Speaker 1: It was excellent, that's right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so we, so we went there.  I remember taking music lessons.  My, my grandfather, my mother's father and my mother are--I have no musical talent, but they are both musicians.  And so I was exposed and took lessons there.  When we were young, we went to nursery school at the Karamu Theater [Playhouse Settlement; Karamu House, Cleveland, Ohio] nursery school [Karamu Nursery School].  Karamu, whatever they called it, the settlement house, where they had the Karamu Theater.  And so I went to nursery school there.  That was near, that was within walking distance of where my grandmother [Wynetta Childress (ph.)] lived.  And as I grew up as a child, my parents would, we would go there and see plays.  It was, you know it was considered a community theater.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Karamu Settlement House was founded by the Jelliffes [Rowena Jelliffe and Russell Jelliffe] right?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Two Jewish people actually.
Speaker 1: That's right.  And there were again in the third and fourth grade, there were Saturday classes for young scientists, I remember being in those. So I really think that Cleveland offered a, a wealth of exposure, even though you know we didn't move out of the projects until I was twelve or thirteen, 'cause I was a young teenager.
Story_ID: 228430
Speaker 1: But even the years we lived in the pro--well first we lied about our income so we had a little more income, you know.  But secondly, we were close enough to everything.  And, and then the black community knew.  You knew everybody in the black community.  So if you were poor, if you actually lived in the projects and were extremely poor, that didn't mean that you might not know through church or something else, someone that was considered middle class.  Everybody--the community was much more compact.  And so you, you could be aware of things that existed.  So I, I think that growing up, I was, I was very much aware of what possibilities existed outside of the African American community.  And aware of how we were restricted from, from--not from access to the museums, et cetera, obviously, but how we were often restricted from the full scope of what that meant.  The public schools were bad and very segregated, but I was in this academically talented track.  And so that brought me in direct contact with people that weren't black. So starting from the fourth grade [at Boulevard Elementary School, Cleveland Heights, Ohio] on, my class was, it was always 25, 30 percent black at least because it's Cleveland [Ohio].  But, but there were students there that weren't black and you could have some clue what they were doing.  And through most of my schooling there, the white kids that were there, were working class white kids, which I also think makes a big difference.  Cleveland is a small city and the true middle class really were in the suburbs.  So I, I only had contact through them through student CORE [Congress of Racial Equality], through the politics.  But in the city proper, the people I went to school with, their fathers worked in the same auto plant where my father [Raymond Murray] worked.  They were bus drivers, they were industrial workers.
Speaker 2: Okay. So true--was it Shaker Heights [Ohio] and other places (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Shaker Heights. You know, like I said, the only people I knew from Shaker Heights were people who were politically active.  But Cleveland Heights [Ohio], Shaker--I do--there were some blacks that by the time I was in high school [Collinwood High School, Cleveland, Ohio], there were a number of blacks that lived in Cleveland Heights.  So I actually might spend some time in Cleveland Heights, that's one of the inner suburbs.  And I might--I would even know some people and maybe visit, you know, had friends that lived there that I grew up with or you know that their family moved out there.  And--but most of the people from the suburbs were, were political.  There was also something called Human Relations Council of Cleveland [sic. Council on Human Relations] or some--something like that, which was not activist in nature like Student CORE was, but it was an effort to bring the race, to bring young people from different backgrounds together to talk.  And it was a, you know, sort of a "kumbaya" kind of approach.  We would have these, you know, meetings and--yeah those of us--it's interesting because those of--'cause there was a group of black and white by this time, of people who were from student CORE type--who were activists that would work with people that--they were more faith-based, more religious, YWYM [sic. Youth With A Mission (YWAM)].  They were not necessarily--did not--we were--we considered ourselves part of the movement, and some of these other kids really didn't.  Either their parents kept them--I, I like to think as they went to college, they considered themselves part of the [Civil Rights] Movement.  So, but you know again that was very structured to try to--well I think the, I think the way it was envisioned was to try to help us poor black kids, you know, have our eyes opened, and we didn't think of it that way.  But that's how they thought of it.
Story_ID: 228431
Speaker 1: The other thing that was conscious and political, there was a young--you're going to ask me his name and I'm going to forget.  But I'll let it simmer in my mind.  There was a young junior high school teacher who was radical.  And wrote an article in one of these small, radical you know, publications that only lasted a year or two.  And he got fired from the Cleveland public schools.  And he changed--and I--one reason I have so much trouble remembering his name 'cause that he changed his name to some African name and I always get confused on it.  But he was fired, it was a big, you know case in Cleveland [Ohio] at that point in time.  And he was very popular among the students.  He was not at a school where I was, but he was very popular among the students.  And I remember seeking him out, my brother [Randall Murray (ph.)] and I seeking him out.  And we had a Marxist study group under him.  We were still in high school [Collinwood High School, Cleveland, Ohio].  So it was just, it was just black kids, okay.
Speaker 2: Now is this, this man still alive?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Is he still in Cleveland area?
Speaker 1: He may have left Cleveland.  I'll think of his name eventually.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Was he involved with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] at all?
Speaker 1: He wasn't involved with SNCC.  He was more radical than SNCC.  He was, he was a poet, he was a poet among other things.
Speaker 2: Not Max Stanford.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But, but here's someone who ideologically read [Karl] Marx.  And he called us together and we used to meet with him every Saturday, and we read history, we read black history.  And we read 'The Communist Manifesto' [Friedrich Engels and Karl Marx].  I mean you know so we, we started reading some Marx and [Vladimir] Lenin and talking about it and studying it.  So this small group.  This is about in '64 [1964], '65 [1965] after we were active in student CORE [Congress of Racial Equality].  So it, it allowed us to analyze the Civil Rights Movement.  And I think it saved me.  I think it saved my life in many ways because in Student CORE, when we were active in Student CORE, the first thing we did, the first thing I was involved in, was a rent strike.  Now I--by this time we no longer lived in the projects and this was in Hough [Cleveland, Ohio], it was the Hough community of Cleveland.
Speaker 2: H-O-U-G-H, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.  And it was--and we were just helping, you know.  It's, it's really the senior, the adult CORE members that were--but they were working with block clubs and the--you know these were horrible slums.  And they organized a rent strike.  And we were involved in it, in whatever way high school students can be.
Story_ID: 228432
Speaker 1: And after that [rent strike in Hough, Cleveland, Ohio] we [Congress of Racial Equality (CORE)] organized a citywide boycott of the schools, a year after that.  You know talking about the segregation of the schools.  This was part of the movement that led up to Reverend [Bruce] Klunder's death.  So the schools--Cleveland [Ohio] schools were segregated.  The black community was getting over, the schools were getting overcrowded and they started putting trailers--now people from Chicago [Illinois] should be used to this, right?  But they started putting trailers in the schoolyards of the black schools rather than integrate them with the white schools that were empty.
Speaker 2: You're referring to the Willis Wagons in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Right, the Willis Wagons of Chicago, right.  Well in Cleveland the Civil Rights Movement fought that and, and the neighborhood that we lived in, Glenville [Cleveland, Ohio], was one of those neighborhoods that was really pushing against the white neighborhood and the, and the elementary schools were really, really crowded.  And so we, we fought very hard on that.  But I want to come back to this Marxist thing.  There was a lot of pressure on me personally as I got ready to graduate from high school [Collinwood High School, Cleveland, Ohio], to go to the South.  I graduated in 1966, to go to the South and work full time for the movement.  SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], something, SNCC would have been the logical thing.  And a number of people who were in Cleveland locally, and a number of people who passed through Cleveland would talk to me about that because I, I did--I was a leader of Student CORE.  And you know this is the, this is 1966 and you know you have a vibrant movement going on.  And if I had not had this Marxist study group, I believe I would have done it.
Speaker 2: It was also like a, kind a period of transition though in '66 [1966] because--they were making that--yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was that.  Black Power was just coming in, exactly, exactly.  And I think those things--and don't forget this Marxist study group like I said, was, was all black.  It was--there were no white kids in it.  But what that study group allowed me to see is that the problems that existed for the Civil Rights Movement wasn't just segregation, or wasn't just that white folks didn't like us.  That there were, there were some structural problems--capitalism--there were some structural problems.  Deep seated problems that existed in the United States.  And you know I figured out, fortunately, 'cause I was very tempted.  I figured out that this is not something that you can do for five years or ten years and think all of a sudden everything's going to be fixed.  And so I, I had it in my mind in large part because of this study group, then a little bit because of the Black Power Movement, and something 'cause of the Muslims.  I, you know I went to some--I heard Malcolm [X] speak a couple times.  I went to the mosque [Mosque No. 7; Masjid Malcolm Shabazz, New York, New York] a few times.
Speaker 2: We have to talk about that too and go back.  We don't want to race through this, now.
Speaker 1: Okay. But anyway because of that analysis, I, I said no, this--I'm going to be--of course now this was a--I'm going to be fifty and we're still going to have trouble in this.  You know if you're, if you're seventeen think that what you're going to--it's going to be like when you're fifty, that's like forever.  I said, I'm going to be fifty years old and we're still going to be struggling.  So I, I better, I better get some skills.  You know this is not--me going down to Mississippi for a year or two is not, is not going to make it.  I better, I better have a longer range view.
Speaker 2: So you had projected a protracted struggle over many years--
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  So I said I need to go to college.  And I went to college with attitude, but I said I need to go to college and get whatever skills I can because this is not going to be over.
Story_ID: 228433
Speaker 1: What was the name of your grade school?
Speaker 2: The one--well the first one I went to is called Sterling [Marion-Sterling Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio].  And that was right in the projects.  And it was built during the Civil War, I remember that.  And I remember my first grade teacher.  She almost ruined my, ruined my life.  She--it's interesting.  I have two stories to tell you about two white women, both of which almost ruined my life.  One was the librarian, which we had a library right in the projects too.  Sterling Branch Library [Cleveland Public Library, Cleveland, Ohio].  And one was my first grade teacher.
Story_ID: 228434
Speaker 1: Let me tell you about the librarian first, who was really trying to help me.  The, the library [Sterling Branch Library, Cleveland Public Library, Cleveland, Ohio] was physically in the projects.  And as I told you, both of my parents [Ruth Childress Murray and Raymond Murray] read all the time, to this day.  And so we would go--once a week I would go to the library with my mother.  And I was--I hadn't learned to read yet, or where I was just learning to read.  And my mother would come--and I think the librarian was impressed that my mother, that I came with my mother, you know.  A lot of kids came to the library, they may not come with their parents, you know.  So I think I was one of the few kids that, you know, came every week and the mother comes out with lots of books.  So I think the, the librarian took an interest.  And my mother would leave me in the children's side, and she would go to the adult side to get her books.  And then she would come back and pick me up.  And I was--you know I would go around and try to find the books and the librarian would never leave me alone.  She would always--"Oh, [HistoryMaker Dr.] Linda [Rae Murray] here, here are your books over"--she kept bringing me back to these books that were horrible.  I mean they were dull and boring, you know.  See--they weren't just 'Dick and Jane' books.  I mean they were--the vocabulary was nothing.  And, and I was trying to learn how to read and I, I was saying, this is not fun.  I didn't know what my--I mean I wanted to learn, I wanted to get books 'cause my mother and father had books all the time, but I didn't see what they saw in it.  It was so horrible.  I would come and I would take the books home and like a half hour later I'd be finished with them and I'd forget about them.  And one day that woman was sick and wasn't at work.  And it was like a whole world opened up to me 'cause the substitute librarian didn't know who I was and didn't pay attention to me.  And I wandered over above my grade level and age level and found some real books that were interesting.  So that, that, that woman--if she had never been sick, I'd have been--I might have decided reading just was out of it.  So I really remember, I remember being amazed that there were books that had interesting things in them and had more words in them that I could learn.
Story_ID: 228435
Speaker 1: But my first grade teacher [at Marion-Sterling Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio] was a southern white woman, and I think she was mentally ill.  And she was old, well I don't know how old she really was 'cause you know to first graders, all kids are--but she had gray hair and so I really think she was older than, than most of the teachers in that school.  And our school day was exactly the same every day.  We would come into school and we would go there and we would pledge allegiance to the flag.  And then we would sing 'My Country, 'Tis of Thee.'  And then every day she would say, "Oh, children I just love it when you sing.  Sing 'Old Black Joe' for me please."  Now again back in that time, even the word black had a, a stigma to it.  You didn't, you know you didn't want to sing 'Old Black Joe.'  I mean that was like you just felt horrible when you sang it.
Speaker 2: It was fighting words in those days.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.  I mean this was not, it's not--this was before Black Power.  So this was a, you know so all of us children, we didn't want to sing 'Old Black Joe,' but we didn't have a--and she would--we would sing "Old Black Joe, my head is bending low, I hear those gentle voices calling Old Black Joe."  We just hated that song.  And every day when we finished it she would say "Oh, it's so beautiful, sing it again."  We'd have to sing it twice every single day, okay.  And then we would have reading group.  And we had three reading groups, fast, intermediate and slow.  We all had one book the whole semester.  The only difference between the groups was how fast the group memorized the book.  We would get in a reading circle every day.  There were not enough books for everybody in the reading circle, okay.  So you would have to pass the book.  And you--this was every day, the same book.  Some short 'Dick and Jane' book.  And you would read a page and you would pass the book, every day.  Well I was in the fast group, so we not only memorized the book, we memorized the pages.  We didn't have to pass nothing.  We could just stand up in the circle and I re--you know you'd recite your page and go.  It never changed, though.  It didn't--it's not like, oh here's another book, okay.  Believe me by the end of the semester, the slow kids could do the same thing, it's just a question of speed.  And then in the afternoon we had art.  And every day except for holidays, we painted goldfish.  I tell you I think this woman was mentally ill.  Every day except holidays we painted goldfish, okay.
Speaker 2: She had 'em mimeographed or something?
Speaker 1: No, you had, no she would say we're going to paint gold--we're going to draw.  We had crayons.  We're going to draw goldfish.  That's what she said, we would have, that's what we would have to do.  Now on the holidays we got to draw pumpkins, you know there's a lot of holidays.  So on the holidays we would draw the holiday theme, whatever it was.  But any other time we had to draw goldfish.  I thought school was the worst thing.  I couldn't imagine anything worse than school, you know because it was exactly the same, the same book, the same pictures, the same song, every day.  You know you could--you could just say it's 2:05 and you--I could tell you well this is what we're gone be doing at 2:05, okay.  Fortunately I didn't have very many more teachers like her.  But again, I, I really think that without the library, you know without being able to read, without having your, your parents, without having my parents [Ruth Childress Murray and Raymond Murray] as an example of people who read, any nor--any child with superior intelligence, the obvious conclusion is school is a complete waste of time.  I mean would--wouldn't that be the obvious conclusion?  So it's just I consider it a miracle that I survived that ridiculous school.
Story_ID: 228436
Speaker 1: But in the third grade [at Marion-Sterling Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio] a black man came and took me to a room.  I was a little scared.  I remember this 'cause I was a little scared.  He was doing an IQ [Intelligence Quotient] test.  I didn't know, I didn't know what it was.  I didn't know what it meant.  By this time my mother [Ruth Childress Murray] was a schoolteacher.  She hadn't graduated from college yet, but they were so short of teachers, she had taken enough courses and she was teaching school in a different school.  And she had my younger brother [Randall Murray (ph.)] and sister [Ellen Murray (ph.)] with her in that school.  And I was left at Sterling.  And this black man came and he did, you know, blots and I mean once he started, I thought it was fun 'cause I just thought it was games.  But it was a IQ test.  And then--and I remember he walked me back to class and he had his hand on my neck and he said, "Well you know what do you think if you went to a different school?"  I didn't know what to think.  And then on the basis of that test, they put me, in--starting in the fourth grade, in this academically tracked school.
Speaker 2: And what was the name of that school?
Speaker 1: Boulevard, Boulevard Elementary School [Cleveland Heights, Ohio].  I had to take three buses to get there; it took a long time 'cause I lived way, like I lived on 26th [Street] and Scovill [Avenue], and this was like 108th [Street] and something.  It was a school, it was a, a white, single, single residence neighborhood.  They had the academically talented program for the fourth, fifth and sixth grades.  Those classes were about half-black and half-white.  But the rest of the school was all white.  The PTA [Parent Teacher Association] was active.  I had never been in a school where the PTA actually did--they had bake--they had--it was like they had bake sales and, and they did not like us.  They, they didn't like our classes.  We came from out of the neighborhood and we were black and they made it clear.  And it was always a dilemma for them because some of their children were in our class.  But they tried as much as they could if they did something, they would try to exclude our classes if they could.  So I remember, I remember that school being unfriendly.  But the, but the academic work there was very different than the regular classes.  So we read real books.  We didn't, we didn't have these readers like the fifth grade reader where you read just little short snippets.  We read actual novels and books.  And we learned how to discuss them.  And we might spend, you know, a month on a book.  And I, you know I love to read.  But you would have discussion questions, you know what--the character development--things I had never thought of that you would, we would discuss in school.
Story_ID: 228437
Speaker 1: They taught you research skills [at Boulevard Elementary School, Cleveland Heights, Ohio].  So every--you would have to do what they call--every day a student would give a report, dinosaurs, whatever, you know, DNA.  They would, they would have to go to--you would have to go to the library, you'd have to make note cards, you'd, you'd have to prepare visual aids.  You know again, this was way back in the day.  So that usually meant the Cleveland [Public] Library [Cleveland, Ohio] had what they call picture files.  So they would cut pictures out from magazines and paste them on cardboard so you could, you know and, and you would be graded by your fellow students on, you know, how well you presented, how did you speak, was it interesting.  And you would have to turn in everything.  You, you'd turn in your note cards and the teacher would say well you know this note--you'd have to, you know, reference everything.  So--and then once a year you have to give what was considered a monthly, a big report that you would work on for months and they would be written as well as oral.  So, so there were basic research skills there, basic writing skills, basic reading skills that were emphasized.  We didn't take typical grammar, fifth grade grammar.  You know it was, it was completely separate from the regular curriculum.  And those, those skills made the difference in high school [Collinwood High School, Cleveland, Ohio] and college as far as I'm concerned.  And I know with my own child and my nieces and nephews as they grew up and as they went to non-public schools here in Chicago [Illinois], I'm just shocked at how those skills aren't there.  They aren't taught.  You know you might find someone in college not understanding how to write a research paper or how to, how to, how to stu--how to research it, how to get references from different places.  So, so that program made a big difference and it, and it was really very different than, than the normal curriculum in the, in the Cleveland [Ohio] schools.  Though I do think the Cleveland schools were better than the Chicago schools, you know, even just the average curriculum.
Story_ID: 228438
Speaker 1: Now you say you were a sports fan in grade school. You were--
Speaker 2: I was a, I was a tomboy.  I was a sports fan.  The Cleveland Indians were doing bad in those years and you, you got box seat tickets, too.  It was geared on how many A's you got, you know.  The more A's you got on your report card at the end of the year, the more tickets they gave you.  And then my, my grandfather worked in a jewelry store downtown, and the store bought tickets.  And they would, you know they'd give him a couple of tickets.  So he would take--you know two or three times during a season he would take me to a game on his tickets.  But I had lots of my own tickets 'cause I was a good student.  So I was very much into baseball at that point.  We lived in the projects, we, we didn't have a real little league, we sort of had a little league, but it wasn't, it wasn't well connected.  And our little league, we didn't have enough coaches and the girls were, you know now again, the girls were not allowed to play in the little league when I was coming up.  So I was the coach for our team because we didn't have an adult coach.  So I was the coach.  I couldn't play.  If we played, if we were playing sandlot, I could play.  But if we were playing the official little league, I was a girl, I couldn't play; I was just a coach.
Speaker 1: So you were the coach of the team?
Speaker 2: I was the coach.  We did--we had a good team.  Well they wouldn't let me play, it was illegal, you know for girls to--
Speaker 1: So it wasn't, there was an adult supervising the team?
Speaker 2: We didn't have an adult supervisor.
Speaker 1: So you had this--
Speaker 2: So I was the coach, and--
Speaker 1: How old were you when you--
Speaker 2: Well I don't know, let's see, let me think.  I was still under the six--it was like fifth, sixth grade [at Boulevard Elementary School, Cleveland Heights, Ohio], something like that.  You know I don't--like I said, I don't think our little league--I think it must have been just lo--with the local recreation center.  I don't think we were really connected.  Some of the other teams had adult coaches, but not everybody, not everybody.  And we just didn't have one.  But, but the diamond was right by our projects.  And so, so we played, so I played a lot of baseball.  Like I said, if it was the official game, then I was just the coach.  If it was just sandlot, then I could play.
Speaker 1: So you would take people in and out of the game and that sort of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I was--I had no problem being the coach.  I was a good baseball player and my, our, my team--I was respected.  And they thought it was bad that I couldn't play.  And there was no problem with me being the coach, you know, we were just little kids.  You know what--how much coaching do you do?  It's not that much, you know.  Make sure everybody gets to play.
Story_ID: 228439
Speaker 1: I never could swim, though, that was, that wasn't good.  And then as I got older in school, I really--I didn't play sports in school.  I remember liking basketball and I remember trying to be in a league, a basketball league.  It wasn't with school, it was with our little--it was a recreation center right next to the projects [in Cleveland, Ohio] too.  And I remember being in the basketball league for that.  But at that point in time, you--if you were, if you were in girls' basketball, you could only dribble, dribble twice and pass.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they called that captain basketball or something like that.
Speaker 1: I don't know what they called it, but it was horrible and I decided forget it.  So I stopped.  I know, I remember my mother [Ruth Childress Murray] was a basketball player when she was in school.  You know I remember her telling me that.  But I thought it was horrible that you could only dribble twice.  You know I had grown up watching East Tech [East Technical High School, Cleveland, Ohio] basketball, so you know I didn't wanna just be dribbling twice and then passing the ball.  So I said well forget this, I'm not going to--I'm not going to do that.  But by the time I got to high school, I had pretty much stopped sports.  You know Title IX didn't exist and--
Speaker 2: So it didn't look like it was any--
Speaker 1: Track, track was the only thing, you know, we're a, we're a Wilma Rudolph kind of city, you know, track was well respected.  I, I didn't run, I didn't have that--I wasn't that fast, I was always sort of slow.  Like in, like in baseball you wouldn't put me on to steal a base.  I was sort of slow.  So track never was something I had thought about.  And when I was in high school [Collinwood High School, Cleveland, Ohio], that was about the only sport that, that women you know, took seriously and did, and did in kind of organized way.  So--and by then I was, I was active politically and doing so many other things.
Story_ID: 228440
Speaker 1: High school you attended was--what was the name of it?
Speaker 2: Collinwood High School.
Speaker 1: Collinwood, okay.  Sounds like that 'Dark Shadows' town, Collinwood.  Spelled the same way?  C-O-L-L-I-N-W-O-O-D.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh. This is--this school went from the seventh grade to the twelfth grade, though I didn't come in in the seventh grade.  I came in at--in the ninth grade.  And there were two schools for the--that were this aca--one was John Adams [High School, Cleveland, Ohio] on one side of town, and then Collinwood High School, which was on the side of the town closest to the lake [Lake Erie].  Those were the two that, you know, that everybody fed up into.  So the Boulevard Elementary School [Cleveland Heights, Ohio], that fed into John Adams.  And I went to seventh and eighth grade out that way.  But when it got time for high school, by then my family had moved to Glenville [Cleveland, Ohio] and it was easier to go to Collinwood, so I transferred there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your family moved out of the projects by that time.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah they moved out of the projects when I was twelve or thirteen, something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So did you have to get adjusted to a new neighborhood and all that?
Speaker 2: It was a neighborhood--we moved right around the corner from my aunt and my grandmother [Wynetta Childress (ph.)] had moved there by then.  So I actually sort of knew the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Now that was the Hough [Cleveland, Ohio] neighborhood you were--
Speaker 2: No.  This was Glenville by this, by this time it was Glenville.  And it was a--it was sort of a changing neighborhood 'cause some old white lady died that lived in our house and I know my, my grandmother is the one--you know and her children were trying to sell the house.  By this time, only black people were moving in.  So my grandmother, you know did, you know, knew that the woman had died and that's--so that's how we got that house.  So it--the adjustment wasn't--it was--the projects was much more social.  You had a higher concentration of kids.  There was a huge area where there weren't any streets.  I mean you know it's huge acreage where you could sort of--so when you were very young, you had, you know you felt like you had more freedom.  You could, you could go lots of places without crossing the street.  By, by the time we moved to Glenville, I was already very much active in other issues, active around school and around politics and around you know, after-school activities and things like that.  So I didn't--I, I think my brother [Randall Murray (ph.)] and sister [Ellen Murray (ph.)] may have felt the change in the neighborhood more than me.  My focus had al--sort of already was away from who, who was playing in the playground.  It was more who had the same kind of interests I did.
Story_ID: 228441
Speaker 1: What subjects interested you the most in school?
Speaker 2: History and math, science.
Speaker 1: Are there any teachers that really stand out that you remember?
Speaker 2: There's one teacher in high school [Collinwood High School, Cleveland, Ohio] that I'm not going to remember her name.  She was--she went to the sister school [Radcliffe College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And her husband went to Harvard, they were black.  These were the first black people that I knew that went to schools that I had heard of like that--to a Ivy League school.  And her husband I believe was in law school.  He was in some kind of graduate school in Cleveland [Ohio].  That's why they were in Cleveland.  They were from the East Coast.  And she was teaching, supporting them while he was doing graduate work.  And she taught history or social studies in the ninth grade, I had her in the ninth grade.  And she was considered a very hard teacher.  She wasn't very friendly.  She wasn't very warm and friendly.  So she was in the school that was predominantly white, predominantly working class Italian.  She was in the special thing for the, you know the, the enrichment program.  And I remember she gave a, an assignment of a term paper that was, that would really take a term.  I mean you know it was, it was a real term paper, it was a real research paper.  And it was, it was staged.  You know again you had to say what your topic was, you had to, you know, give an outline.  You had to go step-by-step, you had to turn it in.  My topic was nuclear disarmament.  And she was so impressed with my--this was part of my, you know, political--I was reading about what the--what the Russians [Soviet Union] were doing for nuclear disarmament and what the Americans were doing for nuclear disarmament.  But I remember she was so--and I was very into the topic, okay.  But she was so impressed with my paper.  I knew this was a mistake when she had me do this, but what are you going to do?  She forced me to read my paper to the class.  She thought it, she thought it was--she told me, she said this is college-level work.  You know, you need to make sure you go to col--you know are you planning to go to college?  This was the ninth grade.  Are you planning to go to college?  Blah, blah, blah.  So she was very encouraging of me.  Now I remember when she--I tried to tell her, you know my--nobody in the class wants to hear this paper 'cause it was--it was rather dry, you know.  In this negotiation the United States proposed this and the Soviets counter--you know I mean it was very dry.  It was even dry for me even though I, I enjoyed doing it.  But I remember that.  I remember she was a little surprised that the class wasn't that interested in it, you know.  She may have even had, I, I vaguely remember that--her area of specialty may have even been Russia or something.  I mean for some reason she took a special interest in this topic.  But other than that, I didn't have any memorable--other than the first grade teacher and her, I didn't have any memorable teachers.
Story_ID: 228442
Speaker 1: I really--in fact by the time I got in high school [Collinwood High School, Cleveland, Ohio], I had a regular day off.  And with--I mean, official with my parents [Ruth Childress Murray and Raymond Murray].  And the--I, I can--our school was--if I hadn't been politically active, who knows what kind of trouble I'd have gotten into.  I felt--
Speaker 2: You had a regular day off. Wait a minute now. During the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I had a regular day off, the Thursday, Thursday was my day off and on Thursday we had bow--again I was, I was on the school paper.  I mean I was, you know, on the debate club.  I mean I was active in a lot of things.  And Thursday we had a bowling league with the school.  And I never went to school on Thursday, I always came to the bowling league.  And I--it may not have been every Thursday because you know it's so many days--if you miss so many days of school, you fail.  Well I forget--whatever the number was.  So I would measure it.  So maybe--it might have been half the Thursdays I had off or something.  So I measured, I would carefully measure out at the beginning of the year, certainly by the, by the eleventh and twelfth grade.  I would carefully measure out how many days off I could afford to take.  I rarely was sick, but I would leave a little margin in case I got sick.  And my mother said this is her day off, I ain't writing no note, you just--you know I know she ain't in school, so what.  Don't bother me with writing no note, you know.  And I, you know, I was fortunately a good student.  You know if I had been a C student or something--but you know I was a A student.  So I just--and I would, and I would say--we'd be sitting in class and well you know we're going to--I said well I can't give my report that day, you know that's my day off, you know.  And I would go to the library.  I would go downtown, I would go to the Main Library [Cleveland Public Library, Cleveland, Ohio] and I never just like stayed at home and stayed in bed.  I would go to a museum.  I would--and I thought those days off were more educational than school.  So I didn't regret it at all.  So it was very carefully planned.  I considered myself following my father.  Remember I told you my father cut class.  So I sort of considered myself following his example--
Story_ID: 228443
Speaker 1: The thing about church, too, is odd, too, 'cause you, you know, black people seem to be so churchy.  I--we may not be more churchy than anybody else, I don't know.  But it just seems like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My parents [Ruth Childress Murray and Raymond Murray] are atheists.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And we went to church.  I went to church when I was little.  When we would--when I would stay with my grandmother [Wynetta Childress (ph.)], she was religious.  Though she was odd, 'cause when we were with her, she was involved in a Unitarian church.  Wasn't no Baptist church.  So we would go to Sunday school with her.  So I, you know I remember that, I did--I didn't--I didn't--it didn't matter.  I mean Sunday school was sort of fun.  But I mean I never took it seriously.  And--
Speaker 1: How do you account for this?  I mean what did your--what happened to your parents where they weren't Christians or Muslims or Hebrews or something?
Speaker 2: I think my grandmother--when, when my mother was coming up, was not that religious.  I mean that is to say she was not devoted and she didn't go to church a whole lot.  So I think that's one thing.  I think the time that my mother was in this tuberculosis kind of sanitarium when she was seven or eight or nine, had a big impact on her.  And I think they read a lot and they, they would--I remember asking that.  'Cause you know I'm growing up.  Everybody went to church except for us, right, everybody went to church.  And I'm sure--I even went to church occasionally with some of my friends.  You know if I spent the night with them, you know you'd have to go to church.  You can't spend the night and you don't go to church the next morning.  So I mean it's not like I never--it's not like I didn't know what went on in church.  And I remember asking my parents when I was young, you know, "Well what--well what religion are we?"  You know and they would say, "Well you can be anything you want to be.  You know you just have to decide.  But we're, we're not any religion.  We don't believe in God (laughter).  But you can be, you know, you can be a, pick a religion if you want."  And then we would have some discussion and they would say well, you know, God is a, you know it's a, it's a--we believe it's a myth.  We think people need to believe in it and that's fine.  You know give some structure, church is not bad.  You know it teaches you good--you know what they try to teach you in church, we believe in.  You know so--but it's just that we're, we're not--and they were very clear.  We are--it's not like, oh I don't go to church.  It's I am an atheist.  I do not believe in God.
Story_ID: 228444
Speaker 1: So I used to go over--I remember a couple times getting in trouble with other neighbors 'cause I--'cause they would say well, "What church, what church does your--what church your family go to?"  And I said, "Oh, we don't go to church, we--our, our religion is atheist," (laughter).  And they would say--but I, I don't know.  I, I've never gone to church and my son's [Marcus Murray] never gone to church, so--
Speaker 2: Did, did you have to defend yourself a lot because of that?
Speaker 1: No.  As we got in the Civil Rights Movement, you know Civil Rights Movement--I spent more time in church when I became active in the Civil Rights Movement than any other time in my life.  I know I'm jumping ahead, but when I was at [Cook] County [Hospital; John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] as an intern and resident, we were involved in major issues there.  And I re--and I had to--and I had to go to visit a lot of churches, we were trying to keep the hospital open.  And I remember some nurses.  They would, they would ask me, "What, you know what church you, you belong to, [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Linda Rae] Murray?"  And I would say, well you know--now, now I was older so I said you know, "I'm really not that religious."  "No, no, no, come on.  What church you, what church your mama go to?"  You know and they'd push it.  I'd say you know I don't--so finally I said, "Look, I'm an atheist, I just don't believe in God."  And they said, "I don't know why you say that, girl, we know you, you too good.  You believe in God whether you know it or not."  So in my life what I found is black people do not believe I'm an atheist.  I suppose some of my enemies might find it not hard to believe, but most black people I know that are, that are friends of mine or acquaintances, they just, they just dismiss it.  It's just like they just put that out their mind.  Because their attitude is if you're a good person and you're trying to do good, you have to be Christian or you have to believe in God, or you have--you know, you have to be something.  And so it's, it's a--so I never have had to battle about it.  I don't, I don't--it's not a major problem for me.  I'm just not--I'm just an atheist, that's all there is to it.  And I've never felt particularly worried about defending it.  I don't have--I, you know like I said I've gone to, I've gone to many a church service, but--so no I've never had to battle about it; never been a problem.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Being black is a problem or being woman is a problem, but being a--being a Communist is a problem.  But being an atheist never was a problem.
Speaker 2: It's, you know it's the kind of thing that, that can be.  I don't, you know, I just, I just know that, that there are some sensitivity out here and people do, you know, use that as a lever to--
Speaker 1: In think in a, I think in a different time period.  I grew up in the '60s [1960s] you know and so when I was in college and stuff, lots of people that are--that go to church today, didn't go to church in the '60s [1960s] you know, or they would go to a church as part of the movement and that's it.  You know so it, so I think it's part of when I grew up how people reacted to that.  It's not something that, it's not something that I go and announce right away.  I'm on the board of a Cath--major Catholic health organization [Trinity Health] as a matter of fact.  They know I'm not Catholic.  I don't go out of my way to tell the nuns I'm an atheist.  They ask me, I'll tell 'em.  But they know I'm not Catholic.  That's the main (laughter), that's the main thing.
Story_ID: 243994
Speaker 1: I was going to tell you one story about the religious--the, the one time in my life where I thought this was really relevant.  Early in the AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] epidemic, a Baptist minister approached me to, to make a tape that they were using to educate Baptist ministers about AIDS.  And he actually was one of the board members of an organization that used to exist in Chicago [Illinois] called the AIDS Pastoral Care Network.  And this was a group of Catholic priests and other leaders of religion who came together to work on the AIDS problems and, and to deal with the homophobia in all the churches.  The feeling was many of the organized churches were not responsive to the AIDS epidemic early on and this was a group of ministers and priests who were trying to respond.  And so after I had worked with them a little bit, they asked me to be on the board.  And you know they, they were very careful.  They have, you know, rabbis and Baptists and you know all the, you know all the different groups.  And I told them, I said well I'll be glad to be on your board, but I, I'm an atheist.  And they said, "Oh, [HistoryMaker Dr.] Linda [Rae Murray], don't worry, we're ecumenical.  We have Jews and radical faeries and Catholics.  We won't mind an atheist or two."  So that was their approach.  And as a matter of fact when I went off the board, because we would always have these discussions on the board and--I was always the one that would say, I thought you guys were supposed to be spiritual leaders.  You know, shouldn't we be doing this and that and the other?  And so I, I have a plaque that's in my office and it, and it is from them and it doesn't say I'm an atheist, but it says--but, but they would always say is, "Well, you may be an atheist, but you're very spiritual."  That, that's what they would always tell me, you know.  "When you talk, you're very spiritual."  So I said, well if you say so.  So I guess that's where I am, that's what--that's--I suppose if I was pressed against the wall, that's what I would tell people.  I'm an atheist, but I guess I'm spiritual enough that the, that the organized religions can tolerate me, so.
Speaker 2: What do you think they mean by that when they say you're spiritual?
Speaker 1: Well--'cause I always referred back to the principles that we worked under, you know and, and you know I mean for lack of a better word, they're the principles of any religion, you know, that you want to be compassionate, that you want to be fair, that you want to take the organization in a direction that fulfilled its mission.  So if there was a grant proposal out there that took us in an opposite direction, that we really, you know we were really supposed to be doing, providing spiritual support for people with AIDS, and for their families.  And so you know if there was a choice, should we do--be doing pastoral care or should we do something else like spend more time on the AIDS walk.  You know I would always say well what are our basic principles say?  I think that's what they meant by it, that I would always refer back to what the organization's principles were.
Story_ID: 243995
Speaker 1: Let's take you back to high school [Collinwood High School, Cleveland, Ohio] and get you in college here.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So you, you decided at a certain point that, that the struggle that you had studied about in high school and you said you were with a Marxist study group and you studied--and you pretty much decided it was like a protracted struggle.
Speaker 2: A protracted struggle.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: The local struggle as I said was around school desegregation.  And the first years of that, which is when Reverend [Bruce] Klunder got killed, were around these trailers.  And at one point even building a, a new building in the, in the playground of an existing black school.
Speaker 1: Now how did Reverend Klunder get killed?  Are you--I suppose you're going to tell us this story about how--what happened to him?
Speaker 2: Yes.  This is a--now we were not--we were in school and we were not allowed to participate in this because it would have jeopardized the leadership of CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] to bring us out for truancy.  So we could only do it in the evenings and on weekends.  But there were demonstrations and picket lines against the building of a new elementary school [Stephen E. Howe Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio] literally in the playground of an overcrowded black elementary school while a few miles away, there were empty classrooms in the white schools.  And you know I didn't see this, I only saw newsreel pictures because I was in school when it happened.  But one day in the spring, the demonstrators were surrounding a tractor and Reverend Klunder and other people laid down, you know they were laying down to stop the tractor from going.  And so Reverend Klunder died when the tractor tracked over him, rolled over him.  And that's why his name is, is in that Civil Rights Memorial [Montgomery, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Did they, did the tractor roll over other--he just--
Speaker 2: He was the only one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: People, other people jumped up.  This is something that I, I was confident then was an accident.  You know it's not, it's not something that the guy [John White] driving the tractor wanted to do.  But I do remember all the pictures and the newsreels, you know, with the tractor marks on his back.  And you know we were at meetings, you know we would be at meetings.  He was a member of CORE, he was a member of this coalition.  So I remember him at meetings, I remember meeting in his church, I remember his wife [Joanne Lehman] and obviously his wife was distraught when this happened.  I remember his little girl [Janice Klunder].  So this, this was very close to me that, that he died.  This is the, this is the only person I know personally you know that, that I was a friend with personally to die in the Civil Rights Movement.  And after that death, there was an escalation of demonstrations.  There were sit-ins at the [Cleveland] Board of Education.  Pregnant women were thrown down the stairs.  And again, we couldn't be there in the day, but we could be there on the weekends.  And that's the only time my parents [Ruth Childress Murray and Raymond Murray] ever went to a demonstration because this, this was just heating up in Cleveland [Ohio] and they, they said--they didn't even tell us that they went down actually on their lunch hour to one of these board of education demonstrations.  They said well you know here are our children out here demonstrating and here, you know, here are people getting killed and getting injured in Cleveland.  We can't just sit at home.  So they went and participated in a few demonstrations.
Story_ID: 243996
Speaker 1: And then the next year, it sort of grew.  The next year we were fighting about the high school.  So the high school that I went to, Collinwood High School [Cleveland, Ohio], was, was basically--it wasn't completely segregated, but it was a predominantly Italian working class high school.  It had 3,500 students.  My sister [Ellen Murray (ph.)] went to it, she was in the seventh grade, and I went there.  My brother [Randall Murray (ph.)] went to the black high school, Glenville High School [Cleveland, Ohio] in our neighborhood, in our community.  And so we were having meetings and demonstrations because we wanted to open up even more--the only way if you were black you could go to the school, is if you were in the academically talented program.  And there were--this school--our, our mascot was a railroad worker, and the school was built around railroads.  So there was a small, tiny black community that had lived there for years around these railroad tracks, that was their natural school.  Other than that, all the blacks were imported.  And so the elementary schools had been the first push, and now after Reverend [Bruce] Klunder died and stuff, then the push was to open up the high school.  To relieve Glenville High School where my brother was going.  And there was room.  And I remember, I remember one day coming to school, again I was active and so I, I always got to school very, very early, 7:15, 7:30, something like that.  And the school was at the end of the bus line.  So the black kids would get on the St. Clair [Avenue] bus and at the end of the line was where the school, Collinwood High School was.  And I remember coming--getting off the bus one morning, it was 7:30, and there were like pickets of white people around the school, chanting.  Which, I mean now I--again, I was a civil rights veteran.  I had been to training on civil disobedience.  I, you know I had been a picket line captain many times.  You know I was like seasoned.  And I said, whoa, look at that.  When you know you get off the bus and you're walking and you say, oh, you know look at that, those picket lines.  And they were well organized and they were disciplined and they were walking.  They weren't, you know, raggedy.  They were walking around in a circle and they were chanting in unison.  I'm saying that, so this is my professional kind--I'm saying that's a good, that's a good picket line.  They must know what they're doing.  So I get closer and they're saying, "Two, four, six, eight, we don't want to integrate."  And I'm saying whoa.  Now it's the end of the bus line, it's 7:30 in the morning.  So I go into school, and it's a big school, it's a huge school.  So I sneak around, I go into school.  And some of the little white girls are running around screaming and crying and everything.  You know they said we got to leave.  They had a--the school was like two square blocks.  They had, I don't know, fifteen entrances.  Every entrance was covered.  They had--this was, this was well organized, and they were trying to get the kids out of the school.  And I said these white people are well organized, they don't want us here.  I should leave.  So I tried to find my little sister.  Well she didn't want to--she said I don't--I'm staying at school, I don't know what's wrong with you.  I actually left school that day.  And in my absence, they had meetings of black student leaders and white--and the white student council leaders, which were not the leadership of these picket line people.  And they had--they reached a truce.  They said we're not gone have any trouble here, people turned in their little, you know, sticks, you know bats and other little paraphernalia that they had.  And everything's going to be okay.  And, and then all my classmates came home and they said, "Oh, [HistoryMaker Dr.] Linda [Rae Murray], everything's worked out."  You know, "We're going to have this truce."  I said, "Oh, okay," you know.
Story_ID: 243997
Speaker 1: In the white community [in Cleveland, Ohio], the reason it [the demonstration at Collinwood High School, Cleveland, Ohio] was so well organized is 'cause the adults were involved, okay.  So they went back and had a community meeting, we didn't know that.  So the next day, I said well okay, you know it might be a little rough, but--'cause Col--I should say Collinwood, this neighborhood was a neighborhood--Murray Hill [Little Italy, Cleveland, Ohio], black people never drove in the neighborhood.  If you, if you accidentally drove through Murray Hill, you could be pulled out of your car and beat up if you were black.  So this, you know this, this is Italian working class neighborhood.  So they had a hard rep.  So the next day I went back to school and this time they even had more people.  But me, I'm thinking well we have this truce, and, you know, we had all these meetings.  So you know maybe it'll be safe, maybe we won't get our ass kicked, so I go in.  Now the school is completely empty.  Now they're coming in, taking the white kids out the school.  Now, you got to leave, you got to leave.  So then I get scared again, but now the neighborhood, because of their evening meeting, now there are like hundreds of--parents surrounding the school.  The day before it was only kids, it was only high school kids.  So today it's like the whole neighborhood.  People must have taken off from work.  It's the whole neighborhood out surrounding the school.  So now I'm looking, I'm saying I can't get out, I can't leave the school.  And now, and it's fifteen or twenty minutes later, my colleagues who are coming later than me, are, are having to fight their way through the crowds, run through the crowd to get into the school.  To, to--which is empty except for black students.
Speaker 2: Now what about the teachers, are they inside?
Speaker 1: The teachers are inside.  Some of the teachers.  The principal [John Lee] was scared and locked their selves up in the principal's office and wouldn't come out.  Now here I, I'm pretty sure this happened in my junior year, I don't think it happened in my senior year.  But I was an upperclassman, I was on the school paper.  I was, I was not--I mean the real black leaders of the school were the sports--the guys on the sports team.  But I was known, I had status as a--so we got--and more importantly, I was in the--you know I was--had been involved in the city-wide school board.  So we tried to get all the kids--we had kids from the seventh grade through the twelfth grade.  So the first thing we tried to do was get all our kids in the auditorium.  And some of the--this was homeroom period.  So some of the teachers didn't want them to go.  Like I said, there was no white--by this time there were no white kids in the school.  So we went around and we tried to get the kids--and we were successful in getting most of them in the auditorium.  And then the other thing--now I must say at this time I was looking for my sister [Ellen Murray (ph.)].  And I was told by some--she left.  And I said, well she must be dead.  I mean you know I, I just wiped her out of my mind I said 'cause you know there's no way she could survive.  What happened is some of the parents that live, some of the black parents that lived near the school, they formed a caravan and they snuck in underneath the school, and they got out as many kids as they could.  Especially the younger kids.  And she actually got to escape with them out.  But the school was basically on lockdown.  There was no way you could get out.
Story_ID: 243998
Speaker 1: So then I was part of the delegation that we went to the principal's [John Lee] office.  We had to beg him to come out.  We said, "You can't--we have to do something.  You have to call the police.  You have to find some way to escort us out of here."  Now the school had 3,500--there must have been three hundred of us.  You know it, it took five, six, seven buses, eight buses to get us out.  But at this point in time, he--the principal wasn't doing anything.  The teachers were sort of in disarray.  And we--so a delegation of us went and we said we--demand police protection.  We got to have some buses to get out of here.  We can't walk through this, this mob and catch the public transportation.  It took a long time to get that, you know to, to be able to get that.  Meanwhile unbeknownst to me, here is my brother [Randall Murray (ph.)] in Glenville [High School, Cleveland, Ohio], okay high school, okay.  And he's sitting in math class, he tells the story.  And the word goes through the school.  People are running through the crowd.  "They're killing people at Collinwood [High School, Cleveland, Ohio], they're killing people at Collinwood."  So everybody at Glenville got family at Collinwood.  He said his, his teacher was black, looked at the kids and said, they're killing people--now remember what this means for, for Cleveland.  This is Murray Hill [Little Italy, Cleveland, Ohio] neighborhoods that do, really do kill black people, okay.  This wasn't just any old white school.  So the math teacher turned around, he said, "You know I'm gone write this long formula on the board," and he turned around.  And the class emptied.  And so from Glenville High School then, you have my brother in the high school marching up to Collinwood to rescue us.  'Cause the word now has gotten out, we had public phones and stuff.  We're trapped in the high school.  We--it's not clear how we're going to get out.  We're trying to beat down the door of the principal's to get the police.  We finally got the principal.  I don't believe he called for the police.  I believe one of us did.  But in any case, he was, he was really scared and he wasn't very helpful.  We got the police.  The Cleveland [Ohio] police came and they brought some buses to transport us out.  I was on the last bus 'cause you know I'm an upperclassman, a leader, right.  So you put the, you put the--but the kids had to run from the building down a short way to get on the bus.  Rocks, bricks, you know.  And then the buses had to go out of the neighborhood, back down toward the hood.  Rocks, bricks, the whole bit.  The police, where do you think the police were?  Well the police were up there with those parents throwing rocks and bricks?  Very few.  The police and their horses were trying to prevent the Glenville students from getting up to Collinwood.  So they were riding their horses through the crowds of students, you know.  Now fortunately our bus, you know they really were trying to go through it.  So as our buses made it back, then that dissipated that march up there.  So that to me sort of crystallized in my mind what, what were we trying to do with this desegregation stuff?  You know what, what did that mean?  Now here I had been in desegregated settings since the fourth grade [at Boulevard Elementary School, Cleveland Heights, Ohio] even though the school system as a whole was segregated.  And what, what did it mean that people would take off of work, bring their babies in their buggies to throw bricks at a bunch of kids, half of whom were--which, I mean these were seventh, eighth, ninth graders, you know.  So I was, I was, I was completely disgusted.  I was ready to be out of high school by then.  You know I mean I was--it was just like I, I just felt that all the limitations of the Civil Rights Movement was crystallized in my mind there.  So here you are fighting for more people to go to school with these people that are going to throw bricks at you.  Even though I, I knew in a concrete way that the courses you could take at Collinwood were better and different than the courses that my brother could take at Glen--I mean I, I, I was aware of what it meant to be in a different setting.  I was aware of the advantages of integrated education, 'cause I, 'cause I had access to them.  So there was no doubt in my mind that there were unequal situations.  But that, that made me come into college with a very kind of much, extremely angry--I was enraged by the time I came to college.
Story_ID: 243999
Speaker 1: Now what college did you choose?
Speaker 2: University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  I applied to a number of colleges.  University of Chicago was not my first choice.  My first choice was Antioch [College, Yellow Springs, Ohio] because, only because they had a work-study program.  So like you went to college for four years and I, you know and every year they let you take a semester off and to go to work.  I--'cause you know by then I was, I was just--I was so angry and I was just saying like I know I need these skills, but you know what can these white people teach me?  I just, I need to get this degree.  I need to get some skills so, so I really wanted to go to Antioch.  My heart was set on going to Antioch because, you know it was, it was the most un-college college I could--that I found.
Speaker 1: It is the most un-college college in the United States, probably the most liberal college.
Speaker 2: That's right.  But I could--but I couldn't afford it.  They--I, I got accepted, but I didn't get the same kind of scholarship arrangement.  I found out later that they actually--those colleges divide up the blacks.  And Antioch had--was--had a bigger responsibility toward some of the southern states, that's one of the reasons.  So, so I ended up at--and then, you know I got into Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio] I got into a number of schools.  So I said if I can't go to Antioch, and, and not really be in college, then I should be in Chicago [Illinois] where some black people are, you know.  Let me--you know I don't want to just spend four years in a college town.  Let me go where there's a city, where there's black people.  They'll be involved in some kind of struggle.  So that's why I came to the University of Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you came here in '67 [1967].
Speaker 2: Six, sixty--well I graduated in--fall '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: Sixty-six (1966), yeah sixty-six [1966].
Speaker 2: Fall of '66 [1966].
Story_ID: 244000
Speaker 1: Came over here [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] to the--what was then the new dorms, they just tore 'em down, over there on Woodlawn [Avenue].  Got stopped by the, by the Chicago [Illinois] police the first night I was there.
Speaker 2: Was it the university police or the Chicago police?
Speaker 1: It was the Chicago police.  I was amazed.  I don't know why it was--but it was the Chicago police, it wasn't the university police.  But they were in the University Community [Service] Center.  There was a bunch of us walking north from--this is on like fifth, what is it 57th [Street], 58th [Street], 59th [Street] and Woodlawn.  So we came out the dorm, maybe eight of us, mixed group 'cause you know it's hard to find eight black women.  It was all women coming out the dorm, it wasn't that many--but it was two or three blacks.  We, we had just met each other.  It was the first night.  And we're walking toward pizza--some pizza place.  Not across the Midway [Plaisance, Chicago, Illinois], 'cause you know they already told us don't go across the Midway, that was my second night to go across.  But you know the first night, you know they said you know, don't go across the Midway, it's dangerous.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause Woodlawn's [Chicago, Illinois] on the other side, right.  And maybe you should explain the--
Speaker 1: Wood, Woodlawn--
Speaker 2: Logistics of University of Chicago.
Speaker 1: Right, they're sitting there on an island and to the north of it, I mean to the south is, is the Midway, which is leftover from the [1893 Chicago] World's Fair [World's Columbian Exposition, Chicago, Illinois].  On the other side of that was the Woodlawn community, which was African American, Disciples and [Blackstone] Rangers were there.  This was, this was the poor black neighborhood.  It was considered dangerous for university students.  So we were walking deeper into Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] to where the, you know, student pizza places are.  And we were straggling along, you know I think we--the, the two or three of us black folks were sort of in the back, but we were clearly together.  There was no--you couldn't assume that we were in two separate groups; we were all together.  And we got stopped by the Chicago police who, and we were young.  So we were seventeen, eighteen years old.  And they said, "What are you girls doing over here in this neighborhood?"  And now I was, again, I'm the political rights activist, so I had, I'm not naive, right.  Even though Cleveland [Ohio] is not Chicago, you know, this is still the man and you know.  So I--and one of them was black.  One of these cops was black; one white and one black.  And I said, "We're, we're walking with the--our friends here to get some pizza."  I didn't say we're students.  I didn't say that.  I wasn't sure if he would believe me.  And they said well where do you live?  'Cause they obviously thought we were from Woodlawn and had wandered over across the Midway.  And I gave him the address, we live at fifty--blah, blah, blah, blah, Woodlawn.  He said, "You don't live there; that's the university dorm.  Now come on, you don't live there.  Now you girls, you need to stay out of trouble and you need to go on back home where you belong."  And they--and then they, then they got in their car and went away.  And they were very clear that that was a dorm, and they were very clear that us three little black girls couldn't possibly live in a dorm.  Now if we had been three young men, they may have done something more, okay.  But we were three girls and you know, weren't causing any trouble.  So they, that's it, they just said, "We just want to warn you, you need to, you need to go on back home."  And they got in their car and left.  So that was the first night.  The second night when I went across the Midway.  'Cause you know I didn't come to the University of Chicago just to be in Hyde Park.  I came to the University of Chicago 'cause they had the black community, okay.  And I had read, I had done some study of the University of Chicago and I knew about the urban renewal and the fights against the poor, you know so I had done some background research.  So I went over to--I was walking over to Woodlawn.  I believe I was on my way to one of the Durhams' house.  I can't remember if it was Dick [Richard Durham] or who, which, which Durham it was.  I hadn't met them before, but there was like a little gathering at their house.  And, and then that second night, there's a little shooting, a little gang shooting, you know like two blocks down from where I am.  You can see the--you know it's dark, so you can see the little gunfire.  I said, well I'm in Chicago now, this is a different, whole different scene.  'Cause we didn't have any big gangs in Cleveland.  So I mean, I had heard of the gangs in Chicago.  So my second night I got exposed to 'em.  I said boy, this is going to be a lesson here.  Which it was.  It was very interesting to be in, in Hyde Park in those days and to, and to see the Disciples and the Rangers.  They had their marches and their little fights.  Nothing as deadly as what happened in the '80s [1980s] with, with all the drug turf stuff, you know.  This was more you know, adolescent, you know, just woofing at each other.  But, but for me coming from Cleveland, it was a big change.
Story_ID: 244001
Speaker 1: What was your major at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Math.  My, my position was the white man couldn't teach me nothing.  Again, now I'm at the height of my adolescent arrogance.  You know I, I'm a revolutionary, you know I, I've organized city-wide boycotts.  By now I'm a committed Marxist.  You know I, I have some historical perspective on the Civil Rights Movement.  And I remember my first year, one of the social studies teachers said, "Oh, [HistoryMaker Dr.] Linda [Rae Murray], you should, you know you should think about majoring in social studies."  I said, "You white men have nothing to teach me.  Only reason I'm here is to learn something about math and science.  That's the only thing I want to learn from you white people.  From the, from the man.  You have nothing else, nothing you can tell me about history or nothing.  I can read on my own.  I'm only here for math and science."  My best grades were not in math and science, you know I got A's in the, in the history and the, and the literature and the social studies.  You know I, I got A's and Bs in math and science, but you know those were, those were not my strongest grades, especially at the University of Chicago.  But, but my position was why waste all this money and time, it was a lot of debt.  I remember when my parents [Ruth Childress Murray and Raymond Murray] sent me off, you know they, they didn't, they didn't have to pay anything.  Even though they were both working, they didn't have to pay anything.  They took--all they could do to send me fifteen or twenty dollars a week.  And, and I--so I had a lot of loans and, and I was very aware of that and I felt like, I'm here to learn.  Don't forget my mother was a mathematician so I did--I said math and science, that's all--I said the white people, they're good at math and science and that's all I want from them.  So I all--I was, I graduated, my bachelor's degree is in mathematics.
Story_ID: 244002
Speaker 1: Now were there any teachers there, that you remember or--
Speaker 2: This guy, I'm horrible on names, it's just a bad thing.  He's--Flack, Richard Flack [sic. Richard Flacks].  He was a social studies student--teacher, sociologist.  He almost died.  Somebody came in and beat him to a pulp in his office before I graduated.  Richard Flack was his name.  He was a, he was a leftist and he tried to have discussions.  He was a sociology teacher, so we tried to talk about the Civil Rights Movement and Black Power Movement and all that kind of stuff, and we read things in there.  And there was one guy whose name I don't remember, who taught African history.  I didn't graduate from University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], but in my last year there, he came, he was new to the campus.  He was young and he was white and he taught African history.  And a whole bunch of us black students signed up for this course.  It was a horrible course.  It was a course that said that Egyptians weren't black and that the northern part of Africa wasn't part of Africa.  You know he made this--you know this, I mean this was, this was not my area, so to us it was a shock.  I mean now I know this is a--you know to divide off the northern part of Africa and pretend that somehow that's part of the Middle East and divorce that from Africa and only talk about the sub-Saharan African.  So there was a politic to this.  And so we were enraged.  And very disappointed.  The course wasn't very well taught.  It was a survey course.  'Cause this was one of the few times at the University of Chicago where they had a course that we thought was relevant to us.  So I remember him, and battling with him a lot.  I think I got a C in that course.  But those are the only two.  Math, you know I enjoyed it, but, but I was--I, I really--it was--I was there on a mission to learn, to get some skills that could be used for the future to help black people.  And it really wasn't until my third year that I decided to try to go to medical school.
Story_ID: 244003
Speaker 1: My roommate in college there at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], was a black woman, Barbara Allen.  She's a physician today.  But both of her parents were physicians.  Before her, I had, I had only met one black person that was a physician in my whole life.  That had interviewed me for some college.  They were a resident at Case Western [Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio].  She was very dismissive of me when she interviewed.  She said, "Well what do you want to do?"  I said, "Well I want to be a community organizer."  And she said--she--I don't think she thought too much of me 'cause I, you know, but anyway.  And so Barbara Allen was from New York and, and both of her parents were doctors.  And I, you know, Barbara and I had been roommates.  After, after the first year we were roommates.  And one Thanksgiving I went home, I went New--I didn't stay with her, but I went to New York for Thanksgiving, for the Thanksgiving holidays.  And I stayed with some friends.  But she was from New York.  So we were going to go out to a party.  And so I went over her house to, you know get her and we were going to go to this party together.  And then that's when I met her mother.  And she wasn't quite ready, so her mother took me in the kitchen, you know, "How are you doing?  What's your major?"  Blah, blah, blah.  "What do you think you're going to do?"  And you know, and at that point in time, I--my, my notion of what I was going to do was well you know I'm, I'm a--you know I'm a full-time revolutionary.  I'm gone get a job, maybe as a community organizer, maybe as a teacher.  And I'm going to, I'm going to be in the struggle.  And, and she said you know, "Why are you, why are you wasting your education at the University of Chicago doing that?  We need people with real skills."  You know well don't forget I'm, you know that's what I'm there for, for real--so I'm listening.  And she said, "Do you know how many black doctors there are?"  I'm a smart ass and I'm political, so I said, "Not enough."  Not enough, we don't have enough black doctors.  And she--there are three--it was under 4,000, 3,850--she had some exact number.  So I was--first of all, I didn't realize.  I mean it was a number that was close to the number of my high school [Collinwood High School, Cleveland, Ohio], so it was under 4,000.  I was surprised.  I tried not to show it, but I was surprised at how few it was.  And I was surprised that she had it down to an exact--she didn't say 3,500.  She had it three thousand--it was down to a specific number.  So I was looking at her like well is she pulling my leg or what?  And then she said, "Half of those people are over the age of fifty."  So then I said whoa, you know, 'cause I'm still young.  So I'm saying, damn, that means they're about to die off if they're over the age of fifty.  And then she said, "And half of those over the age of fifty are over the age of sixty.  And if people like you don't go into medicine, we're going to die out.  And you should seriously think about it if you're serious about, you know, having skills."  And we went to our party and I came home and I--so then I was thinking, well I came here to get skills.  And in my mind skills were like you know, bricklayer, plumber, something that you could--you know this is the '60s [1960s], nation building skills, you know, right.  We're going to build a nation.  So I said, well, let me think.  What do doctors do?
Story_ID: 228455
Speaker 1: So her [Murray's college roommate, Barbara Allen] mother was a physician and, and she was very, she was very--in fact she was very harsh with me.  She said, "You're wasting," you know, "we fought hard for you, for you all to go to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  You're wasting your talents if you just come out and do this," you know.  "You should really think about going into medicine.  If people like you don't go into medicine, who's going to go?  We'll just die out."  And, and so that, over that period of time, I, I thought about it.  And I knew that--I guess 'Ben Casey' or what--you know I knew the TV doctors were phony.  I said well that can't, you know that can't be the real, what really goes on.  And then I thought well what, you know what--I say well they look in your throat and they listen to your lungs and I think I could do that.  I even had in my mind, I had, I, I said to myself well most of the time what doctors do must be dull.  What's on TV can only be occasionally.  You, you can't save a life every day, you know.  So I said well I could do that, I could, I could, I could look at kids' throats and you know, listen to their lungs and make sure they get their shots.  That's something I can do.  And I said and, and then as I thought more about it, I said, I could do that and there's so few of us, I never realized it.  And then doctors make a good salary.  I mean I, I could do that and I could be stable, and I could, I could be a rabble-rouser.  It'd be hard to fire me as a doctor.  You know I'm, you know this is, I'm thinking private--say well you know you got a big mouth.  You won't have to get fired like that high school teacher.  This is something I could do and combine with my politics.  And so, so I made a decision.  I made a decision to do it, and I was in my third year, getting ready to go into my senior year.  So now I had a dilemma because I was at the University of Chicago.  I hadn't been pre-med.  I hadn't taken organic--I was a math major.  I had taken science courses that interested me.  So I, I had a lot of science courses, but I hadn't, I hadn't taken the organic chemistry that comes after the inorganic, I hadn't taken the biochemistry.  I looked up what you needed.  I said I, I need more.  I can't, I can't--I have to go back and take some courses that I didn't take before for pre-med. And I'm in debt.  And every year at the University of Chicago they'd increase your loans, they'd decreased your scholarship.  And I was, I was in a quandary, so I said well I'm going to have to transfer because it's going to take me at least another year beyond what I would have done.  I said I, I'm going to have to transfer and, and I was already, you know, working.  Said I'm going to have to transfer to University of Illinois [at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] to take these courses for medical school 'cause I just can't see being in debt.  Even if they would let me stay, I just can't see paying this, you know, being in debt for the University of Chicago tuition.
Story_ID: 228456
Speaker 1: So I sort of, you know, making up my mind and doing that stuff.  Then I got pregnant.  And you know, you know first of course you try to deny it, you know.  Missed a couple of periods and stuff.  Finally you go to the doctor, he says, "You're pregnant."  So I'm now I'm sitting here saying now what am I gonna do?  Should I get an abortion or not?  The University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] was part of the underground abortion.  I can't remember if abortions were legal.  I think they might have been legal by then, I'm not sure.  But in any case, I knew I could get an abortion 'cause University of Chicago had this whole underground thing that I remember--sending people to, to get an abortion.  So I knew I could get an abortion.  And then, and then I just was in thought and I said to myself well, I had never as a child envisioned myself particularly as married.  So I, and I wasn't religious, so I wasn't connected to--you got to be married and then you got to have a child.  I, I hadn't given it much thought.  I said well if I really go to medical school, then you got to do residency.  I said you know what?  Having a child is never convenient.  You know it's just-when, like when would you plan to have a child?  Well you wouldn't.  And if I'm going to medical school and I'm going to residency, then it really seems like it would be even more inconvenient then.  But I, I would like to have a child.  So then I made a decision.  I made a decision to have my child, my son [Marcus Murray].  But now you're going to have a child and you're going to try to get into medical school.  So you know this is, you know, so I'm contemplating this kind of stuff.  And my sister [Ellen Murray (ph.)] had a child when she was sixteen, so she was, she was living with me at this time with her, with her young son.  So I had some reality check on what it meant to have a young child around.  So then I said, well you know, if you--we're not going to have a revolution if you can't do normal things.  If you can't go to school and work and have babies, if you have to stop all of that to have a revolution, we'll never have a revolution.  So it just ought to be possible to do all of this stuff.  So I made a decision that I was going to have my child and I was going to try to go to medical school.  So now what do you do?  'Cause I'm still a student.
Story_ID: 228457
Speaker 1: So I call my parents [Ruth Childress Murray and Raymond Murray].  My parents, my family, I left this out, my family moved to Chicago [Illinois] by coincidence after my first year of college [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Now how did that happen?
Speaker 1: My father had a job offer up here.  He was working sort of like in War on Poverty programs and he got a job offer at Sherwin-Williams [Company, Cleveland, Ohio] paint company in the personnel department, and it was a big increase for him, a big raise for him.  And my mother was at that time, was teaching math in like Cuyahoga Community College [Cleveland, Ohio], (unclear) junior colleges.  And she was able to get a job.  She knew somebody that came from Cleveland [Ohio].  She was able to get a job at DuPage College [College of DuPage, Glen Ellyn, Illinois] out here in DuPage, junior college out here in DuPage.  And so they--had nothing to do with me, but they moved here.  My brother [Randall Murray (ph.)] and sister [Ellen Murray (ph.)] were still in high school then.  Both of them dropped out when they moved, but they moved here.  So they were all--they were here, they were, they were in Chicago and had been in Chicago.  So I called them up and I said, "Let's go to dinner."  And I'm saying to myself now how am I gone do this?  How am I gone tell 'em I want to go to medical school and I'm pregnant?  So I, so I, I had dinner.  I said, "Well I have two things to tell you that are like important.  I don't know what you, I don't know what you're going to think."  I said first, "I'm pregnant."  Well they were happy.  They were, they were--"Oh, that's wonderful," you know.  And I said, "And secondly, I think I want to go to medical school."  And they thought that was great, too.
Speaker 2: Now, now were you married at that time?
Speaker 1: I wasn't ma--I've never been married.  I wasn't married.  The fa--my son's [Marcus Murray] father [Gary Tyler (ph.)] is a nice guy.  He was, he was a, he was--he had, he had been in the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party].  He's from Chicago.  He had been in the Black Panthers.  He had--he wasn't really in college when I met.  We're, we're--he's a, like a year younger than me.  So he wasn't actually in college.  He was trying, he was trying to, he was trying to be a writer and a reporter and he had been in the Black Panthers, the Chicago Black Panther Party and stuff.  That's what I, you know, so that's sort of how I met him.  But you know this is the '60s [1960s], so like you know we were--I didn't feel like I had to get married or anything you know.  So, so I got--so I transferred to the University of Illinois [at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  I got a job and I had my child.  And it, I think it took me a year and a half or two years.  I went back and I took the courses.  I mean obviously I'm a physician today, so.  I, I was at University of Illinois and they called me in my--the--my senior year, it was really beyond my senior year, but when I was thinking I was going to graduate.  I had already applied to medical school.  I was, again, I already--I was a political person, so I didn't come--I was a math major.  I--that's what I was going to get my degree in.  I didn't want to tell anybody I was pre-med 'cause the word was if they, if they know you're pre-med and black, they'll, they'll do you in.
Story_ID: 228458
Speaker 1: At U of I [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] they called me in and said, you know, "[HistoryMaker Dr.] Linda [Rae Murray], you have," you know, "you need 200 hours to graduate, you got 250," or what--you know I had, I had way over what, you know and, "you're taking up space.  We need you to graduate."  I, you know I had long since finished all my math courses and stuff and I said well, the reason I haven't graduated is because I'm really pre-med and I'm applying to medical school and you know and I, you know, just had whatever cell biology.  I was in the process of doing that.  And they said, "You're never getting into medical school, you know, you need to go on and get out of here.  You, you have a degree in math.  You have no choice.  We're, we're going to make you graduate."  It was December or something.  So I walked down the hall and I changed my major to art.  Filled out the paperwork.  I didn't have a art course.  I tried to pick something I didn't have a course in.  So I changed my major to art so they couldn't force me to graduate.  I only had one more semester to go.  And that's the, that's the time when I was applying.  And I, I remember my organic--you know U of I is a huge place.  And so you don't, you know it's not like U of C [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  So you don't, you don't know very many fac--I didn't know any of the faculty there, nobody.  You're in this huge classroom, three hundred kids, you know, nothing.  And you had to have recommendations.  And so they had a system where they would, they would give you a generic recommendation that some English major would write, just based on your grades.  And, but you had to have it.  So I went to my organic teacher and I remember Marcus [Murray]-- Marcus was--my son--was a little baby in arms then, I had had him.  And, and I had gotten a good grade in organic chemistry.  So I said, well let me, you know go talk to him.  And I had, had some interaction with the professor, not very much, but--and I said, you know "I'm trying to go to medical school and you know I, and I need you--I need a recommendation".  You know and so, "I, I would like to ask you to give me a recommendation."  It was very difficult for me to go ask.  And he, and he, you know, looked up his files and he said, "Oh, I remember, I remember you.  You were an excellent student.  He said I would love to give you a recommendation, but I just can't."  So I was--I said well why not?  He said, "Because I don't think women should be doctors."  I was in shock.  We talked for like two hours.  I said, "Well why do you say that?"  He had grown up in the [Great] Depression.  His mother was a stay-at-home mother and she had to go to work during the Depression.  You know he--and that just scarred him.  He just didn't think women--he thought women should be at home.  And I said, "Well do you, do you know who I am?"  I said, "I'm a"--I said, "The women in my family all work.  First they were picking cotton as slaves, I mean they all--what are you talking about?  We're--you have to work," you know.  I said, "I'm a single mother.  If I don't work, my son is going to starve.  I would prefer to work as a doctor than scrubbing out toilets, but I'm going to work.  Now the question is"--so we had this big discussion back and forth and I was trying to say, you know, working class women and black women, we've always worked.  If you don't work, your kids starve, you know.  I couldn't understand.  He never budged.  So I said--so I finally told him I don't--I guess he didn't do horrible, 'cause I got in.  I said, "Well I'll tell you what.  I said you know I have to have three recommendations.  If you write down exactly what you told me, I could live with that."  He said, "What?"  I said, "If you just, if you promise me that you'll write down that if I was a man, you would think I would be a great doctor and I was a good student, but you don't think I should--if you just are honest.  If you, if you're going to write down I shouldn't be a doctor, I don't want--but if you can promise me that you'll write down the real reason, exactly what you've told me, I'll live with that."  He said, "Okay, I can do that," you know.  So I was shocked at that time to have somebody verbally say that.
Story_ID: 228459
Speaker 1: And I got into the University of Illinois [College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: So this is 1970?
Speaker 1: Seventy--this was--I started medical school in 1973.  So this was early '73 [1973], late '72 [1972].  I got in, I got accepted to the university.  Only place I got in.  I applied to schools in Chicago [Illinois], again.  Fortunately we have a lot of medical schools, but with--as a single parent, I can't--I couldn't be going anywhere else without family support.  So I applied to the schools and I applied to Rush [Medical College, Chicago, Illinois], I applied to schools in Chicago.  I got on the waiting list at Rush.  I got into the University of Illinois.  And then I--now I had to do financial aid.  I'm a single parent.  My parents [Ruth Childress Murray and Raymond Murray], by the way in response to this, they said, "Well we, we have no money, we can't help you with--but what we can do is we can, we can buy a home.  We can buy a two flat to allow you to move back home."  That was their response.  They were rent--they were empty nesters.  Can you imagine?  They were empty nesters at that point, all their kids were gone.  And their youngest daughter [Ellen Murray (ph.)] was living with me, but all their kids were gone.  And, and they bought--we still own it today, a family two flat.  So that, that was their contribution.  But I went to University of Illinois to enter--to, to try and get my financial aid package together and Howard Burrs [ph.] was in charge of financial aid at that point in time.  And he, he went over everything with me and my, you know, debt from U of C [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and all this kind of stuff, and how much everything was going to cost.  And he said, "Well if you're serious about being a doctor, and I'm not sure you're going to make it.  If you're serious about being a doctor, you need to give up your son [Marcus Murray]."  Now again, honestly I believe if I had been born ten years earlier or ten years later, I don't know what--but I was a child of the '60s [1960s] and the--a white man could say nothing.  It was like, I just assumed white men were going to say evil stuff just to mess with you, you know.  So like I was a little taken back.  But you know he's a white man.  I said, "What do you mean give up my son?"  "You can't be serious about going to medical school.  You can't--you don't have fin--you don't, you don't have enough money to support this boy.  Where, where is the boy"--and they found out I was unmarried, you know.  "What about the boy"--I said, "well the--he don't have, you know his father--we ain't together.  His father's some poor black man, don't worry about him.  All he got is me."  So he said, "You're not going to make it.  You need to give him up, give him to someone else to raise if you have any hope of getting through medical school."  I said, "Well you can forget that, I'm not doing that."  And then I said, "Just, just tell me where I can go for scholarships.  I, I didn't come here for like personal advice.  Just, you know, tell me what forms I have to fill out."  And there were scholarships at the university, and there was--I was looking for scholarships, not just loans.  I applied for--but there was a faculty scholarship, and it was supposed to be based only on need.  It was money that the faculty put into a pot.  It wasn't a lot of money, but it wasn't, you know, U of I [University of Illinois] wasn't--tuition wasn't that big.  And so I went to see a assistant dean for, for the--to get interviewed for that scholarship.  And he was even more--now he was in charge of the first year, he was even worse.
Story_ID: 228460
Speaker 1: Now mind you school [University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois] hasn't started.  I haven't even graduated [from University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] yet.  I'm just getting things in order after I changed my major back to math so I could graduate.  I'm just, you know, trying to get my financial aid package together.  So he looks at me and he says, "You're not even going to make it out the first year.  This year half the black students failed the first year of medical school.  You ain't gone make it out the first year, much less graduate.  So we're not wasting a dime on you.  So you ain't getting this scholarship," you know.  So I was really in a little bit of a--'cause I, I--in my mind I'm saying to myself well medical school is probably really hard and I do have this child [Marcus Murray].  I mean I have to be realistic, you know, about how much I can do.  I really need to not work.  And at that point in time, my job, I had a job, I had a full-time--I was working forty hours a week.  And it was at Cook County Hospital [John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois].  I was technically an employee of the University of Illinois.  But I was abstracting charts, medical charts in the county trauma unit and putting them in a computer database.  For people that got hit by a car, or shot, you'd abstract the chart to go into the database.  That was my job, and I could do it in the evenings, you know.  And the guy that was in charge of that, Dr. Boyd [ph.], he had gotten married when he was in medical school.  And he had--and so he and his wife were both doctors, but they had had children when they were in medical school and during their residency.  And he was so happy that I had gotten into school.  And he heard about my troubles with the financial aid and so he said, "[HistoryMaker Dr.] Linda [Rae Murray]," he said, "I can't do this more than one year, but this is what I can do for you."  He said, "You technically are an employee of the University of Illinois.  And you're a research assistant.  And you get free tuition if I keep you on full-time."  He said, "So this first year I'm going to keep you on the payroll."  He said, "Your"--and I was telling him, I said, "I, I really don't think I can work full-time, I really am worried about whether I'll be able to."  He said, "You don't--you just come here and pick up your check."  This was a white man.  He said, "You just come here and pick up your check."  He said, "I can only do it the first year, but I will do that the first year."  And so I not only got the check for not working that first year, which helped.  Which meant I didn't have to work.  But also I got the free tuition because I was technically a research assistant at the University of Illinois.  And, and I think if it hadn't been for that, I would have had trouble in the first year of medical school.
Speaker 2: Now that's really a, a wonderful thing to happen.
Speaker 1: It was a wonderful thing, and it was--and this, this is, like I said, he, he said, "I remember what me and my wife went through," and he said you know, "you shouldn't have, you shouldn't have to worry about that kind of stuff when you're in school."  So it, so it made a big difference.  And I think about that today as I walk past the trauma unit at County (laughter).
Story_ID: 228461
Speaker 1: So we were able to make it.  I was able to, you know, negotiate medical--medical school was not fun.  It was the worst educational experience I ever had.
Speaker 2: What made it the worst experience?
Speaker 1: First of all, the way it was taught was horrible.  You know you go at eight o'clock in the--you have like hours and hours of didactic--it's like the worse way to learn.  Fortunately medical schools have moved--many of them have moved past.  But you would go, you would sit there.  The room would go dark.  There would be slide after slide after slide.  It was just horrible.  And then we--at University of Illinois [College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois] there was a tradition of a note taking collective.  So fortunately, 'cause you would inevitably fall asleep, we had class notes that were ta--you could, you know you subscribe, you took notes once or twice a semester or something.  And so we had excellent notes.  But the, just the volume of things you would have to read and basically memorize.  We had a, a number of minority students there.  Like I told you, the class before us, half the people failed so we really felt under the gun.  We formed study groups early.  So a lot of the things you might see in some of these movies about law school.  So there, so we--I actually was actively involved in a study group.  And I was--and in fact in my medical school career I was--that--my role was to organize study groups.  So the class ahead of us organized a little stuff to help us out with the anatomy class, mock anatomy class.  So we really tried to come together as a group of minorities, Latinos, we had a couple of Native Americans, African Americans, and try to help each other.  Otherwise, we wouldn't have made it through.  Try to help each other survive in medical school.  But it was a horrible experience.  And after the, after the academic class, the first two years are almost all lectures.  When you go out on the hospital setting, it's a very isolated--'cause then you're not, then you're either by yourself or maybe with one or two other students.  And you're in a--and it's an apprenticeship style of learning.  So you know you hang out in the, in the locker room of the--when you're doing surgery rotation.  Well if you're a woman, you can't hang out in the locker room, I mean.  So the, so the method of teaching assumes that all those guys like hang together, do the same things.  It's not very nice.  Depending on where you were, there's a lot of showmanship.  Just like, just like on TV, you know.  "What do you think about this, what do you think," you know, quizzing you.  So it's a very unpleasant way to learn.  I, I don't think a very, very good way to learn.
Story_ID: 228462
Speaker 1: How patients are treated also made a difference.  So they mistreated, they, they always called African American patients by their first name.  They always called white people by their last name.  I mean you know so all of these little things are there.  They would do little tricks.  For example in, in the second year at University of Illinois [College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois] which I, I did think had a better program at that time period 'cause we, we actually started see--touching patients in the second year, learning how to do a history and physical.  But I remember being at Illinois Masonic [Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] where I was learning how to question patients and listen to the heart and stuff.  And I had a South African, I had a South African as a, as the, as the attending.  Now he didn't like South Africa, that's why he left, so that's the only good thing.  But he was still a South Afr--white South African.  And I remember he was having us listen to the heart and there were three of us.  And he said, "Can you hear this murmur?"  And, you know, "It's a systolic murmur, now listen carefully."  And you know so, so at first one of us could hear it.  Then the other two students, two white boys, "Yeah, yeah, I can hear it."  I couldn't hear the murmur, you know.  I mean I couldn't hear it.  I listened.  You know you had to make--you make the patient sit up and take different positions to make murmurs come and go and this is what we were learning.  And finally I just said you know, "I just can't hear this murmur."  And this--now even though this didn't hurt me personally, I remember this.  I said--this white man said, "You're the only honest one, there's no murmur."  Now is that a way to teach--you know and like the--so here are my two colleagues.  They got talked into hearing a murmur that wasn't there, okay.  It's not that they were lying, they got--you know they're trying to, they're trying to be good students.  I just couldn't--you know I was just, I was more--I was a little older than them and I had my [Civil Rights] Movement experience.  And my attitude was I'm never gone--if I lie and say I can hear the murmur, I'm never going to learn how to really hear it.  So I was just, I was not interested in--I, I figured he already thought I was dumb, I had less to lose.  So I never gave up.  I just said I couldn't hear it.  And I, and that ha--and I just said this, these people are crazy.  This is not the way you teach people how to--and those--between those lectures and those, that kind of little trick nonsense, I just, I, I did not like medical school at all.  I thought it was horrible.
Story_ID: 228463
Speaker 1: The only thing I liked about medical school [University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois] was the camaraderie of the students, 'cause it, it really is like you're under fire.  I mean you realize--it's really like you're at war, you know, so when--so people that you go to medical school with or go do a residency, they stay your friends.  Even if you don't particularly--you--there are people that I might not pay much attention to, I might not even like (laughter).  But the fact that we were in medical school together, or in residency together, means that there's some bond there, even if you know you don't like 'em.  So it's really, it was really a, a hor--many of my colleagues, it's a horrible experience.  And it's not a good way to train, to train people.  But our camaraderie and trying to help each other out were really the things that, that helped us.  The biggest thing I'm proud of is in medical school was in my junior year as we went into our senior--the way U of I [University of Illinois] went, at the end of the year you had a big test.  The only thing that mattered is whether you passed or failed that test.  You could pass every test up--it was like the--it was called the comprehensive test.  If you failed that test, you repeated the year.  If you were lucky.  They either kicked you out or you repeated the year.  So that--end of that first year, the, the proudest thing I'm---that I am proudest of is as we were going into our senior year, in our junior year, we were juniors, that spring every minority student passed.  Because we had an entire system, quizzes, old tests, tutoring, we had an entire support system that was student-initiated and run.  We even had a couple of students at that time off at some of these other down state schools.  Every--some people failed, some people failed that test first.  But they, they usually gave you a chance, they gave a retest in the summer.  I forgot how--but some people failed, not as many as usual, and at the end, in the retake, everybody passed.  Now the school thought we had arranged some cheating or something, which we hadn't done.  They were never able--but it was really just the support of the students.  So that was like the--so we felt like finally all these things we've been doing all these years to try to help people has really made a difference, and that year everyone passed and everybody went on to the second year.
Story_ID: 228464
Speaker 1: Were there any memorable teachers or, or doctors that you encountered?
Speaker 2: Sure, there, there--that's when you begin to meet some black doctors.  I remember [HistoryMaker Dr.] Maurice [F.] Rabb, ophthalmologist here in the city.  He was on the faculty at the University of Illinois [College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois].  And we, we came in as freshmen and again, we were products of the '60s [1960s].  So in my class were a number of people who weren't going straight through school.  Maybe they went--graduated and went--they were schoolteachers, they were old--we were a little older group that had decided to go to medical school.  And so we said, "Well, we need to pull in--let's--we don't know nothing about doctors.  Let's, let's get in some black doctors."  So we started look--well Maurice Rabb, he's one of the few we had on faculty.  And he's an ophthalmologist.  So we're sitting around, those of us organizing, we're saying, well, you know, we don't--we didn't know what an ophthalmologist was, an eye doctor.  We, we didn't know.  I mean we saw Department of Ophthalmology, he's an ophthalmologist, you know, so we called him up and asked him would he come and talk to us.  Talk, you know, one evening to the black students.  We said we'd better do our homework and at least look up what, at least look up what ophthalmology is so we don't embarrass ourselves when the brother comes.  He was always helpful.  Another person that was very helpful is Dr. Jorge Prieto, really one of the leading lights, Mexican, Mexican American physician.  His son, little Jorge [Prieto, Jr.] was, is in my class, was in my class.  And I remember before school started, they had a, you know they had some lunch or something for the minority students.  And I remember him coming.  And again, you know he was, he was very welcoming.  He, he, he made a clear effort to connect the struggles of, of Latino students with African American students.  And that impressed me that he--that he--spoke out, clearly, but he was active in the struggle around farm workers and a political activists in the Latino community.  So he, he actually never taught me anything.  I mean I never took a class from him or anything, he was a family practitioner.  But he was there at our orientation.  I remember visiting him several times when I was a medical student.  So he was a--he--and he had a major influence when I was a resident because by then he was at Cook County Hospital [John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois].  We--there all--there was also a pharmacist, a Ph.D., not an M.D.--Sherrard [sic. Dr. Theodore R. Sherrod], Dr. Sherrard in the pharm--in the school of pharmacy.  He always won awards for teaching.  So you have people like that as a medical student. Then we had to reach out.  So [HistoryMaker Dr.] Billie Wright Adams was in practice and we, you know we would--she would have--we had her in to talk to us.  And she would have--especially the women.  She would have things at her home for women. [HistoryMaker Dr.] Gloria Jackson [Bacon].  So we really made an effort to find black attendings and physicians in practice.  We, we weren't--we didn't have anything organized like an official mentoring program, but we, we really made an effort to do that.
Story_ID: 228465
Speaker 1: We were active in the student, SNMA, Student National Medical Association, the black, you know sort of the student version of the NMA [National Medical Association].  We were not active in my years in AMSA [American Medical Student Association], the white student group.  Our--U of I [University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois] was a big--we had--our, our school is a big school and, you know even though we were a white school, because it is so large.  After Howard [University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] and Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], we had a lot, you know we had a lot of minority students.  So we were able to elect Steve Keith [Stephen Keith], his father, Dr. Keith is a pediatrician, and Steve Keith was in my class.  He was on the national board of the, of SNMA.  So we, we made an effort to be active politically, nationally and on a regional level.  We were the biggest concentration of black students.  We have a lot of medical schools in Chicago [Illinois], so we were seen as a resource if you, you know the one or two people that were at the University of Chicago [Pritzker School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois], or at Chicago Medical [School, Rosalind Franklin School of Medicine and Science, North Chicago, Illinois].  So we were a resource.  And so if you went to school anywhere in Chicago, you might know, you would come to U of I and hang out.
Story_ID: 228466
Speaker 1: The one thing--the other thing that happened to me in medical school [University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --that's important is I started the [University of Illinois at Chicago] School of Public Health.  University of Illinois had at that point the only accredited school of public health in the State [of Illinois].  It was a relatively new school.  And it was possible to take courses there without paying more tuition.  So I actually--in fact some of my classmates finished their public health degree before they graduated, they graduated with dual.  You had to give up a lot of clinical experience if you did that, but you could take almost your whole last year and go to the School of Public Health.  I didn't want to do that, but I, I was interested in public health, so I finished about half of the coursework before I graduated.  And what I had always want--when I first came to medical school, I had no idea what doctors did, except what a--you know what my doctor did to me.  And--but I was political.  You know I was a Marxist.  And I remember in the second year someone came running up to me, well actually in the second year we had one lecture in occupational health by [Dr.] Bertram [W.] Carnow.  It was one two-hour lecture, which actually I was interested.  I didn't know they had a field called occupational health.  And it, you know it was about the health of coal miners and, and, and diseases that you can get in the workplace.  And I was really interested in that.  Didn't surprise me that I was interested, but obviously it impressed some of my classmates.  In my third year, about the time you're considering what specialty to go into, one of my classmates came rushing up to me and they said, "Oh [HistoryMaker Dr.] Linda [Rae Murray], they're starting a program just for you."  I said, "What do you mean?"  "They're going to start at [Cook] County Hospital [John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] occupational health.  I remember you were always interested in that," you know.  And that's exactly what happened.  I was toying, I was torn between doing internal medicine and doing pediatrics.  And at that time in the early '70s [1970s] there were a few places that were, that were doing Med-Peds [Combined Internal Medicine & Pediatrics], you were doing them together, but none in Chicago [Illinois], none in Chicago at that.  And I had already--I couldn't leave Chicago as a single mother.  I was going to stay here.  So I was trying to figure out should I do Peds, should I do medicine.  So then this opportunity came and it was the first year that it was going to be a residency at County in occupational medicine.  And as a matter of fact, you could do internal medicine and occupational medicine.  And that's what I did.  And that's what made the difference.  So, so I'm trained as an internist and I'm a specialist in occupational and environmental health.  So then the courses I took in public health now made sense.  Because in order to be a specialist in occupational health, you must complete a master's in public health.  So I was able to finish the last half of that degree while I was a resident at Cook County Hospital.  And it's part of my training as a specialist in environmental and occupational medicine.
Story_ID: 228467
Speaker 1: Where are we now in terms of year? What year is it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I graduated from medical school [University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois] on time in four years (laughter), in 1977.  And entered Cook County Hospital [John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] as an intern in occupational medicine and internal medicine.  I--the first year I won Intern of the Year at the end of the year.  I didn't--I, I considered myself being very disciplined in medical school and in my residency.  And I really, I don't--I didn't stop doing political work, but I really switched my political activity around where I was working around school or around hospitals, around health.  And it's in those years that I became knowledgeable about health policy issues and how the health, health system is structured.  And so the County has an organized house staff, which had union status.  They had gone on strike when I was a medical student.  I knew people who were in the house staff when I was a medical student.  I knew people who were leaders of the strike.  And I was comfortable in County, the County experience, unlike medical school, was a wonderful experience.  It was frustrating on one level because the hospital--those were the days when the hospital was really in danger of closing.  There was a time when they actually didn't meet payroll.  And the house staff union was militant and involved with all the other unions trying to keep that hospital open.  And so that's when I really began to have more of a public face in Chicago [Illinois] in my role as leadership of the Housestaff Association [of Cook County] at Cook County Hospital.
Story_ID: 228468
Speaker 1: So that's when I began to meet--that's when I met Harold Washington, for example, when I was a resident seeking support.  That's when I met the present mayor, [Mayor Richard M.] Daley.  They were both in Springfield [Illinois] in that time period we were seeking support to keep the hospital [Cook County Hospital; John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] open.
Speaker 2: They were both like state representatives.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.  I think, I think they--actually I think they were both state senators.
Speaker 2: State senators, right, yeah you're right.
Speaker 1: And, and of course by now my child [Marcus Murray] is in school and stuff.  And so, so now I'm really at the point where I really feel like I'm a Chicagoan and I'm paying attention in much more detail than when I was in college [University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois] to Chicago [Illinois] politics as opposed to national politics.  You know we [Housestaff Association of Cook County] had to negotiate contracts.  We were a real union, so we had to negotiate contracts.  In my specialty field, that's part of what you need to learn for occupational health, what kind of contract language unions need for this or that.  So I began to work with U--UAW [United Auto Workers Union; United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural Implement Workers of America].  I began to work in, in bringing my special knowledge about health and safety.  So I began to have relationships with the whole range of unions through CACOSH [Chicago Area Committee on Occupational Safety and Health], through one of our organizations around health and safety.  So I, so I had opportunity to, to meet and work with labor organizers, health and safety people that worked in labor unions.  And really those were years where our real effort was to keep the hospital open.  We almost lost it during--that time period.  But, but it was able to stay open.  That's when the Health and Hospitals Governing Commission [Health Hospitals Governing Commission of Cook County], which was a quasi-independent.  It was, it was appointed, but in an indirect way by the, by the governor [James R. Thompson] and by the mayor [Mayor Michael Bilandic] of the city.  But it had some distant--certainly much more distance than we have today from, from the politicians.  It wasn't directly run by the county board [Cook County Board of Commissioners].  That's when Jim--[Dr.] James Haughton came to town and was running the hospital.  But because of the financial problems of the hospital then, and, and because of the political machinations back and forth between the state and the county, it's in that period, my last years as a, as a resident there that we actually lost the Health and Hospitals Governing Commission, and it went back under the direct control of the Cook County Board of Commissioners.
Story_ID: 228469
Speaker 1: While the hospital [Cook County Hospital; John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] stayed open, you know that was a step backwards.
Speaker 2: Now what year is that?
Speaker 1: Let's see, '77 [1977], '80 [1980], 1980.  We lost control and, and the, the Health and Ho--for example, Charlie Hayes [Charles Hayes] was on the Health and Hospitals Governing Commission [Health Hospitals Governing Commission of Cook County] at one point.  But that was dissolved and it went under the--back under the direct control of the Cook County Board [of Commissioners].  And George Dunne and I were political adversaries.  I remember him telling me as--when we were arguing about the hospital--
Speaker 2: He was the county commissioner.
Speaker 1: He was the president of County Board of Commissioners at that point in time.  And at that point in time, Cook County, the old Cook County Hospital had no air conditioning.  And every year, I mean I can't tell you how many people exactly, but every year some people died at that hospital because of heat stroke, you know.  I may not be able to say it was this patient, but I remember once we were arguing about that.  And I was saying you know we, we should have some, some areas of the hospital, like the Intensive [Care Unit]--that are air conditioned so your sickest patients, would you know.  And he told me, "[HistoryMaker Dr.] Linda [Rae Murray], we may not give Cadillac care, but we give Volkswagen care."  I said, "Yeah, but Volkswagens don't have heat and we," you know, "we've got to have a hospital with some heat."  So, so we were adversaries and when I was finishing up my training, of course I wanted to stay in the hospital.  And, and he of course didn't want me to stay. And at that point in time, we were--they were rebuilding the Cermak jail services [Cermak Health Services of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois].  And Jack Rayba [ph.] was brought in.  He had been, he had been one of the leaders of the Housestaff [Association of Cook County] strike, and he was brought back to really build up those services.  And so at first I was going to go work in the jail.  Except George Dunne didn't want me to work in the jail.  So basically he effectively kept me out of becoming an attending at County.  And there was some struggle around me become an attending.  But you have to, you have to go through a set of committees and I never had the signatures to get going, to even make it to the committee.  We actually had the votes on the committee.  It's called the credentialing committee.  We actually had votes on the credential--if they had gotten to the credentialing committee, I would have been voted.  But George Dunne, you know he's a good politician.  He didn't want my name--he didn't want to be in the position of saying no.  He wanted my name never to come up.
Story_ID: 228470
Speaker 1: So I really was not able to get a position--to get a job--what I consider a good job in Chicago [Illinois].  I interviewed at, you know, Michael Reese HMO [Michael Reese Hospital and Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois].  I interviewed a number of places, but at that point in time if I walked into a room, I mean this is a period where we would be on the news almost every night.  We would have demonstrations, we're trying to keep the hospital [Cook County Hospital; John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] open.  We'd have five hundred people every lunch hour, you know, out trying to keep the hospital open.  So I did some work in some emergency rooms and things like that.  But in terms of a, a real solid setting to practice in, it just wasn't around.  And so I reluctantly after about a year, I began to look outside the city, even though I really--you know my family was here, I was a single mother.  I really didn't want to leave Chicago.  And two, and so I thought to myself, I said well, maybe if I take a job at--originally I had always said I would just practice internal medicine and occupational medicine, which is very political, I could just do that more as a voluntary.  'Cause I knew I was gone get in trouble doing occupational medicine.  So when I couldn't find a job, I said well let me think about looking at occupational medicine realm.  And I had two job offers.  One was at University of California in San Francisco, San Francisco General Hospital [and Trauma Center, San Francisco, California].  And the second one was in Winnipeg, Manitoba [Canada], where the Manitoba Federation of Labour, the sort of state federation of labor, was opening up a clinic just for occupational health.  They were going to run a labor-run clinic.  But it had as, you know, Canada is different than the United States.  So they had funding from the government for that.  So I had these two job offers and I, and I remember saying, well I wonder which one I should take.  And I remember my mother [Ruth Childress Murray] said, she said well, she said, "Now whatever you do," she said, "if you go to University of California and you do what you normally do, you're going to get in trouble."  I said, "Well, probably so."  "And they, they might have trouble with that.  If you go to Canada"--she said, "you're going to be with labor if you go to Canada, right?"  I said, "Yeah."  She said, "Well you ought to go where, where you're with labor."  That was--so that's really why I took that job.  I went to Canada.  It was a fascinating--my son [Marcus Murray] with, agreed to go with me.  It was a fascinating--
Speaker 2: Well by this time how old is he?
Speaker 1: He, he was--I think he was eleven when we went to Canada.  He, he--it was a, it was a wonderful experience for both of us.  It's sort of like you're in a foreign country, but they have McDonald's there.  I mean you know it's, you know it's not that foreign.  But it is not, it is not the United States.  And so we both learned a great deal.  It was a very good experience for both of us; I really enjoyed it.  But I, I really felt, I, I knew I didn't want to stay there and so I was there for two years, two and a half years, helping to set up this first clinic.
Story_ID: 228471
Speaker 1: And then I was ready to come home.  Actually, it's very interesting.  I, I agreed to take the job [at Manitoba Federation of Labour, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada] when Harold [Washington] was running for, for mayor.  And I left for the job in January, right after the holidays.  You know, before the primary and stuff.  And I remember after he was elected, I, I got a call from, from [HistoryMaker] Harold Rogers, and said, "[HistoryMaker Dr.] Linda [Rae Murray]," you know, "you can come home.  We'll get you a job in the city if you want."  And I, and I again, I was a young physician.  And I, I hope this was wise.  I think it was wise.  I don't regret it now.  I said, "Harold, I'm a doctor, I don't want to come home and work," you know, "work in [Chicago] City Hall [Chicago, Illinois].  I'm a young doctor, you know if I was older may--so now I, I, I need to establish myself as a physician.  And so I'm--and I made a commitment to these, to this labor union.  So I'm going to stay here for two years, that was my commitment," you know.  And so I, I stayed there.  And when it was--but I had told 'em I'm only coming for two years.  So when it was time for me to sort of come home, Meharry Medical School [sic. Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] had a problem.  They had a residency in occupational health, the only residence in a black school.  There aren't very many occupational health medicine residencies to begin with, and they had the only one.  And they didn't have anyone in charge of it that was board certified in occupational health.  And they were going to lose it, they were going to lose the program if they didn't have someone that was board certified in occupational health.  So they asked me to come down and you know I came down, interviewed, gave some lectures.  But I really wanted to come home to Chicago [Illinois].  And my son [Marcus Murray] had come home a little bit before me 'cause he wanted to graduate from the eighth grade with his classmates.  So I was talking to him, I was saying, well you know I don't think I'm going to take this job, you know 'cause it--already been out of Chicago and I want to come home.  So he looked at me, he said, "Meharry."  He said, "Isn't that one of those black medical schools?"  I said, "Yeah, you know Howard [University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], Me--yeah, that's one of the, you know, black medical schools."  And he said, "And, and don't you need more black doctors like in this occupational health?"  I said, "Absolutely right, you know, you're right."  And he said "Well, I, I just don't understand how you could say no to them because how many black people are there like you that are"--I said, "well not very many," you know.  He said, "Well how can you say no?  I mean this is against all your principles.  You, you have an obligation to go help them out.  And you know I know you want to come home to Chicago, but you have an obligation to help 'em out, at least till they get on their feet."  And I said, "Son, I'm so surprised you said that.  I'm so proud of you.  I, I didn't think you--I just didn't think it was realistic to go down there.  I didn't think you would agree to it."  He said, "I'm not agreeing to go, I'm not going--you go."  And, and that's what happened.  I went and he, he stayed here with my family, with my parents [Ruth Childress Murray and Raymond Murray].  He said, no I'm not going.  This is your principles.  And I went and my arrangement with Meharry was every other Wednesday, they flew me home.  And I was home Thursday, four day weekend, and I would fly back.  And when I came home, I would go to [Cook] County [Hospital; John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois].  I was not, I was illegal; I couldn't touch a patient, okay, 'cause I was black log--walled.  The, the residents used to call me the underground attending.  But I could, I could go--I just couldn't touch a patient.  I could go to clinic.  I could discuss a case with them, I could do lectures, anything that didn't involve touching a patient.  So when I came home, usually I spent at least a day, a day and a half at County in occupational medicine, giving a lecture, you know, doing other work, preparing lectures for Meharry.  And then when I came back finally to Chicago, I was, I was hired in the [Chicago] Department of Health [Chicago Department of Public Health] under Washington.
Story_ID: 228472
Speaker 1: And I came in [Chicago Department of Health; Chicago Department of Public Health, Chicago, Illinois] originally to try to do something around occupational and environmental health.  But I was only here a month or two and I was promoted to be responsible for a much broader range of issues: the AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] program, food inspection, nursing home inspection, sort of the core public health, infectious disease, the core public health sections.  And I only worked for the city for, for a little over a year.  And--
Speaker 2: So this is like '86 [1986] when you came back, '85 [1985]?
Speaker 1: This was, this was right after his [Mayor Harold Washington] second election--yeah, eighty, '83 [1983], '85 [1985].  I can look it up on the CV if you want, but so I was, I was actually--
Speaker 2: Right after the second election, so that's '87 [1987].  That's just before he died, actually I guess.
Speaker 1: Yes, that's why I wasn't there.
Speaker 2: About six months before he died, yeah.
Speaker 1: In fact the day he died, I was--myself and Dr. [David C.] Marder, a colleague, occupational physician that worked with me at the, at the city, we were both getting off the elevator for the--at the [Richard J.] Daley Center [Chicago, Illinois] right across from [Chicago] City Hall [Chicago, Illinois].  And we were getting off the elevator and [Dr.] Lonnie [C.] Edwards was then the commissioner of health.  And he said, "Get back on the elevator, they called us to the fifth floor."  And so we went across and the first paramedic team was already there when we got there.  But we came up with the second paramedic team in his office.  So he was, it was pretty clear he was already gone.  But we participated in the res--started IVs and that kind of stuff.  And Dr. Marder rode in the ambulance and, and Dr. Edwards and I rode in a fire, you know, police car to the hospital.  So after his death with [HistoryMaker] Eugene Sawyer, you know the politics changed and I think Dr. Edwards, I don't know if he felt pressure or whatever.  You know I had a history with Washington as I said that went back when he was a senator.  And of course he was my congressman and I had been chairman of his health task force when he was in [U.S.] Congress.  But after Washington died, less than a year after he died, Lonnie Edwards fired me from the City of Chicago Department of Health.  And there were big press conferences and a number of my colleagues resigned with me.
Story_ID: 228473
Speaker 1: And then I went back to straight internal medicine.  I was a--I took a job at--I was hired by Dr. [Terrence] Conway, he's hired me a couple times to come work at [Rush] Anchor HMO [Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center; Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois].  So I got, I was, I was back into that.  And I worked there for a number of years and again, still involved in health issues around the city and nationally.
Speaker 2: Now we're in the '90s [1990s] now.
Speaker 1: We're, we're into the--yeah, yeah.  And then I had a wonderful five years with Near North Health Services [Corporation, Chicago, Illinois], one of the federally funded health centers in Chicago [Illinois], by Cabrini-Green [Homes, Chicago, Illinois] (unclear) by Cabrini Green.  Really an excellent organization.  I really enjoyed that.  And I was doing some coursework and doing some more studying.  And then was possible then--I, I was able to get back, by the way, when [Mayor Harold] Washington was mayor, as a voluntary.  That means an unpaid attending at Cook County Hospital [John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois].  So when he--in fact I went to meet with him to tell him.  I said you know I'm going to go apply to be on the staff as an unpaid attending, and you might have to talk to George [W.] Dunne.  But you know so--and so they didn't block it and so that happened.  But then Dr. Conway came back to Cook County Hospital.  Dr. Conway was president of the Housestaff [Association of Cook County] the year before I was president.  We've known each other for years.  And he was under Ruth [M.] Rothstein, he was able to hire me back into the County system.  So I've been back in the County system about six or seven years now.
Story_ID: 228474
Speaker 1: Now tell us about some of the other activities you're involved in.  I know there's a--from what I can see, you're involved in a number of different things.
Speaker 2: Well since residency, I've really almost always concentrated my political work around health issues.  So one organization that has spanned several decades has been the American Public Health Association [APHA].  This is a, this isn't the largest public health association in the United States, but it's an organization that brings together different businesses.  Most health organizations are either, you know, national organization of doctors or nurses or, or you know, podiatrists or dentists.  This is an organization where everybody comes together, so you have a multidiscipline area, base to the American Public Health Association.  And I'd been on their national board, I'm very active in my section.  Certainly on most health issues the Public Health Association is going to be to the left, certainly of the AMA [American Medical Association], for example.  So they tend to--I, I would--it's not a progressive organization by any chance, it's a mainstream, professional organization.  But there's certainly enough progressives that are part of it.  And you know there's a socialist caucus, there's a black caucus, Indian [Native American] caucus.  So it's a lively organization.  And that, that's my professional organizational home.  That's really where I've spent most of my time and, and had national leadership roles out of.  So that's certainly one of them.  Locally, Health & Medicine Policy Research Group [Chicago, Illinois] is, is probably the other area where I spend a huge portion of my time.  Most people remember that as Quentin [D.] Young's group, but right now I'm the president of, of that organization.  And you know that's a local policy group where the board is active and there's specific projects we work on.  It might be jail medicine one year, it might be women's health.  We're always concerned about the public sector in Cook County Hospital [John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois], so we're always worried about that.  So that allows me to, you know, work with colleagues that are concerned about health policy issues and clearly, you know fighting to change how the United States--you know used to be I could say us in South Africa didn't have a national health program.  But now it's just us 'cause South Africa has one, you know.  So, so I really focus my political work around health issues, trying to fight for a single payer system, some kind of national health system.  Fighting for minorities in health.
Story_ID: 228475
Speaker 1: Did your work inform the Clinton health plan [Health Security Act] at all?
Speaker 2: I was actually on the board of APHA [American Public Health Association] when the Clinton health plan was being discussed and debated.  I remember we met once with [First Lady] Hillary [Rodham] Clinton came and meet with our board.  APHA has a position for single payer, sort of like Canadian style approach.  So the Clinton health plan didn't particularly like us because that was our position.  I never thought the Clinton health plan would have worked even if it had passed.  But I do remember Hillary Clinton coming in to meet with us and she obviously had done her homework and knew our, our position.  And she said, you know, "Personally I agree with you that we should have a single payer system, but I don't think it's politically possible."  And I think that's one of the problems the United States faces today.  Even if most Americans think well this is the right thing to do, we are, we are--we limit ourselves by what we think is politically feasible to do.  And as a black woman, I just find that--I mean it was never politically feasible to end slavery or it was never politically feasible to end Jim Crowism, you know, so, so my attitude is well if I had that attitude, I just--I would just give up.  I'm thinking back to my great-grandmother, you know.  You just got to keep standing up.  If they knock you down, you got to stand up again.  So I'm, I'm not the--I, I don't, I don't think we're going to solve the health problems in this country until we structurally change how, how it's financed.  Until we move to at least a single payer system.
Story_ID: 228476
Speaker 1: Do you think it's inevitable that it [United States healthcare system] change?
Speaker 2: Yes, without question.  We already have made changes--there, there are changes in healthcare, healthcare is so different than when I started medical school [University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois].  And the changes have been made from the right wing point of view.  And most people--remember HMOs [Health Maintenance Organization] used to be a socialist plot.  That's what I remind people; it used to be a socialist plot.  That you would have a group of people and they would pay a relatively small amount of money every month and all their healthcare needs would be taken care of.  Now what happened unfortunately, is that corporate medicine took hold of that model and they've been more interested in maximizing their profits and surplus and keeping costs down, and less interested in the health status of the population.  And obviously not everybody is covered by it.  So, so they sort of took a plan and made it sort of into a capitalist structure so they're just--so they can make money.  And that's why people hate HMOs.  You can't get an appointment.  You know you--you know if God forbid something happened to you, you got to fight.  Can you get this kind of treatment or that kind of treatment.  Sort of the Denzel Washington kind of you know movie.  It shouldn't be like that.  All--our health is interconnected, and what you need to be healthy is interconnected.  It, it's far more important, I may be exaggerating.  It's at least as important on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois] that we have safe places for people to walk and get some daily exercise as it is that we have good hospitals.  I mean you need both, but you know, but health is so much broader than just medicine or the medical system.  It really has to do with how our neighborhoods are designed, how many street lights you have on them.  Do you have gangs in the neighborhood?  Do you have unemployment?  How much do you have?  How do the police treat you?  These are the real determinants of health.  They have to do with what our parent--I mean they may not have called it health, but it, it has to do with what our--what, what black people have been about all from the beginning.  You know, can you walk down the street with dignity and respect and be treated like a human being?  And in those settings where you can't do that, you're not going to have a healthy population.
Story_ID: 228477
Speaker 1: We didn't discuss the doctor from Howard [University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.]--I thought we wanted to--
Speaker 2: [Dr.] Paul [B.] Cornely.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Dr. Cornely is really one of the leading African American physicians of this century.  He was a physician, a medical doctor.  But he also was the first black person in this country to get a doctorate in public health.  He graduated from the University of Michigan [Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan] with a doctorate in public health.  And he was at Howard University, Howard medical school, for decades and retired from there.  He just recently died in his nineties.  When I was in medical school [University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois], you know I, I never forgot what Barbara Allen's mother told me and so my thesis in, in--for my public health degree was how it is we got so few black doctors.  And I, I did a lot of research about the history of black physicians in this country.  And Dr. Cornely wrote many seminal articles about this (unclear).  He, he's one of those stars like that.  And he, he wrote not only in the Journal of the NMA [Journal of the National Medical Association], but also in some of the other journals.  He did surveys in 1932 what does--how many black doctors we had, where they were.  Los Angeles [California] for example, after, after [Washington] D.C., Los Angeles had the highest number of black doctors in 1932.  Yeah, interesting.  So, so I read many, many of his articles and I knew his name.  I had never met him.  I knew that he was on the faculty at Howard.  And then as I became active in American Public Health Association [APHA], I got to meet him because Dr. Cornely was also the first black person who was president of the American Public Health Association.  And he really was a--it--he is part of the progressive tradition for African American physicians, but he's also a part of the progressive tradition for American healthcare.  And, and really fought for desegregation of hospitals, fought for more minorities.  Really understood public health.  He's really a, a giant in the field of public health.
Story_ID: 228478
Speaker 1: He [Dr. Paul B. Cornely] was in [Washington] D.C. as--on the faculty of Howard [University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] and at one point in the '60s [1960s], the--D.C. sent two delegations to the AMA [American Medical Association] convention.  An integrated delegation and an all-white delegation that represented the guys in private practice.  Because at that point in time the AMA had what they call a state's rule.  So you know in the southern states, AMA was all-white, that's just the way it was.  And certainly in New York City [New York, New York] or something they, they were integrated.  So he was part of that push to, to--it was in the, in the late '60s [1960s] they were still having picket lines around the, around the AMA meetings to try to desegregate the AMA.  That's why I've never, never paid dues.  I've never been a member of the AMA.  So he, he's really a leader.  He's a, he's a--for me, before I met him, he was a, he was a, a leader and hero of mine in a professional sense.  So I consider myself a public health professional.  Here's a leader in public health.  He was a black physician that was an activist.  He, he was a scholar.  He really--he--like I said, I had never met him.  I never even met anybody that met him.  And so he was just like a, a theoretical hero in my mind.  But as I became more active in APHA [American Public Health Association], whenever APHA would meet in D.C.--and by then he was in his eighties or so.  He would come to the meeting.  And the Physician's Forum, which is an organization of progressive physicians that he belonged to that was formed in the late '30s [1930s].  Communist physicians and other progressive physicians that had, that's carried on 'til today.  It's--mostly all we do now is have a dinner at APHA.  But we have a, an award that we give people in his honor.  It's the Paul Cornely Award.  And so when we established that award, I got to meet him.  We established the award, and then whenever we would have a din--whenever we would meet in Washington, D.C., if he was physically, if he was well, he would come to that meeting.  So the last time I saw Dr. Cornely was actually a few years ago now when we gave [HistoryMaker] Dr. David Satcher, who was then [U.S.] surgeon general, when we gave him the Paul Cornely Award.  And Dr. Satcher was very thrilled to get this award named after Dr. Cornely.  And Dr. Cornely came to the dinner and was able actually to present the award to, to David Satcher himself.  And that's the last time I had a chance to see him alive.  He was in his nineties at that point, ninety-three, ninety-four years old.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So he, he died just a year or two ago.  So I can really say he, he's actually a, like a real live hero of mine.  And I was able to meet him at these dinners and spend time with him and get some sense of what it was like for someone of his generation.  So he's a, he's a real giant in the field of healthcare.
Story_ID: 228479
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for, for the black community today?
Speaker 2: I think we're in real trouble.  I--have tried since I was seventeen to have sort of a long range view of the struggle as we've talked about.  So I never thought this was something that was just going to be just a few demonstrations or a few bills and it would be over with.  I, I don't think black people are going to be secure unless the nation is secure.  I think our, our future is bound up with, with Haitian immigrants and you know Guatemalan immigrants and Mexican immigrants and I think it means a profound change in the United States.  I feel that more strongly today than I did when I was seventeen.  I'm convinced that the principles of socialism in the best sense is what we need, a country that's democratic, that's tolerant, where people have real opportunity.  Where people are not individuals by themselves, but we're together.  Where the village comes together, not only to raise children, but to take care of our old and to support each other.  That, that's what I believe in.  It's like--it seems so basic and simple to me.  It seems--it's, it's a principle of every religion, even though I've said--every religion that I've ever known about or studied, this is a, this is part of the basic principle.  And I think America's in trouble.  I, I--here we find ourselves--I mean to me it's almost--I never did drugs.  You know I never smoked weed, I never did drugs.  I, I was a child of the '60s [1960s], but I--people went to jail for that, so I was like very disciplined--and, and I feel like I'm on an LSD trip, you know.  You turn on the news and you, and you--I think I'm back in high school [Collinwood High School, Cleveland, Ohio] where you got people dying and some war, the government's lying about it.  It's, it's, it's very upsetting.  Yesterday I was down at the demonstration downtown here in Chicago [Illinois] in sympathy with New York [New York], and there were less than one thousand people there at that demonstration.  Very few blacks.  So I think we are a country that is in trouble.  I, I personally, for me personally as a person, I'm a physician, I'm working, I have a job that I love.  I, I'm making more money than I ever imagined I would make, even as a doctor.  And what I, what I think about every day is how much time can I spend on the streets, you know.  I'm at the point now where many of my colleagues have taken early retirement, I'm not able to do that.  But, but I was telling somebody the other day, I, I'm ready.  This is--I'm not going to see these changes, but I hope, I hope I live to be a hundred.  And, and if I'm in a wheelchair, I'm going to have a place for a couple of picket signs.
Story_ID: 228480
Speaker 1: I mean I feel like, I feel we've lost ground with, with [President Ronald Wilson] Reagan, with Bush number one [President George Herbert Walker Bush] and Bush number two [President George Walker Bush].  I think we've lost ground.  I think the United States has not come to grips with this color issue.  I mean it's a new century, but we haven't come to grips with it.  And so we don't--it's, it's like we've papered over it.  We're a threat to the world now.  And there's no doubt in my mind that, that the Civil Rights Movement of the '60s [1960s], it won't be the same, but we have to reach that same character, that same pitch, the same level of activity.  And it has to go much deeper in the country than, than the movement of the '60s [1960s] was.  If we're going to--if black people are going to survive.  Because if we don't change the country, we're going to, we're not going to survive.  Things are going to get worse and worse.  The projects, I mean I grew up in the projects [in Cleveland, Ohio].  The projects of today are nothing like the projects when I grew up, they're nothing like it.  I hate to even tell people I grew up in the projects 'cause they, they don't--they misunderstand.  So the, the disparity of income in the black community is much greater than it was.  People with a job often don't even live in the same neighborhood with people that don't have jobs.  So even our ability and our cohesiveness as a community is stretched and strained.  For Dr. [Paul B.] Cornely or [Dr. William] Montague Cobb or a lot of these guys, there were two medical schools, there was Howard [University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.] and Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].  You knew every black doctor.  Today most black doctors are trained in, in predominantly white schools.  They often don't know each other.  It's very difficult to maintain these organizations and to go forward with a sense of purpose.  I mean my god, now we have Republicans like [Alan] Keyes running for [U.S.] Senate.  I mean you know just, I mean unimaginable in my day.  So you know we have black conservatives.  I know young people that, that--well they're young compared to me, that my son's [Marcus Murray] age, he's in his early thirties, that grew up under Republicans and they actually try to pretend like they're conservative.  I suppose they really are, I don't want to, I don't want to denigrate them.  So I think the challenges that exist for us as a people are, are different.  I think we've made a lot of progress.  I, I am example of that progress and so many other people.  And I don't want to in any way belittle that.  But we haven't consolidated those gains and we've slipped backwards.  And we have not addressed the structural problems of the United States.  And we lag behind the rest of the industrialized world.  You know we have less vacation, poorer healthcare, poorer education.  It, it saddens me and even though I imagine it was going to be long struggle, I didn't imagine we were going to be in this place.  I just turned fifty-six last week.  I didn't imagine at the age fifty-six that I would be sitting there contemplating with friends how to fight the same battles I fought at eighteen or twenty or twenty-four.  And that's, that's where we are.  So to me it's been interesting having this conversation with you and I don't usually--my grandchildren are not old enough yet to ask these kind of questions, but I really feel like all of these experiences and all of the skills that I learned from the movement, I need them today.  And I'm, I'm trying very hard to pass those skills on.  Even this is hard, it's even hard to find organizations that you can do that with in a good way that you, that you have people reaching back that are young.  There are some, you know that are around.  And they're ad hoc groups like around the [Iraq] War or around this demonstration.  When I was there yesterday, I saw a number of people that are under thirty that know me, that I, you know and I was glad that they're there trying to organize those move--those demonstrations.  But we're in trouble.  We're in trouble as a country and we're in trouble as a people.  And on balance I can't say we're ahead.  I, I can say in a few areas we've made progress, you know elected officials, professionals trained, more in the middle class.  But there are many areas where we have not made progress, or where we've slipped backwards.
Story_ID: 228481
Speaker 1: When you look back at, at all the things you've done in your life, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Really not.  I'm really--you know I suppose everybody would like to do some things differently.  I really think not.  I think even for example, I really did not want to leave--I really didn't want to be in exile in Canada.  I really didn't want to leave the City of Chicago [Illinois].  But I, I think if I had stayed at Cook County [Hospital; John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois], if I had been able to get a position at Cook County Hospital when I finished my training, I don't think I would be the person I am today.  I think I would be lacking in certain skills and experiences.  So even though it was a painful time and, and it hurt me financially and in a bunch of other ways, looking back I can say--I'm fortunate to be able to say I don't regret it.  That, that I was strengthened.  I, you know it's not often that you get live outside in a different country and see firsthand how the Canadian health system works.  That, that makes me more secure in what I'm fighting for here and the fact that I was able to spend time doing that.
Speaker 1: You saw a practical model of what you were talking about.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  So I don't, so I don't regret how the path sort of my life has taken.  It hasn't particularly always been easy or pleasant.  I, I don't regret it and I think I've been basically very lucky.  I've had good family support, good support of my friends.  Because I am a physician, I have some buffering in terms of finances.  Even the times when I've gotten fired, I'm still a physician.  You know it's one thing to get fired and you're, you know, you work in the kitchen.  But it's another thing to get fired as a physician.  You know so yeah I got fired from the city, but that's okay.  I was able to find another job.  So, so I don't, I don't regret that.  I, I, you know, I hope I have another fifty-six years to, to battle.  I mean you know, you don't know how much time you're going to have.  But I don't consider, I don't consider my life over by any means.  And I finished raising my, my child [Marcus Murray] and you know I've sort of dealt with my family obligations.  And I, I really am gearing up for more decades of struggle.  And I'm really looking forward to retirement.  See I retire in ten years, and then I'll be for real for the first time in my life, a full-time revolutionary.  So that's what I'm looking forward to.
Story_ID: 228482
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well you know the politically correct thing to say is your family and stuff.  But if we ignore personal satisfaction that we get from our families, I hope my legacy will be the students and the people younger than myself that I've in some way touched.  I still--unfortunately I'm old enough that I still run into people in the hospital [John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois].  I just ran into somebody the other day on the elevator that's a surgeon at Cook County that said, "Oh, [HistoryMaker] Dr. [Linda Rae] Murray I remember you came and gave a lecture, and you know"--so that's what I hope to be remembered as.  That, that young people that have worked with me or heard me give a lecture or heard me give a speech, that that meant something to them and that helped them make a decision, or helped them stay active or become active.  And at fifty-six, this is my, this is my major goal on my job.  I want to work with people younger than me to teach them how to cause trouble.  Not just for a year, but for decades.  Because that's what we need, we need troublemakers in order to really change the system.  I hope that's my legacy.
Story_ID: 228483
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Really in that spirit.  I'm not so much--you know any one battle that you might fight, integrating Collinwood High School [Cleveland, Ohio].  You know what does that mean today?  You know I'm not sure what it means today.  I, I think that the thing that I want to be remembered for is that what my--that I did what my great-grandmother said.  That I always stood back up.  If you get knocked down, you keep standing up.  And I hope that I'm pulling somebody up with me now, you know that I'm not just trying to stand up by myself.  That's, that's really what I'm interested in because the struggles of 1960 are different than the struggles of 2004.  And the struggles of 2030 are gone be different still.  But what you need to struggle, and the principles that you're fighting for and how you go about that struggle and what your goals are, I don't think they change.  I think you're talking about justice and peace and, and, and fair play and equity.  I think that stays the same.  So I hope my, I hope what I want to be remembered for is that I did, I did that.  I continue to do that throughout my life and that I help other people figure out how to do it.
Story_ID: 228484
Speaker 1: Grade school [Boulevard Elementary School, Cleveland Heights, Ohio], probably about fifth or sixth grade.  Back in the day when I still had hot comb (laughter).
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay next.
Speaker 1: And here I'm much younger.  That's me on the left.  And in the middle is my baby sister, she's three years younger than me, Ellen [Murray (ph.)].  And there on the right is my--our brother Randall Murray [ph.].  He's a, a jazz musician.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay next.
Speaker 1: This is a shot of me looks like at about five.  And to the left is my maternal grandmother Wynetta Childress [ph.], and to the right is my great-grandmother who I spoke about that would always bring us in.  Logan was her last name, Mama.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Next.
Speaker 1: This is high school [Collinwood High School, Cleveland, Ohio] graduation.  I was happy to get out of high school.
Speaker 2: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Hold on one second. All right, next.
Speaker 1: Actually this is one of my--more favorite pictures.  That's Mama, my, my maternal great-grandmother, and she's holding my brother, my younger brother.  And the young man holding me is my first cousin, the only cousin I have really on my mother's [Ruth Childress Murray] side.  So Chris, Christopher Arnette [ph.], and there I am sitting perched up by him.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Great, next.
Speaker 2: This is a shot of me and my son [Marcus Murray].  One of his hair, hairstyle days.  This actually is when I was working at [Rush] Anchor [HMO] at Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's [Medical Center; Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois].  And he came over.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Approximately what year?
Speaker 2: Well let's see.  I don't know, '87 [1987], something like that.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This dark picture here is myself, and in the middle there is Dr. [Paul B.] Cornely, Paul Cornely that I spoke about, a real leader in public health.  And this was a meeting of the American Public Health Association [APHA] in D.C.  And on this occasion he was able to present to [HistoryMaker] Dr. David Satcher there on the right, the Paul Cornely Award for Social Activism [Paul Cornely Award].
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This wasn't too long ago.  This was a year or so ago, right over here in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois].  One of my political mothers there, Charlene Mitchell, a real leader for struggle in the United States, a leader of the Communist Party, used to be a leader of the Communist Party.  And obviously there on the right is [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis, we worked together for years around many issues.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Now this is some work-related activity.  But they're many of my good friends on here, so that's why I guess I brought it.  Obviously there's [HistoryMaker] Congressman [Danny K.] Davis there, sort of in the middle, and Carmen Velasquez who works around Alivio Health Center [Alivio Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois].  The third from the right is [Dr.] Javette [C.] Orgain.  She's been a past president of National Medical Association [NMA].  We went, right, we went to medical school [University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois] together.  And there I am, and then there's [Dr.] John [R.] Lumpkin who I knew way back in the day before he went to medical school.  At this point he was commissioner of health for the State of Illinois.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  What year was this taken?
Speaker 2: This is probably three or four years ago.  Well it has to--yeah, it was be--when John was still commissioner of health, three or four years ago, yeah, 2000.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  And was there a particular event?
Speaker 2: We were there at the [Cook] County Board [of Commissioners] testifying about something about health care.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: And this was a wonderful day.  This is my son's wedding.  So the gentleman to the right of me is the father of my child, Gary Tyler [ph.], nice young man.  Well he's not young anymore.  Myself and obviously my son and my new daughter, who I love dearly, Angela [ph.].  So they got married at South Shore Country Club [South Shore Cultural Center, Chicago, Illinois], so this is one of these formal wedding pictures one has to do.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay, next.  Oh, year?
Speaker 2: I should have--they had their sixth anniversary now.  So '98 [1998] I guess.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: I think this is just the close-up of Dr. Cornely and myself.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Next.  Next photo please.
Speaker 2: This is the youngest picture that I've ever seen of myself.  So this is me at a few months old.
Speaker 1: OFF CAMERA SPEAKER:  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: And this is my formal high school graduation picture.
Speaker 1: There's always a formal one, and one (unclear)--
Speaker 2: And one in the living room.  This was a formal one.  And actually I, I had lost that necklace.  That necklace was actually made out of jewelry from my grandfather and grandmother's jewelry.  So, I think that was actually a graduation present from, from her.
