Story_ID: 475423
Speaker 1: Good morning Mr. Matthews [HistoryMaker John Matthews].
Speaker 2: Good morning sir.
Speaker 1: So we're gonna start.  I, I will introduce myself, and then I'll have you introduce yourself.  I'm Shawn Wilson with The HistoryMakers.  I'm gonna do the interview today.  This is Neculai Burghelea.  He's going to do the videotaping today.  And so if you will just state your full name, including your middle name.
Speaker 2: John A. Matthews.
Speaker 1: What does the A stand for?
Speaker 2: Alderman.
Speaker 1: Alderman?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: A-L-D-E-R-M-A-N.
Speaker 1: Okay and you're a senior, so you have a son named after you.
Speaker 2: I have a son [John Matthews, Jr.], yeah.
Speaker 1: Your date of birth?
Speaker 2: March the 7th, 1910.
Speaker 1: Place of birth?
Speaker 2: Canal Zone, Panama [Panama Canal Zone].
Speaker 1: So you were born in Panama Canal.
Speaker 2: Pana- that's what I say.
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date?
Speaker 1: Yes sir.
Speaker 2: Today is the 11th.
Speaker 1: Seventeenth.
Speaker 2: I mean the 17th.
Speaker 1: Yes sir, December 17th.
Speaker 2: Two, double-o, six [2006].
Speaker 1: Two thousand six.  The location of this interview?
Speaker 2: 161st Street and Amsterdam Avenue.
Speaker 1: And that's in New York City [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: In New York City.  You want the apart--the building number?
Speaker 1: That's good, that's good.
Speaker 2: 2036 Amsterdam Avenue, New York 10032.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: Occupation, I've got lot of it, man.  I worked salesman of a union, I mean president of a union, or salesman for liquor companies, or missionary man if you wanna call those, whichever one you want.  And those are the things that I did.
Story_ID: 475424
Speaker 1: Well we're gonna start with talking about your parents [Theresa Matthews and Christopher Matthews (ph.)], and I know that they're from Jamaica.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: So what was your mother's name?  Oh, before we start there, there are five questions that I usually ask people.  And I'm gonna ask you the same questions.
Speaker 2: Same thing.
Speaker 1: Short answers.  Your favorite color.
Speaker 2: My favorite color?
Speaker 1: Yes sir.
Speaker 2: Oh boy, I would say aquamarine.
Speaker 1: Aquamarine?
Speaker 2: That's my birthstone.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food?
Speaker 1: Yes sir.
Speaker 2: I used to love lobster, I used to love clams.  I used to love oysters.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Seafood.
Speaker 2: All those things I used to, but I can't eat 'em no more.
Speaker 1: So what about your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of year?  What I do?
Speaker 1: No, what is your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: When I was able to get around, I used to do a lot of hunting and fishing.
Speaker 1: What time of year do you do the hunting and fishing?
Speaker 2: In the hunting, I usually hunt say from November into December.  Fishing, all summer, from here to Cape Code [Massachusetts], Bermuda, Jamaica, all over.
Speaker 1: So what, what of those places have you been as your favorite vacation spot (background noise)?
Speaker 2: Well I love Jamaica very much.  And Bermuda comes second.  And naturally my home, Panama, you know.
Speaker 1: Dr. Ma- do you have a favorite phrase or saying Mr. Matthews [HistoryMaker John Matthews]?
Speaker 2: What was that favorite phrase I have?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What?
Speaker 2: Phrase or saying, something that he always says.
Speaker 1: I, I don't know.
Story_ID: 475425
Speaker 1: Well let's talk about your parents, your mother.  What was her name?
Speaker 2: Theresa.
Speaker 1: Clarissa.
Speaker 2: Theresa [Theresa Matthews],
Speaker 1: Claressa.
Speaker 2: T-H-E-R-E-S-A.
Speaker 1: Theresa, okay.  And where was your mother born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Jamaica (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Jamaica.  Do you know your mother's date of birth?
Speaker 2: Boy, got that one honey?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No, but she died the same--I think she died, wait a minute, she died '69 [1969] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know. I don't know.
Speaker 1: That's okay, we'll keep going.
Speaker 2: I know, I know her birth date was midnight before April the 1st.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because she usually talks about that she almost born on All Fool's Day, you know.  But I don't remember the year.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  It was in the 1800s.
Speaker 2: Do you--did she ever talk about her childhood?
Speaker 1: When she went to school with my father, they all was schoolmates together.  And they came up and they got married.  And my wife--my mother was always a housewife.  We had servants, we had servants, we had a cook and we had a house cleaner.  And that's it.
Speaker 2: So your--they kind of had a little money then.
Speaker 1: My parents?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, my parents was--they do not beg for nothing.  That's all I know.
Speaker 2: And what about your father?  Your father's name.
Speaker 1: Christopher Sylvester Matthews [Christopher Matthews (ph.)].
Speaker 2: And he is also in Jamaica, from Jamaica.
Speaker 1: That's correct.
Speaker 2: And what did he do for a living?
Speaker 1: Well he did what you call--he probably was a teacher and also he was a cabinet maker.  Could make all furniture and all that kind of stuff, yeah.
Speaker 2: So where did they make most of their money from?  From--
Speaker 1: Well I tell you, my father was a real traveler.  We was in Panama, he went to Cuba, then back to Jamaica, you know back and forth, things like that.
Speaker 2: Doing what, though?  Why would he travel back and forth?
Speaker 1: Well he used to do a lot of cabinet work like in Cuba and all that.  Did all that stuff for them.
Speaker 2: So he was a master carpenter.
Speaker 1: Yeah, my father, he used to make furniture and do all kind of--we had a big--he had what you call a big place where they have machines and all that kind of stuff.  Used to cut the wood and do whatever it was.
Speaker 2: Did he ever talk to you about his childhood?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No.  Did your mother ever talk about her childhood?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Did they talk about themselves as before you were born, what it was like when they first got married?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, they--it was very in love and all that kind of stuff you know.
Story_ID: 475426
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: How did they [Matthews' parents, Theresa Matthews and Christopher Matthews (ph.)] get to the Panama Canal [Panama Canal Zone]?  Do he go there for work?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: When the canal was being built?
Speaker 1: While the canal was building, right.  That was in 1909, right.
Speaker 2: So in 1909 they went to--
Speaker 1: To Panama.
Speaker 2: To Panama.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: To work on the canal.
Speaker 1: And I was born in 1910.
Speaker 2: So you were automatically an American citizen.
Speaker 1: Of course, automatically 'cause Panama was part of the--like part of the United States.  And you didn't need a birth certificate or anything, you're just like--just a citizen of the United States.
Story_ID: 475427
Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories of your childhood in Panama?  What do you remember about growing up there?
Speaker 2: I don't remember too much about Panama, but I remember a lot about Jamaica.
Speaker 1: What do you remember about Jamaica?
Speaker 2: Well I went to school there.
Speaker 1: So you left Panama and went to Jamaica.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and you know--yeah I think we left Panama and went to Jamaica and back to Cuba.  Then we leave Cuba and back to Jamaica.
Speaker 1: So we're gonna talk about all those places you lived, but let's talk about Jamaica first.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What do you remember about Jamaica?
Speaker 2: Well I remember it's a beautiful island.  And we was living in Kingston [Jamaica], the capital.  And the school I went to was Jones Town--the grade school they call it, A grade. It's like, what do you call it, a high school, like in high school.  But they call it A Grade, B Grade, C Grade, down the line like that, see.
Speaker 1: How many grades did they have?  How many grades did you have to go through (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They have--I don't know.  I know they got A and B grades.
Speaker 1: A and B, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you were in Jamaica, you were--what, what did you--and you were--you went to school there.  Do you remember anything about your life outside of school?  Like did you, did you learn to fish there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I used to play, I used to play lot of soccer.  I played a lot of soccer and a lot of cricket.  And that's--and then we used to do a lot of race, running races and all like that.
Speaker 1: So at that time, did your parents [Theresa Matthews and Christopher Matthews (ph.)] have all seven children?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: They had all seven children?
Speaker 2: All, yeah.
Speaker 1: So I have all your siblings.  Can you list their names?  Do you know all the names?
Speaker 2: Well, Myrtle [Myrtle Matthews (ph.)], Myrtle, Sylvester's [Sylvester Matthews (ph.)] dead, Gerald [Gerald Matthews (ph.)] is dead, then came myself, then I had Clifford [Clifford Matthews (ph.)], then Norman [Norman Matthews (ph.)], and who else?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Evan [Evan Matthews (ph.)].
Speaker 2: Evan.  Did I say Myrtle before?
Speaker 1: Yes sir.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Evan, I need Danny [Daniel Matthews (ph.)].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And Lolita [Lolita Matthews (ph.)].
Speaker 2: And then Lolita.
Speaker 1: So it's a pretty big family.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Was seven in the family.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Nine.
Speaker 2: Besides two that died.
Speaker 1: So do you remember what the daily life was like?  Did you eat dinner around the dinner table together every night?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we all ate together.  When food is served, as I said before, we had maids to cook and all that kind of stuff.  Table was set.  And my father used to play the organ, and my sister used to play the organ.  She played organ in church, the pipe organ and all like that.  So those are the things that I remember.
Story_ID: 475428
Speaker 1: So do you remember your grandparents at all?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember my grandfather was a Scotsman, and my grandmother, that was my father's [Christopher Matthews (ph.)] mother, but when she was born or whatever, I don't know.  But, but I, I know her.  We used to call her Granny Miller [ph.].  That's the way we used to call her.  And she was born in Clarendon [Clarendon Parish, Jamaica].  And they had business in Clarendon.  And all my relatives, they had stores and all that kind of stuff.  So that's it.
Speaker 1: So did you, did your grandparents come to visit you or did you go to visit them?
Speaker 2: I went to visit them at all time.  My grandfather, my mother's [Theresa Matthews] father, he was living in a place by the name of Cottage [Portland College, Jamaica], Clarendon.  My grandmother was living in--I remember the name and I just forget it.
Speaker 1: Well tell me about Cottage.  What did Cottage--
Speaker 2: Cottage is where my grandfather was living.
Speaker 1: And you went to visit him there?
Speaker 2: I used to go and visit him all the time.
Speaker 1: Tell me what the place looked like (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I used to ride bicycles going from Kingston [Jamaica] down into Clarendon.  I use--that was probably about forty miles.  We used to ride bicycles and go and see him.  And he used to come up to see us in Kingston.  And my grandmother, she used to come up once in a while.  And as I said before, they had businesses down there, so--I have a cousin right now by the name of Stanley [ph.], he's a millionaire from Clarendon.  He used to work for the state (unclear) sugarcane factory.  And he became a millionaire.  And when I was a kid, we used to go to the cane field when, when I go to Clarendon.  And they used to, what do you call it, supervise us going around, let nobody get into the cane field.  So we used to hide in the cane field, you know.  So all those things we used to do when we was kids.  Then we used to--the place my grandmother, I just remember, Rocky Point [Jamaica].  That's right on the seashore.  And they have what you call salt plain, that's where all the salt from the seawater when it comes in, and receded, the salt was left on the, on the plain.  So they pick the salt from the plain.
Story_ID: 475429
Speaker 1: Did you have a job when you were little, as a little child?  Did you do any type of work?  Did you work the sugarcane fields, or did you work in the salt, on the salt plains (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well when I leave school, the first place I work, went to, was the railway, the railroad.  I studied boiler making.  And from boiler making, then I went into Bermuda, from Bermuda went to the United States.
Speaker 1: Right, but when you were a little boy, did you do any type of work to--
Speaker 2: No, no man, we didn't even know nothing 'bout no work.  You kidding me?  We do a lot of playing, race running, playing soccer, playing cricket, doing whatever we could to kill the time for the day.  And we used to do a lot of playing ukuleles at night and we used to stand up on the street corners like and play.  A group of us, you know, the boys, all of us had ukuleles and we used to play standing up together and playing and see who plays the best.
Speaker 1: And do you remember moving to Cuba?
Speaker 2: If I what?
Speaker 1: Did you live in Cuba for a while?
Speaker 2: Yeah, for a while we lived in Cuba for about three years.
Speaker 1: What were--why did the family move to Cuba?
Speaker 2: I guess from working also, yeah.  And my--one of my sisters was born in Cuba.  Was it (unclear), right?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.
Speaker 2: No, no, no (unclear) I think born in Cuba.
Speaker 1: What do you remember about Cuba, do you speak Spanish?
Speaker 2: I speak, I used to speak it, but when I first came here, there was not much Spanish people here.  Very few.  So naturally you don't--you can't converse with no one, you forget the language, you know.  But I still remember some words and what have you.
Speaker 1: So how old were you when you lived in Cuba?
Speaker 2: I probably was around nine, ten years old.
Speaker 1: So that would have been like 1919.
Speaker 2: Yeah, somewhere around that year.  Right, right.  Because my brother Norman [Norman Matthews (ph.)] was born in 1914, and when my brother, he graduated college.  He became a minister.  And he was a minister in Indiana, Indiana here.  And he has quite a few kids also, about seven, right Marianne [Marianne Matthews]?  How many kids Norman has?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Norman had six.
Speaker 2: Six, he was following in my mother's [Theresa Matthews] footsteps (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So when did you move back to Jamaica after you left Cuba?  How old were you when you moved back to Jamaica.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Must have been small.
Speaker 1: Probably was around nine, ten years old.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 475430
Speaker 1: Do you remember like graduating from the, the high school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The high school?
Speaker 1: Was it Jones high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Jones Town high school.
Speaker 1: Jones Town high school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So when you graduated from Jones Town high school, did you go to any other school after that?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Did you go to a night school and study a trade?
Speaker 2: Here, yeah.
Speaker 1: That, that was here?
Speaker 2: I went to the school, the name I gave it to you before.  Wadleigh, Wadleigh High School [Wadleigh High School; Wadleigh Secondary School for the Performing and Visual Arts, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: So that was in, that was here in New York City [New York, New York] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right here, yeah, like 114 [114th Street] between 8 Avenue [8th Avenue; Frederick Douglass Boulevard] and, and 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard].
Story_ID: 475431
Speaker 1: Well tell me before we move on to you coming to the United States, when you were a little boy in Jamaica, what, what sounds that--can you remember from Jamaica?
Speaker 2: What tone?
Speaker 1: Sounds, like special sounds that will--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Or music.
Speaker 1: Well man I didn't know, sound you said?
Speaker 2: Yes sir.
Speaker 1: Sound, what sound.
Speaker 2: What sounds remind you of Jamaica when you hear them today?
Speaker 1: Well calypso, yeah Jamaica calypso, I like that music.  It's very nice.
Speaker 2: Anything else?
Speaker 1: Well, I, I used to love all the things that Jamaicans did.  When they used to have a lot of peas and rice, hockey.  And I don't think hockey was going in no other country but in Jamaica.
Speaker 2: Did your mother [Theresa Matthews] cook Jamaican food at the time?
Speaker 1: My mother didn't cook.
Speaker 2: She did not.
Speaker 1: We had a server.
Speaker 2: Well did the servants cook?
Speaker 1: Yeah, they do all the cooking, and we just sit at the table.  Went the table was set and nobody eats individually, all of us ate together.  My father [Christopher Matthews (ph.)] said grace and we go from there.
Speaker 2: So any--what sights remind you of Jamaica growing up there?  When you see something, and you say that reminds me of Jamaica?
Speaker 1: Well I used to love the opera house, and that was in Kingston [Jamaica].  And I think it was in Astrid [ph.] Street.  No, I can't remember the name of it, but it was downtown, it was right by the park, Kingston park.  It's a big park, we hire automobiles go through and all that.  So that's it.
Speaker 2: So what smells remind you of Jamaica?  When you smell something, you say that smells like Jamaica?
Speaker 1: What, what?
Speaker 2: Smells.  Like when you smell something.
Speaker 1: Food you mean?
Speaker 2: Anything.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I don't know.  The only thing I could think of is the food (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nothing you can think--the food?
Story_ID: 475432
Speaker 1: So why did you decide to move to New York City [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Well I just love New York City.  And I think New York City's a great city, except for like the shooting they have.  And naturally there's a lot of discrimination here just like any other place.  And that's why we used to--I used to fight to break up the discrimination in the City of New York.  And that's the reason why we have the union that was formed because the American Federation of Labor and the Congress--the CIO, which is Congress of, Congress of, CI--Congress of Industrial Organization [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO)].  And later on that American Federation of Labor, which was the AF of L union, was a discriminatory union.  That's why John L. Lewis founded the CIO.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was the president and founder of the CIO union.
Speaker 1: But before we start to talk about your career, I want to talk some about your early adulthood, because you decided to go to Wadleigh night school [Wadleigh High School; Wadleigh Secondary School for the Performing and Visual Arts, New York, New York].  What did you study in night school?
Speaker 2: Political science and every little thing that I could get onto.
Speaker 1: What did you think you wanted to become at that time?
Speaker 2: I wanted to work to be a leader.
Speaker 1: You wanted to be a leader?
Speaker 2: A leader.  I was a born leader.  That's all I ever knew.  Anything I do, I put my heart and soul into it.  And I don't depend and get a person to do it, I do it.  And that's it.
Speaker 1: So you were a political science major at the night, at night school?
Speaker 2: I was a major in city college.
Speaker 1: Did you think you may want to become a lawyer?
Speaker 2: This is what I wanted to be.  And then after I founded the union [Harlem Labor Union] and I had to lead a lot of people, I forget about going to law school.  But I wanted to be a lawyer.
Speaker 1: So you moved to New York, you're going to this night school.  Who were your friends at the time when you were going to Wadleigh night school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh Jesus Christ, man. Who the hell I can remember back in 1914--1940, man shoot.  It's a lot of friends.
Speaker 1: Where did you live when you were--when you first, when you were going to that school?  What part of the city did you live in?
Speaker 2: I was living at 114th Street, 114th, and the school was in 114th.
Story_ID: 475433
Speaker 1: What was Harlem [New York, New York] like at the time?
Speaker 2: Harlem was always a nice looking place because all the white people had moved from Harlem and come in Washington Heights [New York, New York] and went to the Bronx [New York].  And the, the black people used to live below 59th Street.  All out here and down there where Penn Station [Pennsylvania Station, New York, New York] and the--black people used to live down that way, yeah.  And then they move up after the--all the white people start to go from Washington Heights to the Bronx.  Negroes start coming up and live--and Harlem became one of the best parts of the City of New York [New York] because in order to get to the Bronx, you got to come through Harlem.  Get downtown, you gotta go through Harlem.  So the black people had it made (laughter).
Speaker 1: So when you were living on 114th Street and living in Harlem at the time, who were, who were the community leaders?  Who were the people in the community that you looked up to if you were in political science?  Were you following the political events of the time?  Like you, you, you worked with, you drove Adam Clayton Powell, Sr.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: When did you, when were you driving him around?
Speaker 2: The old man? Adam's [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] father?  This was in the '50s [1950s], in the '50s [1950s], yeah.  Well you see what happened (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) (Unclear) before.
Speaker 2: Or in the '40s [1940s], somewhere around there.  But see Adam's father used to live on Convent Avenue.  And when he had to go to anyplace, he says, "I want John [HistoryMaker John Matthews] to drive me."  'Cause they had a station wagon and I had my office at 117th Street, I mean 125th Street.  So I used to leave from there, go up to Convent Avenue, pick him up and take him where he want and bring him back.  That time Aleta Gibson [sic. Althea Gibson] used to play tennis (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) Tennis.
Speaker 2: --right at 149th Street and Convent, that used to be a tennis court there.  You didn't know all that, man, shoot I, I'm taking you back.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So there was a tennis court.
Speaker 2: Right at 149th Street on the east side of the street.  You know it's a big church there now.
Speaker 1: So did you know Althea Gibson?
Speaker 2: Yeah, sure I know her, sure I know her.  And I used to go down to the park--tennis court often and watch 'em play.
Speaker 1: Did you play tennis yourself?
Speaker 2: No, I never--my wife used to, not me.  To me tennis was a woman's game (laughter).
Speaker 1: Why did you think it was a woman's game?
Speaker 2: Well it's so simple.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Arthur Ashe (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I used to love hard playing, playing soccer. And like I say I met Arthur Ashe before when he was used to go there and Aleta Gibson.
Story_ID: 475434
Speaker 1: What was your first job in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: My first job--oh I worked for suits, suit store on 46th Street.  The suit store name was Bromlish [ph.].  They made tailor made suits, different tailors used to come there, get the measurement and they come back for the clothes later on, blah, blah, blah.
Speaker 1: And were you salesman there?
Speaker 2: Please?
Speaker 1: What did you do for--at the?
Speaker 2: I was like when suit delivery and stuff like that.  I used to go to different--take the suits then to the different actors and whatever, wherever they live.
Speaker 1: So you were their delivery person.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were young, you were going to school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you were delivering those suits.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: What were you doing at night?  Night life.  Where did you go out to entertain yourself?
Speaker 2: Well I used to go the Savoy Ballroom [New York, New York], Cotton Club [New York, New York], and then we used to have this place used to be across the street, a Chinese place.  And then it moved to 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard] and we used to go to the Dunbar Palace [New York, New York], which was on 7th Avenue.  We used to go to the Renaissance Casino [Renaissance Casino and Ballroom, New York, New York] which is on 7th Avenue.  That's it.
Speaker 1: And how did you meet your wife?
Speaker 2: Which one, the first one?
Speaker 1: Well I was talking about the second one.
Speaker 2: Well I met this beautiful girl on Broadway.  And I think we told you before she has a friend that was--
Speaker 1: Cleaning store.
Speaker 2: Cleaning store.  That time I had my boat in Freeport [New York], with Freeport I told you once it was a discriminatory area.  And Guy Lombardo, which was the big time musician in this country, and where was I?  Before the built--Guy Lombardo built his--I mean to make the street now named Guy Lombardo Avenue.  That was just a street.  And while I had my boat out there, they was building Guy Lombardo's pavilion or whatever you want to call it, the restaurant and all that stuff.
Story_ID: 475435
Speaker 1: When you were going to the night school, was there--did you receive some sort of night school diploma?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I don't have it today (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You don't have it, no.  But you did graduate from that school [Wadleigh High School; Wadleigh Secondary School for the Performing and Visual Arts, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right.
Speaker 1: And you graduated, do you have an idea what year you graduated from night school?
Speaker 2: Boy (shakes head)--
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: That should be somewhere in the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So let's see in 1940 you would have been thirty years old.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: So you, so you graduated that school back then.  But you told me before that you went to some school and you learned how to build boilers and--
Speaker 2: That was in Jamaica.
Speaker 1: That was in Jamaica.
Speaker 2: In Jamaica.
Speaker 1: But you never used that skill (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, never work with it, no.
Speaker 1: You never worked as a boilermaker.
Speaker 2: But I was trained, you know, went to school for that after I left high school.  Boiler making.
Speaker 1: So during the, during like the Depression [Great Depression] years when things were really tough, how did you get by?
Speaker 2: I was never on relief, that's one thing.  I work.  You don't have to be on home relief (unclear).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  When you lived with your aunt. Isn't that when you lived with your aunt?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was living with my--she's dead now anyhow.
Speaker 1: But you lived with her?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what job did you have?  You said you worked.  Do you remember what kind of work you did?
Speaker 2: I told you before--
Speaker 1: That's when you worked with the suit company?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: When you were delivering the suits.
Speaker 2: And once a week running the elevator for the Dusquare Hotel [ph.].
Speaker 1: So you were an elevator operator.
Speaker 2: Yeah, also yeah.  And then I work with suit company.
Speaker 1: Well when you were the elevator operator, do you feel like--because there was no union then.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Did you feel like there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was union, but no black union.
Speaker 1: No black people in the union.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Did you feel that you were treated the way every--all the--everyone else was treated?  Or you didn't think about it at the time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't think about it because see the people that owned it Dusquare Hotel was Tavaras [ph.] I think they name was, they was Italian.  And they probably was mafias, collecting numbers and all that stuff in this area.  So that was it.
Speaker 1: What was that hotel located?
Speaker 2: Dusquare? It's at 117th Street, St. Nicholas Avenue and 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard] joined together, you know where that, right?  Just like this place here.  And so the Dusquare Hotel.  It was a hotel.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: You know across the street, they have that big project there, that big building.  I remember when they was fighting for--the family was fighting among each other for the ownership of that place.  And they have many entrances in that building.  You know the building I'm talking about, 116th [Street] and 7th Avenue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're--you graduate from that night school, you're roughly thirty.  And you start looking around for another job?  What job do you do right after you get out of that school?
Speaker 2: Elevator for the hotel.
Speaker 1: That's when you worked for the hotel? As an elevator (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Story_ID: 475436
Speaker 1: What made you decide you wanted to, to do something about the unions?  That people were treating black people unfairly (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well let me explain something to you.  I'll go way back.  When I was going to school, I met Rabbi Matthews [Wentworth Arthur Matthew], which went to Ethiopia.  And he had a synagogue.  And he used to have--they used to have a lot of meetings in the streets, talking about discrimination, blah, blah, blah, down the line right before the Theresa Hotel [Hotel Theresa, New York, New York] and what have you.  The Theresa, you know where that is.  So I used to go that night and listen to them talking.  And I remember once I drew a map of Africa and I present to Rabbi Matthews and he showed it to the entire group, map of Africa.  The sons of Africa, see what he done, blah, blah, blah, down the line.  So that was it.
Speaker 1: That was it, meaning you--that's what got you started (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When, when, when, when I used to listen to Rabbi Matthews--
Speaker 1: What was he talking about?  What were some of the things he said?
Speaker 2: Talking about discrimination in the United States and he used to have his meetings at 117 [Street] and 18th Street and Lenox Avenue [Malcolm X Boulevard].  That's where his meeting used to be.  I used a stepladder then to speak from the stepladder.
Speaker 1: So he would get on a stepladder and then talk (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Talking, yeah and speaking.
Speaker 1: And speaking, and--
Speaker 2: That's what--not only him.
Speaker 1: Who were the other?
Speaker 2: They had a lot of guys that can't remember the name, they used to have meetings talking about discrimination in the United States.  One guy I remembered, his name was Carlos something.  But they used to have their meeting before Theresa Hotel.  And they used to do all the speaking out there, every evening, beating down discrimination.  And as I said Rabbi Matthews used to have his meeting at Lenox Avenue.  And then he used to talk about Ethiopia and he went to school in Ethiopia, to get--learning whatever the--in Ethiopia.  And then he came back and he had this synagogue at 129th Street.
Speaker 1: What made you think you could change some of the things he was talking about?
Speaker 2: I just had a feeling that one day just like what Sharpton [HistoryMaker Reverend Al Sharpton] doing, it would come to being.
Story_ID: 475437
Speaker 1: So I read that one of the first things you did is you formed picket lines against the Transport Workers Union [Transport Workers Union of America] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: Who were the people that you worked with?
Speaker 2: Well I worked with--
Speaker 1: Ira Kemp?
Speaker 2: No, no. Roger Strong, Edward Brown, Jimmy Lawson [James Lawson], who else I got there?
Speaker 1: Ira.
Speaker 2: Ira Kemp, Jimmy Lawson, fellow by the name of Jimmy Lawson.
Speaker 1: Where did you meet to organize the, the, the picket line?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What about Marcus Garvey?
Speaker 1: Marcus Garvey, I met Marcus Garvey years ago.  Marcus Garvey, I met him.
Speaker 2: You met him.  Did you believe in what he was doing?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: The Marcus Garvey--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Congress [sic. Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League], what they used to call it (unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Of Racial Equality?
Speaker 1: And I can't remember now.
Speaker 2: So when you were working with Ira and Roger and Edward--
Speaker 1: That was when we picketed--we were trying to form a union.  And that's when we formed the, the union--
Speaker 2: The Harlem Labor Union.
Speaker 1: The Harlem Labor Union.
Speaker 2: So tell me why were you picketing the Transport Workers Union?
Speaker 1: Because they didn't have black guy driving buses.  They didn't have black guy driving subway.  So that's why we had picket lines against them.  And what's his name that went--Michael Quill.  He used to be the Transport Workers Union that works for the subway, the buses and everything.  And I think he went to prison.  I think he went to jail.  And while they (unclear) I picketed the picket line because I think he went to prison for something.  I don't remember.  That was something against the state or the city.  One of the two.
Speaker 2: So were you successful in getting them to hire black bus drivers?
Speaker 1: We put the picket line against the Transport Workers Union and we started from 110th Street and 5th Avenue.  And that's where we had put our picket line against the bus company.  And we even burned a couple buses.  And--
Speaker 2: You did?  You burned up a couple of buses?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And--
Speaker 2: So tell me about whose idea that was.
Speaker 1: I wouldn't know.  I can't tell you that.  I know the bus was burned up.
Speaker 2: Did they, did they throw a fire bomb--
Speaker 1: It just was burned up.
Speaker 2: The buses burned, okay.
Speaker 1: And at 110th Street and 5th Avenue, the bus drivers wouldn't cross the picket line because they was scared.  And we hadn't had a picket line against the bus company.
Speaker 2: How many people?
Speaker 1: Probably about a hundred.  So we used to cross 125th Street, we used to picket all them stores.  And then we got in touch with Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] when he was working for the city council [New York City Council].  And he came down--first he didn't want to.  Then after he says all right, we--I'll give you the church basement.  So we had a picket line--I mean they--all the fellows used to meet in the Abyssinian Baptist Church [New York, New York] in the basement.  And then we start signing up guys to drive bus--who's a bus--a driver.  So I remember the first one, one of the first guy that--was a guy by the name of Charles Smith [ph.].  He was probably about 5'4" and he was one of the ten that went to Broadway and 128th Street or Broadway where the bus terminal is.  And that's where the ten, first ten guys went to be trained for bus drivers.  And that's how you got black guys driving buses today.
Story_ID: 475438
Speaker 1: See I remember when all the ho- hotels--they had all white bus, bus doormen.  And then later on black guys started getting those--what do you call the guy at the bus, at the building?
Speaker 2: Doormen.
Speaker 1: Doormens, yeah.  So that's it.
Speaker 2: So when you, when you--
Speaker 1: There was a hotel, a place, a theater used to be on 6th Avenue, the Hippodrome [Hippodrome Theatre, New York, New York].  Joe Louis fought in there, in the Epidrome [ph.].  And then Madison Square Garden [New York, New York] used to be at 46th Street I think it used to be before it went up 50th Street.  And all that area was Penn Station [Pennsylvania Station, New York, New York].  And they used to have a lot of slaughterhouse down there where they kill cows and what have you.  So then later on they move up to 50th Street.  That's where they are right now, right?
Speaker 2: Now they're on 34th Street.
Speaker 1: The 34th, right before they went up 50th Street.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right, correct.
Speaker 2: So when you got--when you sent those ten bus drivers and those ten bus drivers started to receive training to become part of the--
Speaker 1: Bus drivers (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) bus drivers, how did that make you feel?
Speaker 1: Make me feel like I was in heaven. (Laughter) I accomplished something.  Sure man, I felt good.  We was breaking--I was trying to remember my--what the guy name that was the head of Madison Square Garden.  I can't remember.  But I had meeting with him also while I was--Michael Sherman [ph.] of labor and industry because of the discriminatory factors they used to put against black fighters.  And--
Speaker 2: At Madison Square.
Speaker 1: Madison Square Garden.  They used to discriminate against black people just like they discriminate against Joe Louis during the days he was fighting.  But he made it.  They had to recognize him, see.  But Joe Louis used to--every time he fight, he used to come up in Harlem [New York, New York].  Used to have a ball up in Harlem.  And we used to have big march after Joe Louis fight in the streets.  Everybody used to come out and hundreds of people, to celebrate his victory.
Speaker 2: Right.  Did you watch the fights, always watch the fights?
Speaker 1: I always watch the fights.  Well we did not know radio, I mean TV then.  Used to listen on the radio.
Speaker 2: And you could go to the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York] and listen too, right?
Speaker 1: No, they did not no TV then--
Speaker 2: I mean to listen.  I, I've heard that people would gather around--
Speaker 1: We had a radio and we listened to the fight in the streets, you know.  Everybody used to have they radios and close to the radio.  I remember when he fought Schmeling [Max Schmeling].  I remember when he--I remember all Joe Louis' fights.
Speaker 2: Which one stands out in your mind most?
Speaker 1: Well the one that he beat, what's his name, what's the guy he beat to get the title?  He fought a white guy, I can't--I will remember his name, and he beated him and he took the title away from him.  And that's how Joe Louis became champion.  What the hell is that guy's name?  It would be nice if you knew it.
Speaker 2: Do you remember his name Nick [Neculai Burghelea]?
Speaker 1: You remember his name?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Schmeling?  Max--
Speaker 1: No, not Schmeling.  The one that Joe Louis fought, the first guy he fought, the first white guy.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I don't remember.
Speaker 1: He don't even remember and he's a young fellow.
Speaker 2: I don't remember either.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) But one day-
Speaker 2: But it'll come to you.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he fought that guy and beat the guy for, from the championship.
Story_ID: 475439
Speaker 1: So from that--getting those ten bus drivers to getting those ten black bus drivers on, that made you feel powerful I'm assuming (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh sure.
Speaker 1: And you started the Harlem Labor Union.
Speaker 2: I did, that's right, I did something.
Speaker 1: And tell me about starting the Harbor--the Harlem Labor Union.
Speaker 2: Well the Harlem Labor Union was started from the picket lines of 125th Street.  And that's where we started that from.  And while we were at picket lines against all the--those stores, you take like there was a big place there by the name of--what the hell his name--that vegetary place?  All those stores used to carry nothing but white people.  So we all did picketing against all them stores.  And to break down the discriminatory factors that--boy I can't remember the name of these stores.
Speaker 1: That's okay, they'll come to you, the names of the stores.
Speaker 2: I know the store over across the street on 7th Avenue, the liquor, the whiskey, I mean the jewelry store was Herbert Blue and White Diamond [Herbert's Home of Blue White Diamonds, New York, New York], that I remember.  Couple stores in--the five and ten used to be there, the five and ten.  There was another one with another--it was two different five and ten.  But--
Speaker 1: But what's important is that you picketed those stores.
Speaker 2: I picket all them damn stores, man.  All of 'em, every living store.
Speaker 1: Did you see things change?  Did you see changes after?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Because they, they had to sit down to negotiate with us.  And--
Speaker 1: What were you asking them to do?
Speaker 2: Put on black people.
Speaker 1: Did they do it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they had to.  'Cause we just keep picket line, picket line.  Same goes for Crawford, Crawford Shoe Store [Crawford Show Company].  Also the next one--what the next store--Crawford and Howard.  I think I've got that.  Crawford and Howard, right?  I got it there?
Speaker 1: No sir.
Speaker 2: Crawford was one shoe store and Howard Shoe Store was another one.  And we picketed those two stores in order to put, put black people to work.  And Crawford--they headquarters was in Elmhurst [Queens, New York], Long Island [New York], which I met Mr. Sagworm [ph.], he was the head of Crawford.  And that's the one that had offered me thousands of dollars.  Remember I told you that?
Speaker 1: To do what?
Speaker 2: To get, forget don't--for getting black people.  And I said to him you gotta be kidding with me, you know.  I said you gonna put black people in there to work.  And that's the way we'll get broken up.
Story_ID: 475440
Speaker 1: Once those black bus drivers started to work, then the World War II [WWII] is heating up and you were, were you drafted into the [U.S.] Army (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, what year, I was in--drafted with the Army when all--everybody, everyone had to sign up.  And then you--they call you whenever you're ready to go.  So I went to Fort Dix, New Jersey.  And was stayed in Fort Dix for a long time.  Then they move us on to Fort McClellan, Alabama to form the 92nd Infantry Division, which was the Buffalo division.  And the Buffalo Division was the fighters of World War I [WWI].
Speaker 1: Were they all black?
Speaker 2: All black, but see they wasn't fighting for the United States.  France was the one who took the Buffalo division, France.  And because this country didn't want black people fighting in the Army.  So the French took all the black people to France and that's where they fight in World War I.  Boy I can remember a lot of things, boy.
Speaker 1: So tell me about the 92nd Infantry and World War II.
Speaker 2: It was a beautify infantry.  It was nice, except when you was in, when you was in the Army, you couldn't go to the PX [post exchange] as a black man.  You couldn't ride the bus going to Alabama.  I mean Birmingham [Alabama].  You had to ride a extra bus which was all black.  And if you do get on the white bus, the bus run by the City of Birmingham, you had to sit in the rear, in the back.  And even the German soldiers who was prisoners, they could sit up in the front of the bus going to prison, and you got to sit in the back (laughter).  And as I said before, all the PXs all over the country, black people couldn't go in the PX.
Speaker 1: So you were in the [U.S.] military, but you couldn't go in the PX to shop.
Speaker 2: You couldn't go in the PX.
Speaker 1: Where did you shop then?
Speaker 2: You shop in the street.  You could shop in the--no, you could shop around the commissaries, but you couldn't go in the PX which was place where all--they all sit and congregate, all the white people, fellows there.  But the black guys didn't have no PX.  So you had--whatever you bought, you got to take it back to your barracks because there was no white in, in my division except like the captains and the leaders was all white; not black.
Speaker 1: Did you resent that, all the leaders were all white?
Speaker 2: I done--everywhere I went in the Army I was disgusted and hated the Army.  I didn't hate the Army, no.  Don't get me wrong.  I hated the discriminatory factor of what is being pro- treated in the Army.  And those was my, my, my big cry.  I didn't like those kind of things.
Speaker 1: Did you protest?  Did you--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  We gone protest to who?
Speaker 1: Well did you, did you talk about it to the other black soldiers?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we all talk about those things.  But what could we do?  What can you do?  See black people start getting a break when Truman [President Harry S. Truman] was elected.  And Truman did a hell of a lot, you gotta give him credit.  Even though he was a cracker, (laughter) but he did a lot.  And I've got to give him credit for--and then when Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] came in, he took over and went farther.  And Bobby Kennedy did a lot for black people, a lot.  'Cause I remembered when they put the picket line against--in North Carolina against the college for the guy that went to the college, what's his name?
Speaker 1: In Mississippi?
Speaker 2: No, no, in South Carolina.  No, in Mississippi I think.  What's the name?
Speaker 1: James Meredith?
Speaker 2: Meredith, that's right.  To put him into the college [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi].  So I said that Kennedy did a lot for black people.  The Kennedy family did a lot for black people.
Story_ID: 475441
Speaker 1: To go back to, to the 1940s when you were in the [U.S.] Army, did you ever see any combat?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: What did you do exactly in the 92nd Infantry [92nd Infantry Division]?
Speaker 2: Well I was in, I was in what do you call it, defense platoon.  And that was to actually defend wherever you was.  And it was a platoon that was all trained guys for defense of whatever goes down.
Speaker 1: So did you ever go to Europe?
Speaker 2: No, never went to Europe.
Speaker 1: Did you wanna go?
Speaker 2: Sure.  See when I dis- was discharged from the Army, I even spoke to the guy that was the captain.  I said, "Let--I wanna go to Europe to fight, man."  And he said, "No you ain't."  But I wanted to go.  I didn't care if I got killed or I didn't get killed, but I wanted to go to Europe.  But they wouldn't let me go.  So that's it.
Speaker 1: So when, when the war [World War II, WWII] ended, why did you decide to go to military school?
Speaker 2: Well I went back into the 369th Regiment [369th Infantry Regiment] on 142nd Street and 5th Avenue, and I became a sergeant in, in that outfit, which they call it then from the 369th it went to the 15th Regiment [15th New York National Guard Regiment].  And the 15th Regiment fought in Europe.  That's where the Buffalo division and all them came from.  And Davis was the, the head of--General Davis [Benjamin O. Davis, Sr.].  He was head of the 15th Regiment and before he got his five star generalship.
Story_ID: 475442
Speaker 1: When you were a part of the regiment [369th Infantry Regiment; 15th New York National Guard Regiment], were you doing some--what did you do for a living to support your family?
Speaker 2: I was working in the liquor company.
Speaker 1: So how did you get the job at the liquor company?
Speaker 2: From the union, from the Liquor Salesmen's Union.  And they used to be at 50th Street.  Now they are in Brooklyn [New York].
Speaker 1: Was that union integrated?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But you see we had to picket the union also to get black guys to be salesmen.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that.  So that was when you came back after World War II [WWII]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's after I came--because the union then was carrying all white people as salesmen.  And we picketed the union to put black people as salesmen, and that's how black salesmen became--after we do all those picketing against the union.
Speaker 1: And you became one of the first black salesman to work for a liquor company?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the company?
Speaker 2: I worked for Star Liquor.  I work for Standard Food Company, and those was the two that I worked for.
Speaker 1: Were they two big ones?
Speaker 2: Big company, they were big companies 'cause they had, they had all these liquor--all these liquor salesmen.  Lot of salesmen work for Star Liquor and a lot of salesmen worked for Standard Food.  And that was it.
Speaker 1: Now did they have two groups of salesmen, one white group and one black group to service the different communities?
Speaker 2: Well before we became salesmen, they used to have white salesmen.  Then after we do the picketing, then the union get black guys in.  And then they put them in the communities where black people and blah, blah, blah, and that was it.
Speaker 1: How did you feel about doing that job?  Was it something you wanted to do?
Speaker 2: The union?
Speaker 1: No, that--the salesman, liquor sales--
Speaker 2: I loved that.  That was a nice job.  I used to--I even go to Puerto Rico.  I went to critique in five different states for the liquor company.  We should have a gang of pictures from--you saw those pictures, did my wife [Marianne Matthews] show you?  From all the places we went for Colorado, this place, Kentucky, blah, blah, blah down the line.
Speaker 1: Well we're gonna stop here and change the tapes and we'll keep talking about your days as a salesman.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  He was a good salesman.  He could sell you the Brooklyn Bridge [New York, New York] if you wanted to buy it.
Speaker 1: I used to love salesmanship, man.
Story_ID: 475443
Speaker 1: We were just talking about you working as a liquor salesman, and you were telling me all the awards you, well you were a great salesman, you were one of the best.  You were allowed to take--or you took a lot of trips.  But what you also did during that time that I wanna talk about, because I mean I guess you were going to all of these different restaurants?
Speaker 2: Going to restaurants--
Speaker 1: You know, you were working, selling liquor to the different restaurants and liquor stores (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) to the restaurants and liquor stores.
Speaker 1: That you saw that there were not a lot of black bartenders.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: And, and waiters.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: And so you founded Local 2 [Liquor Salesmen's Union Local 2] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two. That's correct.
Speaker 1: Which was to help black people get jobs as waiters and bartenders.
Speaker 2: Yes, right.  And the first place that I put black people to work was in Frank's Restaurant [New York, New York] on 125th [Street].  And then I picketed a place up in the Bronx [New York].  And you had a union up in the Bronx that they did not know blacks.  I can't remember the union number.  But after I discussed it with the union president up there, right on 163rd Street there was restaurants and bars all around there by Morris Avenue.  And the--and across the street they had welfare department and all that there, big place there.  And there was between Morris Avenue and Park Avenue.  So what else did you ask me?
Speaker 1: Well during that time you got a lot of jobs for black people as waiters and bartenders.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: You were gonna tell me about Frank's Restaurant because that was a big well known restaurant (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Big, big, big restaurant.
Speaker 1: On 125th Street.
Speaker 2: Known all over, run by the mafia.
Speaker 1: It was an Italian restaurant.
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: Were you afraid for your life, that they were gonna do something to you?
Speaker 2: Well they invited me on Long Island [New York].  I knew all about what they was--they set up a big table for me and you know, my organizers.  And they had beautiful food and all.  But they trying to--in other words, they was trying to get together with me, the mafia.  Because Frank's Restaurant was run by the mafia.  And then they had another restaurant, Sal's, was on 125th Street.  But they didn't stay there long because they didn't wanna hire black, Sal's Restaurant [ph.].  'Cause Sal's is downtown now isn't it?  Sal's was a big, big, big restaurant man, just like Frank's.  But I did have nothing to do with Sal's leaving.  They left before I got the sign-in with Frank's because of the picket line.  They got out of town.
Speaker 1: Were you ever afraid that some, that the mob would try to harm you or that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I figured that a lot of times.  I figure one day I may get shot, (laughter) but I didn't.  God saved my life to, to fight.
Speaker 1: Did anything ever happen to you?
Speaker 2: No.  Nobody ever bothers me.  For instance, while I was doing the picketing for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], like I said before, the mafia, one of the guys, I can't think of his name, but he saw the writing on the wall.  He was one of the organizers.  And that time I was with the NAACP and the office was 125th Street, 209 West 125th Street I think it is.  And east, whatever it is.  But he used to come up to the NAACP office, brought presents for me and all that kind of stuff, whiskey and all that.  And as I said before, they invited me out in Freeport [New York].  And that was a Ku Klux Klan [KKK] town, very much so.  And they set up big restaurant, food, and I had my organizers, all them went with me.  So naturally we was worried about you never know what they gonna do.  But they just wanted to get together to straighten things out.  So that was it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And how did they, how did they straighten things out?
Speaker 2: Well they didn't bother us, and--
Speaker 1: But did they agree to hire black staff?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: What did they say?
Speaker 2: Well they says we know, we do things that is wrong, and we're gonna try to eliminate it from your work, blah, blah, blah, and that was it.
Speaker 1: How did that make you feel?
Speaker 2: Make me feel like I'm in heaven, man.  You kidding me?  Every time that I could win a case with black people, man I was the happiest man in the world.  I used to come back man, I used to feel so proud, drink some whiskey (laughter).  Some- when I used to drink rum.  Now I don't.  I used to drink rum all the time.
Story_ID: 475444
Speaker 1: When did you meet your second wife [Marianne Matthews] and get married?
Speaker 2: I met you in, in '60 [1960]?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I came to this country the end of '49 [1949].  And I met him the beginning of '51 [1951].
Speaker 2: So you met her very early on when you were doing all this.  Well was it hard for you to have a, a wife who was white?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  It was.
Speaker 1: Sure.  'Cause ain't no white and black used to be together then.  And I used to take my wife even in Freeport [New York].  I took her out to Cape Cod [Massachusetts].  All while just before it's rough--'cause with me, I didn't care.  I just gonna push to see what's going on.  So when we used to go to Cape Cod, I know they didn't like it, but it's a lot of Portuguese in Fort--Cape Cod.  And the Portuguese, they are all color, see.  And they were the original Portuguese from, from the Cape.  'Cause they used to run the Cape.  And--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  The only trouble I had was when I came back, I used to find--
Speaker 1: Notes under our door (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) Letters under my door, anonymous, telling me nigger lover get out.
Speaker 1: So there were letters under the door?
Speaker 2: I didn't get it, she get 'em under her door on Fort Washington Avenue [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: And this is before you actually got married?
Speaker 2: That's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) Oh yes, way before.
Speaker 2: So when--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  They used to see him pull up in his car and I lived on the, on the ground, on the first--on the ground floor.  In the summer he used to bring me maybe a, an ice cream cone or a malt or something and hand it to me through the window.  So naturally (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And they saw that, yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  They saw that.
Story_ID: 475445
Speaker 1: So when you were working to--with, you know working to deseg- or to get black workers in Frank's [Frank's Restaurant, New York, New York], did they allow black people to eat in the restaurant?
Speaker 2: Black was eating in there, yeah.  'Cause Percy Sutton--all of us used to eat there.  But got no black person working there.
Speaker 1: When you say all of us, who is all of us?
Speaker 2: Was Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] you see there, Sutton you see there, Oliver's [sic. Percy Sutton's brother, Oliver Sutton] brother used to--is a lawyer also.  He used to work there.
Speaker 1: Well what did Dinkins and Sutton and those guys think when you told them that you were going to try to fight to get some black people to work in this restaurant?
Speaker 2: Well I--pardon me.  Before I had the black people working there, I didn't go in Frank's.  I wouldn't go in Frank's.  Even though a lot of black people used to go in there, but I never go in there until after I put the picket line against John Seymour [ph.] who was the head of Frank's.  He was a nice guy, real mafia, but he was kind of nice guy.  And all of them got the--all the owners or leaders of the restaurant was all white.  And as I said the bartenders, the waiters, cooks, everybody was, was white.  And that's--what else can I tell you?
Speaker 1: Right.  So what did you learn from that experience?  That you--
Speaker 2: That I was sent by God to fight for black people (laughter).
Story_ID: 475446
Speaker 1: And what did you do after that?  After you got that black bartender a job (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I still had my union right on 125th Street.
Speaker 1: You--I'm sorry, say that again.
Speaker 2: My union, my office was at 117 West 125th Street.
Speaker 1: So you became the president of Local 2 [Liquor Salesmen's Union Local 2].
Speaker 2: I organized Local 2.
Speaker 1: You organized Local 2.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: So that was for bartenders--
Speaker 2: And restaurant workers (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Waiters and all restaurant workers.
Speaker 2: Right, that's correct.
Speaker 1: So you were able to see a lot of restaurants--
Speaker 2: Lot of changes for black, with black people, right.
Speaker 1: So did any--who else worked with you on that initiative?
Speaker 2: Well I had several organizers.
Speaker 1: Who were they?
Speaker 2: I remember one guy name was Howard Brown [ph.].  He was a Jamaican.  And different guys; I can't think of them now.  I can't remember their names now.
Speaker 1: So I guess you started to feel like you could get black workers to work in other areas too, because I read after that, that you started to try to get more black people to work in Bond Clothing Store.
Speaker 2: When Bond's was on 125th Street and Crawford [Crawford Shoe Company] was on 125th.  And they was probably address was between Lenox [Avenue] and 5th [Avenue], I mean Lenox and 6th [Avenue] [sic.].  I can't remember whether it was the east side.  It maybe was east, yeah I think so.  But that's where that was, Frank's--I mean--
Speaker 1: Bond.
Speaker 2: Bond.
Speaker 1: And what did you do?  Did you get--
Speaker 2: I got black people to work there.
Speaker 1: To work there.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Doing what?
Speaker 2: As salesmen.
Speaker 1: As salesmen, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and what you call it, stock clerk, stock clerk.  I just remember stock clerk because they had to start as a stock clerk, then they become a salesman, correct (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To become a salesman.  What did you do at the Bronx State Hospital [Bronx, New York] to get black employees there?
Speaker 2: Well they was discriminating against nurses, black nurses and stuff like that.  And I won and got black nurses there and what have you.
Speaker 1: So did people start to come to you when they wanted to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, when--if anything is wrong in a--wherever they work and they couldn't get a job, they used to come to the union and then they'll tell you the places and what--it's discriminatory and blah.  Then I would go, go by there and try to find out what's up.  And if they didn't do it, setting up with a picket line.  I used to ride around with my car and all my organizers--a lot of stuff was six organizers or seven.  And we used to have the picket signs in the car.  That time I remember on 3rd Avenue they used to have big companies.  You had several big companies used to be at 3rd Avenue there between 110th [Street] and 108th Street.  So that's it.  What else?
Story_ID: 475447
Speaker 1: So Mr. Matthews, [HistoryMaker John Matthews] how do you organize a picket line?  How do you get people involved?
Speaker 2: Well usually the people who comes around the union hall, they used to sit in the union hall.  And when we have picket line, I notify them that our picket line such-and-such a place.  And everybody goes and the--goes with me and the organizers and we put the picket line and these are the guys that do--carry the signs and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Where did the idea for picket lines come from for you?  How did you know that they--
Speaker 2: Come from different union.
Speaker 1: How did you know it would be so successful?
Speaker 2: You don't know how something become successful except you do it.  That's the only way you can find out if it becomes successful.  See just like on Central Park West, I tried to tell you that the other day.  All those big project there today used to be small houses all over there.  And I had a big picket line over there.  And that's where I went from, from there I went to the hospital on 19th Street.  I took sick right on the picket line, although my wife was with me.  And I had all these people picketing the different--and that's where I went from there to the hospital.
Speaker 1: What happened to you?
Speaker 2: I don't know what is happening, it was my stomach.  And while I was in the hospital, some guys came from Washington, D.C. to the hospital, offering me all kinds of jobs.  I'm telling you man, yeah, they came from Washington, D.C. to the hospital.
Speaker 1: What kind of jobs were they offering you?
Speaker 2: To work for the government or whatever the hell, I don't remember.  But I know they came to the hospital and they stood in the hospital.  How long I was in that hospital, 'bout two weeks?  Yeah, about two or three weeks.  And as I said before, they came to offer me a job.  I think they was offering me a job in Washington, D.C., but I didn't want it 'cause I what am I gonna do in Washington, D.C.? I stay here and fight for the black people.  And that's was it.
Story_ID: 475448
Speaker 1: How did you meet Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Adam?  I met Adam during the time we started the picket lines.  And as I said before, with Adam, we notify him of picket line, he didn't wanna show up. He say, "What you all gonna do?"  You know.  So he finally relented.  And he came around.  Then he became famous like he's the one who did all the picketing because he was a big shot, we was little shot.  But his name was mentioned more than the guys who organized the picket line because see those days, the leader supposed to be of black people was ministers.  They were the big shot doing something for the black people, which they didn't do shit, pardon my vocabulary.  But then as I said when Adam--we notify him and he didn't even wanna come for the picket lines.  Then finally he relented and he came.  And then they start to put up congressman do this and congressman--congressman ain't did shit.  We did all the work.  I know girls that died on the picket line, sun stroke 'cause you know we picketed in the summertime and hot as hell.  So a lot of these girls, some of them kicked the bucket, some wind up in the hospital anything like that.  But we breaking down the barriers.  Which was one of them store name Sim Co. [ph.]?  Wasn't that Sim Co. on 125th Street?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Right.
Speaker 2: Liquor, a whiskey, I mean a store, 125th, Sim Co.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  A shoe store?
Speaker 2: No, no.  Was a (unclear) ladies' apparel.
Story_ID: 475449
Speaker 1: Mr. Matthews [HistoryMaker John Matthews] can you tell me, you, you-at s- one point you worked for Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] as one of his campaign secretaries (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, I was one of his organizers.  See that's when I had the Kennedy Democratic Club [Robert F. Kennedy Democratic Club].
Speaker 1: Now tell me how did you develop that idea and how did it come about?  The Democratic Club and the campaign secretary for Representative Powell (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well before that, I work for Ira Stevens [ph.], the judge, and he won.  And we all met in Frank's Restaurant [New York, New York] and we, we have drinks, blah, blah, blah.  So Steven became a judge in, in the, in the court.  And while I had a link of construction workers which I had right here at 250 Amsterdam Avenue, 2050, what was I talking about?
Speaker 1: You were talking--telling me about how you--the Kennedy Democratic Club came about.
Speaker 2: But before that--
Speaker 1: But before that, you said you worked for Ira Stevens.
Speaker 2: But I didn't have the club then.  You know like a Kennedy Democratic Club.  I had I think a worker to my office at 125th Street for Stevens.  But then after--later on when I found, founded the League of Construction Workers, I know I had two--2050 Amsterdam Avenue, that's where I founded the Democratic, Kennedy Democratic Club.
Speaker 1: So with that club, what were you doing, registering voters to getting people to involve in Kennedy's campaign (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Registering voters. In the Kennedys, I had Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy].  We used to ride in the car, the little parking Broadway there you got me (unclear) and Riverside Drive.  We used to meet right there.  And I was running for district leader.  And he came up and we used to ride in the car going from different neighborhoods, different neighbors so they would met, met him, right.  That is--I'm not talking about the president [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], I'm talking 'bout his brother.
Speaker 1: His brother Bobby.
Speaker 2: And he and I used to ride in the car and we used to have--I used to have meetings on Broadway which I just told you.  Then we used to get in the limousine and ride, going from place to place to place.  Then I wind up with him in Frank's Restaurant.  And the first thing he asked for was beer (laughter).  And that's it.
Story_ID: 475450
Speaker 1: So during the time you worked with, with Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy], were you also working with Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] as his--or is that how (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I talk from there I went with Adam then as what I call it, what I got there?
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, say that again.
Speaker 2: When I work with Powell I was--
Speaker 1: You were, says that you--the campaign, that you were--
Speaker 2: Campaign, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you worked in his campaign.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  See first I had a place across the street over there, was it like a store, storefront.  And I used to sign up a lot of people to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) To do what?
Speaker 2: For the Democratic Party.
Speaker 1: Register them to vote?
Speaker 2: Right.  And then after I--this big place I had twenty-one windows inside that place there.  'Cause I had the meeting room, I had one side was like bar and what, blah, blah, blah, and dance floor and all that.  So I had twenty-one windows in that place.  Like run from six, from 161st Street coming all the way around to Amsterdam Avenue, 2050.  So that's how I started that.
Story_ID: 475451
Speaker 1: Now why did you decide to, to open the League of Construction Workers?
Speaker 2: The league?  Because as I tell you before, trying to--not transfer--the unions had A Local, B Local.  B Local was the fabrication shop where all the black people could work in there.  But in the other high rise buildings and all that, black people couldn't work.  And the A Local black people wasn't in the A Local.  And the union was member of the American Federation of Labor.  And that was a discriminatory union also, right.  So this is where it's all starting.  And then the Congress of Industrial Organizations which was founded by John L. Lewis, and then later on the CIO merged with the AF of L CIO [American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO)].  But the Congress of Industrial Organizations started from discrimination in the AF of L, see.
Speaker 1: Now what did you do?  And, and you fought them as well.  The AF of L.
Speaker 2: Yeah I fought the AF of L, I had to.  Well like Michael Quill and them, they belongs to a union, which was all black.  And they was affiliated with the American Federation of Labor.  So have to break a lot of barriers, man, lot of barriers.  It take time to sit down to remember like if you were to get me when I was sixty, would I remember all that (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're doing a great job, you're doing a great job.
Story_ID: 475452
Speaker 1: Do you remember being the vice president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] with [HistoryMaker] Jeff Greenup (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh sure, sure. Like I tell you he ain't never did nothing.  I don't know what he--what you all want him for 'cause he ain't did nothing.  I don't, I don't know nothing that Greenup do except being a lawyer.  He was probably became president of the NAACP because when I went, started in NAACP, Mrs. Motley, Judge Motley [Constance Baker Motley], Thurgood Marshall, all of them was part of NAACP.  So when Greenup--see you had Percy Sutton, then Joe Overton [L. Joseph Overton], then come Greenup, see.
Speaker 1: So this was the New York chapter.
Speaker 2: No, you got--who did I say first?
Speaker 1: Overton.
Speaker 2: No.  You got Percy Sutton, then you got Joe Overton.  Joe Overton was president of a union also.  And grocery stores workers union [Local 338, Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union], that he was the president of that.  And then you had Adam Clayton Powell [HistoryMaker Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.].  Then you had [HistoryMaker] Basil Patterson.  Then you had Joe Overton.  Then you had Greenup.  God dammit, boy I got some memory.
Speaker 1: That's a good memory.  So you became a lifetime member of the NAACP.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I that's when I got life membership with NAACP.  And when I made my speech, I said the first thing I brought the house down.  I says, "You know, it took forty years for the NAACP to recognize things I have done, forty years."  Everybody, man they clap.  (Unclear), boy they said, "Say it again, man." (Laughter) Yeah boy I tell you, life is funny.
Story_ID: 475453
Speaker 1: Well when you think about like the '60s [1960s] and working with Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] and the Kennedys, and of all of those things you've done, which are you most proud of?
Speaker 2: Well what can I tell you, I'm proud of all of them, man.  I'm proud of everything that I have done.  As I said to you before, probably the reason why I lived to be ninety-seven, I am wide open with everybody.  I don't have no enemies that I know of.  To say you don't have a enemy, you're gonna have enemy, I don't care what you do in life.  But I am an open person.  I like everybody, I don't care who the guy is, could be a junkie.  'Cause I never know when the junkie can help me cross the street.  The same one that I don't like is the one gonna help me, right.  So I have an open mind.  And my life with the human race, I don't care whether you're white or you're black.  To me everybody's the same.  You was made by the same creator just like he put all different types of plant in the woods, different birds, different animals.  And all of 'em feed together except the human being.  We make discrimination against each other.  So that's it.
Story_ID: 475454
Speaker 1: Do you remember back in 1955 when the bus boycott was going on in Montgomery, Alabama?
Speaker 2: The bus--?
Speaker 1: Rosa Parks and the bus boycott (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was not in Alabama.
Speaker 1: I know you were not there, but do you remember when that was happening in the country?
Speaker 2: Sure, sure.  I wanted to go to Alabama, but I don't know what 'caused me didn't to go, but I wanted to go.  That's the time Emmett Till got killed.  And I wanted to go to Alabama because a lot of guys was going then and I wanted to go too, but I think union business prevented me from going.  But I wonder was he in the--pick a fight too.  Maybe I would have been shot or something, who knows (laughter).
Story_ID: 475455
Speaker 1: You were telling me that you and your wife went to the March on Washington.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we went to the March on Washington.  That time I was president of the union. And when they, they organize it, I say I have to go to Washington [D.C.] also.  So we went to Washington.  I had about twenty or thirty buses went down there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) Nineteen sixty-three [1963].
Speaker 2: Yeah, and man thousands of people.  And I sat in the front line and King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was at the podium talking.  And boy, you should hear the applause, man.  But whoever--I think Truman was president [sic. President John Fitzgerald Kennedy].  And in order to drown out the speech of, of Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.], I got a, a record here of his speech in Washington, D.C.  I got it right there, got a big record.  So one day if you want to listen or take it with you, you can make copies of it, whatever.  And King spoke.  I remember when he said, "I went to the mountain" you know, and all that kind of stuff.  And he had--all his staff was on the platform with him.  And he--come on and he said I went--I had a dream last night.  I went to the mountain and blah, blah, blah and this.  I (unclear) more clapping than you could ever hear.  I mean it was thousands of people out there.  And it was beautiful to go on a ride like that.  They had about, leaving from New York [New York], it was about forty buses.
Story_ID: 475456
Speaker 1: When you came back from that, dur- from that march [March on Washington], it was around the same time that you started to then wanna organize the community.  And you became the executive director of the 156th Street Tenants and Friends Block Association.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  'Cause we lived in that block.
Speaker 1: 156th Street Tenants and Friends Block Association.  Tenants and Friends.
Speaker 2: And tell me about that organ--that block organization.
Speaker 1: Well when I started that, we organized all the people in, in the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Why did you start it?
Speaker 1: Well because I love children and I started that to get, to have--take the kids to the park, kids to this place and what have you.  And we used to have big parties in the summertime for the kids.  We used to have bands.  We used to have donation of different things from different places.  And--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Get summer jobs.  That's what he did.
Speaker 1: And then we had a platform built and the platform was for the music, the band.  And then we had races, we had dancing, we had everything in the block. And then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So Mrs. Matthews [Marianne Matthews] says one of the things also is that you got jobs, summer jobs for the children.
Speaker 1: Well like I said summer jobs for the kids too.  And you made me forget now.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: That's okay.  What was I talking?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And those tenants in that block were together.  We were right behind--
Speaker 1: Every person in that block wear a shirt, 156th Street Block Association.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  We had green jackets with yellow, with the yellow thing on the back.
Speaker 1: On the back, it says 156th Street Block Association.  And each person pay for--I remembered the blouses that cost twenty bucks [dollars] apiece for printing and the blouse you know, whoever donated--gave it, you had to pay them first.  I think they cost twenty dollars apiece.  But with the writing on the blouse and everything.  And everybody in that block had a shirt.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's right.
Speaker 1: It was beautiful.  So it was hundreds of people.  Everybody had a shirt and we used to have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Simultaneous) (Unclear).
Speaker 1: --we used to have at 539 in the basement, we had meetings.  And we had an executive board and all like that for the block association.  And we had a bank account.  That was Harlem Saving Bank [New York, New York] used to be at 157th Street, 67th Street [sic.], 57th, one block from--on Broadway before it moved to where it become the Apple Bank [Apple Bank for Savings, New York, New York] now.  That was the Harlem Saving Bank at the time, then they change it to Apple Bank. So that's it.
Speaker 2: So you've been involved in the community for as long as you lived in it.
Speaker 1: As long as I've been here.  I've been with the community and I been with all the people.  Everybody in this neighborhood knows me.
Story_ID: 475457
Speaker 1: What was your job when you worked on that, that Delafield Hospital Community Board [Francis Delafield Hospital Community Board, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: I was the president.  And I was the president, I had an office in Delafield Hospital [Francis Delafield Hospital, New York, New York].  I had secretary, two secretaries.  One girl's name was Doris Saunders [ph.].  That was her name, right? Doris Saunders, yeah.
Speaker 1: How did you become the president?
Speaker 2: Elected.  I was elected from the community, and--
Speaker 1: And what--tell me about the hospital itself, Francis Delafield Hospital (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Delafield Hospital was cancer hospital, right?  That was, what it was.  And was affiliated with Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York].  And that's why it was next door to Columbia Univer- hospital [Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  It's down the street.  It was down the street, not next to it.  Remember?
Speaker 2: And what was your purpose for being the president?  What changes were you trying to make with that hospital?
Speaker 1: I wasn't trying to make no changes with that hospital.  I was--it's after I became president of the Community Board, that Columbia--couple guys used to come in the office and used to tell me all the discriminatory factors in Columbia hospital.  So then I meet with the Columbia because they was affiliated with Delafield.  So we sit down and we have critiques based upon doctors supposed to be and this is it.
Speaker 2: So you were trying to get them to treat black people--
Speaker 1: Just like they did the white people.
Speaker 2: Okay, the patients or the people who worked there?
Speaker 1: That's correct.
Speaker 2: Which ones?  The patients or the workers?
Speaker 1: The workers.
Speaker 2: The workers.
Speaker 1: That's correct.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So the workers at Columbia were being discriminated against?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Because we had a big picket line--where was the picket line--on Broad- no, Fort Washington Avenue.  And that was against (unclear), against Columbia.  And then Columbia sit--sat with me with all the doctors and we get it all straightened out.  And then the union, then we--picket line was off.
Speaker 2: How did they straighten it all out to your satisfaction?
Speaker 1: The same thing I was fighting for, to give black people the same credence as there was the other doctors.
Story_ID: 475458
Speaker 1: What did other people think about you, like Percy Sutton and David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] and--
Speaker 2: They think I was a hell of a guy.  See, that's why I tell you all these guys become president NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], all they did was sit (unclear), they ain't never did nothing.  There's a guy who was chairman of labor and industry did all the work for the NAACP 'cause I break down the discrimination in the Madison Square Garden [New York, New York].  I break down discrimination in 125th Street.  I don't say the NAACP did a damn thing.  They, they came into the battle when you have a battle, to help you out.  But to say they had picket lines, I don't never see them with no picket line except the guys who was chairman of labor and industry for the NAACP.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: See one thing you gotta say about the NAACP.  To me, I think it was name NAACP--Negro, the Negro improvement association, something like that, that was--Negro improvement association.  That's what the NAACP was.
Story_ID: 475459
Speaker 1: You know when you were doing all of this work like make--as the, you know, when you said you fought Madison Square Garden [New York, New York], you fought the stores in Harlem [New York, New York].  Like you were, you were doing a lot of fighting.  Could you see the changes you were--changes being--coming about?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I see the changes every day.  Like for instance subway did not know black workers.  I remember a guy named Johnson [ph.] was the guy who started the picket line against the bus company.  I mean the--
Speaker 1: Subway.
Speaker 2: The subways.  And Johnson and myself, we all used to sit together and we had a picket line against the bus company.  And as I said before, I think Michael Quill also was the head of the Transport Workers Union [Transport Workers Union of America].  So the buses and the subway was in the same category.
Speaker 1: And you fought them to get blacks (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To get black people to drive buses, right.  And Johnson fought also to get black people to drive the subway.
Speaker 1: And, and were you pleased with the outcome?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  All those things we did we--I think I feel very good about them.
Story_ID: 475460
Speaker 1: Like during the '80s [1980s] when like all the drugs came to Harlem [New York, New York] and stuff.
Speaker 2: Drugs?
Speaker 1: Like, like crack [crack cocaine] epidemic and all of that stuff started to happen.
Speaker 2: Well I tell you something.
Speaker 1: Tell me something (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About dope.  The only people I know used to use dope was the musician.  Dope wasn't around that people have today, they didn't even know what dope was.  But the only people I know use dope was the musicians and blah, blah, blah.  Outside of that, I didn't know nobody that was a dope fiend.
Speaker 1: So when you were on the--like when you became a member of the policy board in the 1980s.
Speaker 2: Yeah, what policy board?
Speaker 1: The community liaison organization.  You were helping to make policies (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) yeah.
Speaker 1: You were helping to make policies with fort--
Speaker 2: With the community.
Speaker 1: With black people and their--with the black people and, and what I've read was you somehow were working--you can tell me if this is true or not, to help with the rehabilitation of black people and drugs.
Speaker 2: That's correct.  Not drugs.
Speaker 1: It wasn't drugs, okay.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: To rehabilitate them how?
Speaker 2: I didn't know what drugs was.  As I say to you before, the only people I know used to use drugs was musicians (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were the musicians. Okay.
Speaker 2: You did not--nobody going around the street using drugs.
Speaker 1: So when you were there, the Concerned Citizens Block Association?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: The Concerned Citizens Block Association.  That was a different one from the other block association, the 156--
Speaker 2: No, no, it's 156th Block Association [156th Street Tenants and Friends Block Association].
Speaker 1: So there was a 156th Street and then I read in 1993 you founded and president--
Speaker 2: Founded when I move here.
Speaker 1: The Concerned Citizens Block Association.
Speaker 2: Concerned Citizens Block Association.
Speaker 1: And they got (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I got the charter up there.
Speaker 1: And they got-
Speaker 2: City charter behind you.
Speaker 1: That's behind me, okay.
Story_ID: 475461
Speaker 1: And they called you the mayor of 161st Street.
Speaker 2: That's right, all the fire department [New York City Fire Department] call--and whenever they have an affair, we always get invitation because seven firemen died from that fire department in the block there.  Seven of them got killed in--when it was bombed.
Speaker 1: That's a lot of people.  How many firemen were at that whole firehouse?  Seven out of how many were killed?
Speaker 2: They probably got--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  It's a small--
Speaker 2: It's very small, right?
Speaker 1: About fifty, about fifty there.  They're a bunch of nice guys.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  But the, but the citizens in 161st Street, these people are not together like we were on 156th Street.  No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Like 156th Street.
Speaker 2: You think because the times have changed?
Speaker 1: They need a lot of changes around here right now.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  It's different folks too.
Speaker 1: What changes do we need, do you need around here?
Speaker 2: Well you see the difference in the changes.  You have a lot of people from Dominican Republic just start pouring in here.  Years ago it was all Jewish, Italian.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Some Chinese.
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Some Chinese.
Speaker 2: Chinese.  You didn't have no Spanish people here when I first came here.  You didn't have much Spanish people because President Montanez [ph.] used to be at 125th--116th Street.  He had a bar there.  And he was--he one of the guys that fought what's his name?  What's that guy's name?  Hell of a fight.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Joe Louis?  Is that?
Speaker 2: No, no (unclear).
Speaker 1: Sugar Ray Leonard?
Speaker 2: Was it (unclear)? Kid Sharpton [sic.].  No, Kid Sharpton.  What the hell is--well anyhow he used to have a bar at 124th Street and 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard].  And he was a head of a fighter.  You should know his name because you take all the--he was a good fighter, one of the best.  Kid Sharpton I think his name--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Kid Gavilan.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Sorry.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 475462
Speaker 1: So Mr. Matthews [HistoryMaker John Matthews], when you think about, like you, you've worked in so many arenas and you've fought for so many people, wh- who--which people are you proud that you, that you made a difference for?  Like, like which ones are you really proud?  Like these people really needed you and you were there for them.
Speaker 2: Well I'll tell you one thing.  Years ago they used to--just between you and I, the word used to go around that the American black people was lazy, and they don't wanna do nothing.  And all the foreign come and do all the work, but American blacks was lazy bunches, they don't wanna do nothing.  So this was the thing that was happening.  I don't know why they did say those things.  But--I don't know.  I really don't know why they did, but they did it.  See and like now you have all these Dominicans coming here.  It was done under Roose--
Speaker 1: Giuliani [Rudy Giuliani].
Speaker 2: Giuliani.  He did all that crap.
Story_ID: 475463
Speaker 1: Talk to me about your relationship with David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins].  How well did you know him?  Did you work--
Speaker 2: I know him long time.  But I didn't too much like David Dinkins.
Speaker 1: Why not?
Speaker 2: I just didn't like him, period.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See and when he became mayor, I tell you one thing.  When I was running for district leader, he was running also.  And we become like enemies.  And I keep on the same thing against him, probably have the same thing against me.  And when I was gonna run for district leader again the second time, I was gonna run from the Democratic Club [Robert F. Kennedy Democratic Club] here.  But then I had too much work with the construction workers.  So Dan Aferro [ph.] at that time used to park cars, used to work in the garage on Riverside Drive.  He used to park cars here.  And that's--what that building name again?  That big building across from--the big building on Riverside Drive there, 107th [Street], when you go down the el [elevated train].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You mean where Miss Johnson [ph.] used to live?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I can't remember the name of it.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I don't remember that name either.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I know it's right on the corner, the big building.
Speaker 2: Big, big building.  Got a lot of different apartments in there.  And it's right next to where they--the Indian museum [National Museum of the American Indian-New York, New York, New York] used to be.  You know where that is.
Speaker 1: Yes sir.
Speaker 2: But the Indian museum moved downtown I think now.  But all that--Dunwell Palace [sic. Dunwell Plaza, New York, New York] was it?  What was Dun--no.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No, Dunwell is on Amsterdam [Avenue].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I can't remember the name of it.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I know that's a special name, but I don't remember it.
Story_ID: 475464
Speaker 1: So you've lived--like ninety-seven years is a long time.  Long enough to see a lot of things (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I wanna live to be a hundred.
Speaker 1: Wanna live to be a hundred.  But you lived long enough to see a lot of changes happen.
Speaker 2: Well I see changes happen in New York City [New York, New York], right.  And not only New York City, I see changes going all over the--'cause I remember when Alabama, Mississippi and all them--black people didn't have a chance down there because Alabama was one of the instigator of all the, this unions to fight black people.  So I could see when all the changes come, and when Rosa Park [sic. Rosa Parks] came into being, which was during the time of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], I was proud of it.  To see that some--because the same bus that didn't wanna take her, did the same thing to us when we were soldiers, you see.  So when she did what she did, I felt very proud of her.  And I couldn't find a better resting place for her but Harlem cemetery [Trinity Cemetery and Mausoleum, New York, New York].  I think she deserve it.  And I think Martin Luther King deserve.  Even though I did more than Martin Luther King ever did, but he, he was all over the country and as I said before, years ago all ministers was the leader of the black people.  I don't care what you did, it didn't mean nothing.  They go with the representative, see.  So that's it.
Story_ID: 475465
Speaker 1: How did you become a--and why did you become a member of the Masons?
Speaker 2: Well I become a member of the Masons because when I found out it was a Prince Hall, the charter came from England.  And England distributed the charter of, of Prince Hall to the people who always in the--got the charter.  And so England is the one who gave them the charter.  And then I later on when I joined the Masonry, I joined it because I learned a lot about Masonry.  It came from King Solomon.  And King Solomon was the founder of Israel and all that kind of stuff.  So--and Solomon was, to me was black.  Judas was black because it says one of his own kindred who helped carry his cross, the cross of Jesus, was Judas [sic.].  Was--he carried the cross for Jesus Christ when Christ fell seven times with the cross, right.  So that's it.  So I become love to Masonry because of King Solomon and all, all Masonry started from King Solomon, see.
Speaker 1: How many positions have you held?
Speaker 2: In the Mason?
Speaker 1: Different ones.
Speaker 2: I was president of the (unclear).  I'm a member of the passport and case council.  I'm a member of the foot patrol.  Oh man, so damn much.  I was member and founder of the food program, which I took into the temple.  And I took all that from when I had the store for the youths that was going to--I used to take them to the park and all that.  But then they needed--the building as so--and they was gonna build different thing there.  So I took all the food program over to the temple and I gave it to the temple.  And I had to write up a letter to send to the organization downtown who was giving out the food program.  And then they send back a reply that they accepted it, blah, blah, blah.  Then I had to go downtown and that was it.  And then thousands of people used to come and picket on the lines to get cheese--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Around the corner.
Speaker 2: --honey, and what have you.  The line used to go from 155th Street all the way--coming all the way onto St. Nicholas Avenue.  So we used to give out honey, cheese, what else?  Anything else?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Butter.
Speaker 2: And butter.  Cheese, honey and butter, three things.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And used to have some good cheese.
Speaker 2: Yeah, very good cheese.  But we used to give out thousands, thousands of--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And he didn't get paid for that either.
Speaker 2: I didn't get paid for none of these things, I just did 'em.
Story_ID: 475466
Speaker 1: Which jobs were you actually paid for?
Speaker 2: The liquor company.
Speaker 1: That was the only one?  Everything else was volunteer (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) That was his--
Speaker 1: Everything else was volunteer work?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): That's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, everything else is volunteer.  I don't get paid for nothing except when I work with the liquor company.  Outside of that, I all my time for the community.  I don't get paid for it.  I don't get paid from the Masonic temple.
Speaker 2: Why do you do all so much work for the community?
Speaker 1: I just love people.  All my life, that's the way I am.  And like my wife [Marianne Matthews] says to me the other day, "You too generous giving away money."
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  He is.
Speaker 1: She give me, she gives me a hard time, man because see with me, like the hospital [Francis Delafield Hospital, New York, New York].  Every person that work for me, who do work on me from the doctor to the nurses, they got something for Christmas.  And during before Christmas, I go around and give them envelope with money into it.  That's why everybody treat me right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And I don't give you a hard time.
Speaker 1: My wife, (laughter) yes she gave me a hard time.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): I do not.
Speaker 1: Man, she don't like when I, you know--, "You, you too generous."
Story_ID: 475467
Speaker 1: Well let me ask you this Mr. Matthews [HistoryMaker John Matthews].  What did you think of Malcolm X's style?
Speaker 2: I love him.  I think he was a good guy.  I think he was great.  And--
Speaker 1: Did you remember seeing him on the ladder in Harlem [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know Malcolm.  Sure he used to come up to the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and I can't remember that guy's name.  But anyhow, King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] came up to the NAACP and Malcolm X come up to the NAACP.  And I met him in Frank's Restaurant [New York, New York].  King never come into Frank's Restaurant, I don't remember.  But I know when he came from the South he used to come up to Harlem here.  And when Castro [Fidel Castro] came to the United States, he stayed in the Theresa Hotel [Hotel Theresa, New York, New York].  I met him.
Speaker 1: You met Castro?
Speaker 2: I met Castro too.  I was president of the union [Harlem Labor Union] then.  I met him.
Speaker 1: What was your conversation about with him?  What did you talk about?
Speaker 2: Well we just talk about the things that was done in Cuba and blah, blah, blah, you know.  And see Castro when he fought there, the president of the union then I can't-Batista [Fulgencio Batista] was president of the--of Cuba.  But Batista was a guy that was twice he was president of Cuba.  Because the United States make a--was making those guys.  United States make them.  And the one president was Machado [Gerardo Machado].  And then the second time Batista beat Machado.  Then Castro beat Batista.  And Castro go like he went into a retreat, like Christ went into the--and it was decided whether they should make Cuba a communistic country or go with the United States.  And it took him weeks before he came out with his decision.  In other words, he went up into the mountain and, and figure out what the hell is he gonna do after he won the battle with Batista.  But when he realized that Batista and all of 'em was become president of Cuba through the United States, he went with Khrushchev [Nikita Khrushchev].  And that's where Cuba become a communist nation.
Story_ID: 475468
Speaker 1: You were just telling me--you--we ended talking about Cuba and Castro [Fidel Castro].  But the fire department [New York City Fire Department], we heard some trucks and we talked about them a little and you were telling me your recollection of what the fire department used to be like.
Speaker 2: As I said before, the fire department years ago did not know blacks.  And I remembered in the '60s [1960s] I remember one black guy got a job in the fire department.  And that's the only black guy I know ever been in the fire department.  And it's just recently now they start because of all you read about the fire department discriminate.  So now they start to get blacks into them.  But I did not nothing to do with that.  All this was done from people make complaints downtown and what have you.
Speaker 1: What do you, what do you fight for now?
Speaker 2: What am I fighting for?
Speaker 1: What do you work at?  What are you, what are you working on now?
Speaker 2: I'm not working now.
Speaker 1: Well you do volunteer work.  You have the Christmas tree you put downstairs.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  That's all I do.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And the darn thing fell down.
Speaker 2: The last thing I did last year, took the kids some to Bear Mountain [Bear Mountain State Park, New York].  I took them to Lake Sebago, different places.
Story_ID: 475469
Speaker 1: Well let's talk about some of the things we haven't talked about, like the first.  You were the first black person to have a boat in Freeport, Long Island [New York] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's correct.
Speaker 1: And it was a forty-two footer.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Tell me about it.  What did it look like, what kind of boat was it?
Speaker 2: It was an Owens, forty-two foot Owens [Owens Yacht Company] and sleeps eight people.  I had a galley, I had a compartment below where you store all your whiskey and blah, blah, blah.  I remember once I was going to, going to Cape May [New Jersey] and I took--the storm was very bad.  And I had to call the  [U.S.] Coast Guard.  And the Coast Guard met me at Shark River.  And Shark River is in--what that place name?  Asbury Park [New Jersey], Shark River.  And then they navigated me through the river because that's a dangerous river going in Shark River, was very dangerous so that they navigated me.  I stayed outside until they got to me because I didn't know too much about--and that was a roaring river there when you're coming through the, the inlet.  So they came out and they navigated me through the river.  And then I got through there and then I stayed there for a while before I went on to Atlantic City [New Jersey].  And this was it.  I went from there to Atlantic City, from Atlantic City I went to Cape May.  I leave Cape May, come back to Atlantic City, then I come to New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Then you--but you were probably for a long time the only black person.
Speaker 2: I was the only black guy I know had a boat in Freeport.  Nobody else, period.  And I don't know how I got away with it, but those white guys, they all fell in love with me.  And like I told you before, the canal we used to stay was called Cape Cod, no, what I call it, canal again?  I don't remember the name of the canal.  But that canal was very--Guy Lombardo with his boat, all the other boats.  And I was the only black guy got a boat there.  And as I said before, I was lucky.  I don't know if they like what we call it was a foreigner, but I know they used to give American black people a hard time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you consider yourself a foreigner?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know they used to give American black people a hard time.
Speaker 2: Hard time man, this country.
Speaker 1: Did you consider yourself a foreigner?  Not American black?
Speaker 2: No.  See when I, as a Panamanian, I got say I'm American also, right?  Because we, we're affiliated.  But I was born in Panama, I wasn't born in the United States but Panama was then.  I think after--in 1910 I think the record is if you're born in 19, 1910, you was citizen of the United States, see.  So that's it.  And I was born in 1910.
Speaker 1: Where did your interest in boating come from?  Who taught you how to navigate and all of that stuff?
Speaker 2: How do I know navigation?
Speaker 1: No.  How--who--where did your interest in--where did you--how did you become interested in the hobby of--
Speaker 2: I--all my life I like a boat.  And I used to go out renting rowboats to go fishing.  But then I decided why rent boat when I could buy a boat 'cause I could afford it.  And I think I paid something like twenty thousand dollars in the boat.  And what--paid it off in the bank.  But twenty thousand dollars was twenty thousand dollars.  And I had it for about six or seven years.  Then I sold it to a Jewish family, see.  Jewish family bought the boat from me.  But when I first bought the boat it didn't have (unclear) bridge.  You know the bridge up top.  I, I got installed.  So extra money.  And my mooring used to cost me something like two hundred dollars a month to, to stay on the docks there.  But each person had their own dock and your--but you--any money you spend for gas on your boat, you get it back from the government.  So my boat used to carry like 150 gallons of gas.  You had two gas tanks either side of the boat.  When you go to fill it up, it cost you money, but you get the money back.  But I was president of a union [Harlem Labor Union], I wasn't making money then.  So this make no difference to me, you know.
Speaker 1: What you--I thought you only made money from being a salesman.
Speaker 2: That's what I'm saying.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you became the--go ahead.
Speaker 2: That's right.  But I had money to pay for whatever I did.
Speaker 1: And you had the prestige of being the president of the union.
Speaker 2: That is correct.  Now you're talking.
Story_ID: 475470
Speaker 1: So Mr. Matthews [HistoryMaker John Matthews], what is it you wanna be remembered for?
Speaker 2: I want to remember that I meet a good woman in life and I'm lucky.  Because I'm gonna tell you something boy, my wife [Marianne Matthews], she would have bought me more than she would have bought herself.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  But that's not what he ask you.
Speaker 2: What he ask me?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  He ask you what would you like to be remembered of.  Your accomplishments or what.
Speaker 2: No he did not.  You ask me what I--I said my wife is--right?
Speaker 1: What do you--when people think of you, what is it you want them to think when they, when they have you on their minds?  What do you want them to think about you?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Was a good man, selfless.
Speaker 1: I wasn't--I'm not a selfish person.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No, I said you were, you were selfless person.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Honest, caring, right?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Story_ID: 475471
Speaker 1: What are you most proud of that you've done with your life?  What thing when you think about all the things you've done with your life, what makes you really smile (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well every time I get on a bus, sometimes I say to--I remember one day I got on a bus and I said to the bus driver, I said you know who cause you guys to be driving bus?  I said I did.  And that guy had me spellbound to listen to the things that I--like I'm telling you.  And I think that's one of my greater thing that I have done in life.  And the construction workers.  I broke up the barriers.  I feel very good about that.  I feel very good about the things I did for a lot of youths in the community by taking them to the ballgame.  I used to take all my kids over to Yankee Stadium [New York, New York].  But I used to get free tickets.  So I distribute to, to the kids and, and I used to march with the kids from the center that we had, down the line, down to the Yankee Stadium.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go downtown the 55th Street (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right.  That's the block association [156th Street Tenants and Friends Block Association].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And would you believe to this day some of those kids, they remember him (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They growed up, some of them going to in the [U.S.] Navy.  The minute they come here, they come and look for me.  Mr. Matthews [HistoryMaker John Matthews] we can't forget you.  All these kids, man.  Wherever they go, they never forget me 'cause the things that I did with them.
Speaker 1: How does that make you feel?  How does that make you feel?
Speaker 2: Make me feel good, man.  I said to my wife [Marianne Matthews] a lot of time, I say you know, it's good when you do good for people.  'Cause all these guys are little kids when I know them, that growed up, growed up, growed up.  Then they go into Navy, they're go in the [U.S.] Army.  And yet when they come back, they never forget Mr. Matthews.  That's right.  They come look for me.  And sometime I don't even remember who the hell they are.  My wife remember them more than I do.  But they growed up so much I don't remember.
Speaker 1: And you have so many people.  You have so many, yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I can't remember all of them, man.  But my wife is good at names.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I, I, I remember there was one girl quite a few years ago.  Her parents used to live in the small complex which is a couple of blocks up.  But they moved.  And she was in the neighborhood, and she saw us sitting outside.
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And when she saw me, she said Ms. Matthews, how are you?  I said I'm fine.  How is Mr. Matthews?  I said he's right--I think he was inside, he had gone to the men's room inside the building.  So I said come, I take you inside.  When she came inside, she says my God, she hugged him.  She says I haven't seen you since I used to go to the block party, which was a woman that had four kids of her own.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And then she was in the neighborhood and she knew that we was still here, she looked us up.
Speaker 1: She--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  He didn't know who she was, but I did.
Story_ID: 475472
Speaker 1: Sidney Poitier.  I knew him when he had a restaurant [Ribs in the Ruff] on 7th Avenue [Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard, New York, New York].  And him and Mr. B.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Billy Eckstine [sic. HistoryMaker Harry Belafonte].
Speaker 1: That's Billy Eckstine.  He used to live in 539, 156th [Street].  'Cause he used to go with a girl by the name of--I can't remember her name, but she was married.  And she had to leave and come and live--because she and her husband had like parted.  But then she was going with Billy Eckstine.  And (laughter) that time Harry Belafonte used to be in 505, the corner building on 155th Street there, 56th Street.  And Harry Belafonte used to come in my store every living day.  And he used to dress, dress in blue jean pants and a shirt.  I never seen Harry dressed up in my life.
Speaker 2: Well you said your store.  When did--where was this--
Speaker 1: A dress store right on Amsterdam Avenue.
Speaker 2: You--when did you open a dress store?
Speaker 1: When I used to go with a girl by the name of Doris.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Dorothy McDavid.
Speaker 1: Doris McDavid [sic.].  And I bought the store from another Jewish family, and turn it--her name was on the storefront while I was doing the liquor work.  But I bought this store for her then, see.  I've got her pictures here too.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  She was a model and she--
Speaker 1: She was a model for brand--she was a model for Branford [Branford Modeling Agency].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And she figured the name--
Speaker 1: And she also was in the movies.  I mean the--not the movies, show business.
Speaker 2: Did she sell--was the store successful?  Did she sell a lot of dresses?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was a very, very nice store (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) It was successful--she gave a lot of it away.  Was a ladies apparel store.
Speaker 2: A ladies apparel.  I've got all the stuff that went to bought the store and blah.  I did all right inside.
Speaker 1: So what ended up happening to the store?
Speaker 2: I sold it to a Jewish family.  I told you.
Speaker 1: You sold, I thought you bought it from one.
Speaker 2: I bought it from a Jewish family.  Wait a minute, no.  Did I sell it?  Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, I think so--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.  I didn't sell it.  The school was halfway in the block and the city bought the rest of places and that's how I had to leave it and the city build a school coming over to, to the avenue because it was halfway between St. Nicholas [Avenue] and Amsterdam Avenue.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Didn't your old school burn down?
Speaker 2: Did you--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 475473
Speaker 1: Did you ever do any more work with David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] or Percy Sutton after the old days?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Like you know you didn't work on his mayoral campaign (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No, that's Percy.
Speaker 2: See Percy Sutton was my divorce lawyer.  And he's the one sent me to Mexico 'cause he works in--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Talking 'bout Percy or his brother?
Speaker 2: I said Percy Sutton.  His brother Oliver [Oliver Sutton] works here, but Percy Sutton was my lawyer.  But Oliver was in the same office, but Percy was my, my lawyer even though I know his brother.  And his brother was very good lawyer.  He knew, he knew his work better than Percy.  But Percy become a millionaire overnight.  He's a rich man today.
Speaker 1: How did he become so wealthy?
Speaker 2: Well you see he took over the Harlem Opera House [New York, New York].  They made money from that.  You know what I mean?  They, they was--you know they do a lot of finagling man, you know.  So that's all--they made their money under false pretense, man.  See they wasn't honest like me.
Speaker 1: Who of all those guys did you look up to?
Speaker 2: Well I look up to Adam [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] because Adam didn't take no, no gumption from the other fella, you know.  And Adam was a--he was a good fighter.  And he stuck with--even though he was a minister, he stuck with the underdogs, you know like myself.  I call myself a underdog to him 'cause as I said before, in those days the, the church is under ministers was the leader of black people even though you did all the work, the minister stays in his pulpit and he making all the money and you gets nothing.  So that's it.
Story_ID: 475474
Speaker 1: What are your hopes for the black community?  And we're gonna--
Speaker 2: Well I would be glad one day when a black man becomes president of the United States.  I would love to see that.  You see with me, the United States, I love the United States.  But you can't have two different races in one country.  See and I read the history of the United States.  When the black slave came here, the country wasn't built up.  The black man came here and built up the country for the white man.  And the white man living and the black man's in labor.  And he get hell and the white man live happily ever after, and the black man gets nothing.  So that's how I feel about it.  But I love the United States.  I would wish this country would become something like England.  England don't discriminate against the people.  England--I remember before Churchill [Winston Churchill] turn over England to the United States, which England--the sun never sets on the British Empire, right?  Because when the sun leave and he come to the West, he goes back to the West, they was leading people in India, some parts of China, all over the world England was until Churchill turn over.  Churchill was going to Canada to take London [England] to Canada, to Ottawa [Canada].  But then after hearing Churchill, Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] met.  They had some agreement and England turn over the leadership of the world to the United States.  That's how the United States become the leader.  But when I was a kid coming up as I said before, the sun never sets on the Br- that's all I knew.  They was the leader of the world.  But you didn't find England going to all countries and start a war.  They didn't never did something--they would go into a country that is trying to fight a war to settle it.  But they never go in to fight a war with another country.  We the only ones doing this.
Story_ID: 475475
Speaker 1: So I wanna ask you just a couple more questions about your role at the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  You were the vice president?
Speaker 2: I was vice president and I was chairman of labor and industries for the NAACP.
Speaker 1: How--
Speaker 2: And chairman of labor and industries, the one who go out and find all the jobs.  And break up discrimination in different places.  And that's what I used to do.  The president ain't never did a damn thing.  And we used to have big meetings with all the construction workers.  We was at 509 upstairs, that's where all the--it was a big place up there.  And that's where Crawford's store [Crawford Shoe Company] used to be downstairs and the other store used to be downstairs.
Speaker 1: So did the mafia ever get mixed up in anything you were doing?  Did they ever get mixed up with the NAACP?
Speaker 2: The only mix-up I know with mafia was with Frank's Restaurant [New York, New York].  I know they was the owners of Frank's.
Speaker 1: Did they ever get mixed up with the NAACP?
Speaker 2: No.  Like I said to you, one--a mafia, one of the mafia members used to come up to the NAACP when I gave meetings.  He used to come up there because he fell in love with me or whatever he did.  But he used to bring me like presents packed very nicely.  And then they invited me out to a luncheon out in Long Island [New York].
Speaker 1: Why would they--why would he come and see you?  What was he trying to get you to do for him?
Speaker 2: Because on my good side I guess.  He used to bring me--I never forget man, use--I used to say to him, "Why you bring me all this whiskey for?"  But he used to bring bottles of whiskey and gave me.  He used to sit down and listen to the meeting and then he go back and tell them what's going on, you know.
Speaker 1: Did it ever--were you ever not happy that he was coming up?
Speaker 2: He was a very, very nice fellow--
Speaker 1: He was very nice (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Even though he was a mafia.  And then I used to--I fell in love with him too because I remembered he had a house out in Long Island.  He wanted to sell it to me.  I tell him, "No man, I ain't gonna live out there," you know.  So he wanted to sell me his house.
Speaker 1: Did he ever--did he ever get on your boat?
Speaker 2: No, he never been, no he never been on it.  He never been there.  I never had--I never had a--except for the captains of all the boats out there.  They used to come.  Like the pictures you saw was taken right by my boat.  But all of--Guy Lombardo and all them, all the captains.  All of them used to muster around my boat.  We used to sit there and we used to talk.  And yet I was the only black.
Speaker 1: Did they ever talk about race relations?
Speaker 2: No.  We never talk about them kind of stuff because personally, I didn't even know how--there was a mafia in town.  When I bought my boat, I didn't know all this crap.  But then it was told to me later.  Then when I look around, I say what the hell I'm doing out here?  You know what I mean.  So that was it.
Story_ID: 475476
Speaker 1: So when did you become interested in music?  Who taught you to play music (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well ever since--well I like music from when I was a kid.  My--we had an organ.  My wif- my sister used to play the organ.  My father [Christopher Matthews (ph.)] played the organ.  And I used to be practicing on the organ also.  But I never played the organ like my sister, my sister played the organ for the church and all that kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: So before we end our session today, can you think of anything you didn't talk about that you--that we should talk about?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't know.  We talk about a lot of things, man.
Speaker 1: Well can you play a little tune on your guitar for us?  Can you play a little bit?
Speaker 2: I don't feel like it today.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well can we come back another day?
Speaker 2: Sure, come any days--the both of you come back.
Story_ID: 475477
Speaker 1: Remember when you ran for district leader?  You remember being endorsed by the New York state senator at the time, Vander L. Beatley [sic. Vander L. Beatty]?
Speaker 2: Remember what?
Speaker 1: Do you remember endorsed by the New York state senator at the time you were running in 1980 for district leader?  Do you remember who worked to help you try to win the election?
Speaker 2: A lot of people, a lot of people.  I had people going around with petitions and I can't remember nobody actually--I know it's a lot of people used to go around and have petitions signed for me.
Story_ID: 475478
Speaker 1: Do you remember receiving the--a twenty-five years of excellence service award from the Amsterdam, Amsterdam newspaper [New York Amsterdam News]?
Speaker 2: The Amsterdam?
Speaker 1: Newspaper. Remember--you know the black newspaper here in Harlem [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: The Amsterdam News.
Speaker 1: Yes sir.  Do you remember when they honored you?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And the Pittsburgh Currier [New Pittsburgh Courier].
Speaker 1: And the Pittsburgh Currier, they also honored you.  They gave you awards.  Do you remember receiving those awards?  No.  What about remember when you used to have Harlem Week up here?  When Harlem Week started and they had a white family come up to Harlem and--
Speaker 2: I was a part of that.  We had Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Yes sir.
Speaker 2: And we walk across George Washington Bridge.  And close off the bridge.  And the white family (unclear) was marshal, straight across the bridge, back and forth.  We also--Adam Clayton Powell was in the group.
Speaker 1: Was Charles Schmitz [ph.] the first black driver?
Speaker 2: The first--that's one of the first ten.
Speaker 1: One of the first ten.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And he was also a Mason.
Speaker 1: He was a mason as well?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a 33 Degree Mason.
Story_ID: 475479
Speaker 1: You said you remember when Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] was a bag boy.
Speaker 2: A bag what?
Speaker 1: A bag boy at the store.  Remember when he--I'm sorry, a busboy.
Speaker 2: Not Caldwell [ph.].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  When (unclear).
Speaker 2: Now who--which one do you remember?
Speaker 1: Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins].
Speaker 2: Dinkins, okay.
Speaker 1: Not Dinkins, what's his name?  The one that just win election.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Paterson [HistoryMaker Basil Paterson].
Speaker 1: Rangel, Charlie Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel].
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a busboy--
Speaker 1: Okay you remember when he was a busboy.
Speaker 2: --Theresa Hotel [Hotel Theresa, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember when he was a busboy.
Story_ID: 475480
Speaker 1: Now who was it that played saxophone at house parties every Saturday?
Speaker 2: Oh, I can't remember his name.  But a lot of guys--we had a whole band.  As I said before, when I was playing with different--with a band, we used to play at house parties.  They used to have Saturday night house parties.  And that's all I used to do, go to the--every Saturday night, all Friday night, went to have house party.  We used to go to.
Speaker 1: What instrument did you play?
Speaker 2: I used to play alto saxophone at that time.
Speaker 1: Who taught you how to play that instrument?  Who taught you how to?
Speaker 2: Donovar School of Music [ph.] from 120th Street.  She--Grace Watson [Grace Elizabeth Watson], Skees Watson [ph.].  You, you know Skees Watson?  You don't know him.  Well (unclear), Grace was five of them.  (Unclear) judge--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Shut up Marianne [Marianne Matthews].
Speaker 2: You get me mixed up every time.  Judge Watson [James S. Watson].  He was the first black judge in the United States [sic. New York].  And how we--he's from Jamaica also.  And he was a porter at Penn Station [Pennsylvania Station, New York, New York], but he finally got a judgeship.  And he had Grace Watson, James Watson [James Lopez Watson], he had five kids, all of them, I can't remember the name.  James Watson, Barbara [Barbara M. Watson], well all those people that we all--I know all of them.  And Judge Watson used to live on 120th Street.  And Donovar School of Music was on 120th Street right next to the Watson.  So that's how I kno- met all of them.
Story_ID: 475481
Speaker 1: You were the president of the Bottle and Cork Club.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How did you get--become--were you the first black president of the Bottle and Cork Club?
Speaker 2: No, I can't remember who was the president before.
Speaker 1: What was the Bottle and Cork Club?
Speaker 2: It was liquor salesman's club (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) Liquor salesman.
Speaker 2: For all liquor salesmen, we are one club.
Speaker 1: Black and white or just black?
Speaker 2: No, just black.
Speaker 1: Just black.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How many black liquor salesmen were there?
Speaker 2: Jesus.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I showed you the picture with all of the men.  I don't know how many.
Speaker 2: Maybe 'bout fifty or a hundred, I don't know.
Speaker 1: So who formed the club?  Did you form the club or--
Speaker 2: No, the club was formed before.  I can't remember what was the first president.  But that--when the election, I won the election.  But the first president, I don't remember who was the first president.  I would have remembered it if--but no I can't.  But we used to meet at 141st Street [New York, New York] and we had a regular meeting place there that we meet.  We rented it from a lady and when we have our meeting, that's where we had the whole meeting.
Speaker 1: So do you remember [HistoryMaker] Evelyn Cunningham's husband?
Speaker 2: Her husband?
Speaker 1: Vincent Cunningham [ph.].
Speaker 2: Vincent Cunningham wasn't Evelyn's husband.
Speaker 1: What was her husband's name?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  But Vincent Cunningham wasn't Evelyn Cunningham--
Speaker 1: What was--do you remember which one of her husbands was a salesman who was a liquor salesman?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All, all I know is Vincent Cunningham was a liquor salesman.  But he was affiliated with Evelyn, I don't know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She--Vincent Cunningham--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The lady that Vincent--
Speaker 2: So Vincent Cunningham was a salesman, but he was not Evelyn's husband?
Speaker 1: Not, not that I know of.
Speaker 2: You know of, okay.
Speaker 1: I know he had a--his lady used to work in the drug store on St. Nicholas Avenue.  And they have two kids, but I--he never was Vincent--Evelyn Cunningham--not that I know of.
Story_ID: 475482
Speaker 1: How do you know Evelyn [HistoryMaker Evelyn Cunningham]?
Speaker 2: From the newspaper.  And then she used to be like interview me and different guys I imagine.  And she used to write up, you know, different--she was a very nice person.  And she became big, big timer man, she was big timer.  But she knew what she was doing.  She was no fool there.  Very nice girl.  Is she still alive?
Speaker 1: She's still alive (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) Sure she is.
Speaker 1: She still live on Riverside Drive [New York, New York] or where she live?
Speaker 2: She still lives on Riverside Drive.
Speaker 1: She still live over there?
Speaker 2: Yes sir.
Speaker 1: Yeah, man.  Shoot.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Don't you remember sometime last year we saw her?  I don't remember where, but we saw her.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Wasn't it at Coogan's [New York, New York]?
Speaker 1: Yeah I think so.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I think so too.
Story_ID: 475483
Speaker 1: Okay so before we stop taping you, can you tell me why you agreed to sit down and talk to us?  Why do you think history is important?
Speaker 2: Well I think it's important that the thing that I have done in the community, that it become known later.  That maybe kids who coming up one day when they go to library or where they go, they can see it and understand what true me and other guy make it good for them.
Speaker 1: What challenges did you face in your life?  What were some of the challenges?  What were--what was difficult?  Did you ever come up against anything that was difficult?
Speaker 2: I don't remember anything that was difficult.
Speaker 1: What has been most rewarding?
Speaker 2: To see that something done with all black people.  That was the greatest thing that I think I have done.  To see that black people break up the barriers that as I said before, you got discrimination in New York City [New York, New York].  But it was more prevalent in the South than here.  But I live to see that it is keep on going now that black people coming up, coming up, coming up.  And it make me feel good.  'Cause I feel that my accomplishment and maybe other people that did fighting also, make the other black people living better and have a better time, life than I had.  Even though I didn't depend on the government, but still I was in the, in the same category as the rest, see.  That's it.
Story_ID: 475484
Speaker 1: Christopher Matthews [ph.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And where was the picture taken?
Speaker 1: Maybe in Panama.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And this is your father.
Speaker 1: That's my daddy.
Speaker 2: Hold on a second.  His father was born February 20th, 1886.
Speaker 1: That's the year I was born.
Speaker 2: That's--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Who is this person?
Speaker 2: This is my mother.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What is her name?
Speaker 2: Theresa Matthews.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And this was taken in where?
Speaker 2: Maybe Panama.  I don't know where it was taken.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Thank you.  Next please.  What are we looking at?
Speaker 2: This was at Delafield Hospital [Francis Delafield Hospital, New York, New York] when I was a community leader.  Presented a community.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And where are you in the picture?
Speaker 2: I'm right here.  And this lady over here, bring it back.  This is Bella Abzug.  I think she's dead now.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah she is.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  This is Dave Friedland [David B. Friedland].  He was a city councilman.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  The man with the glasses?
Speaker 2: This guy right here.  This is Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  David Dinkins.
Speaker 2: Right.  No go on over.  I wanna see somebody else.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Who?
Speaker 2: No I was trying to remember.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Next.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: That's me, that's Dave Freidland, city councilman.  I don't remember who the--this my wife, this is Percy Sutton, and this is--what's his name Marianne [Marianne Matthews]?  That lives up here, that his daughter just one judgeship?  Stan Michels [Stanley E. Michels], city councilman.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Dr. Holloman [John L.S. Holloman, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Probably yeah.  Yeah, Dr. Holloman.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And--
Speaker 2: He was in Delafield, Delafield, yeah.  We all was buddy-buddies.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.  Who's this person?
Speaker 2: This is Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson], the founder of Ebony magazine.  This is Frankie Brazil [ph.].  This is me.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  On the right, far right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, far right.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Who's on the far left?
Speaker 2: What this guy name that--he died though.  Liquor salesman, this guy right here.  Can I see that picture a minute?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I'll show you, I'll show you.  Here, take a look here.  Who is this person?
Speaker 2: Beaman, Walter Beaman.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Walter Beaman.
Speaker 2: Walter Beaman.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay and this person?
Speaker 2: This is Frank Brazil.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  This person.
Speaker 2: This is a lawyer.  I can't think of his name now.  And this is Johnson, the founder of Ebony magazine.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's me.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And this is you.  You were eating an ice cream.
Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughter) yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead. Okay who is this?
Speaker 2: That's me and that's Chuck Williams [ph.].  He was a Jamaican representative in the United States for the whiskey business.  Promoting.  I was donating a plaque to him.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What picture are we looking at?
Speaker 2: You're looking at the guys in that picture where my boat was.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Where is--your boat was where?
Speaker 2: In Freeport [New York].  And the name of the boat, you want the name of the boat?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Sure.
Speaker 2: Lady Dorothy.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And you are here.
Speaker 2: That's me.  I can't remember all them guys' names.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's okay.  Okay, what are we looking at?
Speaker 2: Hunting picture.  I was hunting with my dog.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You mean your best friend.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What was the name of the dog?
Speaker 1: Honey.  This was Pat.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That wasn't Honey.
Speaker 1: That's Pat.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Honey was the (unclear).
Speaker 1: He was a hunting dog too.  See the pheasant?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: See the pheasant up there?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, yeah.  That's, that's, that's him?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Interesting.
Speaker 1: Go and get the bird and bring it back.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Who is in the picture?  You can look at the monitor.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is my wife.  This is me.  My wife will remember all of those people.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, so take a look now.
Speaker 1: Take a look.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No, you take a look.  So this is you.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's you and Ronnie [ph.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And your wife, and then--
Speaker 1: Beverly [ph.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  The nephew.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No, but the black lady is--
Speaker 2: That's my daughter.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's his daughter.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  It's your daughter.
Speaker 1: Beverly, Beverly.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Beverly, and to the, to the left of her.
Speaker 1: My son, my son John [John Matthews, Jr.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  John, Jr.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  John, Jr. and this girl?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Mary Ellen [ph.], that's my--
Speaker 1: Mary Ellen.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Your nephew's wife.
Speaker 1: Right.  This me.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You are on the.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  We got the name of these guys?  This is Judge Steven [ph.], this is Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.].  This is Jimmy Richardson [ph.].  I can't remember his name.  He's dead.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  On the right, the left.
Speaker 1: The left.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, let's do it again.  So who's this person?
Speaker 1: I don't remember who.  This is me.  This was the president of Local 15 [International Union of Operating Engineers].  This is Adam Clayton Powell.  This is Judge Steven.  This is Jimmy Richardson.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And this person.
Speaker 1: Charlie Jennings [ph.].  This guy name I remember is Duke Wilson [ph.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Let me, let me zoom in please.
Speaker 1: Duke Wilson.  He used to be out play in a band.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And his wife--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And he, does he have a name?
Speaker 2: I can't remember all these kids, man.  I don't--all these grown up kids.  They used to be from the Block Association, see, 156th Street Block Association [156th Street Tenants and Friends Block Association].  All those kids.  But Duke Wil--I can't, I can't remember them.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I can't either.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay we'll start--
Speaker 1: Well just where are you?  Where are you?
Speaker 2: What this guy name again now?  We just mentioned his name the other day.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  It's the--this man sitting here, kneeling on the left with a, with a hat.
Speaker 2: Bobby, Bobby Peacock [ph.], Bobby Peacock.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Hold on a second.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You and Bobby Peacock.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So who's this person?
Speaker 2: Bobby Peacock.  That's me.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  This is you.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I don't know that one.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: I don't remember them.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Don't remember their names.  They all liquor salesmen.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay and I can't remember.  Anymore?  I can't remember who they are.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, but this is you right here.
Speaker 2: That's me and Bobby Peacock.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay so what are we looking at?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  The liquor salesmen's wives.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right let's start here.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's me right there.  Remember?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and who is this?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Who is this?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  This is Beverly [ph.], not our Beverly, but--
Speaker 1: Aren't the names in the back?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No.  And this Bobby Peacock's wife.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I don't know.  I can't remember all these.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's all right.  What year was this, do you remember?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Gosh.
Speaker 2: It's probably in the '50s [1950s] wasn't it?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  This, this last one over there, that's Delores Cusper [ph.] and her son.  Remember?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Delores.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Delores.  I don't know the rest of 'em.  She and I were--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Hold it, go ahead.
Speaker 1: That's me and my wife.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And what is your wife's name?
Speaker 1: Marianne.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And when was this picture taken?
Speaker 1: On Broadway.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  When?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  March the 13th, 1962.
Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962], yeah.
