Story_ID: 31416
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer. And Scott Stearns is the videographer. And Samuel Adams is the observer. And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us.
Speaker 2: Walter Massey. "W-A-L-T-E-R M-A-S-S-E-Y".
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: April 5th, 1938.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: I have no idea. What is today's date?
Speaker 1: March 13th--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) March 13th, 19--.
Speaker 1: 2002.
Speaker 2: 2002. That's it.
Speaker 1: And--this is just slating.  So it's okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And your--the location. Could we have the address of where we are?
Speaker 2: Morehouse College. 833,--no 830 Westview Drive, Atlanta, Georgia 30314.
Speaker 1: Okay. And your profession?
Speaker 2: President of Morehouse College, physicist.
Speaker 1: And we should also say PhD too.
Speaker 2: Okay. PhD. Right.
Story_ID: 31417
Speaker 1: What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is chicken.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Cape Cod.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't have one.
Story_ID: 31418
Speaker 1: You have been a father and a step is it--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Stepfather, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now your father was--Okay. Can I first start asking about your father--?
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: First name.
Speaker 2: Okay. After my--I had two fathers. My biological father, but my stepfather who adopted me is Mr. Massey, my last name--who I really call my father. So we talking about him?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay. Can you tell us about and what you know about him?
Speaker 2: Yes. Well we grew up in Hattiesburg [Mississippi]. He is--his family was outside of Hattiesburg and from South Carolina. And he married my mother when I was four years old. And then he adopted me and he raised me. So he was my father to all intents and purposes.
Speaker 1: Can you talk--did he ever talk about his growing up there in Hattiesburg and what it was like? And did he share any of those stories?
Speaker 2: Oh sure. We had an extended family. He had several brothers and sister who lived in Perkingston outside of Hattiesburg in the--What we call in the country. And his--he was raised by his aunt and uncle who was--his parents died early. So they had a farm. A rather large farm and we visited and all summers. I spent summers on the farm in Perkinston [Mississippi]. And we'd cut sugar cane and made syrup. And every September we'd go down and slaughter the animals. And relatives would come from Chicago and Detroit and with freezers ice packs and take, you know, beef and pork and hams back home. So it was--I knew him very well. And we hunted and fish in the country and all that--all of those kinds of things.
Speaker 1: Did he share with you any sort of philosophies or anything like that, that stayed with you today, you know, or anything that has stayed with you?
Speaker 2: He was a very hardworking man and a very sober--and I don't mean not drinking. I mean he was a person who--not straight-laced, but had--was disciplined in his own life in terms of things he wanted to achieve. And he raised us, both my brother and I, I think with a fairly strict set of rules of behavior, but most importantly was the preparation, hard work and living a life that was sort of free from character faults.
Speaker 1: And your mother, give her name and tell--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) My mother's name was Essie. "E-S-S-I-E". Nelson was her maiden. And her mother was alive too when I was growing up, my grandmother, Betty Nelson and lived right down the street from us. And my mother was born in Hazlehurst, Mississippi. And my mother was very, very, very--a very  smart woman. She went to college. She dropped out sophomore year, because she became pregnant with me by my father, Chester Gaines. And she was raising me too by herself with my grandmother until she married. But she was a school teacher-- elementary school teacher. And then became elementary school principal. But she was a woman of many hobbies and vocations. Very entrepreneurial. Every summer something else was happening at our house. She started--one summer she had a nursing home--nursing kinder--center. The next summer she'd open a beauty parlor. The next summer she'd have a seamstress shop. Florist shop, whatever. But she was--a restless woman. A very restless woman and always trying new things.
Speaker 1: Did she share any of her growing up with you?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Could you give me just a few stories?
Speaker 2: Well she grew up in Hazlehurst, I think mostly until they moved to Hattiesburg. And her father and mother were both alive up to--until I was born, in fact, they both were. And she had a fairly happy childhood. I don't remember any dramatic stories. The stories she told were mostly about things she and her sister, my Aunt Ruth and her brother Ed would get into when they were children. Sort of your children's type adventures in a small town. Our life was colored-- And that's no pun intended--by the fact that Mississippi was totally segregated. So we lived in two worlds as everyone did then. You lived in your own world of the black community. But you interacted all the while with white community, because that's who worked for. My grandmother was a domestic. Worked for the Morrises and my mother worked for the Morrises in the summer while she was going to school. And I worked awhile for the Morris'. They were kinda benevolent white family who were kind and patron--not patronizing in a bad sense with us. But it was a sort of--not an unusual relationship in the South in those days, for people who worked for one family for generations.
Story_ID: 31419
Speaker 1: Now what are your earliest memory--or some of your earliest memories of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh I know my earliest memory. My very earliest memory is--I was in the backyard at my grandmother's where we lived then. Because my father was in army. My father, Mr. Massey. And he came home in his uniform and I remember him coming home in his uniform. And I was in the backyard. And my next memory is my brother, Al who is four years younger, who--they were boiling--my grandmother used to cook--not cook, boil water in the backyard in a big black skillet--not skillet, pot. You probably never seen one. A big cast iron pot. And you would boil the water to wash clothes and she made soap. You made soap out of lye and ashes. And she made the soap and Al ate some of the lye. And it was horrible, of course, because, you know, it's very toxic. And it burned his mouth. And so I remembered that. Those are the two earliest memories. So I was about four.
Speaker 1: And you're--And you--.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: You have one brother.  Right?
Speaker 2: Yes, he is my half-brother.
Speaker 1: Okay, half-brother.
Speaker 2: I mean he's my brother, but he is by Mr. Massey.
Speaker 1: (unclear).
Speaker 2: Right. Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now what other memories do you have of growing up? You know. And tell me what Hattiesburg looked like? I mean that community at the time. Besides being segregated? How large a community was it? How large a black community was it?
Speaker 2: Hattiesburg was about 40,000. It was actually larger then, than it became subsequently. Because it was the home of Camp Shelby which was, I think probably the third largest army base in the nation after Fort Bragg and Fort Campbell, in those days. So the population was a little bigger. But (unclear) it remained 35 or 40,000 thousand. It's about 70 miles from the Gulf. It was a small town. We thought we lived in town, not the country. Black community must've been maybe a third to a half of that. And it was a fairly prosperous town. Hercules Powder Company, a big chemical company was one of the biggest employers. And as I said Camp Shelby was there. Hired a lot of people. I don't remember--it wasn't a poor town. I don't remember a great deal of poverty. The few people who were poor in the black community everyone knew. And sorta' helped them out. And when we went fishing we'd give them fish and went hunting we'd give them things. And as I said my mother was a school teache, my aunt was a school teacher. And my father worked for Hercules and so he--which was a good job. He was a manual laborer. He was not a skilled laborer, but it was a very good job to work for Hercules. They had a co-op store we shopped in. And most of my friends had similar jobs of that type. So it was a pleasant community. I have very happy memories of my childhood. Except for the instances that deal with segregation. And we did, you know, sort of small town things. We had plenty of room to play. It was a very safe town. So you could walk from one part of town to the other and visit friends around town then. There were no drugs then, of course, nothing like, you know, you have now. So it was very pleasant. It was a small American town in my memory, you know.
Speaker 1: I want you to even take yourself back to then. And I'd like you to describe to us what sights, smells and sounds remind you of your childhood?
Speaker 2: Well there's a pecan tree in the back of the president's house here where we live now [at Morehouse College]. And that reminds me of Hattiesburg. There were pecan--pecan grove. Because my grandmother's--her house and her yard and the yard next door there were big pecan trees. And we'd go out and pick-you know,  pick up the pecans in the fall when they--when they fell off the tree. Woodpeckers. And there aren't many around now. The red capped woodpeckers. I get so excited every time I see one. Shirley my wife thinks (unclear) is just funny. But I saw one a couple of months ago over behind our house. And I ran out of the house with my binoculars. I like to watch birds anyway. So those memories remind me of Hattiesburg. And sugar cane which you don't see anymore either. We grew sugar cane in the country and made syrup or just ate the sugar cane raw. Which would make you sick, of course, if you ate too much.
Speaker 1: Now what--are there any other memories that you have, you know, of those early days? Any other incidents or memories? Whether around family life or (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well the worst memory I have--and it's very early. Can't be much after the ones of my father coming home. We had a dog, a German shepherd named Lady. And the dog I'm told by my mother and grandmother was very fond of me. And the dog would watch for me. So I must've been a little older, you know. Hadn't gone to school. But and they would leave me alone when I was very young in the house or in cradle or crib and the dog would watch and bark when anyone came up and, so forth. And one day the--I was going down the street and I was called by someone and said, "We want you to come down to Steadman's Grocery Store," which was about a half a block down. And the dog was dead and had been killed by a policemen. They--this white policemen. And I don't remember all the epi-the details. But they called her to the car and for some reason, I can't remember, just shot her through the head. And I remember that. Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's cruel. You--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2: Oh I couldn't--I don't know. Six, seven. I don't know, but I remember the dog there. The dog was a part of the family.
Story_ID: 31420
Speaker 1: So when I say, you know, we had happy memories except for those memories that remind you that it was not an idyllic life and you weren't really living in Pleasantville. You know, the small town. You were living in a segregated community which intruded upon your life in very harmful ways.
Speaker 2: Did your parents explain that to you?
Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah.
Speaker 2: And what did they say?
Speaker 1: It was very difficult, because--and it comes from many blacks (unclear), but especially for my father [Mr. Massey]who was a very proud, very proud man. And to have to raise us to accept segregation and to not talk back to white people in certain ways, because I mean it was physically dangerous. Our house was about oh maybe a half a mile--maybe a mile from Richburg Hill. And we used to go skating up there. It was little--probably a little smaller hill than it seemed then. But it was a site of lynchings. Not when I was growing up, but historically it had been there and everybody know what Richburg Hill was. And so you were in an environment when these were real things. You know, this was way before Emmett Till was killed, any of that. So physical danger was not something that was simply a fantasy if you did the wrong things in the wrong environment. And so my parents had to raise us to not do certain things in certain circumstances, but yet to be proud and independent. And that's not easy. It wasn't easy I think for all of us of that generation.
Speaker 2: So let's talk a little bit about the messaging that went along with that. Can you go--can you talk about that? I mean how do you raise, you know, how--what was the messaging they were giving you? Don't go certain places, but be proud of who you are?
Speaker 1: Yes. Do this, just don't, you know, you don't have to do certain things. You don't have to take certain things from people. But don't ex--you know, explode your temper. Don't say certain things that are out of place. Just stay out of the way. That was probably the message. I remember I was on the bus once, oh my goodness.
Speaker 2: (Unclear). Okay. You were just talking--.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: About the messaging?
Speaker 1: The messages mostly--to try to avoid situations. Be aware. Be sensitive to circumstances that might put you in a situation that would be dangerous and inappropriate. As I was about to say, I was--You had to sit in the back of the bus, of course . And I was coming home from elementary school and it was on the other side of town. So I would take the bus on occasions, sometimes I'd walk, we'd walk together. And the bus driver didn't let me off at my stop. He just re--did refuse to stop.  And people would do things like that. I mean just with no reason, just to aggravate you. He said he was not gonna stop. So he took me about three blocks, not three blocks, three stops away from home. And I, you know, was maybe in the fourth grade. And it was a longer way from home. And then he put me off in this neighborhood which was a not--a neighborhood was not too far from us. But a neighborhood where the white kids were very aggressively anti-black, Negro, colored. And they would always throw rocks at us when we went by. So I had to come through this neighborhood. But you were taught, "Well you just don't say anything to the bus driver. Tell us when you'd come home. Don't argue with the bus driver. You know, if he's not gonna let you off. Ask him please to let you off. If he doesn't then you just get off when you have to get off."  But it was that kind of thing, that was the message. Just try to stay out of trouble. But, you know, you when you come home they would tell you, "that was that person's fault. You had nothing to do with it. There's nothing wrong with you. You did nothing wrong." So it was reinforced, your sense of who you were and the message, you know, was to let you know that, "you are not the person who is responsible for this. It's the society of those people who are responsible." But also the message was that all white people are not like this. And we had many examples of those who were not. The Morris' who my grandmother worked for were a very, I think as I say--to the degree that you could be kind within those circumstances, kind and supportive. They didn't pay her enough money, probably for cleaning the house and taking care of her children. But they treated her well and they treated us well. They gave us things above and beyond what they paid her. So it was not an anti-white message by any means that we were given.
Speaker 2: When you think about that, that's pretty sophisticated in many ways. I mean the message--.
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: Being able to do that. To uplift yourself in those environment. You know, what I'm
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Saying. I mean black people--often I think we're too hard on ourselves.
Story_ID: 31421
Speaker 1: Where did you go to elementary school? What was elementary school? What's the name of it?
Speaker 2: It was called Royal Street. No that was before Royal Street. I went first to Sixteenth Section it was called. Because that was the section of the town. And that's where my mother taught, in fact. That's where I went through the third grade and fourth grade I believe. And then we went to Eureka. Which there was only one school that went from 1st through 12th for coloreds, and that was on the other side of town. And I went there from fifth through sixth. And then they built a new high school-- junior high and high school on our side of town called Royal Street High. And I came there in the  seventh grade and that's where I continued until I came to Morehouse [College].
Speaker 1: Now what type of person were you as a young person? Were you quiet? Were you rambunctious? Were you--you were the oldest, I mean so were you--were there things expected of you? Were you introspective?  I mean what--Just what type of person were you?
Speaker 2: I was a little of everything. I was introspective. I liked to read from a very early age. And I spent a great deal of time indoors reading. And to the extent that sometimes my relatives would say, "why don't you go outdoors and play." And my mother would say, "leave him alone . He wants to read." But I was not that shy or introspective. I played in the band, very early. The first band--I was in the sixth grade and we start--seventh grade. And when we started the band at Royal Street I was one of the first in it. And I had very good friends who lived in the community and we would play hooky. I played hooky a lot (laughing) when I was in elementary school. My buddy and I. We almost never went to school (chuckling) it seems like. And my mother found out, of course (chuckling). But I was not--I was not a difficult child. The things that I got in trouble for were those things like playing hooky from school and going to the movies and not coming home on time from playing and that kind of thing. It was--Not--it was a-seemed a fairly a normal childhood to me.
Speaker 1: So you were playing hooky though when you went to Eureka, not when you--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No.
Speaker 1: went to- -?
Speaker 2: When I went to the school where (chuckling) she was teaching. We would go to school. And we found a way to go under the stage. Because in the--We had class in the room--auditorium. There was a door you could under the stage and you could go under the school and sneak out. And so we would go in the morning and we would sneak out. And we'd go play around the neighborhood and do things. And then just before school was over we'd sneak back in (chuckling) under the stage and sit in the class. And one--I remember the day the--my mother was speaking with the teacher. And the teacher would say, "has--." My nickname was Peeka. "P-E-E-K-A". Says, "has Peeka been sick?" My mother said, "no, why?"  Say, "well you know ,he's been missing a lot in school." And she said, "no he comes to school everyday. 'Cause I bring him." She said, "no he hasn't--." And she showed her the book. My mother--people were--got whippings then. I don't remember being hurt, but she would break a switch off of a branch off of it. And she whipped me all the way home with the whole school behind laughing (chuckling) of my being whipped on the legs for playing hooky.
Speaker 1: Now who was your friend at--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Ralph Willard.
Speaker 1: that time?
Speaker 2: (Chuckling) Who lived right on the back of us. Our house was on Scuba Street. His was on (unclear) Street, but they were back-to-back. And we were buddies until I left school.
Speaker 1: And when--did you always have--Well let me ask you during that time-'Cause you seem--You know, that seems to be sort of an adventurous, you know, young boy adventurous (unclear). Was there anything that you sort of dream of being or, you know, or were interested in at that time? 'Cause you said you were a reader.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm. I wanted to leave Mississippi. I wanted to leave Hattiesburg (chuckling). And not so much to escape that environment. I just wanted to see different worlds. We didn't have television, of course. We didn't get our first television until 1948. And it wasn't ours, it was our uncle. I remember we--'48, because we were watching-got it to watch Jackie Robinson with the Brooklyn Dodgers. But so we listened to radio and read. I listened to radio and read a lot and I would daydream. And I used to be teased for daydreaming a good deal. I just--I wanted to travel, to explore to see other parts of the country. And that was always in my imagination. That I would--not any particular career, because I wasn't sure about what careers there were. But I knew I wanted to be something that would allow me to move beyond that environment. In fact, I remember I was a little older--I was older then--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: And, it must have been about the eighth grade or so. And my mother was in the living room and I was in the next room, probably reading or something. And she had some of her friends over. And they were laughing and talking. And they were saying, "well, you know, Peeka spends so much time reading." And my mother said, "yes he likes that and he wants to do--" something I can't remember. And they said, "oh well, you know, he's not gonna be able to do that, he's just gonna be a school teacher." And I remembered and I said, "I will--I'll show them" (chuckling). You know, "I'm gonna do something else. I'm not gonna spend my life in this town." So those kinds of feelings motivated me a great deal to think beyond Hattiesburg and Mississippi.
Speaker 1: And how did you get the nickname Peeka?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.
Speaker 1: Don't know where it--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No. I have no idea.
Story_ID: 31422
Speaker 1: And were there other things influencing you like when you did go to Eureka, or, you know, church or other people in the community that you, you know, were influenced by? Or was it mainly your family?
Speaker 2: I was influenced by my family--extended family. I had a fairly adventuresome family. Say we had, my sister--my mothers sister, my Aunt Ruth had gone to Chicago and moved back. And they traveled in the summer. And her husband, Uncle Lewis was a sleeping car porter. And he worked on the line that went from New Orleans to Chicago to Minnesota, to St. Paul. And he would come back and tell us stories about, you know, his travels on the railroad up north. And all--during all of this time, my father Chester Gains, is his name who is my biological lived in Detroit. I that--I always had a good relation. Both families always had a very good relation. My father and his wife, my stepmother and my mother and my father. So they would come to visit also. And I would go to Detroit for summers when I got a little older to spend time with them. So there was--I was influenced by a larger group of people than just my mother and father, but they were mostly family.
Speaker 1: Do you remember when you first went to Detroit? What that--was that your first time out? Oh okay. Do you remember? Was that your first time out of the south?
Speaker 2: No the first time was in Chicago. And we would go to Chicago regularly. Not every summer, but regularly in the summer. And that was always an adventure, because this would give you some insight into my father, Mr. Massey. As I said he was a proud man. He would--we would leave Hattiesburg about oh 1:00 at night--in the morning after midnight. Food and so forth. Because he did not want to stop until we got to Paducah, Kentucky. Because it was the first place that you could eat without having to go to the back of the restaurant. And we'd (chuckling) drive and we'd get to Paducah about six in the morning. And then we'd drive to Chicago. So we would go--I think the first time I went. Well I could have been maybe eight or nine and we went to a Chicago Cubs game. I remember that.
Story_ID: 31423
Speaker 1: So you were talking about the fact that you saw your first Cubs game. Do you remember, you know, any particular feeling when you first came to Chicago? Was it--'cause it's a much larger city at that point and--.
Speaker 2: (laughs) Well at first I was very disappointed, not at Chicago, but where my father's relatives live. Because they didn't live in Chicago. But if you know Chicago now--They lived in Blue Island which is way out south! And then Blue Island was worse than Hattiesburg [Mississippi]. They had no paved streets. People were living in little shacks. And they were poorer than we were. And we were not poor in my mind. As I said, we had a house, a yard, dogs. And I thought we were middle class. And the people in Chicago that we visited lived in very small places, no yard. Dirt, you know, no grass yards. And I thought, "This is Chicago?" And then I learned how to get downtown. And I was about eleven or twelve I--the first time I did it. We would go downtown. They would--. My father would take us. And we would eat in Chinese restaurant at the loop, right under the El. Yeah, to me it was fascinating. It was just mind-boggling to see the city. But I learned how to take the street car and the bus. And so during the day I would sneak off and go downtown to Chicago myself. And I would go the Chicago Theater. Saw Nat King Cole the first time there. 'Cause they used to--Before they used to have in the old Chicago in the Oriental Theater: They would always have a live show before the movie. And I saw the Nat King Cole Trio the first time before the movie. So I thought Chicago was great. I think--And that's when I really began to be very sure that what I wanted to do is to leave ( Mississippi and see the bigger world.
Story_ID: 31424
Speaker 1: And now what--what did your interest--? Did you immediately become interested in, sort of math or sciences I assume? Or was that something that sort of developed? How did that developed?
Speaker 2: I always liked arithmetic and I always liked then mathematics and liked it. Because you could absorb yourself in it. Solving mathematical problems was a--a way of sort of--I don't mean I wanted deliberately to get away--But it was almost like reading. It just totally occupied your mind to solving difficult--and it does, of course--to solve a difficult mathematical problem. And when you're young anything is difficult. So I liked figuring out the math. I could just sit and figure out math problems, you know, all day. It was like some people with crosswords puzzles, I guess. It was something I liked to do.
Speaker 1: Do you remember your first math teacher?
Speaker 2: Yes, but I don't remember her name. I don't remember her name. But I think it was Dorothy. Mrs--I don't remember her. I can see her face.
Speaker 1: Do you think your--your tendencies in this area, do you think they came from either Chester Gaines or Almar Massey or your mother, you know, Essie? Do you--did any of them have sort of a thing for numbers? Or--?
Speaker 2: No. And I don't have a thing for numbers?
Speaker 1: Okay.  But more quantitative.
Speaker 2: No. (unclear) My wife Shirley. Shir--my wife Shirley and her mother. Shirley's mother, I mean, they can do things in their head with numbers add, subtract and divide. It's quite-Mathematics is formulas. You know, figuring out puzzles. And I--it's my mother. You know, my mother was about--was no doubt the greatest influence in my life with respect to intellectual achievements. She read. She brought books. She had books around the house. She was curious herself and she would help me with the math problems,arithmetic problems then. And she didn't push me towards it. But she made it--she made it very legitimate. She made it such that this was okay to do. And not only that it was okay to do, but it was something that I'm proud of you for doing. And it just seemed natural to be interested in these kinds of things.
Speaker 1: And Mr. Massey, he didn't--He was--?
Speaker 2: He didn't object. He was a--sort of prototypical as I as say. He wasn't--stern is not the word. And strict. But a loving father and certainly a good role model. But he was not very tender. That's the word. He was not a very tender person. He didn't hug a lot. He was sort of a typical Southern man or maybe men generally who are Western kind of strong men. But he was very supportive of every thing I did. He taught me to hunt. Bought me my first shotgun. He taught me how to fish, my brother and I. So, I mean--we did all the father son things that one could--you read about in a book about perfect childhood, you know. He bought me my hunting dog. Taught me how to work the dog and, so forth. And we spent a lot of time together, you know.
Speaker 1: Now so you--what I'm--that's what I'm under--trying to understand--.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: I know-Where did your interest in science even come? Did you?
Speaker 2: I didn't become interested in science until I came to Morehouse [College].
Story_ID: 31425
Speaker 1: So you go from Eureka [High School], you know, you start at sixteen (unclear).
Speaker 2: Right. Right. Sixteen.
Speaker 1: And then you go to Eureka.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: And then Eureka at seven--you said--.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Go back to the new school.
Speaker 2: To the--to the new school Royal Street.
Speaker 1: And now this--when this school opens up, this is a big deal for the--do you know how that even happen? Was it that the black students were gonna get this new school. Do you know--?
Speaker 2: Eureka--.
Speaker 1: The circumstances?
Speaker 2: Was on the older side of town. Had been in the black community where we lived. I mean (unclear) relative terms. You know, for the turn of the century that kind of difference. And the other side of town was growing in terms of the black community. And I don't know all the details. But we--they needed another high school. It was the black community was large enough to have two high schools. And so they built a new high school on the other side of town. So I think it was just population growth. But it happen to be just two blocks from where our house. So it was perfect for all of us who had to either walk or catch the bus to go over to Eureka. And it was brand new, I mean a new building. Eureka was a old school. One of the old typical old--it was well kept, but it was a old school. So we were very proud of the new--and we were the first class, our class going into the seventh grade. And they added classes as they-'Cause they didn't have quite enough to fill up all the upper classes then. So we were--we were a big deal in this new school Ralph and I and all of our cohort of guys. Yeah.
Speaker 1: And it's a brand new school.
Speaker 2: Brand new school.  Everything new. We had to start a band. And so you just had to create a band. And so we all joined the band. Ralph--when I say all of us, there were four of five of us who were very close then. And that's another story we'll get too, but--I was more interested in music than science. I played the alto sax. Ralph played the tenor. And Olan played the tenor. Jimmy James played base and I forgot who played the drums. And we were the core of the band. And other people would join, but we were clearly the leaders of the band. And then we formed our own little rhythm and blues group. Called the 'Blue Gardenias' .
Speaker 1: You did?
Speaker 2: Yes, we were in the ninth grade. We were in the ninth grade.
Speaker 1: And so who now, who was influencing you at that time, I mean were their any groups and things that were--?
Speaker 2: Oh yes. Oh yes. There was a group in town and the saxophonist, in fact, had gone to Morehouse [College] and he was a very, very good saxophonist. And it was a small town. So there were two night clubs. The Harlem Club and I forget--what was the name of the other--I forgot the name of the other. But Mississippi--see the interesting thing about Mississippi is it was a dry state. That means it was illegal to sell alcohol. But you--everyone sold alcohol, but since it was totally dry there were no age limits. That's means it was illegal for everybody (chuckling). Therefore, the bootleggers or the moonshiner who sold the liquor could sell it to anybody of any age since it was all illegal. And we could go to the clubs. And my mother and father would take us. People took their children to nightclubs in those days to see shows. And so they would take us and so we saw the group. But we were playing in the club for several months before my mother knew it. I'd go spend the night with Ralph and we would--about 8:00 or 9:00 we would sneak out of the back window of his bedroom. His mother didn't know either. We'd take our saxophones and we would get on our bicycles and ride our bikes out to the clubs. And we were making money in playing this club. And someone told my mother that,  "Did you know that they are playing at the nightclub?" My mother was great though. She said, "Well, I want to see this." So she came to see us one night. And we were pretty good. We were pretty good. And, but she was very supportive of it. She was very angry that we'd lied and sneaked out of the house and didn't tell them. But, you know, after that they would come to see us play. They didn't stop us.
Speaker 1: So you continued playing then?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: What year did you start?  Do you think--how old were you when you started?
Speaker 2: Had to be in eight grade. So what--we came out of it tenth. Seventh or eight. So I had to be twelve. I started at twelve maybe.
Speaker 1: (Laughs) That's cute.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, 'cause you think of a twelve year old now, you know--.
Speaker 2: (laughing) That's right.
Speaker 1: (laughs) they're totally different.  (unclear).
Speaker 2: Different world.
Speaker 1: You're considered a baby.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: The other thing was black radio influencing your music, you know, the music at that time?
Speaker 2: There was no black radio.
Speaker 1: There wasn't!
Speaker 2: No. In Hattiesburg [Mississippi], you would--could maybe pick-up New Orleans. You could pick-up a station from New Orleans and Memphis at night. They had these clear channel stations in St. Louis--clear channel stations. Sometimes they would have black music. But it was records--78 phonograph records that my parents had. And they liked music a great deal. My mother especially. But it was very difficult to (unclear) pick-up live black radio as we know today. Except for those very few occasions in the evenings.
Speaker 1: And what were--what musicians did you like? You said there were a couple places you played.  But were there any--?
Speaker 2: Louis Jordan, very influential. Played the alto saxophone. Billy Eckstine's Band. He played then. He played trumpet and had his own band. Nat King Cole. The Nat King Cole Trio. (Unclear) group. And then we became very interested in jazz. In tenth grade we discovered West Coast jazz. We discovered Jerry Mulligan and Chet Baker. Oh, and Chico Hamilton. And that just--that became, you know, our life then.
Speaker 1: Well you guys were great friends then?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Oh yeah. Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, these were your buddies?
Speaker 2: That's right, oh yeah.
Story_ID: 31426
Speaker 1: So now how did it happen that you ended up going to Morehouse at the time that you did? Where does--how did that come about?
Speaker 2: It was--.
Speaker 1: (unclear).
Speaker 2: Serendipitous after tenth grade and then the--
Speaker 1: (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yep the bells rang. Yep. Morehouse [College]--.
Speaker 1: (unclear).
Speaker 2: Okay. Sure. That one is eleven, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear). Oh.
Speaker 2: Three, four, five, six, seven, eight.
Speaker 1: (laughing).
Speaker 2: Nine, ten, eleven, I guess.
Speaker 1: Oh  I see okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. That's it.
Speaker 1: So you were a good--you were a good student all along though?
Speaker 2: Not particularly. I mean I was not a bad student. But I--if you would have looked at my grades, I don't think my grades would look that great except in math. (Unclear) school wasn't hard to me. Let's put it like that. It wasn't difficult and so I did what I liked to do in school, but I never flunked anything. It wasn't--it was not difficult. But I was not--I was not one of the top students. Now Jimmy James was one of the top students. I was not the person the teachers thought would be most likely to succeed academically, because Ralph and I were always into something. You know. We were the leaders of band. We just did things in school in extracurricular activity. Morehouse was part of a group of schools, I think three of them that the Ford Foundation choose to experiment--to conduct an experiment to see if they could identify students who were prepared and capable of coming to college without finishing high school. And I--I know Harvard [University] was one (unclear) and Morehouse. And it was a full scholarship that the Ford Foundation funded and they gave test, examinations around the country. Around the south at least, and it was like an SAT or something, I don't remember. But they gave the test in Jackson and I went up with three or four other students from Royal Street to take the test. And my mother [Essie Nelson Massey]--in fact, I drove the car. We took our car and my mother was going up to take classes at Jackson State [University]. She continued to take classes, because she didn't finish school when she had me. But she kept take these education classes to try to get her bachelors degree. And we went to Jackson and I took the exam. I didn't expect anything to come of it. And a few months later they received this letter that said that I'd been admitted to Morehouse College with this full scholarship  I mean we were all flabbergasted. I don't people if they had to bet on would've gotten the scholarship I don't think they would bet that I would the one. But I did. And then we had to discuss whether or not I should take it. My father was not too certain. He thought I was far too young to go of to Atlanta. And we only knew one person who had gone to Morehouse--Sam, what's Sam--not Jackson, it'll come to me in a minute. He is an alumnus now, of course, and Sam was a student here. And he spoke with the family. He was older than me. And my mother--I was ready to go as I told you early on. This was my chance to leave Hattiesburg early and wherever they were gonna send me, I was going. And my mother was very supportive of it. So we all decided that I should accept it.
Speaker 1: That's pretty amazing when you think about it.
Speaker 2: Oh it was the best thing it was--it changed my life, of course. But when I came to Morehouse, I came with my saxophone. And I didn't know what I would major in, but I knew I was going to continue playing music and I did. I was in the band, the orchestra here when I came. And that was major involvement.
Speaker 1: Now I wanna ask one, what did Ralph--what was that like--you know, because here you're--He didn't leave right?
Speaker 2: No Ralph finished school and he went to Hampton [Institute]. We remained friends though. We still are--I don't see him much now. But he went to Hampton after he graduated out of twelfth grade.
Speaker 1: But it's hard a lot of times when, you know, your buddies like that and your buddy leaves. You know, it leaves that sort of empty feeling.
Speaker 2: Well, I think it did. I think--but there were--but the three others were there. Jimmy James who also finished and went to Jackson State. And Olan. So I was--Ralph and I were the closest. He was my best friend, but they were all pretty close and they kept up the band. The Blue Gardenias so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now what was the name of the band?
Speaker 2: The Blue Gardenias.
Speaker 1: The Blue Gardenias. Why did you guys choose that?
Speaker 2: We saw this movie. That movie with Nat King Cole. The Blue Gardenias
Speaker 1: That's cute.
Speaker 2: And we would play it as our theme song. The Blue Gardenias.
Story_ID: 31427
Speaker 1: Now but when you came here were you--were there other tenth graders here?
Speaker 2: Yes. I was in the third group. It went for three years. And there were fifteen each year. Maynard Jackson was in the first group. As a matter of fact, Maynard was two years ahead. So there were fifteen of us. John Hopps who was on the--one of the pictures. James Wallace. Jimmy Wallace from New Orleans who was my--we were freshmen roommates. And Jim's brother who was also James and Jim, who was also the two brothers, the Wallace Brothers. Bo Plessy of whose grandfather was Plessy of Plessy [vs.] Ferguson--from New Orleans. All three of them from New Orleans. And there were fifteen of us. And it was very good. Because we all lived in Grays Hall together. And then we had the two classes ahead of us of upper classman who--Morehouse was a very supportive community. It was only 600 students then. You know, smaller than a freshman class then. So we got a lot of support from each other, from the faculty and students. So after the freshman week, when I called my mother and told her I wanted to come home. Because--I said, "This is--this is not gonna work. These---everybody's  too smart. Everybody's much smarter than me. You know, just speaking with them about courses they've had. They'd taken calculus and physics and chemistry." I hadn't taken nothing. I had only taken biology. I hadn't taken trigonometry let alone calculus. I said, "This--I just won't survive." And when I decided--she said, "Stay, just stay. Go through the week. Stay there." We had to take placement exams then. And during the freshman week and they would post them by rank of all the freshman students. And the number one--the person who scored number one, number two, number three all the way down to the person who scored number 90. In those days they would put it on the dorm door. And I scored, I think five. And I was just--I mean I was blown away. I was so flabbergasted. This was the first time in my life that I realized that I might be smart. I mean I realized--I said well, "maybe I am--maybe I'm smart." I mean I couldn't believe I came with all of these guys from all over the country, you know, who were so smart that I scored five or six or something like that. Both Plessy-No,  Phil Thompson was one. Bo Plessy  was second. The Green brothers Frank and Al were there. And I was five or six (unclear). And that changed my whole view of who I was and, you know, how I thought of myself.
Speaker 1: That was the first exam?
Speaker 2: It was a placement exam.
Speaker 1: It was a placement--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Exam?
Speaker 2: Before we even took classes. You had to take that in order for them to advise you as to what classes you were capable of taking. So it was kinda comprehensive examination on math, English, everything, you know.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: It was. I mean as I said, I really then began to believe that I'm smart. Now if I'm smart then, maybe I can really learn this. Maybe I can learn anything. If I really am smart then it's not a question of can I do it? It's a question of I need to study. You know, I need to perform. I need to become informed. Now I tell students I realized that I was ignorant, but I wasn't dumb. You know. There's a big difference. I didn't know things, but I wasn't a person who was incapable of learning. And that's what really--not that story--so that's how I really got into science. Because everyone said--I liked math and I knew I was gonna do that. Said well, "nobody takes McBay's course, Henry McBay as a freshmen, chemistry, very few shouldn't do that." I said, "Well I'm gonna take it." So Hopps and I said, "we gonna take this course" (chuckling). So we just took the hardest courses in science. And they said, "Nobody majored in physics." And they taught physics at Clark College across the street. We didn't even have a Physics Department. And I said, "Well I'm gonna go take physics." So I went over and I took physics and I feel in love with physics. Because what I liked about it--it was a way to use mathematics to help you understand just common everyday physics--phenomenon, you know, how light works. Why things shine in a certain way. What sound is like. Why it travels this way. Electricity. And the mathematics was a basis for understanding the physics to me. So I can into the sciences from a mathematical--and I'm probably a double major in math and physics. But then once I got into physics it was a way of learning more about the world and physical and natural phenomenon and yet using the mathematics as an aide to do that.
Speaker 1: So you were very emboldened by the fact of your placement?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: It made you--you were like. And it happened early--.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So it wasn't like you had to go--.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Through the course.  Right.
Speaker 2: And I don't--I think if that hadn't happen--I think what would have happened and it happens to many students is you take a course and it seems so difficult, extraordinary difficult and you don't believe that you can possibly learn this material. And so you give up or you hold back or you go into something else. But that experience just made me believe that I could probably master this material if I just worked hard enough. And you're right, that's is an--was an amazing thing is when that happens. And when I've counseled students throughout the years I use that example to others to say you really--you don't know, you really don't know what your capable of mastering until you really test yourself. And you have to believe that you can do it. And you have to stay with it long enough. But if you don't have that sense of confidence you won't stay with it long enough.
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: Now we had teachers here at Morehouse who instilled that attitude in us. (Unclear) that exam was a beginning, but then the teachers also would just keep telling us, you know, "you can do this. Yes, you're capable of learning this, you're a very smart person." You know. But here is what you don't know. My freshman English teacher Dr. Chancellor, gave me a high school English book, because I didn't know the basics. You know, I didn't know what a dangling participle--I didn't know what a participle was. Let alone a dangling participle or a gerund . You know I--So he said, "you don't know the language. You need to learn basics." And so I would study--he would tutor me in a high school English book at the same time I was taking college English.  And in physics, the same thing. I didn't have trigonometry. You can't do physics 'cause of a thing called vectors which is just trigonometry. And so Chris--Dr. Christiansen gave me a high school trigonometry book. And I had to learn trigonometry at the same time I was learning physics. I never would have done that--no way I would have done that and thought I could succeed had it not been for that experience and the teachers reinforcing it. And my classmates. People like Hopps and Wallace. We also reinforced each other.
Story_ID: 31428
Speaker 1: Did you find--so you really threw yourself in the academics here. And you--.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You worked really hard? (Unclear)--.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I spent nights in the library. So--.
Speaker 1: And how were you enjoying this experience--what was it like? I mean after you got over your initial I don't wanna, you know, I--this is--Were you enjoying it at least?
Speaker 2: Oh yes. Oh yes. I always liked to learn. I liked reading--it was just fascinating to me. It was a--it opened a new world. Oh my first course in religion taught by Sam Williams. That's Williams. A very famous philosophy and religion teacher. I mean to even learn that there so (unclear). I only knew Baptist religions. I didn't really know much about Catholicism. Let alone Zoronastrianism and Jainism and Hinduism. I mean it was just a wonderful experience to be exposed to so many new things. And when I would go home my mother loved me to talk about these things. Because she was intellectually curious. So it was a great experience for me. I felt very, very good, you know, from the time I began to apply myself. And then I did very well. You know, I got good--very good grades. And so that reinforced it.
Speaker 1: So in your--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: First year, you got--'cause you were treated--that's what I don't understand this was a pilot program--a special program. And you were treated as freshmen or were you treated as a special--?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Group?
Speaker 2: We took regular courses. We were treated as freshmen. The teachers knew who we were and we lived together in the dorm. But we--there was--were no special program--academic programs for us. I think the teachers probably--the professors may have spent--I know they did more time, but the--also the older students who were very proud of us. You know, it could have gone the other way. They could have been either resentful or thought of us as these nerds on the campus. They were not. I mean the older students who were not (unclear) early admit students. They were very proud of us seemingly and supported us. It was--it was not a difficult environment to really apply yourself in. In fact, it was a very supportive environment.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) Okay. But I want to ask. What was the Morehouse--. Okay, I know. What was the Morehouse campus like then? What was the Morehouse that you came to?
Speaker 2: The Morehouse campus now. Where we are sitting did not exist. This was not part of the campus. So if we were to go maybe west about a block, the old campus and it's still there--there are a few new buildings on it. But that was the old Morehouse campus. And we had the dormitories. They're still there that I stayed in. And the academic buildings are still there. And we--the colleges shared courses even more than they do now. Because they were much smaller. So as I said I took physics at Clark [College], right across the street. And Atlanta University was here. So it was part of the campus. It was small and contained. Of course, Atlanta was segregated. So we spent much of our time in this community and it was a very vibrant middle-class black community. With movie theaters, restaurants, grocery stores. The faculty lived in the community unlike now. So it was not just a school. The enti--churches were right here. So it was a very safe community. And as I said one in which you make new friends outside. And some of the students, Vic Jett, for example, who is in the picture on the fraternity was from Atlanta. And he became my best friend here. And so his family sort of adopted me. So I'd go eat dinner with Vic on Sundays. And spend times on weekends with him. And--you know, we met students who lived in Atlanta and met their families. So it was a small college of 600 but it was a larger middle-class and upper-class  environment.
Story_ID: 31429
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you--.
Speaker 2: Excuse me.
Speaker 1: Just about what the Morehouse--what the environment was like when you can on at that time, and who were some of the people that were very prominent here? That's all--. I'm just--
Speaker 2: Sure, Sure.
Speaker 1: Trying to understand?
Speaker 2: It was a small community, 600 students. And there were each--probably every department had one major professor who was the chair usually. And they were the sort of backbone of college and were people who really made Morehouse an excellent place. In mathematics there was Pop Dansby. And he--I became very close with him, because I was a math major. (Unclear) and he was--he taught a generation of us math. There was Henry McBay in chemistry. And Henry McBay has produced more black PhD's in chemistry than any professor. He died about four or five--seven years ago now--than any faculty member in the country. You know, white or black. And then--Christiansen for me, but he taught at Clark [College, now Clark Atlanta University]. (ph.) S. H.--Sabinas Hobart Christiansen, he was Danish and he was white. But we had many white teachers. He taught physics. And he became really my mentor throughout life, until he died. And Kennedy in history. Brisbane in political science. E.B. Williams in economics and French (unclear)--oh his name will come to me.  So there were a coterie of the professors who were sort of anchors in the department. And the classes were small. And so you really got to know the professors. And many of them lived right in the community. So you would see them after school or they would invite you over to the home--their homes on weekends or Sundays. Chris [Professor Christiansen] did in particular. And Chris really sort of opened my eyes to another world. Because he and his wife Marion both played string instruments. And he would invite Hopps and I over sometimes on Sunday. And we'd have dinner. And then she would play the piano and he would play the violin. I mean I'd never been in a setting like that  in my life. These sophisticated European, educated people. And they had a pet skunk (chuckling) that had de-natured is the word. And Chris would let us have a sherry. It was very sophisticated. We could have a small glass of sherry with dinner--after dinner. And he became very close to me. And he was the one who really convinced me that I was smart enough to be a physicist. That I could do physics.
Speaker 1: Now the other questions I have for you McBay, was his class as difficult as you--?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughing).
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: There's a saying here that-We had a school here that's the Department of Religion, Watson. Professor Watson. Melvin Watson. He's still alive. He comes (Unclear).  I  just saw him the other day. He and his wife came to [Dr. Hugh] Gloster's funeral. But they would say--saying that, "Henry McBay had produced more religion majors and preachers at Morehouse than Reverend Watson because they all flunked chemistry (laughs)." That was a very difficult class. And few people--he flunked a number of people and very few people got A's out of the class. So his reputation was well deserved. Was well deserved.
Speaker 1: Now the other thing I'm sort of curious about--And this goes back to Chris--?
Speaker 2: Chris--his last name was Christiansen. We called him Chris.
Speaker 1: Okay Christianson. Your exposure-Well no, you had the Morrises.  Was he like sort of the Morrises figure to you, in terms of--if you remember, you said, "I had also--I grew up learning that also all white people weren't, you know, bad".
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But here this person became a, you know, that's different than sort of a, you know, being a nice white as opposed to a mentor white--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And which he and his wife became--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: To you.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So what I'm wondering is what was that sort of relationship? You know, you were acculturated really--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So to speak.
Speaker 2: I don't remember having any difficulty with it. I know what you mean. I don't remember the racial issue being important at all. But Chris was just such a wonderful person. He was down to earth. He was sort of a character. He was a scientist in general--not absent-minded. But had that sort of a way about him. Moving between laboratories and doing things and he was not pompous at all, in any way. And he got to know my parents. My mother would come up and she'd go over and meet him. And she'd him--and he'd tell her, you know, that I could really do this if I just stuck with it and persevered. That I was very good. And I didn't know whether I was good or not, of course. So don't remember the racial issue being any--of any consequence. I do recall, as I said earlier that he and his wife opened my eyes to another slice of life, a more sophisticated--not elegant in the sense of having money, but tasteful. A tasteful way of life that I had never experienced. And we had another woman, white teacher Ms. Woffle, Ruth Woffle who taught art and music appreciation. And she also showed me and I think many of us another part of life, that at least I hadn't seen. She would take us to the High Museum [Atlanta, Goergia]. And we'd diagram art work. And we'd diagram--she had taught us how to diagram classical music to listen and follow the score in classical music. And as I said, we had other white teachers. Bohoom who taught math. And the community was such here on this campus that that was not a real issue. [Morehouse College president] Benjamin Mays never allowed it to be because he always preached the message that we were as good as anyone. And you're at Morehouse and, therefore, you must be. And you--this is a sign of it. And you just have to continue to apply yourself and work. So when you leave here you can compete with anyone.
Story_ID: 31430
Speaker 1: There was chapel right? Chapel was--he was known for chapel Right?
Speaker 2: Everyday as a freshman. Everyday from 9:00 to 9:30.
Speaker 1: And talk about chapel and the significance of it. Did it have significance?
Speaker 2: Oh yes. It was required for freshmen, as I said everyday. And then after that once a week. But we went. And he spoke a great deal. But Dean Brazile (ph.) who doesn't get as much credit as he should for shaping Morehouse. Because he was Benjamin Mays' academic dean. And he really ran a lot of the academic programs and was the person who, you know, sort of set the rules and standards of behavior, inside and outside of the class room. And Dean Brazile would speak a great deal in the--in chapel. And we'd have people come--came in from the outside, you know, white and black, Indian, African. That's when President Tubman came, as I recall. And it was a way of again, allowing us to be exposed to individuals of international, national, international stature and renowned. And to hear messages about life and achievement from them. So it was very important. It still is. We call it Crown Forum now. And it's only--you only have to go to so many during your Morehouse experience. But we're probably the only school in the country that requires a college-wide gathering for all students. Because it seems it's very important to reinforce the messages about what it means to be a Morehouse man outside of the classroom.
Story_ID: 31431
Speaker 1: Now when you first, when Chris [Professor S.H. Christiansen] okay allowed you to discover, you know, physics--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: And showed you the beauty of physics. Can you talk about that sort of feeling of spark or magic that, you know, occurred within you? I mean why did it seem like so exciting and sort of intriguing?
Speaker 2: Well as I said earlier, I always liked math and liked to sit down and solve a problem. A math problem to work my way through it. And my goodness if you really did this, you'd come out with this answer. And low and behold it was right. And there was no way (unclear) that you could tell in the beginning that you really were going to be able to produce this answer. Because there's so many intermediate steps. You just couldn't see to the end. And it was working through those steps and then coming up--so oh my God it really worked. Well physics is even more complicated. Because it's not just solving mathematical equation. It's really trying to understand how some phenomenon (unclear) works and seeing how the mathematics allows you to explain it. And that's just marvelous. There's no reason that it should be true. There no reason that the universe should be created so that it has a mathematical basis to understand physical phenomenon, but it does. And so you could actually figure out why the shy is blue by working through a mathematical equation that relates different frequency of light to the way it scatters some particles in the air and all of those things. And low and behold you'd come up with some wave length which is how you measure color and yes that's--these things have a logic to them . There's some rational basis (unclear). And it can be understood. And it was just marvelous to me that this could happen. And also it was difficult. So it became--and that may sound strange, but it becomes--you never mastered it. And I'd never mastered it until the time I went into administration. I mean because it's always some other level to learn. There's always some new phenomenon. Some new mathematics you have to--so it's--you continue to building on what you have learned. But it's always something else. You can--you're never at a point you say, "well okay now I know this, what do I do." You never know it at all. And its just a continual intellectual journey.
Story_ID: 31432
Speaker 1: Now what else was significant about your experience here? You know, that sort of helped shape and form you? You know, during your four years? And you're Omega Psi Phi?
Speaker 2: That was very important.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: The students. I think that's true even now. The entire community is important. So as much as the classroom experiences were great--it was the knowing the women at Spelman [College] students. I knew many more at Clark [Atlanta University], because I took my physics over there. And I knew a number around the Atlanta community. So and I met families of--who had come from backgrounds and means that were so far removed from my small family. Even though as I said I thought we were middle class. But I found here there were people of wealth and had had wealth for generations. And whose grandparents had gone to college, let alone parents. And they were worldly sophisticated people. Traveled to Europe and studied in France. And I had made friends among those communities with people here. So it was not just the Morehouse [College] experience here on campus. It was that entire community experience that made me hold my undergraduate life, I think, as valuable as it was.
Speaker 1: And did you--whatabout Omega Psi Phi. The only reason--I was just thinking about when we were doing the pictures, you saidJoe Bagget almost got you guys thrown out--.
Speaker 2: It's not Joe, I can't remember. Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I just can't remember. It will come to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But what was that-- if you don't want to talk about--.
Speaker 2: (laughing) No, I'll talk about it. I'll tell you exactly what happened. Well you're on the--when you're going through probation. And when you're especially on the line, there are certain rules. You're not suppose to eat at certain times. And you can't go to bed until certain times. And you're with your dean of pledges all the time. His job is sort of to make sure you get across the burning sands. Better not give away any secrets here. And we were in a room and--I mean we were tired. This is like the fourth day and this goes on for a week. And when you're tired and sleepy and you still have to go to class. And we were certainly not suppose to eat except at certain specified times. And not treats. And we were--and if you did something, you just--everything was set back. And I remember we were in the room. And we all sort of heard this munching and crumbling. And the dean of pledge was right there. And that was--It was not Joe--eating a candy bar. Trying to sneak and eat a candy bar in full view, you know, of the dean of pledge. And we had to do something. Then you go out and walk another mile. You know, some punishment for that. Oh we were so angry with this guy. I still remember it.
Speaker 1: It's a wonder you didn't all gang up on him.
Speaker 2: We couldn't! We would have! (laughs).
Speaker 1: So now Omega Psi Phi? Why did you choose that particular--?
Speaker 2: I don't know. We all decided. And I can't remember why we decided. I mean Hopps, Vic. We wanted to go as a group which ever one. We didn't want to be a Kappa. I can't remember why, but we definitely did not. And we didn't wanna be--it was the people who were in it. I'm sure it was. The upperclassme,. I just can't remember. Also Benjamin Mays was an Omega. So we all knew that. So I'm not sure that had much to do with it. But it was the--we chose that. And once we did, we all went together. And that's really made the experience great. Because we were still together as a sort of group as we had been, as early admit students.
Speaker 1: So the group pretty much stayed--well you were together until--.
Speaker 2: We were in the same class throughout.
Speaker 1: The end? Did you integrate within the regular class--?
Speaker 2: Oh sure. Oh sure.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) over the years?
Speaker 2: Not all the Omegas were early admit students. It was about four of us. And so all the rest of the guys we're still friends--those who are still alive. Some have died.
Story_ID: 31433
Speaker 1: Now were there any other things, you know, important about the Morehouse experience? Any other things that influenced you or experienced (unclear) you'd like to tell one or two?
Speaker 2: Of what nature ?
Speaker 1: Any nature--
Speaker 2: There was--.
Speaker 1: (laughs) Do I wanna expose (unclear) or not.
Speaker 2: No. No, it's just that we are--well we had--it was a fun experience. We had weekend parties. Football was big. We were a small school. But we had very festive homecomings and weekends. And, of course, we didn't have--there were no women, except at Spelman [College]. And you could only go to Spelman once a week--twice a week. You go over from 4--4:30 to 5:00 on Thursday and from 4:00 to 6:00 on Sundays. That was it. Now the girls--women took--girls took classes here. So you could see them. But you couldn't--and Spelman women could not leave campus on Sundays without hat and gloves and heels (chuckling). Yeah. But some--homecoming Fisk [University] would come down. We'd play them and they would bring girls! You know, unescorted. And you would sign up, if you wanted to meet a Fisk girl. They would stay over at our university. And you'd go there and sit there in the lobby. And the girls would come down the stairs dressed for the prom--the homecoming prom. And they'd have a little name. They'd called out your name. And, of course, you know, the people would be anxiously awaiting the hope that the girl who came down was as pretty as the one, you know, as they hope she would be. And my date for one, nice girl. But she must've been almost six feet tall (chuckling). It turned out we had a--once you got to the dance, you know, you could sort of meet other people, but it was really an experience to see guys sitting there wondering and hoping. Because, you know. And to see a very pretty girl come down and hope that's your name. Hope that's your name, right. It wouldn't be. But we would go out to jazz. I was still very much interested in jazz. I'll tell you why I left music, a very pedestrian decision. I was playing in the orchestra and it's my sophomore year. I played first solo sax the first chair. So I could read music very well. Maybe that's where the math comes in. I had no problem reading music. And the band practice was the same time as the physics laboratory. And neither person--neither faculty member would change, of course, just for me one person. So I had to choose between whether or not I was gonna remain in physics--I had just started to be a major in it. Or stay in the orchestra. And I think fortunately for my career, I chose to take the physics lab. So I really had to drop out, because I couldn't go to practice. Drop out of the orchestra. I could still play in some of the group. But what reinforced the decision was the fact that I had--The persons in the--who played like third or fourth chair alto--couldn't hardly--couldn't read music very well. I would help him out. His name was Walter Booker Jr. You may know the name.  Walter Booker Jr. is a world famous jazz bassist now. Yeah.  Walter played--he could play the bass and he played third sax.  And Walter and I would sit around the dorm room after--he was two years ahead of me.  And try to play jazz and improvise. I could read music so much better than him.  But he could improvise rings around me when it came to playing jazz.  And that's when I decided, "Look, I'm not going to be the world class jazz musician that I--you know, think I might be.  And I like physics anyway."  So. But the reason I finally made a decision was the conflict between the lab and the band practice.  And so I really--I then I gave up serious a pursuit of playing saxophone.
Story_ID: 31434
Speaker 1: Now what--I, you know, I think back about your younger and (unclear) well he could be a teach--you know, all he can be is a teacher.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know.  And I'm wondering what  is [Physics Professor S.H. Christiansen] Chris telling you at this point about what you can be and what do?  Or what are you thinking?  You know, your majoring in physics (unclear).  But what are you wanting to be?
Speaker 2: Well Chris had started telling me by then--I was the only physics major.  So in most--the class--the upper level classes I was the only student .  So it was like one-on-one tutoring.  Except in some of the classes--John Hopps, who was then my roommate again.  We were not sophomores.  John was a chemistry major.  But he was a physical chemistry major. And a lot of science of chemistry and physics overlap when you're at that certain level.  And I said, "John, why don't you come take this course with me?"  So John would--took atomic physics and  quantum mechanics with me, just to keep me company, in the course.  So I was his-not just one other student.  I was his student.  Now it's interesting about Chris, the year before me he had one student.  Maybe not the year--two or three years before. He had maybe one student a year for four or five years.  And all of us got a PhD.  All of us.  (unclear) around Paris.  Joe (unclear) who died, myself.  Oh what his--Fred, Fred--I can't remember Fred's name.  So he--at one time Chris,Chris had produce probably more black PhD's in physics  than any--there weren't that many, maybe 20 or so.  And Chris had produced four of us.  So he had already sent students to graduate school.  And he was already, you know, telling me that I--what my career might be like.  That I should go to graduate school.  Here are some places.  He had knew professors around the country.  And he knew which schools might be good for me.  And he knew where I'd find a professor who would really be a mentor.  And that's what happened to me.  And that's why I went to Washington University.  'Cause he thought Eugene Feinberg (ph.) would be good.  And that's who I worked with.  Eugene Feinberg who was another mentor.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you went straight from--you didn't--did you go straight from--.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I did not go straight to graduate school.
Speaker 1: You didn't .  That's what I thought.  That's what I thought.  Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now at this point and time do you know about  Edward Bouche'?  Do you know--?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  That was much later.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay. So there's wasn't--besides Chris there weren't like role models you had in  the  sort of physics (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well Tanny.  (ph.) Tanny Stovall who was a senior when I was a maybe a sophomore. And Tanny'd gone to the University of Minnesota.  So the older students.  But there were no black physicists who were role models, no.
Speaker 1: And so you graduate.  But what are your--I mean your thought-your thoughts were you were gonna go on to graduate school?  Your thought were you're gonna graduate.  And then--?
Speaker 2: Well I was going to go to graduate school.  But I thought also I might go to work.  In fact, I did.  I decided-I had a job at White Sands Missile proving ground in (unclear)--in Mexico.  I took a, you know, test.  It was a government (unclear) job at the laboratory there in mathematics.  A GS whatever entry level government service.  And I was gonna do that.  And John was going up to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology].  Hopps.  And Chris said, "Well you know--."  There are only two people in physics."  Chris and Charles Cooke (unclear) Cooke.  Who was black. Charlie Cooke who had a master's, said, "You know, Charles needs to go off and work on his PhD."  And so we agreed with President Mays and President Clark that he should go--take next year off and go to the University of Iowa.  And I would like for you to teach the freshman physics course."  I had just  graduated (laughs).  And I said, "Well you know, I really don't wanna stay in Atlanta.  I wanna to--."  He said, "Well that'll be very good.  Because I can keep working with you on advanced physics.  And we will send you to Columbia University for the summer to take nuclear physics and quantum mechanics."  New York City (laughs).  I said, "Okay.  I'll do that."  And I went to New York  City first.  Now that was my first time in New York City.  First time really seeing a big city.  And that was a wonderful experience.
Speaker 1: So this is '58, '59 [1958, 1959].
Speaker 2: '58-Summer of '58 [1958].  '58.  and so I came back to teach a year here, after going to Columbia.
Speaker 1: And did you--so were you hanging out in Harlem and all the (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Oh--oh sure.  I was at Small's.  Went down to the Blue Note, the Village.  Oh I was everywhere in New York.  And it was just a wonderful--it was wonderful.  And I had--there were some Morehouse graduates around.  And they showed me all around.  Around the city and I learned the subway and everything.
Speaker 1: And so you came back here and you were teaching.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you did that for one-two--.
Speaker 2: I did that for one year.  And--.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Then I went to Howard [University] for a year.  Yeah.  The next year on a scholarship after I taught here for a year.
Story_ID: 31435
Speaker 1: And was there anything significant about the Howard experience?
Speaker 2: (laughing) Yes.  And I would upset people at Howard [University] (unclear) so long ago.  I was doing well.  I was getting all A's.  in all the courses there.  But it wasn't very satisfying.  And I was--the courses were taught in the-like from 5:00 to 8:00 in the evening.  Because they had-A number of the students were working in the government laboratory--science labs.  And they would come back to work on their graduate post.  And it was Christmas.  And John Hopps came through.  And he came and spent a few--he was at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology].  And John came through.  And we spent a couple of days together.  He was on his way home to Texas.  And John showed me what he was studying at MIT.  And I looked at what I was doing.  And I just--I said, this is not gonna work.  You know.  He--'cause I am not keeping up with the, you know, with the best.  I'm just not.  I just have to go to another school."  And I started looking--applying to other schools.  The level of physics and the pace compared to what John was doing was just not comparable.  So-And I said, "You know, if I'm really gonna be a physicist, I have to go somewhere where I can move at this pace and at this level."
Speaker 1: And so that was the move to Washington U[niversity].
Speaker 2: Right.  And then I talked to Chris.  And  I applied  at Stanford, [University of California] Berkeley, [University of] Illinois and a few other places. And I can't remember where I was accepted at.  But he thought Wash U. was  the right size, department.  And  that Eugene Feinberg (ph.) would be a good professor.
Story_ID: 31436
Speaker 1: You go  to study what with Fine--?
Speaker 2: [Washington University Physics professor Eugene] Feinberg (ph.).
Speaker 1: Feinberg.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now what was he like?  You know, 'cause you've had this very nurturing person here.  Was he what--Was Chris [Morehouse College professor S.H. Christiansen] right about him being the right person to study with?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He really was.  He wasn't nurturing in the sense.  He was a quiet man.  He talked a lot.  He had a sense of humor.  A  sort of wry sense of humor.  But he was very supportive of me, just as Chris was.  He was very demanding in terms of the standards.  He was a well-known physicist.  He probably should have gotten a Nobel Prize with Eugene [P.] Wigner for some of the work he did.  And he's recognized at that level.  But he was understanding.  I wanted to quit about three years into it. Maybe four.  I was working on this thesis and I just seemed like I would never end, doing these massive calculations on--using a computer.  And I just didn't think it ever gonna be end.  And I went in and told him, I just didn't think I could do this.  I thought I wanted to quit.  And he was--he was--he wasn't reticent. But he was--he didn't use a lot of words in conveying messages.  We used to--all of us who was his students would joke that you never knew when the conversation was over. Because he would sit there and you would get up. And he'd start talking again (Laughs). He was thinking, you know.  And he said, "No, you're doing very well."  I said, "But I'm taking so long."  He said, "well now let me tell you. Most people take five six years.  And you're not behind schedule and I think the work is coming along well.  And, you know, you're gonna be able to do this."  He said, "No you shouldn't do that.  You shouldn't quit."  And I didn't believe it still.  And he said, "now--."  He just went over what I had done.  He said, "Well now you've done this."  I had already published a paper.  Said--and 'Physical Review Letters'.  He said, "You know, there are faculties who haven't--at the Ph.D. level who haven't--." That's the journal in physics.  Phys Rev Letters, physical review letter.  He said, "You've published a paper already and Phys Rev Letters. And you haven't graduated.  You have all A's  here.  And you're in a very difficult course."  And he just sort of laid it out. It was in a very calm way.  And he just, you know, like Chris. He convinced me that I could do this and I was doing alright.  And he spent a lot of time with me. All of his students actually.  You'd go in once a week and talk about your progress, how well you were doing.  And what you're having problems with.  And he would work with you on that. Point you out, you know, directions. "Well have you thought about this? Maybe you oughta try this."  He was very good.  He was very good for all of us who worked with him.
Speaker 1: And the work you were doing on quan--quantum liquids and solid (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Placement.  Okay
Speaker 2: Right
Speaker 1: That was what you were--?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Both for your masters and doctorate?
Speaker 2: I didn't go to ma--I mean they--you just--When you're working in physics--.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: at a certain point you go by the office and they give you a master's degree (Laughs). Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so you successfully--Then did you find the answers?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Oh yes.  Oh yeah.  I finished the thesis.  And actually when I took it into him, he was very--he said, "This is--." He didn't speak--as I say he wasn't very emotive person. He said, "This is a monumental piece of work."  (Laughs) Coming from Feinberg that was high praise.  And then so he arranged to have me give a talk. My first talk at the American Physical Society Conference in Chicago.  And he wanted to have me give an invited talk, which is, you know, the--not one of just a session. But one of the major talks.  He thought it was a great piece of work.  And he supported me after that.  We stayed in touch.  We stayed in touch 'til he died.  Stayed very close.
Speaker 1: And you had already gotten married too, at this point. Right?
Speaker 2: I got married just before I finished my senior--my last year.  Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.
Story_ID: 31437
Speaker 1: Now then after Wash u, you--and--Do you go to Argonne Labs?
Speaker 2: I went to Argonne.  Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this--wha--in terms of--were you at that point sort of casting your net wide? Or had you sort of focused on Argonne as the place to be?
Speaker 2: No I wasn't--hadn't cast my net wide. I don't--I can't remember where I applied for jobs.  But Argon was very good.  I don't know if it was the top of my list.  Because the group there was working in the field I was working in.  It was in Chicago and I liked Chicago.  And I wanted--they needed a theoretician.  They were doing experiments in this--in liquid helium. And they need a theoretician in the group.  What theoreticians try to do is explain as they say in mathematical terms the phenomena that happens or the experimentalist verify by carrying out experiments.  And so they had--were doing these experiments and were measuring certain results. But there was no theoretical understanding of why these results came out this way. And so they wanted a theorist to work with them.  And so it was very good.  And so I was intending to stay at Argon. I was intending to stay at Argonne in Chicago.  I was doing physics full time.  That was my job.  Go to the lab, I do physics.  I come home, I do physics.  I was doing physics. And I was--I had an offer for a leave to go to England.  The University of Sussex to work with another very good group in my field.  I got in--Tony Leggett and other people who I got to know later.  When you're in these fields you know everybody.  And I was about to go to England. And I'd gotten divorced then from my first wife Judy.  We were only married about two and a half years.  And I got a letter from a old friend of mine from graduate school, from the University of Illinois.  And he was there. Was a young faculty member.  We graduated together in physics.  And he wrote me about all the concerns he had about his black students.  Illinois had just admitted--that was when schools were opening up a large number.  I mean three or four hundred black students from Chicago and Philadelphia of all places 'cause the student was recruiting then.  There were hardly any black faculty members.  None in the sciences.  And Joel said, "you know, you really Walter ought to consider coming down."  So I went down and met some people.  And they made me an offer to come to Illinois.  And I went because I really thought, you know, this was something--just instead of sitting in a labora--not a lab, but  my desk all day I would be involved in the issues of the day.  This was 1968.  Black Panthers on campus.  And the students are burning libraries around the country, riot.  And the--had a big problem with the sciences.  Also the group at Illinois was the very best group in the world in my field in physics.  John Bardeen, Nobel Prize winner twice.  The only ones that had ever won--Leo Kadanoff, Gordon Baine (ph.), [John Robert] Bob Schrieffer.  This was wide (unclear) knowledge and the best group in the world in many body theory, which was an (unclear).  So I took a $5,000 salary cut (Laughing). I went from $68,000 to eleven to go to Illinois for the physics and for the experience.  My first night on campus at the University of Illinois, I was sleeping on the floor.  I didn't have a bed, because my furniture hadn't come.  I was sleeping on a pallet that I had made.  I had a call from a guy named Dave Addison who I still--just spoke with a few weeks ago--who was president of the black students association.  Three in the morning.  Dave said, "Professor Massey."  Who's Professor Ma--I've never been called professor.  I said, "Walter Massey, yes."  He said, "Could you come down to the county jail?"  I said, "Why?"  He said, "they've arrested 250 black freshmen--I mean students. And we're just trying to find some black faculty to come there."  That started my year and a half at [University of] Illinois (Laughs). The rest of it was dealing with those issues.  And Dave and I got to be very, very close.  I founded the Black Faculty and Staff Association.  I became advisor to the Black Student Association.  I mean we--It was just a whirlwind of dealing with racial issues.  The black students from Chicago had got in fights with the local students from Urbana, who were angry. Because they--for years they'd been sitting there in this town.  The school never recruited them.  So the school recruits the students from Chicago.  The public--this is the south.  Urbana Illinois-Champaign.  The police are racist.  I mean racist.  It's like being back in Mississippi again.  So that was a whole episode of my life which is like a big blur.  And I was trying to do physics and trying to do all those things.  And--but I made wonderful friends at Illinois. And, you know, who will remain friends for life.  In fact we have sometimes sort of reunions to talk about those days.  You would have a meeting with students and the Chancellor.  And there'd have to be a rule that you can't bring guns to the meeting.  Those were--those were--It was like that in those days. I mean students were really revolutionary.  They weren't playing in the revolution like they do now (Laughs).  You know, that's when--As I said the Panthers were on campus. And they would come down from Chicago.  And the students and the Urbana--Steve Jackson who led the Champaign Group. They had guns (Laughs).
Speaker 1: So and this is a whole new experience for you.
Speaker 2: Oh, oh!  This is--.
Speaker 1: (Laughs) I know you were like--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I know you were like--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you're--you're used to being in the lab.
Speaker 2: That's right
Speaker 1: Or, you know,  in a gentile environment (Laughs).
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: At Morehouse (Laughs).
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And so--so what are you thinking about this?  So I mean are you--Are you committed because people have called on you to sort of play a ro--you know. I mean to play a role----?
Speaker 2: It was burning me up.  And there were four--five tenure-tracked black faculty members through the entire university. Out of maybe 3,000 faculty.  And every committee had anything to do with blacks you were asked to--and you had to.  I mean--And they--I think it was burning all of us up.  And so when Leo Kadanoff who was my--became my mentor there who was not much older than me. But Leo was a brilliant physicist still. Just retired last year from the University of Chicago.  And I was working with Leo.  He had sort of become a mentor of mine.  And Leo said he was going to Brown [University].  He had accepted an offer at Brown.  And he said, "Why don't you come with me Walter?"  And I was single then.  And I said, "Well I don't know."  What's--I didn't know anything about Brown.  So I went to visit Brown.  And this was a wonderful life. I mean it was a wonderful campus.  When the black students protested, they went to sit in the church, you know. And they wouldn't leave the church until the school accepted their demands.  It was just--It was so much more civilized (Laughs). And I could do my physics.  And I could still, you know, contribute to the black community.  But it--I said, "Yes Leo I'm coming."  (Laughs) So I went to Brown.
Story_ID: 31438
Speaker 1: And how was that experience?  'Cause it really was--I mean I know you talked--you were able to nurture a lot of students there.  You know, and sort of get into the academic life.  It wasn't like being on fire probably--.
Speaker 2: No.  It wasn't.
Speaker 1: (unclear).
Speaker 2: No it wasn't.  It was--the pace, the tone, the demeanor, the tradition was--And it had been much more--they'd--I --the [University of] Illinois experience was wonderful.  I made friends there.  We'll be friends throughout life.  But Illinois made a number of mistakes. They admitted all of these students--too many at one time.  They didn't have the support group.  They didn't have the financial aid. They didn't have the courses that the students needed in order to cope with the rigor of college. And they just were not prepared.  Now they worked at it.  And the students who finally graduated are very loyal to Illinois.  That was good.  But Brown had gone about it in another way.  They recruited much more selectively all the students and had support for them and all of that.  It was an ivy league school as opposed to the large state university.  Much smaller.  And there I founded a program called the Inner City Teachers of Science (ICTOS), to try to encourage and educate students to go into science teaching in urban schools.  Because the Illinois experience had showed me one of the biggest problems was the quality of science teaching in the urban schools.  'Cause we had all these students from Chicago and Philadelphia who had come there. And you could see that they were just simply not prepared for the level of science that they were gonna have to engage at a college level.  And so that's when I got very interested in high school science teaching.  And I started that program at Brown.  But I could do those things at Brown.  They gave me the freedom and the support to experiment and do different things.  It was a wonderful experience. My entire ten--eleven years at Brown.
Speaker 1: Now you went to Brown what?  1970 was (unclear)?
Speaker 2: It was sixty--nine [1969].
Speaker 1: Sixty--nine [1969].
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay. And you were there to----.
Speaker 2: 'Til '79 [1979].
Speaker 1: Sev--Okay. And was there other things significant about that experience from you, you know, as a physics--what do--phy--what do you call--?
Speaker 2: Physicist.
Speaker 1: Physicist.
Speaker 2: (Laughs).
Speaker 1: (Laughs) Oh my God! I'm like okay--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But was there some--were there things that happened in terms of your career--other things that you got involved with then that sort of shaped you there.
Speaker 2: Well the physics went well there.  I went with tenure.  And I was offered tenure at [University of] Illinois to keep me there.  It was--the decision was not as easy.
Speaker 1: You got tenure that easily?
Speaker 2: It wasn't easy to make (Laughs).
Speaker 1: No, no, no.  But I'm just saying you got tenure at U of I?  They just----Okay, okay (Laughs).  Oh my.  Usually people stay a little while.  But they were like----.
Speaker 2: In the sciences, you know, it's not easy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's what I thought.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But you either are moved up or you're not going to.  I mean you don't stay around the science and math.  And, you know,  I had published.  I had published at least a paper a year or more in 'Phys Rev Letters'. Where--as I say were at the top.  And they wanted me to stay at Illinois.  I still have the letter.  John Bardeen wrote me a handwritten letter asking me to stay.  And it's one of the most treasured things I have.  John Bardeen as I say is a legend in physics.  The only physicist to win two Nobel Prizes.  So I went with tenure there.  That's not what I was going to--so I could do physics.  That's when I think I did the best physics that I've ever done.  At least the work I've done there is the most important I've ever done during that period at Brown
Speaker 1: And why is that?
Speaker 2: Because it--with a colleague of mine we explained--When I first went to Argon I said they were--had these experiments, the results of which you couldn't explain on the basis of the existing theories about how sound travels through liquid helium.  And there was a issue with the sound dispersing--falling.  Being attenuated (unclear). And it shouldn't have been.  It just should--That shouldn't have happened given the way we--you understood how these interactions took place between the atoms and sound waves.  And so we developed a theory to explain that.  And it was--it's quite well known.  I mean it's just--It was a major break through.
Speaker 1: Can you explain the theory?  What was the breakthrough--I mean what was the--what was the theory?
Speaker 2: Well I'll tell you the phenomena was if you sent sound--and you just  pulse helium create a sound wave and the sound travels through.  And the sound waves are called phonons really. And it travels through helium.  Of course it dies down after a while.  It's--it's like sound dies off.  But there was at one point at a certain level of phonon energy to speak the sound just sort of dropped off.  It's called anomalous dispersion.  Why should that hap--what happened at that point?  And we--and there was a process in the liquid he--the only way--It shouldn't have.  There was just no way you could conserve energy and momentum, which you have to in anything, and have that happen.  Because there was a process that this phonon could--How could it lose energy?  It could split into two phonons, three phonons. Each one have less energy or be dispersed in another direction.  And so we show--And this turned out it was based on what I brought to it was work I had done in my thesis.  We showed that, in fact, there was a way this three phonon process could take place and conserve energy and momentum. Because of some anomaly in something called the liquid structure function. Which I had calculated.  And we knew there was this anomaly in the liquid structure function.  But we didn't (unclear) related.  And so we explained that.  And it was a big deal.  It was a big deal.  So the physics were going well.  But the most important thing about Brown was that when I started this ICTOS program I had to work with faculty from several departments.  It wasn't just the physics program.  It was science.  And I was the leader of it.  And I received the National Science Foundational Grant which I wrote.  And so I worked with people in education, Chemistry, Biology, Mathematics and Physics.  And that's when I first discovered that not only did I enjoy working with people in different fields, but that people liked working with me.  And that I had some qualities of management or administration or  leadership that people found attractive and were willing to work with me.  And that you could get things done on larger issues by working in those kind of structures than perhaps you could do just by being in the, you know, in physics or even in the sciences.  And that lead to me being offered the deanship at Brown.  Because I'd gotten to know so many faculty in other fields.  And the rest as they say is history (Laughs).
Speaker 1: History.
Speaker 2: Because I went into administration.  I liked it and kept getting offers to go into higher level jobs.
Story_ID: 31439
Speaker 1: So you left Brown at what time?  Did you--?
Speaker 2: Seventy-nine [1979].
Speaker 1: Seventy-nine [1979].  And then you were recruited back to Argonne [National Laboratory]?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And that--was you--Now explain Argonne Labs.  Because--as its affiliation with the University of Chicago. And how that, you know, worked in this sort of, you know, where you--.
Speaker 2: Argonne is one of about five national laboratories.  They were all started at the--during the World War II, or immediately afterwards.  Either to develop atomic energy, which Argonne was for peaceful uses--nuclear reactors and so forth.  Or to develop weapons, as was Los Alamos and Livermore were.  They are all owned by the government.  The Department of Energy is the parent agency. But they all are managed by either universities or industrial contractors.  They're called GOCOs (Government Owned Contractor Operated).  The University of California operates the weapons lab.  The University of Chicago operates Argonne for the government.  So that's the relation--So all the employees at Argonne are University of Chicago Employees.  But the funds for the research and the salaries come from the government.  So I was an employee of the University of Chicago as director of the lab.
Speaker 1: And Argonne Lab's focus is nuclear.  Isn't it?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: It started in nuclear but now it's--and over the years when I was there it became a much broader science research laboratory.  Nuclear reactors were still a major component. But only one component.
Speaker 1: Now had it changed much in the time that you had been away? You know, from your short--your stint there at the be--You know, before?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  Not in a fundamental way. They had built some new facilities.  The reactor programs were less important than they had been.  Environmental sciences had grown.  Solar energy.  It became an energy research lab not just nuclear energy.  It was about the same size.  Many of the people--practically all the people who were there when I was entry level scientist were there.  So to come back as director was also very nice.  Because many of those whom I'd worked with on those original experiments were still there.
Speaker 1: Now the other perspective I'd like you to give is that you're dealing--You're operating in a world that's still very white in many ways.  Where you're the only one or one of a few?
Speaker 2: Yes. Right.  Oh yes definitely.
Speaker 1: And so how--what was the process where you actually ended up becoming chair--You know, chairman of are--I mean what was that proc--?
Speaker 2: Director.
Speaker 1: Right director.  Right.  I mean director. I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: I didn't apply for the job.  I was dean at Brown [University].  I was happy at Brown.  We loved Brown.  We lived right on campus in the dean's house.  Our children were growing up there in the campus community.  And a gentleman named Bill Cannon (Laughing)--I kid him about it.  I tell people, "If a guy named Bill Cannon comes to see you, don't see him."  Bill Cannon came to see me.  And he was the vice-president of the University of Chicago.  And he said, "Hannah [H.] Gray called."  And I had met Hannah because she received an honorary degree at Brown that previous year.  And I had been her host, when she came on campus.  You know, they reassign honorary degree people to a faculty member. And I was assigned to her.  Because when I was dean, she had been dean at Yale.  And we knew each other as deans. She had published at Yale,  I'm sorry.  So Hannah said, "I'd like you to speak to Bill Cannon.  We're trying to find a director of Argonne and he's just trying to get some names from people.  And since you worked there--."  Even when I was at Brown, I would go back in the summers and do research at Argonne some summers.  "And we'd like to--He's speaking with a few people around the country to get some ideas, you know, who would make a good director--What do they need at the labs?  and have a conversation with him."  So Bill came to see me.  And we had the conversation.  That was that.  About three weeks later Hannah Gray calls and said, "Walter," I said, "Yes."  She said, "You know we'd like for you to come out to visit the University and meet with a few people."  And I said, "Well why? What's going on?"  Said, "There are several people here who would like for you to consider becoming director of Argon."  (Laughs) I said, "Oh so this is what Bill Cannon (laughs) was up to."  So I went out and we negotiated.  You know, it was not an easy decision.  Shirley was not that gung ho on going back to Chicago.  By this time I'm married to Shirley, who's from Chicago, of course.  And the places they showed us in Hyde Park where we have to live were nowhere near the level, you know, we could afford to live in Providence [Rhode Island].  And Chicago was dirtier than Providence. And it seemed fine, but it was not something I leapt into.  But I looked at the scope of the job and the significance of being the first black director, you know, of a major--one of these national laboratories. And what it would mean for science and for, you know, role modeling and for me.  You know it allowed me to do administration which I was beginning to like. But also stay science based and not get away from things I spent my life doing.  And also I was connected with the University of Chicago.  So I wasn't leaving the academic world completely.  And that's how I wound up.  But I didn't realize this was--I never seemed to realize these jobs--the significance they are.  I didn't realize this was gonna be such a big deal until we had made the decision and we were at the White House.  Shirley and I for--I can't remember. Some reception. And Lerone Bennett was there.  And we were chatting. And we had known Lerone.  I can't remember how--but a Morehouse graduate, of course.  And Shirley said, "Well we're moving back to Chicago."  Lerone said, "really?"  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "what are you gonna do?" And I said, "I'm gonna be director of Argonne National Laboratory."  He said, "What!"  He said, "Are you serious?"  I said, "Yes!"  He said, "Oh my goodness!"  (Laughs) And soon as I got there came--He sent Ebony out. And they did this huge spread, you know. I'm on the cover of 'Ebony'.  You know, an eight or nine page spread about Argonne and me.  So Lerone is the one who made me realize (laughs), "Well wow. Maybe this is a big deal. Bigger than I thought (laughs)."
Story_ID: 31440
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson, and I'm the interviewer.  And Scott Stearns is the videographer.  And can you state today--I want you to--we won't go through the whole slating, but I want you to state your name and today's date.
Speaker 2: I don't know what today's date is (laughs).
Speaker 1: It's July, is it the ninth?
Speaker 2: It's the tenth.
Speaker 1: The tenth, July 10, okay.
Speaker 2: It's July 10th, and my name is Walter Massey.
Speaker 1: Okay, July 10, 2002.
Speaker 2: Two thousand and two.
Story_ID: 31441
Speaker 1: You know, when we finished last time, you had just gotten the, you know, Ebony [magazine] had done this big spread on you.  You had gotten the offer, you know, the call from [then University of Chicago president] Hannah Gray--.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --to come on to Argonne Labs [National Laboratory], and that was really a big deal in many, many ways.  You are the first black, and I want you to talk about you coming here to Chicago and, you know, what happened.
Speaker 2: It was a big deal.  It was actually a bigger deal than I realized.  I think I said before when it dawned on me how much it meant was when I ran into Lerone Bennett at the White House, and he was so excited about it.  It turned out to be a very significant point in our lives, looking back.  One, we came back to Chicago where we had gotten married, Shirley and I.  And there were old friends we'd met.  But when we left here, I was the assistant professor at University of Illinois.  And we came back and I was also appointed a full professor at the University of Chicago as well as director of Argonne.  And we moved into Hyde Park into a very nice building, a building we just--when we lived here, we didn't know who lived in such a building cause we were never invited to things (laughs).  In this building was a doorman and elevator operators and so forth.  And, but the university arranged for us to find an apartment there.  In fact, it's an interesting story.  Ed Levy, who had been former president of the University of Chicago and form, former attorney general, Ed and his wife, Kate, lived there.  And we looked at the apartment, and we said we just--we can't afford this.  There's no way, possible way, but we want to stay here (laughs).  This is where we'd like to, so they worked out an arrangement whereby we could pay for it with the university helping.  But coming back as Argonne, a director of Argonne really just opened up a, a new world to us because I was invited to join things on the same level as CEOs of major corporations like the, Argonne's a major employer.  They hired almost 4,500 people in this greater Chicago area.  So I was invited to join the Commerce Club, the Economic Club, and we began to just move in a different circle of people in Chicago than we had before we left.  And it just opened up so many new doors for us.
Speaker 1: Now, how, how--what did that do to you sort of personally?  I mean, you know, there's a saying, "to whom much, whom much is given, much is expected".  And so here, you know, you're a symbol really in the black community.  And I'm wondering, sometimes that puts a lot of, you know, strains on people.  And I'm wondering if that factored in at all?
Speaker 2: It always does, but it was less so in this job, and it was very interesting--a good, excellent question, because up until then, and even if I go beyond this period, I've been on the (unclear) college campus or university campuses with a number of African American students, other students and faculty, young faculty, and my role had been increasingly to be a mentor.  I think as I said before, when I was at University of Illinois, this was a role I played in working with students and faculty organizations.  And I was always one of the few or the only few senior people, so I was drawn into that.  But this job didn't deal with those issues.  I was director of the lab and it's outside of Chicago, about thirty miles, in the suburbs, staff overwhelmingly white.  The suburbs are overwhelmingly white, and I was dealing with critical national issues like the future of breeder reactors, nuclear reactors, which is a big issue, the role of solar energy and we're building the large accelerators.  So I spent a great deal of time on science and technology issues in that job in the, in the first few years.  And I commuted, I lived in Hyde Park, but I commuted out every morning.  So our world, it was very interesting, was not, not very much involved with the black community here in Chicago when we first returned, except people we knew.  Our world was mostly almost overwhelmingly white in terms of the corporate world here and the national scientific and technical community.  And I did a lot with the White House and with Congress.  It was only--after I'd been here a few years, I be--began to spend more time on campus.  And, in fact, in 1984--I came in '79 [1979], we restructured the management of the laboratory and hired a laboratory director who reported to me in a new position that was created for me which was vice president of research at the University of Chicago on campus, but with responsibility for the laboratory and for research on the campus.  So I had the, all research portfolio.  And then we began to get involved with students on the campus.  I was on the campus, and the same issues came up (laughter) again, which was very good.  And we would have--we had a very large apartment.  It was very nice.  And we used to have all of the black students at the University of Chicago for dinner.  Sometimes we'd do two nights, but we could get practically all of them, you know, a hundred and twenty or so in our apartment.  And they, they--I still run into students who appreciated that cause there were so venue--so few venues that they had to come together and just be around others like them or, and I would invite a few black faculty and others, so, and give them a chance to relax, be away from home, think about issues that concerned them, their futures and what they wanted to do in life.
Story_ID: 31442
Speaker 1: Now, why is it restructured in nineteen, you know, '85 [1985]?  Was that your impetus to restructure the position or was that the University?  I mean where you said you got more involved more in students?
Speaker 2: We had a very complicated management structure for the lab when I came.  And it's a long history, and I, I can do a brief version.  It's a national laboratory, but it's been operated since its inception by the University of Chicago.  And this is--I may have said before, this is--it was a typical management structure for these laboratories that were founded, originated out of the cold--World War II, Manhattan project, most of them.  The University of California, for example, operates three big labs, and, and my--if we skip forward, I was responsible for those labs later in life when I was at the University of California.  But the laboratories operated major research facilities, a very large accelerator for high energy physics.  And before Fermi Lab, it was the largest in the Midwest.  And other universities such as Wisconsin, Michigan, Notre Dame, others, felt that the University of Chicago scientists had a perceived, unfair advantage in having access to this national laboratory, which they operated on, on behalf of everybody.  So in the mid--late '50s [1950s] or early '60s [1960s], mid-'50s [1950s], they changed the management of the laboratory to have it operated by the University of Chicago in conjunction with a group called the Argonne Universities Association (AUA), which consisted of about twenty other major Midwestern universities.  So when I came, there was the AUA and the university, who were part of the management structure.  And it was just too complicated, so complex.  When you have too many responsible, nobody's responsible.  And so the Department of Energy at that time just became very dissatisfied with the management of the laboratory.  And they couldn't put all of the blame on the university because they would say, well, we don't have total control.  And the AUA would say, well, we have to defer to Chicago.  So that was the impetus.  So we dissolved the Argonne Universities Association, set up a separate board of governors, which had representatives from other schools, but was--it was clear that the University of Chicago was responsible.  And it was part of that signal that they were responsible, we created this position of vice president for research at the University of Chicago with responsibility for the lab.  That's how it came about.
Speaker 1: Now, so you were--you could have easily been a fall guy in that situation, but the university was very supportive of you in that way.  I mean I'm just saying, you know, a lot of times blacks get in position--you said, my, you know, it was--do you understand?
Speaker 2: Sure, sure, sure.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had a very good relationship with Hannah Gray, right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Dr. Gray, and that continued--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Oh, sure, still does.
Story_ID: 31443
Speaker 1: I'm just wondering, what things did you learn, Walter, in this whole--Dr. Massey, in this whole, you know, process because this is a different stage than you've played on before in many ways.  You have more of a relationship with, you know, you get more relationship with the federal government on that level--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and, I'm just wondering, you know, how it changed you in many ways, and what things you learned?
Speaker 2: I learned a great deal about power structures and how they work.  I learned a great deal about management.  I had never managed anything that large, but by watching and listening and taking advice, but it was mostly about the levers one has to pull to get things done in a world where power and authority and influence matters.  The Department of, of Energy had, was--they were, they were either going to open the contracts up for bids, and it comes up every five years, or give it to AUA (Argonne Universities Association), I think when we started out.  Well, we didn't want that.  My loyalty was the University of Chicago.  Also, it didn't make sense to have a consortium managing a laboratory.  But we had to convince the department that this was--Department of Energy, Secretary of Energy, the White House--speaking of major, not just the finances, the contract for the, the university gets for managing the lab, but oversight of some of the country's most important research and development efforts.  And so we--I began to, got to know our Congressional delegation.  They were very helpful.  I spent a lot of time working with them, [U.S. Congressman] Dan Rostenkowski, for example, who was then a very powerful figure and other representatives.  I also spent a great deal of time working with local groups out in the suburbs--got to know the representative--DuPage County Republicans, all of those associations there.  So I, I, I really learned how to mobilize the political influence.  Also, we worked a great, a great deal with our trustees because our trustees at universities were, at the University of Chicago, you know, like a who's who list of corporate structure in Chicago and therefore, nationally, the CEOs of the big banks, Amoco, the Tribune.  And I'd saw how Hannah and our trustees sort of moved easily in this world, which was new to me, but I learned by watching and by having, having to do it, and do myself.  So that was perhaps the, the greatest lesson I learned, was just how things work at a level in this country, probably in any society, when you have to deal with people who have real power.  And you have to convince them of the validity of your argument, but you also have to find the pressure points to persuade them (laughs) to first listen to your arguments, but perhaps when the decision is, comes very close, and may not even be made on the most rational grounds.  It may be made on grounds of political, of a political nature or other influential--other influences that are brought to bear.
Speaker 1: Now, with--was, you know, I've--one question just popped in my mind.  Henry McVey, was he alive still when you were at--.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So what did he think of this, you know, because--.
Speaker 2: Oh, Henry McVey, he invited me down to give a talk.  He was a graduate of the University of Chicago, oh, yes.  And he, oh, not just a graduate.  I mean this was his university.  And he only, when he introduced me, and when he asked me to come back to give a talk to students and faculty, as director of Argonne, he said, "and he's also a full professor of physics at "the" university.  He didn't have to say which one (laughs).  That's how proud he was of the University of Chicago.  And Benjamin Mays, of course, was also a graduate of the University of Chicago, as was Frederick Knapp (ph.), who was head of biology.  So the relationship historically between some of the most influential Morehouse faculty and leaders and the University of Chicago had been very deep.  So they were very proud of me being here, as well, of course, as being director of this major, national laboratory.
Speaker 1: You know, what's amazing about this story is, it's in such stark contrast to U of I [University of Illinois] experience, you know, in some respects--.
Speaker 2: Yes, oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --You know, which that was, you know, it was a sign--it was the times, that that was, you know, very, you know, a lot of turmoil on the campus--.
Speaker 2: Turmoil, that's right.
Speaker 1: --And things like that.  So that was sort of cute.  That story you told, it just sounded so cute (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Unclear) Yes, that was, things have changed a great deal, but that--I learned from that experience, right, yes.
Speaker 1: Now, was there anything else significant about the Argonne experience?  I mean from even your knowledge as a scientist and how things operate, you know, on the, sort of the larger governmental level with the Department of Energy and, you know, federal, were there other things you learned about decision making and how things are done cause there's the policy.  I don't--had--you were operating on a policy level, you know, in terms of how important decisions are made as it relates to, you know, sci--you know, practical information of science in the United States and around the world.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So--.
Speaker 2: Well, I had to manage the laboratory, about 4,500 employees, that had a budget of close to 400 million dollars.  And so I learned a great deal just about the, the day-to-day managing, you know, dealing with budget issues, selling the budget to DOE [Department of Energy] because you had gotten all of your funding from there.  Then later on, we began a program to work closely with industry, to try to spin off our research into the private sector because of a change in law in 1982, called the 'Bayh-Dole Act' that allowed federally funded research to be spun off or licensed to private business.  And we developed a corporation to do that, and I was the, I was the founding chairman of that arch-development corporation.  And there, there were a number of issues and activities and procedures and--that I, I learned by the on-the-job and working with more senior people that would apply to running any kind of organization.  And in 1982, I think it was '82 [1982], there was a change in national energy policy, and many of the programs that we were working on at Argonne were, the funding was cut drastically, environmental area, the solar energy area and others.  And that was a source of funds, and the Congress and the President just didn't fund some of the programs.  So we had to lay almost a thousand people in a very short time, and we had to do it in a way that did not allow us to be accused of age discrimination, sex or race discrimination.  And we had to do it in a way that the employees found, you know--it seemed to be fair.  And that was a very traumatic experience, but also a valuable experience for me because we did it.  And we actually, we--I don't think we had one serious lawsuit out of it.  And the employees felt that we had done it fair.  I was, I was very open, and I had learned this through my college years, in sharing with them information.  So I had all laboratory meetings, three a day to get all of those 4,000 or so people in a large auditorium and a cafeteria.  And I went through all the details of the federal budget and just showed them why we had no choice; and involved the staff and helped them develop outplacement program, counseling programs and so forth.  And that, going through that experience really has been very valuable for me as I've faced other kinds of situations, as I did later at the University of California when you just have to deal with very drastic changes in budget in an institution.  And you have to do it in a way that people perceive that they're being treated fairly and not capriciously in the situation.
Story_ID: 31444
Speaker 1: Now, (unclear) what programs did you implement or things that happened under your tenure that Argonne that you've thought of.
Speaker 2: We dev--well, we were--the programs varied.  Their--the larg-largest program was the nuclear reactor program.  The others were on the basic science side, solid-state physics, chemistry and the third element had to do with large facilities.  And those three make up a national laboratory, basically.  If a national laboratory doesn't have a major program because things are funded in Washington by programs so the nuclear energy program out of DOE [Department of Energy] funded most of that.  If you don't have a good basic science program, you can't attract good, young scientists and engineers.  They won't come just to work on nuclear energy.  And if you don't have a large facility, then universities and the federal government question why you should exist because the argument would be most of what you do can be done, done at universities.  There's always this, a competition, even now, between universities and national labs and other facilities as to who gets the federal money for research.  We didn't--our major facility was being closed.  This accelerator I mentioned earlier that had been in the '50s [1950s] or '60s [1960s] (unclear) because of this EGS.  So we were in danger of not having a facility, and we had a major (laughs), national controversy and competition with a set of universities in the Southeast cause the Southeastern University Research Association, SURA, for the location of a major accelerator.  And again, I had to go through all of the influence, gathering and so forth, but we lost it.  And we had to develop a new one.  And one of the things I was very proud of, is we developed a new neutron source, a neutron scattering.  And actually, it turned out to be a better facility for Argonne because it was much more versatile.  It allowed us to do research for industry and with industry and then, based on that, we received support for what is called an advanced photon source, a major source of using light to--it's like a huge x-ray.  It's like an x-ray as large as a block, city block, that uses light to study materials.  And so Argonne now is the home of the advanced photon source, which is "the" most advanced source in the country for doing research in that area.  The other area that's the most controversial, had to do with our nuclear reactor program.  And when I came to the lab, I was skeptical about the role that nuclear energy was going to play in the national.  It wasn't very popular.  The year, the month my appointment was announced, Three-Mile Island happened.  And so I was coming to run this laboratory (laughs), which had the largest nuclear reactor program in the country in a climate, that Three-Mile Island had just happened.  And people were becoming more skeptical, more afraid of nuclear energy.  And I became convinced, after being there, that, in fact, the country needed a strong research program in nuclear energy.  And I put, spent a great deal of, of time working with the laboratory and working with our facility in Idaho, where the nuclear reactors are located, with the Idaho delegation, with others and, and with a very good leader, Chuck Teal (ph.), of that program, working with Chuck, to save that program.  And Chuck did most of it, actually, and creating a new technical approach to the, the operation of a reactor and the burning of the wastes, it's called, the wastes that comes out of the reactor.  So those two things were very (unclear) prevalent.  The other thing I became very much involved with, I got sort of back to some of my original interests, was in science education.  The lab had a science education program and a division of science education.  But it was not very much involved with high schools and the issue of minorities in inner cities was, was not high on the agenda.  And I began to get the laboratory more involved nationally with other programs that I was familiar with through the American Association for Advancement of Science, the National Science Foundation, where I'd been on the board, and other activities and, and with the local community, and with schools in the city of Chicago as well as in the, in the suburbs.  So those were the three things that I felt most proud of achieving at the lab and I felt made, made a difference.
Story_ID: 31445
Speaker 1: You were at the [Argonne National Laboratory] lab from like 1959 to 1980--was it eighty, eighty-five [1985]--(unclear)--?
Speaker 2: I was their director from '79 [1979].
Speaker 1: Seventy--I'm sorry--.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --I didn't mean--'79 [1979] to eighty?
Speaker 2: Four [1984], and then from '84 [1984] to '91 [1991], I was, I wasn't at the lab but I was still responsible for the lab as vice president for research.
Speaker 1: And that's when, that was the changing of the position and everything?
Speaker 2: Right, in '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: Okay, now, that--so you had, at that point, you don't have all the headaches, sort of, of the lab--I mean the--?
Speaker 2: No, you're right, the day-to-day running, day-to-day running of the lab.
Speaker 1: Right, the--so you don't have the headaches.  And, but at the same time--.
Speaker 2: Nor the, nor do I have the excitement.  I mean it's very important because, and one, the lab was a wonderful job, director of the lab because, say, Tuesday morning, I'd be in my office and I'm in, you know, it wasn't very busy, I'd say, well, maybe I'll go over and see what's happening over at the photon source or over at the fusion source.  And I would, I mean it was, there was always--I'm a scientists, you know, (unclear) boss.  And it was just like a cookie jar.  It just always--and since I was director (laughs), people would stop and show me around and explain things.  And I learn--I just learned--and what's the other question you asked, what did I--I was physicists, so I knew physics, and I knew something about other sciences, but when I left Argonne, I had a much broader appreciation of science and engineering and technology than I had when I came.
Speaker 1: And can you just follow up on that, so what, what did you learn?  What was supplemented about your, you know, your education there because I've told many people the story that I've talked, that we talked (unclear) (laughs) to a physicist, and that, you know, just the whole thing, I said, when he told me he worked on a problem for years (laughter).  I said, it was like totally outside of my, my understanding or comprehension.
Speaker 2: Yep, yes, and sometimes you work on 'em for years and it doesn't work (laughs).
Speaker 1: So I said, on a formula, you know.  So anyway, I'm just wondering did you see interactions between the sciences in a new way that you hadn't seen before, and what sciences?  You know, what--you said, I learned about other areas.
Speaker 2: I learned about big science, and, yes, I learned about connections and inner disciplinary science more than I had at a university because I was in a department, and universities tend to be more departmentalized than national labs.  So it--.
Speaker 1: What is big science?  Sorry.
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry (laughts), big science is science that either involves a large number of people and (unclear) or big facilities.  Like I said, the, the neutron source or the advanced photon source.  This involves, these are multi--hundreds of million dollars in projects and large facilities that just, you couldn't put on a university campus, that required, you know, hundreds of engineers as well as scientists, as well as technicians.  And they're multi-year because they take so long, so long to build.  And the--that's one part.  And the, the, the problems you work on are problems that require knowledge from so many disciplines.  They require you to know some biology, physics, engineering, chemistry to, to focus on the program.  So that's what I mean by big science, and you just can't do it on a university campus.  The biggest is Fermi Lab here, which is, it's--all of this laboratory is devoted to, when it comes down to it, to finding the smallest particles that we know about in the universe, all of this huge facility and all of these thousands of people.  So I learned about big science.  I also gained appreciation of engineering, which I didn't have, and the importance of the applied science, how you really make science work to solve problems of society, not just working on problems for years of mostly intellectual curiosity because they're fascinating to you and they may or may not have a practical application, certainly in your lifetime.  The problems that you work in these laboratories, many of them are problems that are driven by societal needs.  And I met a number of people that I just would never have met.  There's, there's no way I could have become friends with all of these Mormons in Idaho (laughter).  And Shirley and I made very good friends because we went to Idaho at least twice a year, sometimes even more.  So it was, it was a, a rich experience in so many ways.
Story_ID: 31446
Speaker 1: I asking you just about Cordell Reed because that's sort of an interesting--he's over Com Ed, and you know, you had the position--but I--.
Speaker 2: It was, that was a very interesting relationship.  Commonwealth Edison was one of the first major utilities to adopt, to build reactors.  And one of, one of the reasons--not the only reason, but one of the reasons is because of the, Argonne [National] Lab[oratory] was here, and the earliest reactors were developed, some of the first reactors for power production, prototypes were developed at the lab, and so it always had been the kind of close relation between engineers at Commonwealth Edison and Argonne.  So when I came, I met Tom Ayres, who was then CEO of Commonwealth, and Wally Behnke (ph.) who was vice chairman, and who later became a member of our board on a very--I got him very much involved at Argonne.  And then through them, Cordell, who was then, he was--he wasn't the head of the nuclear program at Commonwealth.  But he became, over the years, and so, yeah, we still know each other.  But we worked, not directly, because nuclear program was not--was more experimental then but we were all in this nuclear world.  And at that time, we felt we were under attack (laughs).  And so all of us in the nuclear energy community world wide have gotten to know each other.  And so I got to know people working on the breeder reactors in France, Japan, Sweden, Britain because Argonne was such a historic name in that world.  But, yes, I knew Cordell.
Story_ID: 31447
Speaker 1: Now, did you--what were your thoughts about the nuclear industry?  You said, you know, I was trying to find other, you know, approaches, but what are your feelings today about it?  It's not talked about a lot through--you know, a lot after Three-Mile Island [nuclear plant] was, you know, the way--the monies being spent, you know, why are we spending this money; people are dying, you know, the environment, all those things sort of came as a result of Three-Mile Island [ref. to 1979 nuclear accident].
Speaker 2: And Chernobyl [Soviet nuclear plant].
Speaker 1: And Chernobyl.
Speaker 2: Chernobyl made it worse.  Three-Mile Island, actually no one died.  And people forget that because it was legend.  People died after Chernobyl.  What happened is, because of all of those issues and concerns about nuclear wastes, which became the primary driving force for those who opposed it, and safety, and safety, legitimate safety issue, the cost just became astronomical.  So the, the motivation for nuclear energy in the beginning was that it was gonna cheap and it was to be a source of power that was practically inexhaustible, I mean compared to coal under the guise, at least you're not depleting natural resources of the earth at any great rate.  But because--you, you needed a, a certain number of the reactors to make them cost effective.  And places like Commonwealth and others, when they couldn't grow the base of the number on the customer base, the per unit cost just became so high, and they were (unclear) and so no longer cost-effective compared with oil and gas, and the price, the prices of oil and gas came down from the '70's [1970s].  So it was combination of costs, safety and political opposition.  It just was not popular.  Well, it's very interesting, now, there's much more--more and more talk about the role of nuclear energy because people are more concerned about global warming and nuclear energy does not contribute to global warming because it burns no fossil fuels.  It, it doesn't pollute.  It doesn't, it doesn't produce carbon dioxide or other oxides as a, as a by-product of its burning.  So it's a clean energy--you still have the wastes, but in terms of the energy.  So, and it--even now, some of the environment groups who were adamantly opposed to nuclear energy are beginning to say, well, maybe there's a role here.  And there is, has been developed a new generation of concepts--they haven't been actually built, for smaller, safer reactors.  So that actually, there's much more talk now about a revival of nuclear energy than there has been, say in twenty years.
Speaker 1: And the whole issue of nuclear, the waste part, have there been advancements in that also or not?
Speaker 2: Well, this morning, just on the way here, I heard that the Cong--the Senate has passed a bill designating a place called Yucca Mountain in, in New Mexico [sic. Nevada] as the site.  This site has been developed for twenty years.  They've been working on it, and it's mired in political controversy, and the state of New Mexico [sic, Nevada] is opposed, and they are going to--they've already sued the federal government to oppose the wastes being placed Yucca Mountain.  And who knows?  That's gonna take another four or five years to work its way through.  Meanwhile, the wastes is piling up at the sites around the country where it's being generated.  So the disposal of the wastes is both a technical and scientific issue.  But it's much more of a political issue.
Speaker 1: Well--.
Speaker 2: Nuclear Energy 101 (laughs), the politics of--
Speaker 1: The politics of Nuclear Energy 101.
Speaker 2: --Nuclear Energy 101 (laughs).
Speaker 1: Yeah, of the realities too, people are afraid--you know, I mean the whole--.
Speaker 2: People are afraid of radioactivity--that's another whole--unwarrantedly, I think, compared to the risk of, certainly now of, of the people who die from diseases due to, just pollution from burning coal or other fossil fuels, I mean, many more people suffer from those than have ever suffered from any radioactivity, the results of being exposed to radio activity.
Speaker 1: You know, but I think it also has to do with just--about the invisibility of --.
Speaker 2: It's not known, it's not--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: And it's not anything you can see or touch.
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 31448
Speaker 1: You said, I was sort of bored, you know, I mean after the management structure change, you're become--you're more in the mentoring role with students, you know, and all that.  And I'm just wondering that period from--I keep getting the dates wrongs, but 1985 to 1990, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I'm just, you know, were you getting sort of restless?  Were there things that you liked about the mentoring role, and, you know, and the whole University of Chicago experience and also getting to know, you know, Chicago.  But, you know, you, you were knowing black and white Chicago people.  But you were, you became a little more ingrained in, you know, in Chicago and the community, civically.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But I'm just wondering were there--you know, I'm just wanting a comment about that part, you know, of your life, that sort of five-year period.
Speaker 2: I wouldn't--I wasn't getting bored, but I think you correctly--I think it's a difference between a management job where you're actually running an organization and a senior staff job where you're overseeing various things.  And it's just a different kind of, a different kind job.  It's not as day-to-day engaging.  You deal more of policy issues.  You deal with--I spent a lot more time in Washington on lab and university issues and a great deal of time in the Chicago community.  And I began--this is when I was first asked to join a corporate board, my first corporate board is here, Amoco.  And the CEO of Amoco is the trustee of the University and incidentally, got to know me and also the lab, and I, I was in--I worked with the governor's office on major issues affecting the state.  For example, I was on the Governor's Commission of Science and Technology, which a few of us helped found, in fact.  I helped found something called the Illinois Coalition which was a state-wide group to try to attract more dollar investment in science and technology to Illinois.  Our argument was that for every dollar in taxes we send out, we only get back twenty-five cents.  With California, every dollar they send out, they get back a dollar and fifty cents and, and Washington state, for, you know, the ratio was even more.  So I was very much involved in those issues.  And also Hannah [Gray, University of Chicago president], and not only allowed, but encouraged it because she was much more involved on a national scene.  She was not--didn't join any of the local corporate boards and was not very much involved in the committee.  And the university needed that, every university.  Northwestern was much more, and our--involved, and our trustees would often say, the university needs to be more involved.  So I was, that was one of roles I played during that period.  And it was very good of the school (unclear) that I (unclear), very good for me, to us, personally because we, again, moved up into another world of the corporate boards and national visibility.  But, yes, you're right, I began to, to want to do something else because that's not something--you can't make a career out of those, those things.  You either go on to become president of the University--you can't be a vice president forever.  Well, some people could, I couldn't (laughs).  And that's when I decided, well, I'm going to--since I'm learning more and more about science policy and I, I really couldn't go back to physics in any effective way.  Once you're out--you can, but I didn't want to.  I just wanted to do other things for the--that I'm more involved in science policy, I just may as well make this my next intellectual involvement.  And I spoke to Hannah about it, and people in the School of Public Policy, because I wasn't teaching during this period.  I was almost like (unclear) students.  I said, well, I would like to look at, one, teach a course in science policies, started some, propose in science policy in our new school of Public Policy.  And people thought this was a great idea.  We had--didn't, hadn't had, didn't have a program on that.  As part of it, I said, well, I need to go learn more, so when we arranged fro me to take a sabbatical to go to Europe and spend that time comparing European science and technology policy issues that--especially when it comes to technology transfer, which is what I was very much involved with then, this whole notion I mentioned earlier, of spinning off research from the university and the lab to private industry.  And we had this arch development corporation, we found it was becoming very well known.  So I'd intended, fully intended to come back after my sabbatical, take a faculty position, I would still be physics, but actually move my expertise into science and technology policy and teach a course and so forth and see about where that would go
Story_ID: 31449
Speaker 1: Well, another-- another phone call.  I was, I always got this phone call .  I, in the time, as part of this national involvement, I had been asked to serve on something called PCAST, President's Council of Advisors, Science and Technology, which was a very, very prestigious group, and it does what it just says, advises the president of the United States on science and technology policy.  I actually met with the--you meet with the president periodically, about ten people.
Speaker 2: [President Ronald] Reagan was--was he the president--?
Speaker 1: No, [President George H. W.] Bush, first Bush.
Speaker 2: Bush, okay.
Speaker 1: It was 1990.  And I'd spent the, spending more time at the White House and science in the Office of Science and Technology Policy, and the--really gotten to know the president's science advisor, who I'd known before, [D.] Allan Bromley, who's a physicist, and Allan and I had known each other, but began to work with Allan.  And I was in New Mexico--we had a house in Santa Fe then, and I was driving on the street, and I got this call from Allan.  And the caller said, it's the White House.  And it was Allan Bromley, and he said, Walter?  I said, yes.  He said, are there any conditions under which you would allow the President to nominate you to be the director of the National Science Foundation?  And I said, well, if you put it like that, Allan, of course, (laughs) there's some conditions under which I would, I would consider this.  And so President Bush nominated--I didn't, I was--I didn't leap at this.  It wasn't, it wasn't clear to me that I wanted to do this.  Well, I've, I've never been a big fan of politics in Washington.  And this was a presidential appointment, ratified by the senate, six-year term.  And I'd been on the National Science board, so I knew what the science director did, very prestigious.  The most prestigious assignment, outside of biology, but we'd have to move from Chicago.  I'd have to resign from the corporate boards.  You'd have to go through all of this investigation, you go through--I already had clearances, but you had to go to a deeper level of clearance; had to go back and check your background from the time you were born, literally.  It's, the, the depths of scrutiny.  And just, it was so much, I just--I wanted to, I just was going to come back and teach this course in science and technology policy.  But we talked it over, Shirley and I, and Hannah [Gray, president of the University of Chicago] and all the scientists, of course, wanted me to do it, around the nation, the people, all the, all the scientists wanted, supported it.  So in the end it was the right thing to do, and I was proud I did it, and when I made the decision I was very glad.  But when I received this phone call from Allan, I said, no, I'm not sure I want to do that, Allan.  It just wasn't clear to me.  I said, I'm a Democrat anyway, you know.  This is a Republican administration.  And I went up to the White House for an interview.  And I think what convinced me at the Office of Personnel Policy, they interviewed me.  So now, you realize that if you are appointed by the president to this position, you have to defend the president's policies on the Hill when you go up and present the budget on (unclear) for the (unclear).  I said, yes, said, well, that's no problem because I happen to agree.  Bush was very good to science and technology.  Said, "do you have a political affiliation"?  I said, well, "Yes, I'm registered as a Democrat."  Said, well, do you have--"Will you have a problem being a Democrat working and supporting this policy?"  I said, no.  And that was the only question they asked me about my politics.  And that, I began to think differently.  I said, well, "Maybe I will not involved in political issues," and I didn't.  It turns out the National Science Foundation is just treated by all administrations, usually, as an independent, non-partisan position.  And they don't put any pressure on you to take partisan positions or political positions.  You just, you have to support their science policy, but you're a part of developing it also.  So I had--I really, that was very good.
Speaker 2: Now, this was sort of, pretty amazing that you got this call, you, you're thinking about, you know, that that's what you want to be as science policy, and--.
Speaker 1: And then I did.  That's right (laughs).
Speaker 2: God is looking out for you.
Speaker 1: That's right.  I said, well, you know, I'll just come back and obviously, I had more--and I'll have more experience, and I will know things first hand nationally.  So I will come back to the University of Chicago or wherever, and I will have this science policy knowledge on a much broader level than I would have had just being director of Argonne [National Laboratory] and vice president for research.
Story_ID: 31450
Speaker 1: For those people--cause it's not like a lot of people know much about the National Science Foundation.  It's, I mean it's not even this--I mean in the regular population.
Speaker 2: No, they don't.
Speaker 1: So can you just talk a little bit about what that, you know, what that entity does and it's role, you know, the role that it has?
Speaker 2: Yes, I should say a bit about how science is funded in the United States. Most, the federal government and industry are two major sources, but practically all of the basic research, the fundamental research is not, just for applications, as I spoke earlier about, for immediate applications funded by the federal government.  And it's funded by two major agencies, the National Institutes of Health, which most people know because they're more visible.  They fund things related to disease, cancer and so forth, AIDS research.  They fund most of the biological research.  and the National Science Foundation funds all of the, you know, practically all of the basic research in the physics, chemistry, some biology, basic, not biomedical, biotechnology, but basic biology, mathematics and so forth.  So it is "the" major agency for support of science outside of the biomedical fields in the United States.  And it was started after World War II as a lot of these agencies were to make sure we maintain a strong research basis after the, after the War, the War was over.  The Department of Energy, it funds some research, through Argonne, as I mentioned, but the NSF certainly is seen in the academic community as the premier science agency.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the theory after World War II in its founding?  Was it that the United States didn't want to be behind the eight ball and this was--I'm just, you know, cause--.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --these things come out of the (unclear), or something happening or whatever.  And I mean just like [President George W.] Bush recently has funded, you know, he's structured--what is the new agency he's created around terrorism or whatever.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Homeland Defense [sic. Security].
Speaker 1: Right, Homeland defense, right, right.  So I'm just wondering what, you know, where were we sort of before World War II, in, you know, our belief about sciences and, you know, and the--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and the world.
Speaker 2: I think before World War II the federal government funded some science.  There was a predecessor of NASA called the National Aviation--I can't remember the exact words.  There was a, the Department of Agriculture funded a lot of the research in agriculture, at land-grant universities.  It was spread out.  It wasn't, wasn't coordinated.  And, of course, what, what happened in World War Ii is that it was one of the first wars where the results of science were clear in demonstrating the capability contributed to, to a nation's military.  The most visible example was the atom--atomic bomb, of course.  And that was developed out of the Manhattan Project, which became the Atomic Energy Commission, which became the Department of Energy (DOE).  So that's national lab route.  But people are not aware as under the radar, some--you know, other fundamental things that were--cryptography, the, probably the materials that were dev--special materials that were developed, all of these things were developed on university campuses; others with support from the army and the Navy, mostly the Navy, the Office of Naval Research.  After World War II, the people who had been involved outside of the atomic energy area because their, their effort was going on clear because it was so obvious.  But there was no clear continuation of the funding in the other basic fields.  And so the people who had been involved in that, Allen Waterman is the name that people who know this will know, worked with President Truman and others to, developed an agency that would continue funding this other area of basic research, just DOE or the Atomic Energy Commission would fund the energy-related research.  That agency evolved, became the National Science Foundation after World War II.  And NIH [National Institute of Health] also brought together a number of smaller agencies to fund the, the medical-related research.
Story_ID: 31451
Speaker 1: Now, I know that you talked about your trip to Camp David--.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --during this, I mean where you mentioned it, I have it in my note here.  You know, that was sort of [an] exciting thing to go to Camp David.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Well, what were, what were the circumstances that you were invited there?
Speaker 2: This was PCAST, [President's Council of Advisors on Science & Technology] the group I mentioned.  This was before I became director of the NSF [National Science Foundation].  That's when I was vice president of research at Chicago--it was the, only a few months, a year before, but--maybe a few months, when I was PCAST.  And President [George H. W.] Bush invited PCAST for his first meeting with us to Camp David on a Saturday morning.  And we went out to Camp David.  The president came out in a pair of khakis a plaid shirt, with a dog, greeted us (laughter).  He was (unclear), he was, he was always like that.  I liked worked with President Bush.  I really did.  I really did, and he was always just open, warm, personable, down to earth, I mean I liked working with him.  And that's how he was.
Story_ID: 31452
Speaker 1: You know, that's sort of--I mean this thing is (unclear).  But anyway, because do you think--I just have this question to ask you, and it's sort of off point, but it seems like the sciences were almost color--made almost a color-blind society, and almost, you know, and even your ascension, you know, federal government with the head of National Science Foundation, it was de-politicized in many ways.  I, I'm not--you know, I don't hear any color issues coming in here.  I'm not saying you didn't experience them, but it just seems like, you know, here's someone who's knowledgeable and can do this.  You know, you had developed skills along the way.  I'm not saying that, but, you know, the ascension is pretty--.
Speaker 2: Well, I, I've been asked this before in interviews, what about issues of race and prejudice?  I'm sure they were there, and looking back, I may see, well, maybe that, that was happening.  But I'd be very honest, and you hear it during my career, and, and I think it has been part of its being in this particular arena that I've been in, there's been remarkably little of that certainly, I felt--that's affected me.  Now, the prob--the, I think the problem is it's, it's been so difficult to enter these fields.  So there were so few of us who were in the fields, but it's like, it's a, it's a fraternity, like many others that--but it's one that once you are there, the, the, it's--the language, the mores, the culture, the inclusiveness is such, and the issues you deal with are such that they tend to at least in, and outside of some social issues, they, they tend to minimize race or ethnicity.  Also, it's a very international community.  I mean some of the most important people have been the Asian Americans, Europeans, Jews, people, second-generation, first generation that's come across.  And the, one of the reasons I went into physics in the first place, it was because it's, it's pretty hard to fake your competence.  I mean (laughs), this problem (unclear) what it--you either solve the problem or you don't solve it.  And, you know, you, you can't--it's, it's difficult to say well, I can't do that because, you know, of my race.  Well, you know, mathematics is mathematics and physics is physics.  Now, the cultural and racial issues comes when you get, like in any other field, when it comes time for promotions, to be department heads in universities or access to resources.  If you're in a department, and you have a prejudiced chairman of the department who doesn't give you resources, I never experienced that.  Some of my colleagues did, and I don't know if I was just lucky or had a different personality or what.  But it, the field is less, I think, less amenable to manipulation because of one's race or gender.  But not wholly, because you'll hear, one, one (unclear) at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] even now complain about disparities in salary and promotion and so forth.  So it's there, but not as--it's, it's harder to pull off than it is in other fields.
Story_ID: 31453
Speaker 1: Now, when you got to the National Science Foundation, what were the, I mean what were some of the issues that you were, the main issues you were dealing with, and I'm talking about in terms of our policy and where, you know, we were and abroad, you know, and who were some of the major players?  Was the University of Chicago, was it a major player?  Was MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] just as--you know, I mean who were the, sort of, the players of what--?
Speaker 2: The major, the--there were several types.  It's, it's funny.  In any position I've been in, there's always been some sub-issue that takes a lot of your time, that's not central to the mission, but you, you have to deal with, like the students at Illinois.  And it's almost like a comic opera, a soap opera, you know, and there's always a sub theme, you know, in any story.  Mine, in Washington was the, that members of the Virginia delegation wanted us to move the headquarters from--of the NSF, from downtown Washington, two blocks from the White House, to the suburbs of Virginia--Washington, Virginia.  Of course, none of the people who worked as NSF wanted to move to this small town, Boston, Virginia and none of the senior management.  We didn't want to move because in ten minutes, I could call [D.] Allan Bromley, the science advisor on the phone, and say, Allen, you have a few minutes?  I'll run over.  Or I could run over and talk with people, you know, anywhere, White House, Office of Management and Budget.  So that became sub-theme throughout--(unclear) And I threw that in because it was a very funny story, and it ended in a funny way.  But the, the real policy issues was, I think, the policy issues and science issues.  The policy issues had to do with the role of science, federally supported science, in addressing society's problems or in funding the research interests of scientists.  And this may not sound very exciting to you, but I, and that, the clash of opinions on that were very dramatic in the science and science policy world because the scientists and many people believe that the role, the success of the National Science Foundation was that it did not try to fund, solve, short-term problems.  Let DOE [Department of Energy] do that, let the Department of Defense do that, NIH [National Institutes of Health], that the success of American science had been in allowing scientists to propose the things they wanted to work on and funding the best ideas.  And they were long range, and that's, that's how we produced great science and great science engineers.  Well, some, especially some in Congress, Senator Barbara Mikulski who was chairman of our appropriations committee, from Maryland, whom I got to know very well, and others, felt that, to quote her "these scientists just want to play in their own sandbox", and she was a former nun from Baltimore, and in her appropriation bill was all--also HUD, and some other housing.  She said, "Why should I--with all the problems we have in society, why should I direct money towards the NSF when they are not even interested in attacking these problems?"  She said, you can't--"I don't believe that science has no role in attacking--in addressing these problems.  What about science education?  Why aren't you guys doing more in this field?"  That became the major issue I, I dealt with, trying to balance the, the need for support of scientists, also addressing legitimate concern that Senator Miku-Mikulski and others had, but also address the political concern that, that I had to face; that if the chairman of our appropriations committees and others did not think we were moving in the right direction, I mean, she made it very clear that she was not gonna support increased funding.  Go to the NIH.  They deal with diseases, clearly, the public understands that.  So I, along with a few other colleagues put together this commission on the future of the National Science Foundation.
Story_ID: 31454
Speaker 1: Why was Virginia so--how could they dictate or say that, you know, say we want you to move here, the state of--I didn't understand that.
Speaker 2: The building that we were in was an old building.  And it was--the foundation needed new space.  And that, the process had started before I arrived.  And so the notion that the NSF [National Science Foundation] might move was, was not something that just came out of the blue.  In fact, Senator [Barbara] Mikulski who's from Maryland had proposed a move to Maryland and why would anyone want it?  It's a very prestigious agency in addition to the jobs you're creating in your district or your state.  It, it--wherever it was going to go, would attract visitors from all over the world, scientists and all, and that's what finally happened in Virginia.  It did happen.  So when Maryland, for some reason--I can't--that was before me, but by the time I got there it had been proposed in Congress that the new site be in Virginia.  But the White House hadn't agreed to that, had to sign off on it.  And when I arrived, that was the state of things.  And the, the Virginia delegation, Senator [Charles] Robb and a Congressman named Wolfe, were really pushing me.  As director, I could, I could make the decision because the White House was being very neutral, very, very--and again, back to this illusion I made earlier of how the White House just treated me and the agency really very well.  And they didn't push us, or say, well, you should go to Virginia because we need the Virginians support on this issue.  It wasn't completely hands off, but it was clear, it was my decision.  And I didn't want to move because none of the scientists wanted me to move.  So I was the defender.  But that issue was sort of going on while we were dealing with this major issue of science policy, and what should be the focus of interception at NS, and you won't recall this, you may, but this was right at the period when we all thought that the Japanese were gonna surpass us in science and technology.  So the whole issue of national competitiveness.  We were losing our competitiveness because we were not translating our science into technology.  The Japanese were stealing our basic science and producing devices that then were computers and so forth, semi-conductor chips and--but it was American science.  So why couldn't we do a better job of translating our science into technology and therefore, into applications and therefore, into quality of life and economic development for the United States.  That was the raging debate during that period.  And the NSF, I was right in the middle of that.  As I said, the scientists were totally against NSF going in this direction, but we were getting political pressure to do so.  So I del--I put together a commission.  And it was a very good commission, and we really had to, sort of walked a fine line between those two issues.  And then the administration changed.  So the debate changed.  George [H.W.] Bush lost the election.  Did the Democrats lose the House, lose the Senate?  Yes, and the--but the whole debate changed, yeah, because the Republicans came and the Republicans in the, in the Congress were clearly what we called government minimalists.  And their philosophies, simply put, the government should not try to interfere in the marketplace.  So you're, they clearly supported scientists doing science; let the market take care of technology transfer.  The other--so we never resolved it (laughter)--sort of changed.  The scientific issues were fascinating.  We were, had proposed to build two large telescopes, one in South America and one in Hawaii, and there were international--they were going to be built through an international consortium, and the issues were, how do we bring together the other countries to help pay for it?  What kind of telescope should be built?  What was the latest technology in terms of designing the, the lens and so forth?  And that was, I mean just fascinating.  The other, which became a mix of science and politics was a device built that was des--proposed to detect gravity waves.  And what are gravity waves?  Well, the, they're light waves so, and they're water waves and sound waves in the, in the, Einstein's grand theory of relativity, they're supposed to be gravity waves, gravities.  It's communicated, the force, through waves.  Nobody's ever detected them, and the proposal was that black--a black hole might have produced enough energy to create gravity waves in space that you might detect.  But the chances were so small and the sensitivity you'd have to have on this device were so great, and there was major debate in the scientific community whether or not this was possible.  And the NSF was proposed it.  And I became convinced by the scientists who wanted it that this was exciting stuff that was probably possible. Then the other issue was, well, if you can build it, where should it be built?  And it was, it required--and probably going into too much detail, but it required at least two sites and maybe three, thousands of miles apart because these, the, the waves are such that the distance you had--you had to detect them at various points, and you couldn't really make sure it was really a gravity wave.  And that's too complicated to explain.  So, and this science, this is the other part of science.  You always got down to a political side.  Okay, it's great science, but now we're gonna build something.  And you were gonna build something, you have to build somewhere.  And anywhere is--there's nowhere where there's, a congressman does not have a district (laughs).  And so whenever you're going to build a major facility that costs hundreds of millions of dollars, people become suddenly interested in the project (laughs).  And so we got into that side of it of where we would build it, and where we would put it and so forth.  So it worked out fine.  It's called LIGO, (unclear) project, a laser-intense gravity observatory.
Speaker 1: Did it get built?
Speaker 2: It got built, got built.  Put one site in Louisiana which happened to be in the district of a very powerful senator.  I think we put the other--where, we put the other site, in Maine, happened to be in the, a nice good district for a supporter.  And I can't remember where the other was gonna be.  But it actually got built, yeah.  And I got invited to the dedication last year (laughs).
Speaker 1: So it works and everything.
Speaker 2: Well, it's built, it's built, it's built.
Speaker 1: Okay, we don't know how--.
Speaker 2: We don't know if it works--.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it's built.
Story_ID: 31455
Speaker 1: The other question I have for you, the importance of the North and South Pole in the whole scientific community, is that much--was there any discussion of that because people don't know what actually happens in those places except what you see on, in some of these documentaries?  I mean, you know, the general public, but did that play into the, you know, into the discussion at all, (unclear) Antarctica--.
Speaker 2: The, Antarctica, very much so.  Not so much--the North Pole, artic research, there are two, two aspects to the question.  There are science issues which you want to address by looking at--polar research, it's called, either North or South.  Some is how climate changes or varies in different areas.  The other is the ice cores at both poles, over the years have deposited layers of particulates or matter, and that is well preserved.  Also, the ice melts or forms differently depending upon the temperature at the time when it was forming.  So by digging these cores, you can, you can ask questions about the temperature vari--this whole question about global--has the world really warmed up by looking at ice cores and, and the temperature variation.  But the Antarctic now, is used for much more than simply polar research because it's located where it is in, in, at the, that site on the, the earth where it rotates.  The atmosphere is very thin, and solar particles penetrate the atmosphere much better.  Also, it's very isolated without interruptions.  You have a good view of the sky also.  So you can do a lot of astrophysical research there.  And we did fund an astrophysical lab, the University of Chicago actually operates there.  But that's another story, the NSF, the--Antarctica is divided up, it's an international continent.  And it's divided up into zones that are controlled by the various countries.  And there's a multinational body that adjudicates what happens.  The United States' zone in Antarctica is the responsibility of the National Science Foundation, yeah.  So as director of the National Science Foundation, I was responsible for, all of the United States' program in Antarctica.  Actually, I had to go down, went to the South Pole and all of that.  But (laughs), I used to kid, joke with people that if you come with me to the South Pole, I can marry you and divorce you.  I literally could.  It was like being captain of a ship, you know.  I had those powers in, in Antarctica (laughs).  And that was a fun part of the job to go to Antarctica and visit the South Pole.  But in, the answer to your question, there's a great deal of science that takes place in Antarctica.
Story_ID: 31456
Speaker 1: Now, what other things were surprising about the position and that you learned or that, you know, programs, any other programs that you were proud of or programs unfinished that you would have liked to have done, you know, when the administration changed or--?
Speaker 2: Two different questions.
Speaker 1: I know, the--.
Speaker 2: Science and science education, one I was very proud of, and Luther Williams, who directed that, who's an African American who was in charge of the science educator director was really responsible for growing the science education budget, starting a number of new programs that addressed science in high school, in public schools, at a level the NSF had not been involved with because we'd done mostly research and, and universities.  And those programs have made a difference in getting youngsters interested in science.  And so I was very supportive of Luther and able to support him very well in that.  The, the other things I was, I was surprised by, presently, is the influence the director of the National Foundation had in the nat--in the whole international science arena  I had gone to Europe, as I mentioned earlier, just before I took the job.  And, but it had been announced that I would be appointed.  And, in fact, one of the conditions I asked the White House for is that I be allowed to take this eight-month sabbatical and come back to the job.  And they said, fine.  You know, said, by the time you go through your security clearance (laughs), we work through Congress, it's gonna be about that anyway, and it would be good for you to have the experience.  But when it was announced, worldwide, that President Bush had nominated or intended to, announced intended to send to the Senate the nomination of Walter Massey, to be the director of the National Science Foundation, when we arrived in Europe then, we arrived another, at a different level.  And now that I think about it, it was like, when I say coming back to Chicago as director of Argonne.  Being in Europe as director, you know, designate of the National Science Foundation, just opened up European science doors to me.  So the science, it was equivalent of the science minister in many countries.  So we were invited--I was invited to laboratories.  I was given an office at the major science agency in France, CNRS [Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique].  Their staff assisted me.  When I wanted to go to Germany to see what they were doing in science and technology policy, the ministry of Germany; R&D invited me over.  They, I was treated like scientific royalty in Europe, and I didn't ex--obviously, I wouldn't have known that or expected (unclear).  So, we, even now, we have a number of friends throughout Europe in the scientific community because of this sabbatical and my being named as director of NSF.
Story_ID: 31457
Speaker 1: Now, eventually, now, who were the key players or countries outside of the United States, you know, in the whole sci--development in the science, in the scientific arena?
Speaker 2: Well, then it was mostly European countries and Japan, Germany, France, Great Britain.  If you look, if one looked at a measure of the proportion of, of gross domestic product, looked at research, R&D per GDP, it's called the ratio, and that's a major thing one tracts as well as the number of scientific publications.  It was Japan, France, and Germany, Great Britain and the United States.  The Asian countries, China in particular and Taiwan and others have become much more significant over the last decade and a half.  And even places like India in certain fields of software--not so much--and basic science.  But it still would be those five, Japan, Germany, Great Britain, France and the United States.
Speaker 1: Now, in terms of where science technology is going today, what--do you see that there's been a great change you left the National Science Foundation or not?
Speaker 2: Yes, biology, things--I shouldn't say biology, but the, the world of bio slash, bio-chemistry, bio-physics, bio-technology, bio-informatics has become much more important.  And the, the science and scientists who are coming out of that world have become more influential just in this, this past decade.  So until just this decade ago, since World War II, physicists were the top of the heap in science because it was physicists who, who were so important in winning the second world war and in creating these developments.  Now, physics is still very much important, but one of the major issues we're dealing with now in respect to science policy is the balance of funding between the life sciences, which has been growing tremendously and the physical, chemistry and mathematical sciences which have been relatively flat.  And the question is, is this in the best interest of long-term scientific development because we as a--many of us, and many people still believe that fund--the issues that you deal with in physics and mathematics are so still the--still the fundamental underpinning of understanding the nature of the universe.
Story_ID: 31458
Speaker 1: The administration changed and you--well, you got a call.  You, what--how did the University of California get--(unclear) ?
Speaker 2: I received another phone call (laughs).
Speaker 1: Phone call.  I was just going to say, you got a call (laughs).
Speaker 2: I did (laughs).  I received a phone call--well, I wasn't sure I wanted to stay when the new administration came in.  My job wasn't in danger.  It was a six-year appointment.  Now, the president can fire you from any--or the president can make life so uncomfortable for the head of the Federal Reserve who was also a six-year appointment that you just leave.  But I had no reason--I was a Democrat, as I said, anyway.  I had no reason to believe that my job was in jeopardy as NSF [National Science Foundation]--and the Congress was still--the Senate was still Democratic.  So Senator [Barbara] Mikulski, who was a major supporter and others, and [Congressman Louis] Lou Stokes on the House side.  This, this House is still Democratic then.  It wasn't until the next election.  Then my major congressional supporters were there, so even if a new president had come in and his--it's never the president.  It's the people around him, and had wanted their own person at NSF, it would have, it would have been politically messy because the Democratic support on the Hill would have supported.  But I had, I never, and really in my mind, intended to stay six years.  I just, I didn't think we were gonna stay in Washington six years.  I told Shirley, we'll stay maybe four.  And that's not atypical.  NSF directors would stay three or four years, and it--so it wasn't seen as a lack of commitment or anything like that.  But when you're in those positions, jobs at the level, there're so few openings at, at the levels that you aspire to, that the timing rarely comes exactly, you know, at the, the exact time that you like.  So I had intended to stay and finish these programs that I was working on, to implement the recommendations of our commission, and I knew the Democrats did support some of the tech transfer efforts we were involved with.  And so I, that was all gonna be good.  But Jack [W.] Peltason called.  Jack was then president of the University of California system.  He had been chancellor of the Irvine campus.  So he was president of the system, all the nine campuses.  Well, you would not remember, but the name Jack Peltason comes up back when I was at Illinois because Jack was president of the University of Illinois, Urbana, Champaign-Urbana, chancellor.  And when you, you go back, you would say, I worked very closely with the chancellor because I was so, I was one of the few black faculty and I was the chairman of the black faculty and staff association.  So Jack and I worked a long time ago on those issues.  He had gone on to California, and then I'd gone various places.  And Jack called and said, Walter, I want, I would like for you to talk to a search committee about this position of provost for the University of California system.  And again, I said, well, "I'm not sure, Jack.  I don't, I don't want to--I'm not sure."  I just, I don't know--I'd been at California on sabbatical and Santa Cruz in the early '70s [1970s].  But he said, "well, there's also the position of chancellor of the Irvine campus, and I'd like to have you for either one."  He said, "I'd really like you to be provost because that's the depth, that's my second person."  He said, that's, "that's the position that's second to the president, and you have responsibility for all of the campuses, plus the three national laboratories and the two weapons lab in Lawrence-Berkeley."  And he said," it's just a great position."  And he said, also, now, I can't--this is nothing I can, can deal--can promise or orchestrate.  He said, but, you know," I'm gonna be seventy the year after next, Walter, and they're gonna have to find a new president pretty soon. " And so it was clear that if, if the--being the number two person, then it, you know, if I didn't get it, that'd be mine to lose in that sense.  So well, I spoke with a number of people about it, and Shirley, we decided, well, okay, we'll go to California.  And so we decided to go to California (laughter).  And going to California was not easy.  I talked to Vernon Jordan a lot about it.  Vernon was, Vernon said, "yeah, you probably--this is a good time to leave Washington because no matter what your job is, when a new administration comes in, they just have all their people to come in."  And so then Ann Jordan said, well, you know, it'll make sense to start over.  (Unclear) Said, oh, we're going, the children said, we'll go to California.  So we had a house in Cape Cod.  We sold the house in Cape Cod; had a house in Santa Fe.  We sold the house in Santa Fe.  We sold the apartment in Chicago, going west.  We're gonna spend the rest of our lives.  This is where we're going to retire in California.  We bought a big house, a nice house, spent a lot of money.  And we went (laughs), we were there, you know.  I said, well, even if I don't become president, you know, provost of the University of California system is, I mean that's, you know, some people would like to compete for that job.  So, so you have that.  And who knows, something else might open up.  And also, as soon as it was announced--I had to resign from all my boards when I went to Washington.  People started to call.  We want you to rejoin the boards of California, corporations out there.  We'd like to have you.  I said, okay.  And the University of California, the job would pay well.  It didn't, didn't compete with private schools, public stuff, but say, you had a housing allowance and all of this.
Story_ID: 31459
Speaker 1: Well, as soon as I arrived in California, there was a big scandal because the previous president, David Gardner, it was found out that the regents had voted him this retirement package, which everyone thought was overly generous.  It's sort of like what they're saying now about these CEOs at the present time, corporations.  And there was this great hew and cry for reform of the University of California system governors, the office of the president, and to take away all, of benefits from these overpaid bureaucrats in the office of the president, who are not on the frontline running the campuses anyway.  So, they took away the housing allowance, forty thousand dollars a year (laughs).  They also took away many of the retirement benefits, and at the same time, the, the state would into an economic slump, the greatest slump since World War II, since the, maybe '60s [1960s], I guess.  So the budget was cut for the University system.  So I, I walked into a situation almost like the one I had had at Argonne [National Laboratory], where we had to lay off, not just staff, but faculty members throughout the University of California system.  First day on the job, literally, I chaired a ad-hoc committee, composed of representatives of all the campuses, whose job was to figure out how to cut twenty percent out of the budget for the system.  I didn't know anything about the budget.  But as provost, I had to chair  this, this committee.  And so I dealt with that, I dealt with that for the next couple of years or so, on these issues.  And it was a very political state.  And also it's the first time I'd been in a public university since Illinois where they have the Sunshine Act.  So everything is open, the regents meetings are open to the public and the press.  Then the whole issue of affirmative action came, Proposition 209, passed by the state, Proposition 217, the on immigration.  Then the regents, a certain regent led by Ward Connerly.  And you, and that was a region and others began to push for the university to abolish its affirmative action program.  As provost, it was my job--I was the person to defend those programs, not just because I was black on affirmative action, but as senior academic officer, it was my job to gather the evidence on the records of the programs, to make--you had to make sure the campuses could provide historical records that demonstrated the success; also, to show that they were fair and legal, and that they didn't violate Bakke, you know, which had been the California-based Supreme Court decision.  So I was thrust right in the middle of this, which was fine.  I mean, I love, I love a battle.  But it was, that was the, a lot of the issues.  Meantime, on the national lab side, I had the weapons lab, and there was a movement to maybe close one of the weapons labs because the cold war is over.  Why do we need to invest all of this money in two labs, Livermore and Los Alamos.  So I was very much involved in those issues back--and then Hazel O'Leary who was Secretary of Energy, was responsible for the labs.  And Hazel and I had worked together, and we had a director of [Lawrence] Livermore [National Laboratory] that we wanted to remove, the president, and we had done a review, the outside peer review.  And it, was found that he was not performing adequately.  But he was very popular with a conservative military hawks and director of Livermore.  He'd come out of this weapons background.  So we fired him--I won't mention his name, but it's public record.  And in the process, and word got out that we were gonna fire him, and I began to be attacked on radio stations nationwide, these talk radio stations by the right-wing commentators that we, the University of California had this liberal provost who was trying to undermine our nation's security by firing John Knuckles, is his name, who was the, sort of the last bastion (laughter) of defense for this, our declining nuclear weapons capacity.  So I was in all of these issues.  And it was fun to be involved with them, but I wasn't being very much on campus with the academic programs.  And I was also spending a great deal of time up in Sacramento defending our budget.  So that's two and a half years.  And then they began to search for the new president.  Jack announced his retirement, and Jack made it clear that I was his choice.  And they had a number of regents who, it was clear--and I had the support of the chan--the major chancellors, Chuck Young, UCLA, who was the senior chancellor, Dick Atkinson, San Diego, Horoy (ph.) down at Riverside and Carl Pitts at Santa Cruz, the chancellors.  And the other person who would have been competing was Chang Lin Tin, at Berkeley.  And so--I mean there was a very good chance of me getting the job.  I got a phone call (laughter).  The president, "Did you read that the president of Morehouse has resigned under some cloud of scandal?"  I said, no, I didn't read that.  It's in the 'Ebony'.  Look at it, 'The Atlanta Journal Constitution', it's in 'JET'.  I said, no, I hadn't seen that.  Are you going to go back?  I said, why would I go back to my house?  I mean this, this is, this has noth--this is nowhere on my trajectory.  You know, it's not a research university.  It's not a big science facility.  And we, we're in California (laughter).  And so I said, you know how much I have invested in California?  I said, no, "I'm not going to Morehouse."  I mean, you know, I'm a great supporter of the college and I will certainly work--I'm sorry to hear that, to help find somebody.  Phone calls kept coming.  They just kept coming.  "Aren't you going to Morehouse?  When are you gonna go back to Morehouse?  They need you at Morehouse; you just have to go to Morehouse."
Story_ID: 31460
Speaker 1: Okay, so you get this call?
Speaker 2: Calls.
Speaker 1: Calls.
Speaker 2: But finally, it was like these--oh, I know what happened.  Before, I received an official call.  They had a search firm working and the search firm called after a lot of alumni called.  And I said, no, I'm not interested.  You know, and that was that.  And John Hopps, who I mentioned earlier, John, who had been my college roommate, who was very active in this effort and John was up at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] then.  John came out to California for, and have dinner with me and really, you know, impressed me on the, the need to look at this more seriously and more thoughtfully.  He described the situation and the circumstances under which Roy [Leroy Keith] left, the cloud and the cloud, that casts a cloud really over the college.  And, and they, the idea was you needed someone who had some really national visibility, who would--that's whose--by their coming, would make a statement as well as, you know, coming to actually do something (laughs).  And John said, "Look, Walter, if you will consider going back, and you need me, I'll go back with you."  Well, and I said, "Really?"  And he said, "Yeah."  And I said, "Well, all right, man, okay."  So I thought about it then.  I began, and I, and actually we were coming--Shirley and I were coming to Atlanta to give a talk.  I was giving a talk at the triple AS, the American Association for the Advancement of Science, their national meeting in Atlanta.  And I said, well, yeah, I can go over to the campus, just look around, talk to some people.  And I did, and I talked to some alumni I knew in Atlanta.  And I began to take more seriously the notion that this was some--might be something I should do because of the need there, but also I began to reflect at being back on how important the college had been to me.  And I was really torn.  I was just torn about it.  I was also, at the meantime, I was interviewed to be president of the University of Illinois, here.  Yeah, and I, you know, it was down to Jim Strubble and myself (laughter).  So all of this was going on.  And I just wasn't sure.  I wasn't sure about this, a big move again.  And all my life, had just been science, big science, big--you know, even in the academic institutions, and this is world I love.  It's--I love the issues, it's what I've grown up with.  And to just come back to any undergraduate--I wouldn't have gone to any other undergraduate college.  That wasn't even an issue, but to go to any undergraduate and then, back in the South where I spent all of my career trying to get out of the South since I was born in Mississippi.  I mean so I had (unclear) to weigh all that.  What finally did it is I, I was, came to Chicago for something, and I was flying back.  And Shirley picked me up--in the car were my two sons.  One lived in, Eric lived in Chicago, actually, and Keith lived in Santa Fe then.  I said, "What are you guys doing here?"  (Laughs) And Shirley said, "I think we should have a family talk."  And so we did, and we talked about whether I should make the move, and my sons thought I should.  He said, you know, "Dad, you know, it'd be great to be president of University of California," especially my youngest son, Eric, but he said, "You know, a lot of people could do that, but I don't see anybody who could do what you could do at Morehouse.  And, you know, what you ought to do."  And so (laughter), I decided, okay.  And I called a number--I called McVey, too, who was still alive, and was on the search committee, yeah.  And McVey, I mean he was just ecstatic that I would come back to do this.  And then I said, well, okay, I'll do this.  I will look at it, I said, but I will go interview the board search committee.  I don't want to deal with a search firm, you know, all of that.  I want to hear directly from the board members involved, what they want and why they think I can do this.  And so we had a, a meeting here at O'Hare at a little room there at O'Hare Hilton.  And Lerone Bennett was there and Otis Moss who was the chairman and Flash Davis who was the vice chair.  And after that, I went back, and I decided we were going to do it.  Well, I told Jack [W.] Peltason, and he was, he was just devastated.  I mean he was pleased, he understood my coming to Morehouse, but he would have pleased if I had taken the Illinois job because that was his old institution, you know.  And, but the next morning, the search committee, the [University of California] Regents search committee was gonna have its first meeting to begin the process of looking for a new president of University of California.  And I, I--for all the reasons, I knew, you know, my name was one of--and the chair of the committee was Roy Brofrey (ph.) who also had been on the chair of the committee that selected me as provost.  So Roy, I knew Roy was one of my strong backers.  And they were, they were gonna meet at 9:00, yeah, I think down at UCLA or somewhere.  And I asked my office to see if you can find Roy before he went in the meeting.  And they found Roy about ten minutes before.  And he said, what's going on, you know, Walter?  I said, Roy, maybe I'm not a candidate for the president, I said, but I don't want to be.  And he, he was speechless, he said, "What?"  He said, "Why?  Is it all this affirmative action stuff, Walter, is that bothering you?"  I said, "No."  And I, so I said, "I'll tell you later, but I've decided I'm going to go back and be president of Morehouse, my alma mater."  And (laughter), so he went in and he told the committee that I wasn't, you know, I was, withdrawing from it.  And then I went off to Morehouse.
Story_ID: 31461
Speaker 1: You know, a lot of time--the thing that's significant, I think about this and the recent thing with [Dr. Henry Louis] 'Skip' Gates, and I mean it's not a para--it's nowhere near a parallel, but what I'm saying Walter is a lot of times people have not gone back, you know, to help our institutions.  And this is a very important institution, and I remembered someone had even said the standards of the institution had sort of fallen, you know.  There, there had been that, you know, thing.  So it, it says a lot that you went back to your institution is what I'm saying.
Speaker 2: It does.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: You didn't, you could, you know, you had already mainstreamed yourself, big time.  So what were your--what are you proud that you've done and accomplished there, and how did it even feel to go back?
Speaker 1: It felt--it was a little awkward at first.  It was another world.  People didn't know me either.  I think the faculty were a little suspicious.  There were, as always, people who question your motives, you know.  Why did he really leave the University of California?  What do you want here?  Will I come in not understanding the institution, and all--and actually a lot of those things, the latter, were true.  I didn't understand it in many ways.  It was not where I'd been.  And a lot of my body language and signals were misread because they were used to a different style of leadership, and I don't mean just Morehouse, in a lot of the HBCUs (unclear) are used to a more autocratic style or president, a, more of a--as one of the (laughter) faculty members said, they're used to more presidentialism.  And that's just not me.  And so when I--I was very casual and open, and I would say things, and people would suspect other motives.  And so there a lot of awkwardness and working through things.  And I would say, make an announcement or give a speech, and it would be interpreted, you know, misinterpreted.  People just didn't know me, you know, and, and I didn't know them.  So we went through that, and the campus really required a lot.  It really did.  I mean and my predecessor had done a very good job, but I came at a time when it, it really required a lot.  The president, and no president had lived actually on the campus for over thirty years.  And so when Shirley and I came, I said, well, (laughter) got to go--that one absolute condition is that we have to live on or near the campus.  And there was no house.  So the trustee--and there was not, no one argued it.  They said, great.  And the students said, oh, wow, we'd love that.  But there were things like that, that we went through.  So you asked what we're most proud of, we have a place.  We're on campus.  I am visible.  She's visible.  She's involved.  The faculty and I, we--I really understand the place and people know me so when I make these statements, they put them in context.  And I, I really think we've been, we've been lucky.  We've gained a lot from it, but I do think--and I say, we, because Shirley--we really have, I think, helped established a, a greater sense of community with the college and the students and faculty.  And there have been a number of improvements, not just from me, but, you know, with, with all of us, all of us involved.  Of course, we were voted the number one college for African Americans in the nation.  And we're very attractive to the very best students, and we've--I've become very involved in Atlanta.  So has Shirley.  And my national visibility and connections, I think, have brought something.  The one thing I'll tell you that's the most pleasant surprise is how little of my national involvement I've had to forego because of being at Morehouse.  I just, and I had assumed and accepted the fact that being president of this small, undergraduate liberal arts college and historically black and in the South was just going to mean my invitation to be involved in the issues that I'd been involved in before on a national or international scale was going to decrease significantly because I just wasn't at one of the, you know, the top research universities.  It went down some, and some things I didn't get involved in before, but on the whole, Morehouse has proven to be a tremendous base from which to do so many things.  And also, it gives me another perspect--not only gives me another perspective, but I bring another perspective.  And it's sort of like what my son, Eric, said, it's, I--well, now, when I go into a room, the president of MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology], president of University of California, then there's the president of Morehouse, well, the president of Morehouse occupies a special position because there's no one else in that room that brings that perspective, but who also understands the issues that they deal with.  And as sort of the culminating attestation to that, is I received another phone (laughter) call several months ago from the White House.  Now, I'd assumed that my days of being involved really at top-level, policymaking at that level were over.  And I, I do, I miss that world, and I said to people, I really, I just miss that--I got a call actually, saying President Bush the second was putting together new members of PCAST [Presidents Council of Advisors on Science & Technology].  And I had been on his father's PCAST, and they wanted me to join.  So I'm, now, I'm on the President's Council of Advisors of Science and Technology under George W. Bush.  So I'm back in the mix there, and it's, it's nice.
Story_ID: 31462
Speaker 1: You, I'm sure anybody seeing this tape, you--and I always, I say, we, and that's just, I think like that because there's no doubt that Shirley has played, not--I don't mean this sort of wife behind you, issue.  I mean as a partner in everything, everything I've done since we've been married.  And her being a part of a team with me has just made me much more effective in things I do.  And also, she has an insight into people and issues that deal with people that I've developed in being married to her over the years, that I didn't have.  I mean I came out of the science laboratory, and I really, and I didn't think about some issues.  She would say, well, you know, the, the secretaries are not gonna like this.  And I (unclear) (kno the secretaries?  Look, I'm running a lab with 3,500 people, what, you know, (laughs), the secretaries?  Well, I learned, the secretaries matter, probably matter more than most people in getting things done, and let, you know, people, the secretary I use as a generic term.  Also, in my--what's so very important in jobs I've been in is, all the--when you're involved civic activities, there're the social connections.  Other people have wives also, other CEOs have wives.  So when you're invited to join these boards or organizations, people who're inviting you to join, I know that I'm now in this world, look, look at well, you know, who are we associating with generally?  What kind of family do they have?  What are their values?  And that word is gonna be more important now in this corporate, in the corporate world.  So she's been extremely important, very important.  She's been--well, I wouldn't be here, couldn't have done it.
Speaker 2: Right, a part--a true partner.
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, oh, yeah, right.
Speaker 2: It shows the value of marriage.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I'm a big believer in marriage.
Story_ID: 31463
Speaker 1: How old were our parents when they passed away?
Speaker 2: They were fairly young, my mother was.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I'm just saying, if they could have seen the success and what you came through and all that, almost a world of hatred, you know, and just rising up like this, you know.  I'm just, that's why I'm asking you legacy questions because you, you know, I saw you--you know, the other thing is that you came back and it was emotional coming back to, to, you know, to Morehouse--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Here was Benjamin Mays and the, you know, McVey.  And that was an important thing, but I think back at what you came, you know, where you came from and almost the hatred and yet, look at how you've risen up.  And I'm just wondering if you can--you don't have any encapsulation of your life in some respects or--?
Speaker 2: I think I've been very lucky.  No, I really do.  I know what you're asking, and, but when I look at my life--I, I've worked hard.  And I have, I've worked hard, and, you know, I still do, but I think I've just been incredibly lucky to have done these things and to be where I am.  My, my--the legacy I'm most concerned about is my children.  I want my children to think they had a good dad.  I mean I really do.  And they do, and I have great children.  I really, really do.  And I just, I would like the people, say at Morehouse [College] or anywhere else, to, to think that, you know, he was really seriously committed to making the institution a better place.  But I don't, when I, when we--when I tell this story, I can see when I'm saying it how it sounds, but I don't think of myself as having come out of these circumstances and risen up in any dramatic way, you know, because it, if you would sort of go back, it's all--a lot of things just happened (laughs).  I didn't, I didn't have a plan, I mean my plan was to get out of Mississippi (laughter), and once I achieved that, you know, it's pretty much, that, well, now, I'm going to do what I like.  And then I married Shirley, we had children, and I was professor at Brown [University].  That was, to me, the--what else did I need in life?  I mean I remember, and they're still some of my happiest times.  I was working on my science, (unclear) good family.  We weren't, we hadn't, we, we were--on a professor's salary, you're always struggling, assistant professor.  So I didn't, I never thought at that point, and I was an adult then, you know, I was in my late thirties, I didn't have this plan to do all of these other things.  And so when I look, and Shirley and I talked about it, we lead a wonderful life.  We just do.  We lead, we lead a life just so far beyond anything we could have ever dreamed about or expected or, or planned for.  And I just think we're lucky.
