Story_ID: 647873
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: It's Gwen, G-W-E-N, Mazer, M-A-Z-E-R [HistoryMaker Gwen Mazer].
Speaker 1: All right.  And where were you born?
Speaker 2: New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: Personal style and image consultant, and I am also an author.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is November 8, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in San Francisco [California] on a sunny day.
Story_ID: 647874
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight, you know, questions we always ask as sort of a warm up.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Caviar.
Speaker 1: All right.  A favorite color?
Speaker 2: Turquoise.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Autumn.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Italy and if not Italy, I'll take the Caribbean, any island.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Let go and let God.
Story_ID: 647875
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and then your father's [Theodore Goodman] side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We'll keep them separate; and then we'll put them together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Edythe Belle Goodman [Edythe Winfrey Goodman], E-D-Y-T-H-E, B-E-L-L-E Goodman--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --G-O-O-D-M-A-N.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is August 21, 1912.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: And, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Oh, place of birth, I'm--
Speaker 2: Place?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family in terms of how far back you can trace them and where they were?
Speaker 2: Well, I can trace back to my great-grandmother.  My great-grandfather, there are lots of, there's lots of information about but I do not have, I don't have any photos of him.  You're talking about my mother's fa- my mother's family right?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So my grandfather and my grandmother [Lucy Johnson Winfrey], I basically grew up with them because we lived first in a two family house and then we moved to a home that we purchased next door.  And, so they were in my life almost all of my, well, from the time I was born.  So my grandfather is Roger M. Winfrey [Roger Winfrey] and he was born in Virginia as was my grandmother.  And my grandfather came to the East Coast to New York State in the--do you want to know when he was born?
Speaker 1: Sure, yeah.
Speaker 2: He was born in 1878 and came to New York as a young man, I don't know how, whether he came via the Underground Railroad or--
Speaker 1: Well, he wouldn't have to do that if he was born in 1878.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, but it wasn't too terrific down there in Virginia still.
Speaker 1: So you think he may have had to smuggle himself away because of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't know if he smuggled himself away but he came at a fairly young age and I don't know a great deal except that he moved to Upstate New York and kept very close ties with his family in the South.  So his mother who would have been my great-grandmother [Mary Jackson Ligon], I have pictures of her and she lived until she was about 101.  So I actually do remem- I don't remember her but there are pictures of me with her as an infant and then lots of pictures of them together because he would go back and forth.  My grandmother had, and he had one, two, three, I think three siblings, most of whom stayed in the South.
Speaker 1: Now this is in, they're from Blackstone, Virginia?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And is there any place, you know, any other place in the South that your (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Most of my family is in Richmond [Virginia] and Blackstone [Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Are there any stories about what they were doing during slavery or Reconstruction (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't, I don't have that.  We're in the midst of researching it but I don't have that.  Unfortunately, my grandmother absolutely refused to talk about it.  You know, if I asked her, she just didn't want to have that conversation.  And all of--her father who would have been my great-grandfather [Clayton Johnson] was a very well known, well--minister and I have newspaper articles about him.  I know that he traveled a great deal and I know that one of my great aunts traveled with him.  I have no idea why he was traveling and where.  I know that he was traveling and went to places like Oklahoma.  Grandmother had a large family and one of her brothers had a large farm in Virginia which we used to visit when we, when we were kids because it was so different from the New York City life.  I will never forget it because I can see my aunt ringing the neck of a chicken.  So we spent time in the summer my grandfather always wanted to go to visit his family.  And we went to visit my grandmother's family as well.
Story_ID: 647876
Speaker 1: Now your [maternal] great-grandfather [Clayton Johnson] who is the minister, do you know what denomination he was in?
Speaker 2: I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't.  But you know we come from a line of Baptists so I wouldn't be surprised if he was (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Because my grandfather [Roger Winfrey] was most definitely Baptist.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So there's land on this side of the family.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: There's land on both sides of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And my grandmother's brother had a fairly substantial size farm because I can remember tobacco and corn, and for me being a New Yorker, I was really not terribly interested 'cause it was so different but, yes.  And then my grandfather purchased a home and land in New York in 1903 and that's essentially where my mother [Edythe Winfrey Goodman] grew up and where I grew up.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now what part of New York did your--
Speaker 2: Williamsbridge which is the northeast end of the Bronx [New York].  And when he purchased, it was all farm land and it was a very--there were about five men that had all worked for the railroad, five African American men who all worked for the railroad who were the only--let's see, on our block there were only three black people.  Everyone else was Italian and German and when my mother was growing up there were, there was a contingent of black people spread around Williamsbridge.  But it was primarily an Italian and German area.  So I grew up in a really integrated neighborhood and everybody knew I was Mrs. Winfrey's [Lucy Johnson Winfrey] granddaughter and Mrs. Goodman's daughter.  And my mother went to the same public school [P.S. 103; P.S. 103 Hector Fontanez School, Bronx, New York] that I went to.  Or I should say I went to the same public school that she went to.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the family was fir- firmly ensconced there in Williamsbridge (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, very firmly.  I mean we just sold the properties less than ten years ago.  I mean even though none of us were living there.
Speaker 1: Were most of the people who lived there associated with the railroad (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.  There were two churches, there was an Episcopal church and there was a Baptist church.  And my mother had grown up with the same contingent of African Americans that essentially I grew up with.  Of course we were Negro then.  Then we became black.  But all, I mean everybody was Aunt Whomever, you know, which I guess was very much a sign of respect in the, in growing up at that time.  But I had, I had a lot of black friends within the community and I'm trying to think.  There were--as a little girl, not too many white friends but there were white friends like attended birthday parties.  I mean you had white friends that you played with and so on.  But in general, I guess the separation must have come when it came for social events because it was very much cooking classes and Sunday school and all kinds of activities.  And with my mother being a early childhood edu- educator, I started oh, gosh, at the age of three--my mother played the piano.  She was a painter as well.  So I was painting, I was drawing, I was doing all of those things and I still have a memory of being about three years old holding her hand going to the Museum of Natural History [American Museum of Natural History, New York, New York].  And, so I spent--I don't know that I had a childhood-childhood in that I was more interested in things of that nature.  I was interested in painting, I was interested in drawing.  And my mother's brother [Sol Winfrey, Sr.] had gone to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] and he had been like an errand, gopher for a very famous interior designer, a woman by the name of Elsie de Wolfe.  So in my grandfather's basement were all of these magazines of style and fashion and travel and in many ways they were my cutouts.  And, so very early on, very early, I decided that I was either going to be a fashion designer or a fashion editor.
Story_ID: 647877
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to, we're going to go back now to your mother [Edythe Winfrey Goodman] and, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, sorry.
Speaker 1: --but that's good though 'cause I didn't want to stop you from telling me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You're telling--that's, you know, what got you started--
Speaker 2: Okay, so (simultaneous) --
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So did your mother talk about growing up in Williamsbridge [Bronx, New York]?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, yes.  I've got loads of--she was interviewed and I've forgotten the university, so she has her life on tape and she talks about there still being horse drawn carriages and how, when the ice man used to come and when the--and they knew everybody. So mother's history was very much being as she always used to say, "I'm a native New Yorker" (laughter).  But she was very active in the neighborhood and in the Bronx [New York] and in Manhattan [New York, New York] in general.  She was on boards, on committees.  She served in various capacities.  She was an early member of the National Council of Negro Women, all of those things.  In terms of childhood (sighs), I would have to go look at some of the letters to remember everything but she loved her childhood in many ways, although she hated being the middle child.
Story_ID: 647878
Speaker 1: Had her mother completed school too and gone to college and--
Speaker 2: Grandmother [Lucy Johnson Winfrey] did not finish college, she had finished high school.  My grandfather [Roger Winfrey] finished high school.  Both of--her brother--my mother [Edythe Winfrey Goodman] and her brother [Sol Winfrey, Sr.] both completed college.  Her younger sister moved to California and did not complete.  But in New York [New York]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, mother's education was in New York City.
Speaker 1: And your mother had some other sisters too, right?
Speaker 2: No, I'm just saying--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --she had one brother, older brother, one younger sister [Marjorie Winfrey Sloan].  The younger sister moved to California.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So our family was never huge.  I only have one brother.
Speaker 1: All right.  So what college did your mother attend and--
Speaker 2: She went to Hunter College [New York, New York], Bank Street College [Bank Street College of Education, New York, New York], NYU [New York University, New York, New York]--I was just looking at the list.  She was completing, she completed her master's [degree] I think at Bank Street and was still working on her Ph.D. when she died.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, she went to school her whole life basically.
Speaker 2: She did.  She was in school and it was convenient in a way because even though she worked--and my dad [Theodore Goodman] was really rather incredible.  He said, "It's more important to me that your mother be happy and get all the education that she needs.  That she needs to feel good, you know, that she wants."  And, so he would pick her up and take her to school and wait for her many a day, many an evening and bring her back home.
Story_ID: 647879
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to go to your father's side again (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, that's Theodore Roosevelt Goodman [Theodore Goodman].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Theodore Roosevelt--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Goodman.
Speaker 1: Goodman, okay, all right.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth, did I give you a date?  I think it was--
Speaker 1: Nineteen o--
Speaker 2: --'07 [sic. 1906]?
Speaker 1: --seven [1907], right.
Speaker 2: I think that's correct.  My sister-in-law is in the midst of doing some of the archival work and I couldn't get into the site to get the exact date.   At any rate in 1907, in Richmond, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One brother, three sisters.
Speaker 1: All right.  How far back can you trace his family in Richmond?
Speaker 2: Right now there is a huge amount of work being done.  I'm--I knew my--his mother [Emmeline Rose Goodman] so I knew his--my grandmother.  I did not know his father.  I have no memory of his father [Neverson Goodman].  Evidently he came to New York at some point.  I don't remember him in Richmond.  I have many more memories of my great--of my grandmother than I do of him.  I have no memories of him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in terms of this, that side of the family, it's so huge that's the side of the family that does the family reunions, that's the side of the family whose family history is being done but it's so vast and so wide, I can't even begin to give you any information because I haven't kept up with it.  I have two cousins who are in the midst of all of the recording.  And they never left Virginia so they've got much more information than I do and I haven't been to a reunion in a long time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, Richmond is such a dramatic place in the history of the country--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --being the capital of the Confederacy and the last battle being fought there right outside of Petersburg [Virginia] and involving all the black troops, and then the black residents of Richmond greeting Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] as he rode through.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories about any of that in your family that come down?
Speaker 2: Not that I know.  Not that I know.  I will, I had intended to find out more information for you and I can.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It seemed like there would be a lot of, a lot of opportunity for a lot of rich stories.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Unless they came from someplace else to Richmond.
Speaker 2: No, they were--the Bells and the Goodmans were very much residents of Richmond.  I have cousins who were the first firemen and you know major doctors and so on.  So one of my father's sisters had eleven children and every single one of them is successful.  And a number of them are well, you know, somewhat known in Richmond.  But I didn't, I haven't been in Richmond in fifteen years.
Story_ID: 647880
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father's [Theodore Goodman] upbringing?  What was he--was he raised in Richmond [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: He was raised in Richmond, came to--I don't know a lot about his upbringing.  He came to New York [New York] and, during the Depression [Great Depression] was there--here I guess before the Depression but got a job at the post office as lots of African Americans did and he stayed there.  He did not ever change jobs.  Once he came north and met and married my mother [Edythe Winfrey Goodman], and he was working at the post office before that.  And he was a wonderful dad, just the most warm, kind, supportive gentleman.  He was a real gentleman.  And I would say that all of the men in my family have been just these lovely gentlemen.  I always think of my grandfather [Neverson Goodman], I was very close to my grandfather by the way and I was very close to my dad.  He was quite close to his family in Richmond.  My mother didn't enjoy going south nearly as much so we didn't go that often.  He was a champion bridge player.  He was a, you know, 9th Degree Mason and that was not something that made my mother very happy because she was very much a Christian and felt there must be something wrong with being a Mason.  And they traveled quite a bit together in their later life.  So daddy always said, "Why did it take me so long to travel?  This is the most wonderful thing in the world."  They went to China, they went to Japan, they went, you know, to lots of places and he died very suddenly and at a young age.
Speaker 1: When did he pass?
Speaker 2: I can tell you the date 'cause I was in Europe: May 31, 1976, yeah.
Story_ID: 647881
Speaker 1: What are you missing?
Speaker 2: So your father [Theodore Goodman], now did he have a chance to go to school, I mean to finish co- college?
Speaker 1: No, he did not complete college (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: He started but was supporting my mother [Edythe Winfrey Goodman] going and it just never happened.
Speaker 2: Yeah, being a postal worker in those days was a good, you know, a--
Speaker 1: Was a good job.
Speaker 2: A very, very good job in the black community so, especially.  And there are stories I've heard of Ph.D.s working in the post office--
Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) who couldn't find anything else.
Speaker 1: Couldn't find anything else, exactly.  And I think that he was the kind of man who was so happy to support his wife's ambitions that when it was time for him to go to school, you know, it just didn't happen.
Story_ID: 647882
Speaker 1: Now when you consider your parents' personalities, their sense of humor, how they walk, talk, how--what they look like, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: In terms of ambition and intensity and--I look a lot like my mother [Edythe Winfrey Goodman].  I have a lot of her qualities and since she has passed, I find myself realizing how many more of her qualities I have.  I have the humor of my father [Theodore Goodman].  I have a much more easy sense of life than my--which my father had.  My dad loved to dance.  He didn't think it was a sin if you had a drink.  But I look very much like my mother.  Actually and it's vacillated.  I've looked--I look at pictures of her as a young woman and we look a lot alike and then there are periods of time that people thought that I looked like my dad.  But I really do have her qualities.  I have her drive.  I have her intensity.  I have her curiosity.  She painted, she was a wonderful pianist.  I was a terrible pianist.  She loved to cook.  She enjoyed interior design.  She was curious about everything and was determined to travel, which she did.  So, yeah, I'm definitely in many ways my mother's daughter.
Story_ID: 647883
Speaker 1: Tell us about your, you have one brother, right?
Speaker 2: I have one brother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's Theodore Roger Goodman [Theodore R. Goodman].  He's a couple of years younger than I and he married very young at the age of twenty-one, and he is still married to the woman who was the love of his life. Oh, sorry.
Speaker 1: Oh, well, just--okay.
Speaker 2: I was jingling.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: He moved to Suffield, Connecticut, raised three sons, became a senior vice president at, I think it was Mechanics Bank [Framers and Mechanics Bank; Citizens Bank, N.A.] because he was at Mechanics and he was at Hartford [Connecticut].  He was due to become president of the bank and he was in a very white community and the chairman of the board who he knew well took him aside and said, "Mr. Goodman, you will never become the president of this bank because of your race."  And he said he realized he was training people who, you know, were going to ultimately have that job.  He sails, he's a sports car enthusiast, he's belonged to The Austin Healey Sports Club [The Austin Healey Sports and Touring Club] since the '50s [1950s], he's been married for fifty years, lives in Florida in a place called The Villages, retired--he said to me the other day, he said, "God, Gwen [HistoryMaker Gwen Mazer], I've been retired for thirteen years. I can't believe that."  My nephews--oh, forgot to give you pictures of them.  One went to Dart- one went to Rutgers [Rutgers University, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey], one went to Trinity and one went to--did I say Rutgers, Trinity and Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], all graduated.  My brother did not graduate.  He was busy keeping his family together and rose very well through the ranks and made a great success for himself.  Do you want to know what the boys do?
Speaker 1: Oh, sure.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Gordon [Gordon Goodman] owns a construction firm in Atlanta [Georgia].  David [David Goodman] works for a biochemical firm and travels the world with a medical device that's a very sophisticated device.  And he's all over the world demonstrating and showing how this is used.  And my oldest nephew [T.R. Goodman (ph.)] owns a sports training company in Santa Monica [California] and has trained some major athletes.  And he's--he travels around the world as well, often times you know, if one of his athletes is in the Olympics, he may well be off there as well, and lots of people in Hollywood and all of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yes, as an infant in the baby carriage in the garden watching the pattern of the leaves on my baby blanket.
Speaker 1: Now this is, this presages (laughter) something about style and--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 647884
Speaker 1: You have another--
Speaker 2: Yes.  We had a woman who took care of me and I can remember I was very precise about how things were put into my bureau drawer.  And I remember walk--barely being able to, you know, open this thing and seeing that everything was not lined up the way that I liked it and having a temper tantrum.
Speaker 1: Now this is--how old are you at this point (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was about three or four.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  So this is, so you had this sense of order and pattern.
Speaker 2: And pattern, that's why I told you this story because I--it was--I can remember still that it was upsetting to me to look at it not being organized.  I--organized is the word that I would--
Speaker 1: Are you like that now in terms of your personal affects?  You want them organized?
Speaker 2: Yes, but I don't know (unclear), (laughter) I have to say.  I must not, I--there was a period of time that I was very organized, but I'm less organized at this point in life.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  But that's a tendency.
Story_ID: 647885
Speaker 1: Now you grew up in Williamsbridge [Bronx, New York].
Speaker 2: Williamsbridge, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  And can you describe the house you lived in and what the neighborhood was like?
Speaker 2: Yes, two family house.  My [maternal] grandparents lived downstairs, we lived upstairs.  Both my mother [Edythe Winfrey Goodman] and my grandmother [Lucy Johnson Winfrey] loved antiques so there were lots of antiques in the house.
Speaker 1: So are these like brownstones or--
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't a brownstone.  It had a front porch and, you know, shingles and a little foyer and, you know, staircase going up and straight ahead and I would call it more a railroad shape, you know, all the, all the rooms ran in one line.  At least upstairs it--well, that's not exactly true.  You came upstairs, to the right was the living room and the sitting room and then as you walked the length of the house, kitchen to the front, fairly decent sized bedrooms.  And I always had my own bedroom from the time I was born.  I never had a sibling to share a bedroom.  Garden, my grandfather [Roger Winfrey] raised roses and sweet peas and grape, we had grape barbers so there were lots and lots of grapes and there were fruit trees, pears and what was the other thing?  Pears and peaches, how could I forget?  Because I loved cooking with my grandmother.  And in the fall when the time came there was all the canning and then we had a big cellar, and all the fruit went into the cellar.  So my wintertime memories are having--being told, "Go downstairs in the cellar and pick a can of fruit that you want to have for dessert."  And there was always a Virginia ham hanging in the, hanging in the basement.  And the one thing my grandfather liked to cook were greens that he would cook unto death.  Grandmother's house had a big coal stove as well as a regular stove.  I think they were all attached.  There was a gas stove, but there was a coal stove as well.  Let's see.  What do I, give me some more of what you need.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was it a wooden house or, you know--
Speaker 2: A shingle, shingle and stucco.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we had lots of garages as well.  Further--we had several lots so there were garages at the bottom of the hill.  There was a private garage for our car and then there was a whole series of other garages that my grandfather built very early on obviously for more income.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this area was semirural at one--it was rural at one time but then it became (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It wasn't rural when I grew up but--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --it was definitely rural when my mother grew up and actually even when I was in high school [Evander Childs High School; Evander Childs Educational Campus, New York, New York] there were people who still had goat farms.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it, yeah.  And yet in--there were two apartment buildings that had been built that were fairly, I mean they certainly didn't have any black people in them.  And in the block that I lived in, there were only two white familie- two black families.  There were no other black families in the block.
Speaker 1: This is in the Bronx [New York], in the Bronx and this is, was it near--
Speaker 2: It's near (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) JFK Airport [John F. Kennedy International Airport, New York, New York] or (unclear)--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's near the Bronx River.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact when my mother was a child she could walk out of her door and walk down to the Bronx River and then there was the trains that went by and wave to my grandfather on his way to Chicago [Illinois] or Los Angeles [California] or wherever.  But it was pretty rural and not so rural when I was growing up.  But the, but the public school that I went to was the same one that my mother went to, so obviously it was built when she was a child.
Story_ID: 647886
Speaker 1: Now what was the name of the school?
Speaker 2: Public--P.S. 103 [P.S. 103 Hector Fontanez School, Bronx, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you start kindergarten there?
Speaker 2: Oh, I sure did and I was the only black kid.  But again, a number of the teachers knew my family so I couldn't get away with anything.  It's like oh, there's Ms., there's Ms. Winfrey's [Lucy Johnson Winfrey] granddaughter.  And during that time, you know, the--we had trolleys and I still remember those straw seats that you'd push back and forth like if it was going in one direction, seats would get pushed for the direction it was going.  And then when it ended the line and it came the other way, the conductor would come through and push the seats back to the other direction.
Speaker 1: Okay. I've never seen those, but that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And they had them for a long, long time and then of course they got replaced by buses.
Story_ID: 647887
Speaker 1: So what did you like to do?  Did you have a--?
Speaker 2: I liked to draw.  I liked to paint.  I was pressed into music lessons twice a week until I refused on my sixteenth birthday to take them any longer, 'cause I couldn't stand the sound of my own playing.  And I love the piano.  It's my favorite instrument.  And my mother [Edythe Winfrey Goodman] was really, really good at it.  My father [Theodore Goodman], some of my memories of him is him doing his best to teach me to ride my bicycle.  And once I got the hang of it that was pure freedom.  I can still have that feeling of the idea that I could get on this bike and I could go visit girlfriends and I could go really, really fast, you know, and that was just marvelous to me.  I had cooking lessons.  I had, I had a coterie of girlfriends and we were--what were--we were a group.  We called ourselves the, for some dumb reason, I think we were the Robinettes [ph.].  God only knows why or where.  But it was about eight of us that had our little club together and went to the movies together and had parties together and did all kinds of things together.  And there were a lot of concerts, children's concerts that we were taken to, a lot of dance programs, a lot of things at Juilliard [Juilliard School of Music; The Juilliard School, New York, New York], at Carnegie Hall [New York, New York], so there was all of, you know, turning us into, at least me, into a proper young lady.  So a lot of my time if it wasn't at school, I was either doing piano lessons, taking cooking classes, no dance classes until I took, enrolled myself in the Dunham School [Katherine Dunham School of Dance and Theater, New York, New York].  I guess at some point during those, that period, my mother sent me off to [HistoryMaker] Ophelia DeVore.  And, you now, it's interesting, I couldn't wait to kind of grow up (laughter) so I was sort of in a holding pattern until I could do the things that I really wanted to do.  I would go down into Manhattan [New York, New York] with my mother and my grandmother [Lucy Johnson Winfrey].  We would go to W. and J. Sloane [New York, New York] for antiques.  And I guess I spent a lot of time--I remember there was a woman who always took a group of us to either the concerts or to the museum or to some cultural event.  So for me that was something I had been doing from the beginning so that was great.  I loved it.
Speaker 1: What are the, I guess more memorable concerts or events that you attended?
Speaker 2: I can tell you the very first ballet I attended because I can still see it.  What--and I don't know if it was the very first but it was one of the first and that was 'Firebird' ['The Firebird,' Igor Stravinsky].  And I remember being so excited that I jumped up from my seat and I was just dazzled.  It was the costumes, it was the color, it was the movement.  It was the, it was just all of that.  And, so I think for me from the very beginning, I always knew that I would have some kind of creative life because those were the things that I resonated to entirely.
Story_ID: 647888
Speaker 1: Now did you, any of your little girlfriends in the Robinettes [ph.], were they exposed to (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not as much as I was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not as much as I was.  I think that that was primarily because my mother [Edythe Winfrey Goodman] did what she did.  And I always teased her as an adult, I would say, "So I was really your childhood experiment," you know, with all of the things that she exposed me to.  Because we would go to The Metropolitan [The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, New York], we'd go to the--more than anything I remember going to the Natural History [American Museum of Natural History, New York, New York] because everything was so big, you know, and if you're really a little person and you're looking at those dinosaurs and so on it's pretty astonishing.  But it was a pretty, you know, I played outside a lot.  I probably rode my bicycle a lot.  I fell down a lot.  I have knees, the scars to prove it on my knees learning to ride the bicycle.  And my father [Theodore Goodman] was a great tennis player so he took me to, oh, gosh, I don't remember that tennis court but it was in Harlem [New York, New York].  And I was hopeless 'cause I wore glasses and I could not connect a ball and a bat or a ball and a racquet to save myself.  So my interests were really more artistic, creative and I really enjoyed, always enjoyed being on my own.  I read a lot.  I read in bed.  My first job when I was twelve years old, I--we had a public library at our corner so when I was about twelve, maybe a little younger, I marched myself up there and got a job working at the library stacking books so I could read more.  And, so that was really, I mean for me if I was writing, if I was painting, if I was drawing, if I was doing any of those things, I was a happy girl.
Story_ID: 647889
Speaker 1: So I take it you were a good student, you had good grades?
Speaker 2: I was a decent student.  I wouldn't say I was a great student.  I was a dec- I was, yeah, I was decent student, you know.  I didn't end up on any major honor roll.  And I was rather surprised at that when I, you know, when my mother [Edythe Winfrey Goodman] passed, I found some of my report cards and I thought wow, I wasn't that good (laughter), you know.  It wasn't as good as I thought I was.  That was a surprise.
Speaker 1: I would think with all the exposure you probably--did you have a, was your mother, did she push you in terms of grades or that sort of thing or did she--
Speaker 2: You know, I would have thought she would have pushed me more but I actually think she--at some point she was so focused on her own work that I'm not sure that she was noticing as much as she might have.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause I--you said she was really a student of early childhood education.
Speaker 2: Education, exactly.
Speaker 1: And she might have embraced a philosophy of more, of letting children, you know, learn at their own pace or something.  And not have been pushy at that level knowing that you would, you know, pick up what you needed--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --as you--yeah.  Did she have an educational philosophy that she leaned towards like a, what's the--I can't think of the name of the school I'm trying to think of but the--
Speaker 2: Oh, like the Montessori (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) Montessori, yeah, Montessori.
Speaker 2: I--no.  She was not involved with Montessori.  But Bank Street [Bank Street College of Education, New York, New York], which is where she studied a great deal, had a very liberal, advanced course, courses for educating children.  And I know she embraced that philosophy but don't ask me what it was 'cause I was too young to pay any attention.
Speaker 1: I think a lot of the more, you know, advanced private schools have a philos- you know, model themselves after Montessori or Piaget [Jean Piaget] or one of those, you know.  So I just wondered if that was even important to her that you, you know, be either a, an A student or--
Speaker 2: I think she was more interested in my having a broad cultural exposure, which she didn't seem as curious to have for my brother [Theodore R. Goodman].  My, of course my brother left home, you know, at a fairly early age to be married and he spent a lot of time with my dad [Theodore Goodman] and they were really both sports buffs and car buffs and, you know, my memory is more of them doing those things.  I don't have a great memory of my mother taking the two of us to all of these cultural events.  And my brother and I have often talked about that and said, "How come that didn't happen?  You know what, was it that that was what girls did and you know boys weren't supposed to have those things?"
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's interesting your father took care of his upbringing and your mother took care of yours.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in a, in a way and yet they always you know were in sync with each other; but I always, my brother and I always found that curious, you know, when we, when we talked as adults, "Oh, how come that happened?"
Story_ID: 647890
Speaker 1: Now in terms of school [P.S. 103; P.S. 103 Hector Fontanez School, Bronx, New York] did you have any favorite teachers or mentors in school?
Speaker 2: I did.  There was a wonderful man--well, first of all I remember my very first grade teacher.  Her name was Miss--Mrs. Ziffel, Z-I-F-F-E-L.  Why I would remember her?  She was just--you know, here I was the only black girl in the class and while I didn't have a consciousness of that initially, I had a consciousness of being the only black girl in the class when I was a little older.  But I can still see myself, I can see where I was sitting and I can see how I had this little, of which I guess, you know, every kid got a pencil box at the beginning of school and your name was engraved in all your pencils and all of that.  And I just remember her paying a lot of attention to me and, you know, making sure that I was taken care of.  And I liked her immensely.  And then in high school [Evander Childs High School; Evander Childs Education Campus, New York, New York] it was Mr. Ziffel--Mr., oh, god, I just lost his name, Zantel [ph.].  Mr. Zantel who encouraged me tremendously with art and felt that I had the talent and the opportunity to really make a career in the, in the fashion world.  So when I was about fourteen, I designed with my friend Harry Young [ph.], our first clothing collection.  And then (laughter), I'll never forget that because we decided that we were designers and we knew what everybody should wear and we talked my girlfriends into buying clothes that we were making.
Speaker 1: So you were actually creating the clothes from scratch?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I was--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Harry and I were doing the drawings and then I had been given--that was the other thing, I did forget that, I had been given a sewing machine very early so I loved it, you know.  I was happily sewing and I was so interested in clothes that at that time lots of black families used dress makers.  And I had a dress maker from the time I was about twelve or thirteen and I worked with her on the clothes that I wanted to wear.  So I could have, thought I knew how to do all that and you know, I knew how to stitch and sew and so on.  But when I got to Fashion Institute [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York] I realized that I didn't really want to sew, I just wanted to design it.  I had no intere- I didn't mind knowing how to do it but I did not want to do it.
Story_ID: 647891
Speaker 1: Now did you go to a middle school then high school or was it--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --straight--
Speaker 2: Straight through.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: From public school [P.S. 103; P.S. 103 Hector Fontanez School, Bronx, New York] to Evander Childs High School [Evander Childs Educational Campus, New York, New York], from Evander Childs straight on to Fashion Institute [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Evander Childs, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Childs?
Speaker 2: E-V--oh, like children, C-H-I-L-D--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --S.
Speaker 1: Was it basically the same racial breakdown there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'd say it was probably--now there it got a little rougher because, you know, Williamsbridge [Bronx, New York] was kind of like this little cocoon and now I was in a broader base of people, lots of people obviously that I didn't know.  But we used to be about twelve or fourteen of us and we would start the walk.  I think I was the furthest away from the school and then we'd all meet each other on the way and then--this is all the black kids.  And then we'd all go to the school together.  And, so I probably had a more segregated high school experience than I did a public school experience because at that point I had a broader base of African American friends.  And I do remember there being not a prejudice but just a, what seemed like a natural separation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Does that make sense?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it does make sense.  That's usually where, when, you know--
Speaker 2: When it happens.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, you know, cause then you're kind of defining who you are.  And I can tell you that one of the worst experiences for me was swimming.
Speaker 1: Now why?
Speaker 2: Because I was the only black girl in the swimming class and of course, you know, my hair was going to just not do what the rest of the girls' hair did and I was mortified.  I absolutely dreaded those classes like you can't imagine.  How I ever passed the swimming, the swimming classes, I have no idea.  And the other thing, I was, I was clumsy.  I think that's why I'd rather--I didn't have good--well, I wore glasses for one thing.  I wore glasses until I was about sixteen and then my eyes shifted and I didn't put glasses on again until I was in my fifties, which is weird.  But the other thing that I do remember is that things like horrible, those horrible gym shorts.  And again like my experience with my father [Theodore Goodman] with tennis, I couldn't catch a ball to save myself so I would be the last person that would be chosen for any kind of team.  And I remem- (background noise)--oh, that was weird.  I remember the experience of one girl, her name was Dorothy Scardino [ph.] and she always hit me with the ball.  And I could never get out of the way of the ball.
Speaker 1: This is dodge ball or something or--
Speaker 2: No, not dodge ball.  Maybe it was dodge ball.
Speaker 1: They line you up in two sides (unclear) wall?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, I think--was that dodge ball?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's dodge ball.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was--yeah, I was terrible.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  Now later on you would dance, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a different kind of movement, but the idea--and of course, you know, I was always concerned that my glasses were going to be hit and all of that.  Yeah, and it's interesting because dance was a whole other way of moving, but the idea of throwing and catching a ball (shakes head), I just couldn't do it.
Story_ID: 647892
Speaker 1: Now this is interesting because for what you do now as a living--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you basically if I could, if I may--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --boil it down, you teach people to be cool basically, you know, in some (unclear).
Speaker 2: No, I wouldn't say that, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I would say that my work is really assisting both men and women in presenting themselves authentically so that it's from the inside out.  So yes, it does involve esteem, it does involve a sense of self worth and in many ways I--part of my role is almost as a psychologist.  But it's not about being cool.  It's about--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Not in the sense that you're following a crowd or any of that?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.  Not at all.  It's really--
Speaker 1: Okay.  That was a poor choice.  I didn't really mean it that way but I meant--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --you know, when people are cool they usually have an internal kind of, you know, grace about them.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And people will say, "Well, that person is cool," you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, or that that person feels--for me it's a matter of feeling authentically who you are as opposed to putting on a face.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And I was definitely not cool at dodge ball, that's for sure.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, I just think (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I think I veered to things that I felt that I was good at and I was not interested for the most part in things that I couldn't do well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I discovered really early where my talents were.  And in a way that limited possibility because I was so focused.  I mean I didn't realize that then but I certainly realized it as an older person.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Most teenagers feel awkward when they're teenagers and the way you describe yourself you certainly felt that way on some level.
Speaker 2: I felt awkward in that circumstance.  I felt very confident in other areas.  So I didn't feel, I didn't feel awkward in general.  I felt very confident in general; and I had a strong sense that if I wanted something I could create it.  I could make it happen.
Story_ID: 647893
Speaker 1: Now are there any mentors or you know role models in high school [Evander Childs High School; Evander Childs Educational Campus, New York, New York] in terms of the teachers or the staff there?
Speaker 2: Just Mr. Zantel [ph.] who felt that I, I mean that's who I remember.  He felt that I really had a talent and that I should consider art school (clears throat) and was instrumental actually in my going to Fashion Institute of Technology [New York, New York] when I finished high school.
Story_ID: 647894
Speaker 1: Now I didn't ask you this but how--were you affected by church growing up?  Did you, did you go to church?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did and I hated it.  My [maternal] grandfather [Roger Winfrey] was a deacon.  My grand- my mother [Edythe Winfrey Goodman] taught Sunday school.  I had to teach Sunday school.  I was in church every single Sunday until my sixteenth birthday and I had announced to my family that on my sixteenth birthday that would be the last Sunday that I'd be going to church and that I'd be teaching.
Speaker 1: Did you?  And what, how did they react to that?
Speaker 2: They knew I meant it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you didn't get any negative feedback?
Speaker 2: I think I probably--no.  I just said, "I'm, you know, on my sixteenth birthday, I'm done."  And if you want to know why, part of that--they used to call me the little old lady when I was really, really little.  They would say, "(Smacks lips) That child, she has been here so many times."  And I used to watch faces and I knew that the minister was not to be trusted, that he was dishonest.  And I remember telling my mother when I was really little, "He lies."  And I didn't like him, at all.  Now there were ladies in the church that I adored, including one who I'll never forget her as long as I live and I'm going to forget her name now.  But she did yoga, if you can imagine and she had traveled and she had this expression that was so adorable.  And she'd look at me and she'd say, "Beautiful day, Gwendolyn [HistoryMaker Gwen Mazer].  Sun is shining.  It's a lovely day.  Every day is a lovely day."  And there were, there were just these charming women, you know, that just had this lovely feeling about them.  But then there were also the women that used to fall out, you know, in the fit, in the church or on a Sun- and that scared me to death.  It's like what is wrong with them?  What--why are they doing that?  I just didn't understand it and it wasn't anything that my grandmother [Lucy Johnson Winfrey] would ever do.  She was so Victorian you couldn't imagine.  And I just wasn't interested.  And I'd found myself very early reading about other religions.  And, you know, I've been a little bit of all of it.
Story_ID: 647895
Speaker 1: Yeah, we need this part, this (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In--(laughter) ba- basically, you know, early on, I just started asking questions about, you know, all these, this bible stuff.  And it just didn't make a whole lot of sense to me and I got thrown out of one of my classes for asking too many questions.  And, so for me it was more like okay, it's Sunday, you know, you get dressed.  You go to Sunday school and, you know, if I could avoid church in any way possible as I grew older I would.  But I couldn't.  But I do have this wonderful memory of the preparation for church because my [maternal] grandfather [Roger Winfrey], who dressed so beautifully, would always pluck sweet peas from the, from the way they grew on the fence on the way to the car.  So one would go into his lapel and then we had an old, beautiful old Buick that had flower holders.  So he would do flower, you know, sweet peas and roses for the flower holders for the car for the drive to church.  And I always thought that that was just really very lovely. That part I liked.  But the rest of it, I couldn't wait to be sixteen years old and be done with it.
Story_ID: 647896
Speaker 1: Now did you have a prom in--?
Speaker 2: I did not go to my prom [at Evander Childs High School; Evander Childs Educational Campus, New York, New York] because I graduated six months ahead; and I couldn't wait to get out of there and start life.  So, and I think part of it, I didn't realize it then but I think part of it was that we were such a minority in school and there would be all these white kids.  And I am surprised to even hear myself say that in many ways, but I really have often wondered why were you not interested in going to the prom?  And that's the only answer I can come up with.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's a different cultural experience or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Separate from--
Speaker 2: But there were parties, I mean there were parties for all of us within our community.
Speaker 1: Now did you--was it allowed, were you allowed to play popular music in the house?
Speaker 2: Oh, god, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Grandfather [Mazer's maternal grandfather, Roger Winfrey] didn't think too much about dancing but I danced anyway.  And yes, there was all kinds of music being played all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have favorite musicians?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I kind of came into age at the very beginning of all of, you know, the jazz that was happening as well as, what was, not rock and roll but what came before--
Speaker 1: Rhythm and blues?
Speaker 2: Rhythm and blues.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so all of those people, all of those, all of those performers.  But I resonated very strongly to all the early jazz whether it was Miles Davis and the MJQ [Modern Jazz Quartet] and I mean I loved all of that kind of music.  That--and anything, anybody that played a great piano was my idea of heaven.
Speaker 1: Did your parents like jazz or--
Speaker 2: Not as much as I did.  I mean I can remember that my dad [Theodore Goodman] loved jazz.  My mother [Edythe Winfrey Goodman] preferred classical music and on Sundays when I was a kid, she always played the piano on late Sunday afternoons.  That was kind of, there was dinner and I--that was during a period where families came to visit each other and you had the little hour long proper visits with people and then I guess it was dinner time.  And before dinner, mother played the piano.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But there was no problem about any music I wanted to listen to.  It wasn't like oh, turn that off, that's awful or--none of that.
Story_ID: 647897
Speaker 1: Now did you have any interest in television or movies?
Speaker 2: Oh, god, yeah.  I mean, but all (laughter)--once again, you know, when I was really little I guess it was things like the 'Seven Dwarfs' ['Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs'] and 'Pinocchio' and all of that.  But then it was films with Ava Gardner and, I think Ava Gardner was one of my famous, favorites.  But then I discovered foreign films and that was my interest.  Jacques Tati, 'Mr. Hulot's Holiday' ['Les Vacances de Monsieur Hulot'].  And I had a really, a wonderful guy friend and we always went to foreign films together, you know.  He was one of my first dates.  And we both just fell in love with foreign films.  So I, and I also am not good about remembering movies.  You know, if I see a movie it's good that was great.  But I'm not one of those that, like my friend Doris [ph.], who is one of my favorite, one of my girlfriends, closest girlfriends, had a huge crush on Victor Mature and she was always--I mean really to the point that she would not just go to see the movie once, but she'd sit in the movie house all day long watching Victor Mature.  I've forgotten whether it was 'Ben Hur' or whatever he was--
Speaker 1: I think 'Demetrius and the Gladiators' and--
Speaker 2: Something like that or--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Wasn't he Sol- Solomon or--
Speaker 1: He was Samson [in 'Samson and Delilah'].
Speaker 2: Samson.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That was the one.
Speaker 1: Samson.
Speaker 2: And, no for me it was the foreign films.  And that also kind of created the impetus to begin to spend more and more time in the city in Manhattan [New York, New York] because all the foreign films were playing in the city proper so going to the Thalia [Bowery Theatre, New York, New York] and the Broadway houses and so on.  But I do remember dating and going to movies on the grand concourse because there were these great big, wonderful movie houses but don't ask me what I saw.  I don't remember, you know, it was probably whatever was the popular movies of the day.  But as soon as I discovered foreign films, I was a goner.  And I think it was because I had a real sense of the desire to travel so this was, you know, it was Europe, it was France, it was Italy.  I mean that was just like oh, wow, I'm going there!  And I do remember one that was a, had a great influence on me, it was the one that was done in Brazil.
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: You--
Speaker 1: --'Black Orpheus.'
Speaker 2: 'Black Orpheus.'
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That was my breakout.  'Black Orpheus,' it was like okay, I like, I loved that film.  And I think it was again the, it was just magical.
Speaker 1: It is a great movie.
Speaker 2: It was a great movie.  And, yeah, so that kind of film really had an influence on me.  And I realized, I have a friend that I'd grown up with.  When I moved out here I only saw him a couple of times.  He had become a doctor and he was living in Palo Alto [California] and we had lunch and he said, "You know, Gwen [HistoryMaker Gwen Mazer], you were so different.  You were not like any of the rest of us."  And I don't know.
Story_ID: 647898
Speaker 1: One of the differences is that you are, you're a good writer.  I mean I was reading some of your writing.  I mean it appears to me that you, I mean you've probably spent a lot of time writing, I mean reading and writing.  Was this true growing up?  Did you--
Speaker 2: I did an enormous amount of reading.  The writing came quite naturally.  I have never taken a writing class in my life.  But I'm, I was always very articulate and I think it just--and because I'm so visual and because I take things in, in a, in a very visceral way, I think that the writing comes--came much more naturally.  In fact with the Dunham work--can we veer into that or--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I--when Dunham asked me if I would be her biographer I indeed wrote quite a, quite a piece.  And at that time I don't even know how this happened, but I guess I ended up at Random House [Random House Inc.; Penguin Random House] and Toni Morris- no, it was before Random House.  I met Toni Morrison.  I don't even know how Toni and I met and she read the script.  And she said, "This is good.  I'm taking--," that's what happened.  She said, "I'm going to introduce you to the president of Random House 'cause this is a book that will, you know, we really need to get this published."  And of course it happened at a moment when [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham was not at her pinnacle so he felt that the script, the book was good but that there was no market for it.  And I took that as I'm no good at this and I stopped writing for a good long while until I guess I don't remember whether--that was during Bazaar [Harper's Bazaar].  I guess I had, I guess I had left Bazaar at that point or was freelancing, I can't remember.  But at any rate, I just felt like, well, I just don't know how to do this so I stopped for a while but not for long.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Because it's--
Speaker 2: But thank you.
Speaker 1: The article is very descriptive.  It's not just a narration of what she did.  It's a very des- descriptive article so--
Speaker 2: Well, I think the one that's from--I couldn't find the ones from the Chicago Sun-Times, but I have to say with the book, with 'Wise Talk' ['Wise Talk: Wild Women,' Gwen Mazer and Christine Alicino], that was such a fabulous experience to write that book.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well we're going to get to it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We'll get to that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 647899
Speaker 1: In high school [Evander Childs High School; Evander Childs Educational Campus, New York, New York], now did you write for the school newspaper or anything like that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nope, I didn't write at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did not write a line until I--I mean professionally--until I went to Harper's Bazaar.
Speaker 1: Now in Williams- growing up in Williamsburg [sic.]--
Speaker 2: Williamsbridge.
Speaker 1: Bridge right, yeah.  Growing in Williamsbridge in the Bronx [New York], did you, you said every summer you'd go to--or some summers you'd go to Virginia and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We'd spend some summers going, I mean time going to Virginia and then it was, you know, Orchard Beach [Bronx, New York] and Rye beach [Rye, New York] and, you know, the usual teenage things.  But our family, we did not travel and that was something that as I was watching movies and, that was kind of like okay when am I going to get to do this?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was a question I was going to ask you if you had a chance to travel (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, no, not as a young, not as a young person.  I--my travel began in the '60s [1960s], by myself I took my first trip out of the country.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, let me know when we get to that point now.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now you go to the--now was there anything special about graduation?  Did you have any--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --special honors or--
Speaker 2: Not that I can--I couldn't find any if I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, I have to, I'm sure that--I don't know how many people you talk with, but I kind of felt like I was waiting to live my life, you know, that this was just cursory stuff that I had to get through to get on with it so probably that--I just don't have that many great stories to tell you about that time of my life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As opposed to perhaps someone who lived in the south and had a more cohesive group of friends and all of that.  I mean for me it was like just let me get into the city please (laughter).
Story_ID: 647900
Speaker 1: Fashion Institute of Technology [New York, New York] right after high school [Evander Childs High School; Evander Childs Educational Campus, New York, New York].  So tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Again, being the only black person and going in, now I'm, you know, still young but I'm going into Manhattan [New York, New York], taking the train, going to the school and the, and, you know, it had just been accredited I guess a number of years before I started.  Teachers were strict.  There was a lot of, you know, cursory stuff of making little what I would call almost pot holders and mighty ring corners and so on and so on.  And after about a year or so I thought I need something more than this.  And that's when--I didn't put that in there, but I went to both Hunter College [New York, New York] and NYU [New York University, New York, New York], so I was at NYU at their School of Retailing [New York University School of Retailing; New York University Leonard N. Stern School of Business, New York, New York].  Excuse me, Hunter and their school of retailing and there I had a really interesting woman [Peggy George] who actually was the sister of Agnes de Mille who was a psychology professor.  And she said to me, "You know, you're really good at this but," (laughter) "you would be a really good psychologist." And I was so bent on being in the world of fashion that I didn't pay that a great deal of attention.  But what I really, the courses I took were really useful but what I came to understand as the work that I do, I spend as much time with the psychology of the person as I do other aspects of them.  And again it's something that's quite natural for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very easy for me.
Story_ID: 647901
Speaker 1: While I was at NYU [New York University, New York, New York], I decided to go to Lord and Taylor [New York, New York]; and I was shopping and this notion occurred to me that I should go upstairs and ask for a job because I loved the store and at that time it had the most fabulous window displays in all of New York City [New York, New York].  It had the most creativity.  It had, it was promoting American designers.  It was promote--it was just, it was amazing.  And I was very aware of most of the stores and that--surprisingly enough they hired me.
Speaker 2: Okay.  In what position?
Speaker 1: I was basically, I don't even know what the title was.  But let me tell you a little bit more about it and then we can get to that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I got hired in the jewelry department basically like an assistant's assistant's assistant.  But I got hired by a woman, her name was Biddy Atkinson [ph.] and it turned out that she was the best jewelry buyer in the country and I didn't know that either.  And my job essentially was to do drawings because there were no Xerox machines and all of that.  My job was to draw the designs of every piece of jewelry that came into the store.  And then she started to let me do the window dis- the displays in the department and that was heaven.  And at one point she said, "You know, I'm going to--you're really talented.  I'm going to teach you all--what I know."  And she just pushed me and pushed me and she allowed me to work part time in the window display department which was right next to the jewelry department.  You know, there were the store up above and then below where all the offices was and the window display department was right there.  And, you know, that was like unbelievable, you know, that I could, I wasn't getting paid for it but who cared?  And I got to meet all kinds of people and she was, she was really, really the person who influenced me the most and who encouraged me the most.  And at one point I got sent to another department and I hated it.  And, so I went down to her office and I said, "Could I come back to work in your offi- in your office because I really don't like being upstairs in the underwear department.  That does not work."  And again I think there was one other black person there and I guess it must, I mean I don't even remember barely her name and I think she was pretty much an amaze--you know, she was an executive there.  So I must have been like the second person.  And I meant--eventually was promoted to a junior executive position and I used to travel to Lord and Taylor stores outside of New York City to White Plains [New York] and to Long Island [New York] for the jewelry department and do all of the window, all of the displays of the department and some training, which was really pretty astonishing.
Story_ID: 647902
Speaker 1: In most of the cities in the country in those days it was hard to find a black woman in the--
Speaker 2: Doing anything.
Speaker 1: --in a department store other than--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --mopping the bathroom or something like that.
Speaker 2: Not--exactly.
Speaker 1: You know, so it was a--I know we--they had pro- protests in Dayton [Ohio] up until 1963 when they finally got black sales clerks--
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: --for the first time, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: I know New York [New York] was ahead by maybe twenty years of that but--
Speaker 2: And, you know, it's interesting, my [maternal] grandfather [Roger Winfrey] had an expression that he used to use.  He would say, "My dear you have to be twice as good and twice as fast.  But don't let anybody ever tell you that you can't do something that you choose to do."  And I really took that to heart.  So I never had this like oh, maybe they won't let me or maybe I'm not good enough or may--I just didn't.  You know, I just barreled ahead and it didn't occur to me that there wasn't another black person there.  And then we had a family friend who ran the window displays for a store that doesn't exist anymore called Alexander's Department Store.  And I eventually left Lord and Taylor [New York, New York] and went to Alexander's and became their fashion director.  Again it was owned--the stores were owned by the Farkas family and it, once again it was one of those situations where they said, "Ah-ha!"  And they just kind of let me do what I was good at.  So I ended up doing the--that's how I entered into the photography business because I was in charge of photographing for their ads.  And the first real encounter I had in terms of competition and prejudice was when the position opened for fashion director.  And I was determined that I was going to have that job no matter what.  And it was between myself and I don't remember if she was Jewish or what she was, but I got the job and she was so, she was, she couldn't believe it.  She was so angry that she encountered, you know, she called me on it.  And I said, "Yes, I did and I deserved it because I'm better at it."  And I mean I can remember that's the first time, because my mother [Edythe Winfrey Goodman] had that quality.  Like if she was ready to go for something it was like that's mine and that's how--I'd never experienced that feeling before.  It was like that's mine and I'm going to have it.  And that's what happened.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So was--did you have a sense at that time that you were breaking new ground that other people did not have success at (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, to be honest with you I was just doing my thing.  And then, and then what began to happen is because I was the on--this is what I was aware of that I was the only black person.  So if I, if I, if I decided that there was something I wanted to do or I want- wanted to accomplish, the people that would, that I would be interviewing with would be so surprised that I was there that it was almost like they were hypnotized (laughter) to my kind of--you know, it was like, who on earth is she anyway, you know?  And it would happen.  And I remember that particularly when I found that issue of the Urbanite, there was a black woman by the name of Elsie [ph.], her name is in there.  I found the invitation because somehow or another, she was at McCall's Magazine and she was another mentor because the--I mean I didn't see that many black people wandering around in the fashion business.  And when I became the editor for the Urbanite, having been at Lord and Taylor, I knew all the best stores.  I knew who made the best clothes, I knew who had all the best accessories, and I'd pick up the phone and I'd say, "This is Gwen Goodman [HistoryMaker Gwen Mazer] and I'd like--," and of course with a name like Goodman they weren't expecting me.  And I'd go wherever I went and I'd say, "Well, I'm, you know, I've become the fashion editor and I would like to use your clothes in our magazine."  Well, first of all they weren't expecting a nice Jewish girl to walk in the room and that was always really fun because then it would be me.  And they weren't expecting me.  And they'd be so nonplussed that whatever it was they'd end up saying yes.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, all right, so--
Speaker 2: That make any sense?
Speaker 1: Yes, it does.  It does make sense.  It's reality so--now how long, now, so you became fashion director at Alexander's.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you were there for how many years?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, you know, I'm one of these people that's always done two things at once so let me think.  It must have been until I think about 1960 or '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sixty [1960].
Speaker 1: Until '60 [1960] or '61 [1961]?
Speaker 2: About, yeah.
Story_ID: 647903
Speaker 1: Now is this when you decided to start your own place?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.
Speaker 1: No?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: So what happened after Alexander's [Alexander's Department Store]?
Speaker 2: After Alexander's, I met my husband [Ira Mazer] and my husband who has passed, is--was Russian Jewish, first generation.  And we married in '61 [1961], and he was an art director at the most famous advertising agency in New York City [New York, New York], that was Doyle Dane Bernbach [DDB Worldwide Communications Group Inc.].  And in 1963, he opened, he left Doyle Dane and together we opened the largest, one of the largest advertising photography studies in New York City and I became the head stylist for the studio.  And we did everything from Carnation, I mean we did all the commercial advertising.  And things like Carnation milk and Beautyrest mattress and cosmetics and all of that.  And at that point there were still no blacks being shown in advertising as you well know and I would work with the art directors and I was great at casting.  I mean I could cast those little corn, Kellogg's Corn Flake [Kellogg's Corn Flakes], freckle face little kids in a (snaps) heartbeat.  And, so I did that until Harper's Bazaar came along and literally came calling.
Speaker 1: So that's in '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you did this from, okay.  From '61 [1961] to '68 [1968] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, I--
Speaker 1: --you had--
Speaker 2: Sixty- about '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963], okay.
Speaker 2: Sixty-two [1962], '63 [1963].  We married in '61 [1961].
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you started wor- working for Doyle Dane and Bernbach?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: On his own--no.
Speaker 2: He worked for Doyle Dane--
Speaker 1: He worked--okay.
Speaker 2: --Bernbach as a top art director.  He left Doyle Dane in '63 [1963] and we opened Advertising Images [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's how Harper's Bazaar heard about me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Advertising Images.
Speaker 2: And that was a very, very wild and heady time in New York.  I--my dad [Theodore Goodman] said to me at one point, he said, "Little girl you have flown so high you don't even know you're in the sky."  I mean I was living my dream, you know. I was right in the thick of it, you know, Advertising Images, Doyle Dane Bernbach and we knew--I, through my marriage, met everybody in the advertising, photography, fashion business.  All the fabulous photographers and New York was incredible at that period of time.  It was quite an adventure, you know.  There was, Max's Kansas City [New York, New York] was open and--oh, there was a photographer during that period of time, there were two African American photographers, one by the name of Hugh Bell. Hugh Bell was the second photographer to work for Esquire magazine after [HistoryMaker] Gordon Parks. And I must say that I credit Hugh in even opening up the world of advertising photography to me and him telling me, "You could really be great at this you know?"  And I said, "Well, you know, what is it?  I don't, you know, how does that all work?"  And so he introduced me, he began to introduce me to other advertising people, which is how I met my husband.  And, so New York City at that point in the '60s [1960s] was, and being in the world of fashion was an extraordinary ride.
Story_ID: 647904
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, tell us about the other photographer?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, there weren't, there weren't that many African American photog- photographers, but I was fortunate to meet Hugh [Hugh Bell].  And Hugh was really very successful working with, as I said Esquire magazine and I--just really wonderful accounts.  But I think he, his--a lot of his work was with Esquire.  And then with Cyril, Cyril was more of a commercial photographer.
Speaker 1: This is Cyr- Cyril McClain [ph.]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: C-Y-R-I-L, I mean I haven't been in touch with those people in a century.  And, so with my being thrust into the world of advertising and fashion with our studio and with other art directors and so on, that's how Harper's Bazaar came to hear, came to know of my work because we did some major accounts.
Story_ID: 647905
Speaker 1: Now was there any trepidation about marrying a--now this is a Jewish, Russian Jewish man, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In those days this is--
Speaker 2: No, not at all; and I became Jewish.  But I had studied Buddhism before that.  I told you I was not interested in being a Baptist (laughter).  So I'd actually met a wonderful African American man who was the presser for the clothes at Lord and Taylor [New York, New York] and he introduced me to Buddhism, gave me these books on Buddhism.  You can imagine how far ahead he was.  I mean I knew nothing about Buddhi- Buddhism.  And the reason that I became Jewish was because the line is carried by the matriarch and I wanted our children, if we had any, to have the choice to be Jewish or not be Jewish and my husband [Ira Mazer] was not very Jewish I must say.  I mean he was Jewish by birth but it was really a formality.  But there is an image I have, because I studied for a year at Temple Emanu-El in New York City [New York, New York] with a wonderful rabbi and intellectually it was absolutely, so interesting to me.  And on the day of my confirmation, I guess it was a confirmation, I can still see my mother [Edythe Winfrey Goodman].  Because my mother was quite short like, just under five feet and she's sitting in the anteroom waiting and her feet didn't quite touch the ground. And she was really quite fine with it.  My [maternal] grandfather [Roger Winfrey] said, "Now dear," this is how he always spoke to me, "now dear, Gwendolyn [HistoryMaker Gwen Mazer], you are going through a phase and I just want you to know that if you ever choose to be Christian again, that would be okay with me.  That would be a good thing."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At any rate--
Speaker 1: But did you ever go back?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I divorced.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so--
Speaker 2: I mean but it was, it was to make him happy basically.
Story_ID: 647906
Speaker 1: Now you were mentioning during the break your inner strength being confirmed I guess in some ways by your [maternal] grandfather [Roger Winfrey] and your father [Theodore Goodman]?
Speaker 2: Yes, because they both had--whenever I traveled or whenever something, whenever I had an adventure, grandfather would always say, "Now I want you to sit down and tell me everything.  I want to know what happened and what did you learn from that and what was that experience like for you?"  And then with my dad because I, you know, I would, you know, first time at Lord and Taylor [New York, New York] and then I'm at Alexander's [Alexander's Department Store] and then I'm, you know, marrying this advertising person [Ira Mazer] and he would just, he'd say, "Well, you seem to know the direction you're going in."  I mean he was not, he was just there you know just cheering me on and not having any judgments about, "Well, I don't know if you should be doing this or not."  I mean he was just wonderful.
Story_ID: 647907
Speaker 1: I'm interviewed first by--well, here's how this came to pass.  First, one of the top photographers we knew felt that I should meet Diana Vreeland who was the editor-in-chief at that time of Vogue magazine.  I was terrified.  Now this time I was terrified.  This was like meeting the most famous person in the world of fashion.
Speaker 2: Now just to back track a little bit now--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --this is, we're starting in a position where your marriage has run its course right and did the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, I'm still married [to Ira Mazer].
Speaker 2: You're still married?  Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh, no, I'm very much--
Speaker 2: And was the--
Speaker 1: --I'm very much married and--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --one of the other photographers who was a friend of ours felt that again seeing the kind of work I was doing that I should meet one of the, I should meet Diana Vreeland who was the fashion editor at Vogue--
Speaker 2: Okay.  But--
Speaker 1: --because--
Speaker 2: --were you still--
Speaker 1: I was still working.
Speaker 2: --wor- working for--
Speaker 1: I was Adver--
Speaker 2: --Advertising Images [New York, New York]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm still there.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: But he said, "You know, Gwen [HistoryMaker Gwen Mazer] should really meet Diana Vreeland." And so they set it up. I was terrified.  Actually, excuse me, that's not correct.  That happened early on in my marriage.  That was beforehand.  That was when I just, we had just opened the studio so that was in the earlier '60s [1960s].  Anyway, I went for this interview.  I went to (laughter) a store in New York [New York] and I remember just--this one really had me undone.  I didn't know what I was going to wear, how--at any rate, I went to Ohrbach's which was a store in New York City that used to do knock offs of all the designer collections.  And I bought this little coat and this proper outfit to go for my interview.  And Ms. Vreeland was really very charming to me.  I had no idea half of what she said and I did, I did not get that job with her.  Andre Talley [Andre Leon Talley] ended up with the job who became--well, you know who Andre Talley is from, from Vogue.  And he ended up with the job at, not at that same time but a little later and also African American.
Story_ID: 647908
Speaker 1: So it was years later that after I had been working at our studio [Advertising Images, New York, New York] that I got a call from Harper's Bazaar; and at the same time I had, we had two--a very close friend who had said to me that he would love to partner with me to open a store. And so I, when I went to Harper's Bazaar to be interviewed, I said to Nancy White who was the editor-in-chief, "Well, I'm about to, in a, in a year's time I'm going to open a retail store either in Boston [Massachusetts] or in New York [New York]."  And she said, "Well, that's fine because you don't have to be here on a full time schedule.  I have a couple of ideas of what I would like to have you do.  We're interested in boutiques now because that's a, you know, a big phase in the world of fashion and we'd like you to be the boutique editor and to cover them in New York and London [England] and Paris [France] and that will fit with your schedule."  And, so I obviously said, "Yes," and became the editor for a section that I created for them called the 'Bazaar's Bazaar.'
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that was an amazing and wonderful experience.  I had a little office with no windows and attended meetings and at the same time was free to also develop the store.  And my partner, and you can read that in The New Yorker magazine, was a woman from an old Boston family and it was quite heady I have to say.  At first the store was going to open in Boston because the family owned a lot of real estate in Boston along with a fleet of antique cars.  And Paul Rudolf was hired to design the building.  And it just didn't make sense to be opening this kind of store in Boston.  And so we decided that it should be in New York and that's how Narcissa [Narcissa Boutique, New York, New York] was born.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So this is also in 1968?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Sixty-nine [1969].  It was '69 [1969] by the time we started with the, with the store.  And my pages for Bazaar didn't start to come out until sixty- the beginning of '69 [1969].  So in my manner of doing two things at once that were both really wonderful, I was writing and doing all the ad- you know, all the photography.  I wasn't doing the photography but hiring photographers to do my pages with, in Bazaar and at the same time preparing for the store.  And it worked wonderfully because suddenly I had the world of Paris open to me through the magazine and I was able to buy in Europe things that I would have never had access to no matter how much money there was to be spent.  But the editor-in-chief of the Paris Harper's Bazaar and I became good friends.  That's why I had that little letter there for you.  And she introduced me to just amazing things in Paris and I met Yves Saint Laurent and she took me to all of these wonderful places to purchase things.  So I was able to buy early 19th century umbrellas and (unclear) of all kinds and obviously opened my eyes to parts of Paris that I didn't know.  I had been to Europe several times before but this was extraordinary.  And the store was really heralded as one of the most fabulous stores in New York.  We had our own designer, Eric Lund who has now passed but had been a designer at Henri Bendel and he was a really close and dear friend so he came to work for us.  And my partner was traveling to India so she'd come back with bucket loads of interesting things; and the store was pretty interesting, pretty interesting and very exciting.
Story_ID: 647909
Speaker 1: Did you have a particular kind of garment that you favored in those days?
Speaker 2: Yes.  You know that was a period of time where travel to India, Afghanistan, Turkey, ethnic jewelry from those countries, carpets.  And then Eric [Eric Lund] was an incredible designer and I've always believed in very simple clothing and then the embellishment being the accessories which then create the personality and the character.  So we bought--because I was able to do this, both through Bazaar [Harper's Bazaar] and because I knew New York City [New York, New York] so well, along 39th Street used to be all of these fabric firms that had fabrics from the '20s [1920s] and the '30s [1930s] and I would go in and buy bolts of the most amazing stuff [for Narcissa Boutique, New York, New York].  You know, maybe there would only be twenty yards or fifty yards and beautiful ribbons and passementerie.  And then we purchased a fabric from Liberty of London [England] and again because of Bazaar I had entre to so many of the--first of all I knew the names of the fabric manufacturers that I wanted and, so we had silk jerseys and wool jerseys and clothing that was fluid and floated through the body.  But I also had kaftans from Morocco and then we took the patterns from Moroccan kaftans and turned them into long, silk knitted garments and kurtas, the shorter ones are called kurtas.  And, so we adapted the kurtas.  But for beautiful silk tops that you could wear to a dinner, you could wear them, well, people weren't wearing jeans, I mean at least women weren't.  You could wear them casually, you could wear them very dressed up.  And then you'd add all of this, all of this wonderful jewelry and it was a very individual look.  It was a very elegant, very refined, beautiful fabrics, unique fabrics.  And we had a work room where we would present a collection and then women could come and order a special edition.  The line would be the same but the fabric and the pa- the fabric would be what would make the garment theirs.  And then with the jewelry from India and harem pants from Turkey and jalabiyas from--I mean all--it was just great fun.  And it was at that beginning period, there were--the first boutique from India had opened in New York City so there was a kind of sense of this more unique, more exotic feeling happening.  I don't know if it was happening as much in the rest of the country but you know by now we're into the '70s [1970s] and it was, it was, well, you can read the article and extrapolate from that what you, what you want.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Rather than my talking about it.
Speaker 1: Well, we need you to talk about it (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm--yeah, well, that's true.
Speaker 1: Of course you--
Speaker 2: Well, it feels kind of like bragging.  Everybody from Richard Avedon to all the socialites loved the store.  Eric had a reputation from Henri Bendel so they were excited that he was there as the designer and there we are.
Story_ID: 647910
Speaker 1: Did you have an African American clientele at all, I mean in this--?
Speaker 2: No, unfortunately, no.  Maybe--well, I shouldn't say none but so few.  I mean we were on East 58th Street in Manhattan [New York, New York], at 242 East 58th Street.  So we're between, where were we, between 2nd [Avenue] and 3rd [Avenue] or 3rd and Lexington [Avenue].  I can nev- can't even remember.  But it wasn't, it was in the papers and most people, you know, if they didn't see a picture of me, I was [HistoryMaker] Gwen Mazer, you know.  So even people--and my maiden name had been Goodman so I was always being thought of as somebody who is Jewish unless I was described as otherwise.  So--
Speaker 1: So it wasn't widely known that you were black then?
Speaker 2: I think not.  I think, I mean not--I think that very, very, very few African Americans knew of my existence.
Speaker 1: Well, I--reason why I ask I always think about the fashion I guess--
Speaker 2: Ebony?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, Eunice Johnson's Ebony Fashion Fair.
Speaker 2: I--you know, I was so in another arena from the, from that, you know, and that was her thing.  I mean it would have been no reason that she would have likely hired me.  And I just never even thought about reaching out to Ebony because I just didn't think about it I guess.  You know the clientele [at Narcissa Boutique, New York, New York], I mean and [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll and I knew each other, so I'm trying to remember.  I know that Diahann was around during that time and there were, there were several other black women who were around town but were not necessarily part of a black environment.  And I'm trying to think, there was one other African American woman who owned a boutique in Manhattan and as far as I know, we were the only two.  Her name is Jackie [ph.], oh, lord, what's Jackie's last name?  She has a place now in Jamaica, a resort and health spa and I can't think of her last name right now.  But she had a boutique in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York] that was fabulous, absolutely fabulous.  So she definitely preceded me in having a store.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And then I think by the time I left New York [New York], a couple of other shops had opened.
Story_ID: 647911
Speaker 1: The store [Narcissa Boutique, New York, New York] opens in '69 [1969] and you're writing ar- writing articles too for Harper's Bazaar (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm writing articles for Harper's Bazaar.  Nancy White who had been the editor-in-chief is replaced by a man by the name of Jim Brady [James Brady] who had come from Woman--Women's Wear Daily and he suggested to me that I might like to write about something other than fashion.  And he said, "What would you like to do?"  And I said, "You know, I'm really curious about people's lifestyles, especially people in the arts."  And he said, "Good, you have a new column."  And that's how 'Lifestyle' was born.  And whether I was the first person to ever write a lifestyle column, I'm not quite sure but I know I was right up there with the first.  And that was again an extraordinary experience because it meant that I could write about anybody in the arts that I wanted to, whether it was [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni or Geraldo Rivera or, you know, I, the whole range of folks, whether it was dancers, writers.  Janet Flanner had always written for The New Yorker under the pseudonym of Genet and to be able to interview Janet Flanner was incredible, you know, it was a wonderful experience.  And--
Speaker 1: So you had a sense of who your, who the readership would want to, want to read about?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I mean I was reading the magazine and I was a New Yorker so I was right in the thick of what was going on.  And one of the wonderful things of being an editor, I mean I had seats on the aisle for anything I wanted to go to.  So, you know, it was interesting to be able to kind of explore who was out there, who was interesting.  And at that time I had a good friend who was a writer for The New York Times and, so we used to go to a lot of the events together.  And again, you know, New York [New York] had so much to offer.  You know, Janet Flanner may have lived in Paris [France] but she was going to come to New York for sure.  And I wanted to--one of the things that was important to me was to make sure that as much as I could that I would expose African Americans in that column.  And Nikki was the very first person that I wrote a piece about.  And I think I mentioned to you earlier that Nikki said that that exposure in the magazine legitimatized her to a much broader audience.  It was like if Harper's Bazaar was going to write about her, then she must be okay.
Story_ID: 647912
Speaker 1: Now how did you first become aware of [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni?
Speaker 2: Oh, I knew Nikki.  I knew Nikki from New York [New York], you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, New York is kind of like a potpourri of people.  And I couldn't tell you how I met Nikki, I have no idea, probably at some dinner party or some event.  And she was part of a whole other circle of people that I eventually spent time with.  And I knew that she was really a little rebel and that her work was good and I wanted to get it out there.  On the other spectrum from Nikki, one of the pieces that I was really pleased to be able to do, I flew to Italy and did a piece on Barbara Chase-Riboud.  Barbara Chase-Riboud is African American.  You know Barbara?
Speaker 1: I do, but go on and explain--
Speaker 2: Okay, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) because a lot of people don't.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So Barbara Chase-Riboud--
Speaker 1: May- maybe we should do the same for Nikki Giovanni too, who is a poet, because somebody is going to watching this that may not know.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So shall we back up to--
Speaker 1: We'll back up a little bit about Nikki Giovanni who was--who's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  So Nikki Giovanni was a poet.  She had just published her first book of poetry ['Black Feeling, Black Talk,' Nikki Giovanni], I have it here but I don't, I think it might be on the bookshelf.  And I was excited by the way that she was writing and I wanted to expose her to a broader audience of, a broader audience.  And I had no idea that that exposure made that much difference in her career until she came--when I wrote 'Wise Talk: Wild Women' [Gwen Mazer and Christine Alicino], Nikki was one of the people that I wanted in the book and she flew out to do an interview with me.  And then a couple of years later, I had started a lecture series with some of the women from the book and Nikki and I were at dinner and she told me the story of how being in Bazaar allowed her to be in this other magazine.  I don't remember if it was McCall's [McCall's Magazine] or Glamour.  There was a contest and she won.  And she said she owed a great part of that to being as she described it, legitimatized by being in Harper's Bazaar.
Story_ID: 647913
Speaker 1: So now as far as Barbara [Barbara Chase-Riboud] is concerned, Barbara and I met in Europe and we had a lot of mutual friends; and she at the time was married to Marc Riboud who was one of the most famous reporter--photographers for Life magazine and for oh, dear, what's the other one that begins with an M?  Anyway, she was married to Marc.  They had two children.  Barbara was having an exhibition that was going to go--the foundry was in Italy in a little small town.  That's where the photograph comes from with me walking with the ocelot and, so I wanted to photograph Barbara at the foundry and also at the villa that they lived in again, exposing an African American who was living an international life that most people, black, white or otherwise would never think was happening within--with an African American.
Story_ID: 647914
Speaker 1: Now at that juncture, I mean [HistoryMaker] Nikki Giovanni I think had, she had, she had poetry books out, she's well known in the black arts community as a poet.
Speaker 2: Just beginning to be.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: She wasn't that well known.  We're talking about 19--when was that?  Well, we can look on the date.  I think it was 1971.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well, we were reading her poetry in Dayton [Ohio] in '69 [1969].  We--
Speaker 2: Were you? Okay.
Speaker 1: A certain segment of people who were--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --into the Black Arts Movement--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --who knew about it then.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: But she wasn't known--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --broadly.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: And with Barbara, I doubt that less than, I mean a very small percentage of African Americans are aware of Barbara Chase-Riboud as a sculptor (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know she--okay.
Speaker 2: Did you--
Speaker 1: As a sculptor?  No, no, I know as an author of--
Speaker 2: Oh, my god, her--
Speaker 1: --of historical books, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh, you mean her 'Sally Hemings' ['Sally Hemings: A Novel,' Barbara Chase-Riboud] and--
Speaker 1: Yes, right.
Speaker 2: Barbara is one of the most famous sculptors and her work, she just had a major retrospective in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] I believe and I was interested in the, in the sculptor.  She had not written 'Sally Hemings' when we did this piece.  She had written, I have a couple of her poe- one is a book of poetry ['Portrait of a Nude Woman as Cleopatra,' Barbara Chase-Riboud], one is about China ['From Memphis and Peking,' Barbara Chase-Riboud].  Yeah, the 'Sally Hemings' book and I think there's one other.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think the Amistad [La Amistad], I think it is, it's something about lions is in the title ['Echo of Lions,' Barbara Chase-Riboud].  It's about, I think it's about the Amistad mutiny I believe.
Speaker 2: About Amistad?
Speaker 1: I believe so.
Speaker 2: Oh, really?
Speaker 1: I think that's it.
Speaker 2: I don't remember that.  But any rate, her sculpture and I thought I had a photograph of she and I at, I do have it somewhere at the foundry and her sculptures are monolithic.  I mean we're not talking little pieces.  We are talking fifteen feet and her, the combination is with yarn and steel.
Speaker 1: No, I didn't--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's pretty amazing work.  So it was important to me to get that into the magazine [Harper's Bazaar], along with the Janet Flanners and the Alwin Nikolaises.  And the reason for Geraldo Rivera was he had just broken a major story in New York City [New York, New York] about the terrible conditions that people were living in, in mental institutions.  And he'd become momentarily so famous and he was, had just married Kurt Vonnegut's daughter [Edith Vonnegut].  And actually if I, if I were the kind of writer or journalist who was a sensationalist, I could have broken such a major awful story (laughter) of Geraldo Rivera because I went to photograph him and do the story somewhere, someplace he was staying in New York outside of the city.  And when the photographer and I got there, he was, the entire--everybody was stoned out of their minds and he was in the bathtub with his wife.  And I remember think-, and I remember being kind of stunned, you know, at first.  And I said to the photographer, "Well, you know, we can't, you know, this is ridiculous.  I'm not going to photograph him like this."  So I laid him out and turned on my heel and left and then years later I thought oh, my god, you were such a nitwit.  If you had really had any, any journalistic sense about you, here he was at that moment being one of the most talked about people in New York; and I would have had photographs that would have been just (shakes head)--
Story_ID: 647915
Speaker 1: So you did like finally photograph Geraldo Rivera (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I finally pho- photographed Geraldo.  I invited him to my house for dinner, he and his wife [Edith Vonnegut].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this time they, it was--?
Speaker 2: This time they were well behaved.
Speaker 1: I see, I see.  Okay.  So how long did you work for Harper's Bazaar?
Speaker 2: From '68 [1968] to '74 [1974], seventy- end of '73 [1973], '74 [1974].
Speaker 1: And what happened at that point?  Did you just--
Speaker 2: What happened is we got another editor-in-chief and he wanted me to go to Town and Country magazine.  And I decided that I wanted to take a break.  I wanted to do some traveling and I guess at around that time I had met Katherine and, so that's what happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you had met whom at the--
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham.
Speaker 1: Katherine Dunham.  All right, okay.
Speaker 2: And, so I was writing for other magazines as I mentioned to you, I mean as you've already seen and I was traveling.  And I guess I went with the Chicago Sun-Times.  I was interviewing Manley and Katherine and, you know, quite frankly I was bouncing around with so many people I don't remember at this moment.  They'd give me an assignment and off I'd go, some notable--not, some not so notable.  And I loved the Caribbean so it was also an opportunity for me to take a little time and enjoy, enjoy the Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: Travel through the islands.
Speaker 1: Now you interviewed Michael Manley during this period?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: In Jamaica, the president then.
Speaker 2: He was still the president.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the president.  In those days, Bob Marley was still alive.  I don't know if you ever had a chance to--
Speaker 2: I never met him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean I knew of him but you know I came there--you know, Chicago Sun-Times said, "Go interview Manley and his wife [Beverley Anderson Manley]" and dinners with them and--no concerts with Bob Marley.
Story_ID: 647916
Speaker 1: You were explaining I think before we started the interview about how the [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham visit, you know, evolved because you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --were trying to do research on her here prior to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, actually what happened, I think that the Essence piece may be a later piece than the Chicago Sun-Times piece.  And when they asked me to go to Chicago [Illinois], to East St. Louis [Illinois] to interview Dunham, I mean she had always been someone I was very aware of because I had been at the Dunham School [Katherine Dunham School of Dance and Theater, New York, New York] and I loved what she did.  And, so I read a great deal about her before I went and I was astonished because there she was.  I'd never been in St. Louis [Missouri] and she was in East St. Louis.  She had started the Dunham Foundation [East St. Louis, Illinois] and she was teaching at Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois] and I spent about four days there.  And I was going to the school with her and sitting in the room while she did her thing and the (laughter) thing I was struck by because I had never experienced this, was that when she came in she said, "All right, I want all the weapons on my desk."  And I was just floored, you know, because up came a couple of knives and a gun and she proceeded to teach and talk and so on.  And it was the first time I saw a performance of capoeira because she was teaching that whole Brazilian format.  And so I just kind of tooled around--wherever she was going I went with her and I'm just writing my notes and observing what was happening.
Story_ID: 647917
Speaker 1: And about three days in she [HistoryMaker Katherine Dunham] said, "You know, you're the person I want to have do my autobiography--my biography.  And if you really want to know what I'm up to for this story, then you have to come to Haiti."  And Haiti was the one Caribbean country that I swore I would never go to because of Duvalier [Francois Duvalier].  And of course Duvalier was dead, but the Baby Doc [Jean-Claude Duvalier] and Madame Duvalier [Simone Duvalier], who was the Simone les griots and really the impetus behind a lot of the horror that was happening there.  And, so I went back to Chicago [Illinois] and I said, "Well, Ms. Dunham would like me to go to Haiti." And they said, "Well, go to Haiti," and they paid for me to go to Haiti.  And I'll never forget it because of all the countries that I have been in, in the Caribbean and I've been to almost every one of them, I'd never been so struck by both the energy, the beauty and the devastation at the same time.  Haiti was like a, like a love affair.  You never knew whether you were going to have a case of the blues or you were going to be ecstatic.  And through Katherine I saw parts of Haiti that I--were amazing.  I ended up going to Cap-Haitien [Haiti] with a UNESCO [United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization] person and Katherine's place was like paradise in the middle of, in the middle--I mean you'd come into Haiti and it would be unbelievable and then suddenly you were in the area where Habitation [Habitation Leclerc, Port-au-Prince, Haiti] was and that had been a gift to her from one of the presidents [sic.].  I can't remember which president at this moment.  And--
Speaker 2: Well, she lived--tell us something about that place.  It has a historical--
Speaker 1: Well, it was the place of Pauline [Pauline Bonaparte] when she came from France.
Speaker 2: This is Napoleon's [Napoleon Bonaparte] sister?
Speaker 1: Napoleon's sister.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And Habitacion Leclerc was in a forest.  It was one of the most exquisitely beautiful places.  And of course Katherine had superb taste and so the place was simple, but it was magnificent.  I mean it's just beautifully built and everything about it was serene and lovely.  But when she received it, initially it was the place that she came with the dancers to renew after their times on the road and so on.  So over the years it was built into something quite magnificent.  It didn't look like that I'm sure when she first started.  But she had an exquisite eye and, so there was a joy in being there.  And I have memories of sitting out at sunset watching the sunset over these absolutely gigantic--excuse me--gigantic palm, royal palm trees and these incredible flocks of bats which one would not think of as beautiful, but these bats flying up into this almost darkened sky and swooping all over.  Bats when they fly are quite lovely to see.  It was a place of respite for her and a place of renewal.  And for me, because she charmed me into the idea that I should do this book, I probably went to Haiti close to a dozen times.  And she was there with Jeanelle Stovall who ran the business end of things and Rosie Rubenstein who was her right hand.  Rosie was Israeli and occasionally when I would go down there would be other members of the Dunham Company [Katherine Dunham Company] there to visit.  And it was, it was quite amazing.
Story_ID: 647918
Speaker 1: Well what did you find out about [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham that, I mean you probably found out a lot of things you didn't know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did.
Speaker 1: But what can you tell us today that--?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know how many people know that she was very, very close to Bernard Berenson, the art, the art critic.  And Bernard Berenson had invited Katherine to Tatti, which was his estate in Italy.  And, you know, I just gave away all the journals.  I gave them to the Dunham Foundation [East St. Louis, Illinois] to--because there was nothing that I was going to do with them at this point in time.  So there were the--there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is the Dunham, Dunham Foundation--
Speaker 2: Not the one in--
Speaker 1: in East Saint--
Speaker 2: I did not give them to--
Speaker 1: Not--okay.
Speaker 2: --the one in East St. Louis [Illinois].  I gave them to Halifu Osumare who has a foundation here at Davis [University of California, Davis, Davis, California] along with a lot of the papers that I had.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So at UC Davis near Sacramento [California]?
Speaker 2: Right. Now whether they're with the, with UC or with Halifu, I can't tell you.  But if you want further information I can give you her numbers.  What I found out about Dunham, of course she was married to John [John Thomas Pratt], just lost his last name.  Her husband, the man by whom she had her daughter [Marie-Christine Dunham Pratt] was also her director and her costume designer and they were really a wonderful combination creatively.  And there's a wonderful expression that Dunham told me that when she first met, not Picasso [Pablo Picasso], oh, god, there's so many of these stories.  Oh, dear, not Duchamp [Marcel Duchamp].  I'll remember the artist.  He said that she does with her legs what we do with our pen for art.  And, so Dunham's life was peopled with artists of the time.  And she was always in struggle because the company [Katherine Dunham Company] never was (background noise) making--oops--
Speaker 1: That's okay.  We're okay.
Speaker 2: --never making enough money to always be able to perform and create.  So a lot of her creativity was constantly being pushed aside to raise money, to raise funds to be able to get on to do the next thing.  And, so being able to spend time intellectually, intellectually, Katherine was brilliant.  And she needed that kind of stimulation.  She needed to be around creative intellectuals who could feed her.  And her relationship with Ber- Berenson was not romantic, it was, to some degree, he was her mentor.  And of course here's a man who knows everything there is to know about art and, so he was just food for her growth.  And they were close for many, many years.  And he was old enough to be her, certainly her father if not her grandfather; but a really import, really important part of her life.
Story_ID: 647919
Speaker 1: You told us earlier that the book was, that Toni Morrison was excited about the project.
Speaker 2: Toni was very excited about the book and I was too innocent at the time to realize how extraordinarily lucky I was to have had somebody like Toni Morrison even consider it, much less try to find me an agent at MCI [MCI Communications Corp.; Verizon Communications, Inc.] and introduce me to the president at Random House [Random House Inc.; Penguin Random House].  And of course I felt like well, if Random House didn't feel that it was viable then there was no point in my doing the book.
Speaker 1: But you worked on it how many years?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh--
Speaker 1: So a dozen trips to Haiti and--
Speaker 2: A dozen trips to Haiti and it was mostly in Haiti that, you know, what would happen is I would fly down and Katherine [HistoryMaker Katherine Dunham] always liked to be very relaxed.  So we might be going out to Ibo Beach [Haiti].  In fact I found something, it--I think it's in that piece that I talk about us going out to Ibo Beach.  And she would like to sit out on a long, you know, on a beach chair and order us drinks.  And, you know, she'd just chat and she'd be talking about what had happened in Europe and what had happened with her life with John [John Thomas Pratt], what had happened in terms of Haiti, which was really a very huge part of her life, I think much more so than people really might have realized.  And it was pretty adventurous.  We got held up with the Tonton Macoute and there were times with the machetes and it was (laughter) really interesting because it just--
Speaker 1: The Tonton Macoute was the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Macoute.  The Tonton--
Speaker 1: --kind of like the--
Speaker 2: They were the terrorists so to speak.
Speaker 1: Almost like the--what are they called, Gestapo would be for Hitler [Adolf Hitler].
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: Tonton Macoute was for Baby Doc [Jean-Claude Duvalier].
Speaker 2: Was for Baby Doc.  But then we'd say, "Oh, Madame Dunham," and they'd say, "Oh, Madame Dunham," and they'd let us go (laughter) no matter--because she was so well loved and respected.  The things I remember about Haiti itself and Madame Duvalier [Simone Duvalier], I never met her.  But when I went the first time the American ambassador to Haiti was someone I had been introduced to.  So that was wonderful because it kind of allowed for a certain amount of safety.  And at that time also there was a very famous--Ho- Hotel Oloffson [Port-au-Prince, Haiti] was the major place at that time.  And there was this wonderful madman who kind of was the--I don't know even how I would call him with his white suit and his white hat.  And he was an artist himself but he also was kind of the greeter of anybody he thought he should know.  And I met interesting artists that I wouldn't have met.  I had a wonderful time because the ambassador was there and, so I was very comfortable 'cause it's a little scary.  It was one of the reasons I had never gone to Haiti before because I really thought it was dangerous and it was actually to a degree.
Story_ID: 647920
Speaker 1: I got to go up into the mountains with Katherine [HistoryMaker Katherine Dunham].  There were places--I--one of the things that shocked me was I'd never had the experience of an elitist, black nation where there were black people treating other black people so horribly.  It was--when I say horribly, I mean I met one person who was a school teacher and some friends were coming to Haiti because I had raved about it so much.  And, so we deci- decided to rent a house so that they could stay.  I wasn't going to stay at the residence with my friends.  And they were two people who were the housekeeper and so on for the house.  And after a couple of days I was thinking wait a minute, I know where my bedroom is and I know where Olivia's [ph.]--where are these people sleeping?  And they were sleeping not in the house, outside of the house in what was not much larger than a dog house and I came to find that that was not unique.  And I was just appalled that that would even, that that could even happen.  And there was a real, real division in Haiti that I'd never experienced.  Maybe it existed in other islands of the Caribbean but I had never experienced that before.  (Laughter) I remember we ended up giving them all of our money, all of our clothes, I mean it was just horrible.
Story_ID: 647921
Speaker 1: Katherine had a peristyle and a peristyle is a big, round hut, but it's much more glamorous than a, I mean it's--I'm missing the word that I want but a peristyle is where the dances of the Vodun were presented.  And some of it was done harshly to support the residence, but it wasn't a performance like a choreographed performance.  Yes, she had--everybody was in costume, the place was magnificent, the peristyle was just beautifully done but the performances were real.
Speaker 2: So they're actually rituals of Vodun?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, and if you're experiencing that and the sound of Haiti, you never, there is never a moment that you're not hearing the sound of drums, almost to the point that you, you know, you start to feel it in your body.  And there were many times that I could barely hold onto my seat.  I mean I could feel myself leaving and just going into trance myself.  But watching these people literally dance up a pole.  And, you know, you could see they were, they were leaving their bodies.  It was amazing experience to have.
Speaker 2: Now [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham, now she was, I guess we'd say a mamalao in some way or--
Speaker 1: She was a mambo.
Speaker 2: A mambo, okay.
Speaker 1: The mambo.  A mambo is the grand person and--
Speaker 2: She's the grand mama of the--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: She gave me a necklace of snake bones.  I was never, I was not interested in being initiated.  But every now and then I take those bones out and I think wow, that's really incredible.
Story_ID: 647922
Speaker 1: Now [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham at this, by this time she was in her what?
Speaker 2: In her sixties.
Speaker 1: Sixties, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, her late sixties.
Speaker 1: And she would live until about nine- 2000 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She lived until she was, till two--no, it was later than 2000 cause Katherine was supposed to be in the book ['Wise Talk: Wild Women,' Gwen Mazer and Christine Alicino] book so I interviewed--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) 2005 or so?
Speaker 2: Two thousand five [sic. 2006], right--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --cause that's the last time I saw her was about 2005. Now I don't know that I want, I mean I feel kind of like--well, we can talk about, we can say that even at that point in time Katherine always had a very interesting, younger companion, a young man was definitely there on more than one occasion that I spent time there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, dinner was very formal and she would come very regally dressed, being escorted by this Nubian like gentleman down for dinner.
Speaker 1: So she, would she spend like--
Speaker 2: Months.
Speaker 1: What portion of the year would she spend in Haiti (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At that, at that particular time yes, I can't reme- it was, she was either there or she was in East St. Louis [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So she spent a good amount of time there and a, and a fair amount of time in East St. Louis.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And when you were interviewing her she could still walk and everything?
Speaker 2: Oh, she was, yeah.  Didn't I show you that other--well, here's a photo of her from--
Speaker 1: Where she's stand--well, we don't, that's all right.
Speaker 2: Oops, sorry.  Sorry about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Forgot.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) the photo but we'll shoot it later (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I hope you're editing right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we'll shoot it later.  We'll shoot it hopefully a little bit later.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was just asking was she moving?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Oh, no, she was fine.  Her knees bothered her as anybody who had danced all their life, she definitely had some problems with her knees but that was it.
Story_ID: 647923
Speaker 1: Well let me move on to--
Speaker 2: Where are we?
Speaker 1: Well, the Essence article ['Katherine Dunham'] appeared in '76 [1976] and (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, and that's--okay, so if the Essence article appeared in '76 [1976], that is the year that I also joined Nazareno Gabrielli, the Italian company.  And that came about again very serendipitously through a very good friend who was the American director for the Italian designer Valentino who is a well known designer.  And Hermene [ph.] called me to say, "You know, the--there is a--the president of this Italian firm is in town and I've told him about you and they would like to meet you."  And they met me and offered me a contract and a few seconds later I was off to Italy.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  You, I have a note here that you helped develop the Beverly Hills [California] store?
Speaker 2: I--first, my first assignment from them was to open an office for them in New York City [New York, New York].  They had no representation in New York and I had to hire an architect, find the real estate, hire an architect and design and have the space built.  And then they would send the merchandise to fill the showroom office which they were not very good at doing I must say.  And simultaneous--not simultaneously but about a year after that they had decided they wanted to open an office in, a store rather, a retail store in Beverly Hills.  So I would go to Italy a couple of times a year to review the collection and also to work with the fashion designer who was doing a clothing collection.  However, I have to say and I don't know how to say this for the camera that there were so many times that all of these plans were made but nothing ever happened, you know.  I mean it was kind of, (speaking Spanish) "Domani seniora, domani", you know, "we'll, you know, we'll get to it."  But it didn't, didn't always flow so quickly.  And, so I was sitting in this showroom with not the merchandise that I needed to have and they did indeed open a store.  They had asked, you know, for market research that would assist them because they products were beautiful but they were a little conservative for the United States.
Story_ID: 647924
Speaker 1: The long and the short of it is that in 1978, I met Doug Tompkins [Douglas Tompkins] from Esprit [Esprit Holdings Limited] and that was an, again an intuitive experience.  I totally didn't expect this.  And Doug asked me if I would be the creative director of Esprit and I was ready to leave Nazareno Gabrielli and I had no intention of moving to California.  In fact when I found out that it was California that he was (laughter) asking me to move to I said, "I really need to think about this.  You know I've never lived anywhere except New York City [New York, New York]."  He said, "Well, I'll leave you a ticket and when you're ready why don't you come out and take a look."  And, you know, here I am still in California.  And that was a wonderful experience because at the time Esprit was a company with seven different divisions and my job was to create an identity that pulled all these seven divisions into one corporate entity in terms of their image and that was very exciting to do, starting the catalogs for them.  And my first assignment having been in California less than a month was to do this first catalog.  And Doug wanted me to photograph it in the desert, in Death Valley, and it was July.  And I'd never been to Death Valley and I had a private plane that we had hired, a load of clothes, a load of models, hairdressers, makeup people, the whole nine yards.  And it was so hot in Death Valley that the only way we could photograph was after the sun set and before the sun came up so our shoots took place like at from five [o'clock] in the morning until eight in the morning and from seven or so at night until actually the moon was up and a couple of the shots in there are under moonlight.  And I had never had the experience of being in a plane that couldn't land because the air was so dense and the pilot had a how to fly book in his lap.  So I remember thinking, I don't think we want to fly back with the same pilot so I had to fire the pilot and send somebo- I had them send somebody else, send another plane.
Story_ID: 647925
Speaker 1: I was just asking off camera like about, you know, why would he send you to Death Valley when you could go to White Sands, New Mexico or someplace that wasn't as deadly as Death Valley, Valley, the deadliest spot in the world, actually the lowest point--
Speaker 2: I couldn't begin to tell you and I had barely arrived in California so I had no idea of what I would experience.  And it was pretty interesting, I mean trying to manage this load of lunatics and get the shots.  The shots were fabulous, wonderful photographer.
Speaker 1: So did it all end well?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have the--
Speaker 1: Nobody got--
Speaker 2: I have the catalog to prove it (laughter).
Speaker 1: So nobody got hurt or--
Speaker 2: No, they didn't get hurt.  They, some of them behaved badly.  It was the--I remember jumping into the swimming pool and it was so hot out that when you jumped in the pool it was freezing.  I mean it was that much variation in the temperature.  I never had that experience before.  It was quite amazing, but we got wonderful photographs really, really wonderful photographs.  And Esprit [Esprit Holdings Limited], and this was Doug's [Douglas Tompkins] idea to use real people.  And, so I would hold these casting calls for real people.  It was mostly young women and there'd be, you know, two blocks long of women, young women--
Speaker 1: So you mean real people as opposed to professional models?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Exactly, real people instead of professional models.  So we didn't use professional models probably for the first two, the first, at least the first two catalogs.  One of the women who we used did become--she was African American as a matter of fact and she did become a well known model.  She ended up with a modeling career.  She's now an anthropologist but she--
Speaker 1: Who?
Speaker 2: Beatrice, what is Beatrice's last name?  Beatrice Ross [ph.] I think her name is.  Yeah, I mean she didn't go to New York [New York] but she did well out here.
Story_ID: 647926
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were with Esprit [Esprit Holdings Limited] for how many years?
Speaker 2: 'Til '81 [1981], and what happened for me was I began to, I was looking around--well, first of all coming from New York [New York], I, to take on this position, I was finding myself being interviewed and written about a lot and it was kind of surprising.  And at the same time I was also invited to become a board member for the Magic Theatre [San Francisco, California], which was great for me because I was really missing great theater from New York.  And at that time Sam Shepard was doing 'True West' and it was a very vibrant period of time to be involved with something like that.  And I also realized that this is the period now of women rising in business and this whole dress for success issue had come into play.  And companies were looking at, you know, what do we do with women? How do we approach them?  And I saw an opportunity to use some of my background from my past experience and opened what I initially called Gwen Mazer and Associates that became Total Image Management [San Francisco, California].  And I started--it was much easier before we had Facebook and the Internet and all of that to actually begin to find out who I should talk to.  And I ended up with programs for organizations like the U.S. forest depart- forestry department [U.S. Forests Service] and the U.S. Postal Service and it just went on and on.  From there, insurance firms and they were trying to figure out how do women fit into the work place?  Women were trying to fit out, figure out what should I look like to be successful in business?  And California was a pretty, especially San Francisco [California], was more casual, more laid back.  I couldn't underdress enough.  I'd never worn a pair of jeans in my life.  I actually while I was at Esprit, I had to, I went to New York and I bought a pair of jeans, a pair of Italian jeans, that was a funny moment, and I came into the office wearing the jeans and everybody said, "Where did you get those jeans?"  And the next thing I knew they were knocking them off for the collection.  That was really funny.  But I saw this opportunity to really have a business so I started Total Image Management.  And at first it was mostly corporate but I was really, I really received a lot of exposure and that brought me women in business, in philanthropy and various socialites as my clients.  And at that time--we're now in 1981, '82 [1982], people were still really, really dressing.  So particularly clients who were in philan- philanthropists and socialites needed just loads of clothes, unlike 2013 where you, I see people at the symphony in blue jeans; and, so it was really wonderful.  And there were some good designers out here and the business just grew.
Story_ID: 647927
Speaker 1: And during that time--go ahead.
Speaker 2: I just had, I was, I was wondering now I know you have advised both women and men [at Total Image Management, San Francisco, California].
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: But I think women probably, and correct, correct me if I'm wrong, have--there's so many choices that they might wear, where men, you know, a business environment, you know, some kind of sport coat or a suit or depending on what you, you know, is it pinstripes or not, you know, three piece or what--but they--there aren't that many, you know, big options I guess.  I mean you could, you know, I guess dress in something that was inappropriate for the job I guess but--
Speaker 1: Oh, many men did, trust me, many men did, but women have far more opportunities to screw up in terms of the choice, the broad range of choices.  Now, right now because the men, the market for men has become so huge there are many, many, many choices now for men, many, many, many more than there used to be and a lot of opportunity to screw up as much as women.  And in California I think it's a little different and especially in Cal- in San Francisco [California] because this is such a big tech [technology] hub and that's really part of what took hold ten, fifteen years ago with casual dress because a lot of money was coming out of Silicon Valley and these kids were walking around with holes in their jeans and their baseball caps on backwards.  And the attorneys and financial people would go down in their suits and then not be feeling like well, you know, I'm just not as cool as the rest of these guys.  And, so that was part of the unraveling of a great deal of business dress.  And, so there are just loads and loads and loads of--
Speaker 2: So in those days when you started though--
Speaker 1: Um-hm, it was very much more formal.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, okay.
Speaker 1: Yes, and so there were workshops and seminars as well as many a time that I'd be called upon if there was someone that they felt really was a great employee that they wanted to promote but whose presentation just didn't fly.  And I had any number of companies pay not only my fees but buy the wardrobe for the cl- for the person.
Story_ID: 647928
Speaker 1: Can you give us an exa- you don't have to name any names but just can you give us an example of what, you know, some- something that just doesn't fly in a work place as opposed, you know, that you--
Speaker 2: For right now or for then?
Speaker 1: For then I guess (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well I can re- I can tell you two things.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One in particular was a woman that I, that was my very first call [at Total Image Management, San Francisco, California] and I think it may have been for an insurance firm.  And this was the president of the firm or the CEO of the firm and he said, "I really feel that So and So is a great employee and we'd really like to promote her."  And they would always try to be really discreet.  And they said, "But I want you to take a look at her and see what you can do."  And she was wearing a lime green polyester pantsuit that was so awful you just couldn't imagine that anybody would have chosen that.  And she was very, very appreciative of the fact that the company thought so much of her that they would single her out and make sure that she was taken care of.  Now they did not pay for her clothes, but they did pay for me to work with her one on one.  Oftentimes there would be several people that needed to be targeted and they would walk me around the company.  They'd say, "Okay.  I want you to see So and So and So and So," and then I would do a full program not targeting them but giving them the lessons and the information as a group.  One of the most amazing experiences was an engineering firm that had one woman who was as, according to the man who interviewed me, the most brilliant of all the engineers in the company.  And he said, "But we sent her to Europe and it was a disaster.  It was a total disaster.  She didn't know how to get in and out of a car.  She didn't know how to take off and on her coat.  She had no idea of formal manners.  She didn't understand anything about eating." And he said, "We just can't have this happen again."  In that case they had me, they paid for her entire wardrobe and they paid for me to privately show her just dining, how to get in and out of a car gracefully where I'm not climbing (laughter), you know, all over the place to get in the car, and all those things.  And it worked so well that she was a, she was, it was like night and day for her going back the second time.  But what was interesting is that it boosted her confidence to the point that she got very grand and rather difficult (laughter).  On top of which she had a fire in her house and all the clothes burned up.  So I don't know what happened to her after that.  But, you know, and one of my favorites was the sweetest man, he too being an engineer and I don't even remember which one of these companies it was for.  And they said, "And you really, this time we really got to pay attention to the men."  And, so what I would often do is a before and after with a particular employee.  And I don't know whether this guy was, I mean he'd never worn shoes, he always wore Birkenstocks and he was kind of, you know, just like, schlumpy guy and so I got him totally outfitted.  And you know first he came out as Roger or whatever his name was and then he came out dressed and the women were like, "Who is that?"  And he was so darling he said, "I've never worn shoes before.  These are really great."  He bought the en- everything that he wore he purchased and he was a changed person.
Speaker 1: He's--
Speaker 2: To--
Speaker 1: --another engineer?
Speaker 2: Another--engineers, yeah.  Engineers are usually really difficult.
Story_ID: 647929
Speaker 1: Wells Fargo [Wells Fargo and Company] was a client for many years and when Wells Fargo decided that they wanted to put banks in Safeways [Safeway Inc.] and other stores of that nature, they wanted to distinguish their employees from the people who were shopping.  So they hired me to design an entire uniform program, hire the designers, find the--design neckties that were specific to, you know, the company, find the factories, find the warehouses, get the products designed.  I hired Banana Republic to do one collection, I hired another designer to do the women's collection and we did millions of dollars of clothing for the company.  And I flew all over the country and it was really funny 'cause when I got to places like Texas and the countries where the men grow really big and tall and, you know, and I had all of these ex-football players, I had to find a company here that could accommodate a 6'5", three hundred pound guy.  And we would have all of these clothes custom done, they'd go--everything would get shipped to the warehouse and then every single person got a tissued gift box package with a full wardrobe of clothes to work at the bank until the bank got sold.  And then my job was (laughter) could you please get rid of these clothes really fast before the merger goes through?  That was quite an adventure.  So image consulting is--has a very broad range.  It can be corporate, it can be individual and of course Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] was a client for several years and that was an amazing experience.
Speaker 2: Was it--now she seems to be, you know, on top of what she wears (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She's, she has fully realized herself at this point.  When I started working with Oprah, it was at the period that she was questioning her body size and--
Speaker 2: Oh, she was just beginning--now you started the business [Total Image Management, San Francisco, California] in '82 [1982].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And I remember a trend, there was a fashion trend where women were wearing old sport coats, men's sport coats to business meetings in Chicago [Illinois].  It was--they would go to resale shops--
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: --and buy these sport coats--
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: --roll the sleeves up.  And they would have these big, the big shoulders and a lot of the jackets for women and they included big shoulder pads and they--
Speaker 1: Well the '80s [1980s], that was the look and part of that reason was because women were supposed to look powerful.  So this, it was all of this, these theories about, you know, if you had your big shoulders then you could, you know, be stronger and nonsense about if you were really going into a powerful meeting you were supposed to wear red which--
Speaker 2: Right.  I heard that.
Speaker 1: --I didn't, I didn't buy all of that.  But the big shoulders definitely.  In fact when (laughter) I was with a client a couple of weeks ago, one of the processes is oftentimes to go through the closet and she looked at me and she said, "Do I really have to get rid of this?"  I said, "Unless you want to look like you've been caught in a time warp, yes, that's got to go."  It was, you know, a whole series of those jackets from--
Speaker 2: The big--
Speaker 1: --from that period of time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was big hair and big--
Speaker 1: Big hair, big shoulders, you know, we're coming through.  You know, it really was--when I look at it now it looks so ridiculous but, you know, most of fashion does look ridiculous when the time for it has passed because the meaning is not just about the clothing; again it's about the time period in which the clothing is being experienced.
Story_ID: 647930
Speaker 1: So did you cou- counsel Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] in the early stages of her success like in '80 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In 1989, I started--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now she's about midway, you know--
Speaker 2: She was about midway--
Speaker 1: --everybody knows her.
Speaker 2: --through, exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I had seen her on television and then serendipitously [HistoryMaker] Susan Taylor and I were in touch and she said that she was--you know, I was interested in working with Oprah and Oprah had, and Susan had actually been trying to find me.  So it just coalesced and I sent a portfolio out for Oprah's approval and I had a designer that I was working with at that time.  And I got a call like, "Can you be here in the next few days?"  And the next thing I knew, I was in Chicago [Illinois] going through Oprah's closets.  And I worked with her for about two and a half years and designed and made oh, gosh, more clothes than I can count and flew to Chicago every couple of weeks with great big wardrobe boxes and loads and loads of accessories and all of that.  But that was after my store [Gwen Mazer Collection, San Francisco, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you started a, yeah.  Okay.  So your--
Speaker 2: So wait a minute.  It's the store--no, I beg your pardon, I have my dates wrong.  The store was from '86 [1986] to the end of '90 [1990]; and I started with Oprah I guess in '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think '91 [1991], '92 [1992].
Story_ID: 647931
Speaker 1: So do you want to go back and talk about the store because that happened simultaneously with the Total Image Management [San Francisco, California] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  Right, right, right.  The--now during the '80s [1980s] you founded the Gwen Mazer Collection [San Francisco, California].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And it's--
Speaker 1: And that came out of my consulting.  And one of the reasons that I decided to open a store here was I couldn't find all of the things that I really wanted for clients and I also wanted a venue where I could do seminars and workshops and consulting other than in my off, you know, other than going to corporations and to clients and so on.  And, so at that point my personal partner and I decided to go for it and I was very fortunate.  I was able to raise the money, you know, I formed a corporation and sold stock and opened the store.  And it was again a store that was rather unique in that it sold only women's accessories, jewelry, scarves, belts, hats, handbags, gloves, sweaters.  And again, I was able to purchase things that were very, very unique and I had a staff, a rather large staff as a matter of fact, nearly--a large staff of fashion consultants that I trained.  And, so a woman could come into the store, leave her wardrobe of clothes, we would accessorize them and then she'd pick them up at the end of the day.  We did lots and lots and lots of seminars and workshops and fundraisers and all these various things.  And the store was unusual in that most stores, the merchandise is on display and out.  Our store, all--there were certainly displays but most of the jewelry was in drawers and we would give a client a tray and tell them where various things was.  And it was sort of like a hunt to find something that you could fall in love with and women loved that, just loved that.  So, and then we had a really, really big earthquake in '89 [1989] and 60 percent of our business was, at that time, tourists but--60 percent of the business was tourists to begin with, but of that 60 percent, a huge amount were from Japan because Japan was in its heyday at that point in time.  And between Japan, Japan's economy kind of collapsed at the, almost the same time during the time that the earthquake did and Union Square [San Francisco, California] just (makes noise), you know, everybody was afraid to come to San Francisco [California], so in '91 [1991] we closed.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that's when I started with Oprah [Oprah Winfrey].
Speaker 2: Oh, so you started with Oprah in '91 [1991] after--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 647932
Speaker 1: You served in '95 [1995] as president of the San Francisco [California] chapter of the Association of Image Consultants International [AICI], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.  And we--San Francisco was the founding chapter of the organization to begin with.  It was called AIC [Association of Image Consultants] then, and in I guess about '97 [1997] or maybe it was earlier because the found- the Association of Image Consultants International started either in '81 [1981] or '82 [1982].  And about 1986, there was a New York [New York] organization and the two chapters came together and now it's all over the world.  But the field of image consulting really got its ground here.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And why here rather than New York City or--
Speaker 2: I have no idea except that I think image consulting--maybe we needed it out here (laughter) more than New York.  I'm not really sure.  New York had the Fashion Group [Fashion Group International Inc.] and I was a member of Fashion Group in New York and then out here and that was a major organization for anybody who was in the fashion industry.  But the Association of Image Consultants started here and there were lots of you know there were color consultants, you know, this whole business of what your colors were was, kind of came into, into vogue during that period of time.  And it was a very viable, active organization.
Story_ID: 647933
Speaker 1: Now did you do something else with Wells Fargo [Wells Fargo and Company] or was there--
Speaker 2: Well, I just told you that Wells (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did all kinds of things, the uniform program that went into Safeway stores [Safeway Inc.] and the like and loads of workshops and seminars and all kinds of programs for them.  Did--is there something else you wanted to know about Wells Far--
Speaker 1: No, the outline just had a, they had it in the beginning, then it popped up again.  I think it is just a--
Speaker 2: A continuation?
Speaker 1: --continuation of what you already discussed.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I'm just--
Speaker 2: There was something you said to me that I was going to continue on.  Now I've lost--
Speaker 1: Oh, why San Francisco [California] instead of New York and--
Speaker 2: I don't know the answer to that.  But because I was being profiled a lot whether it was television, radio or et cetera, I was invited to--and also because I owned a store in Union Square [San Francisco, California] I became a trustee for the Sutter-Stockton Garage [San Francisco, California] board and served on that for a long time and then became a trustee as well for--and that I loved, for the Fort Mason Foundation [San Francisco, California], which has now been taken over by the Presidio Trust [San Francisco, California].  But that was a wonderful experience.  Are you familiar with--
Speaker 1: No.  No, tell us.
Speaker 2: Well, Fort Mason [Fort Mason Center for Arts and Culture, San Francisco, California] is really where the troops used to leave from for the services.  You know, it's right on the water and had these huge piers and the piers were turned into places for incubators for artists, for musicians, for music schools, ultimately a museum for theater, the Cal Theatre [California Theatre, San Francisco, California] was built which was in--it's now a pretty major theater.  It was built in one of the, one of the pier buildings.  And then because the piers were also open at times, performances were given in the actual pier themselves.  The first performances of Sam Shepard's 'True West' and 'Buried Child' were done here, Stacy Keach, Jessica Lange, wonderful, wonderful actors.  So for me it was extremely exciting because I really missed New York theater.  And, so to be a part of the Magic [Magic Theatre, San Francisco, California]--and then be also on the board of the foundation of which Magic had a space along with other programs was just one of the best times of my life.
Story_ID: 647934
Speaker 1: Now you served as a professor at the Academy of--
Speaker 2: Of Art [Academy of Art University, San Francisco, California] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) of Art, yeah.
Speaker 2: Teaching history of fashion, intro to fashion.  I developed a course for them on style.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm a Gemini, so Geminis never do one thing.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now in 2002--well, your mother [Edythe Winfrey Goodman] passed in 2002, but it's also the year from my notes here that you conceived the idea of the book 'Wise Talk: Wild Women' [Gwen Mazer and Christine Alicino].
Speaker 2: I started thinking about 'Wise Talk: Wild Women' because I realized that, you know, my mother was almost ninety when she passed and I was, you know, growing older myself and it was suddenly, particularly because of advertising and marketing, women are sort of eliminated at the age of forty.  Now it's gotten a little better, but I was really curious to know what were women in their sixties thinking about, what was the impetus to grow to the next stage of life and not keel into, you know, just fall apart and feel like you were old and done?  And, so it began to incubate particularly because of the consulting.  And I would hear from women constantly, "Oh, I, you know, I look so old or I've got wrinkles or this is happening and that is happening to me."  And the other thing that was interesting to me was how many women listened to their intuitive voice.  And then once again serendipitously, I was at a dinner party and this woman came across the room and started, we started chatting and I was, you know, spouting off about my feelings about what did it feel like to be a woman growing into her sixties and how women weren't ig- were ignored and not paid attention to and, you know, what I was hearing from my clients.  And she just looked at me and she said, "Have you ever thought of writing a book?"  And I said, "Yes, I certainly have.  It's a subject that's really interesting to me."  And she looked at me and she said, "Well, you know, I'm a publisher and I'd like to publish it."  And that's exactly how it happened.
Speaker 1: Well, and it sounds like it doesn't get any better than this for an author, you know (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But, so the result, the book was--how long did it take to write the book?
Speaker 2: I started writing the book in let's see, 2004 and I was traveling because I wanted to interview various philosophers such as Barbara Marx Hubbard who is an evolution--you know, believes in evolutionary consciousness.  And I wanted to do a piece around Jean Houston because she's got this wildly eccentric background and is an interesting philosopher, teacher, writer.  So the book was finished in and came out in April of 2007.  I also had a co-author who was the photographer on the book, Christine Alicino, who was a friend of many years who I had become reacquainted with when we both discovered we were in San Francisco [California].  And the pho- photography was done with a four by five [inch] camera, you know, with the gelatin, the last of almost gelatin, I think I have it right, is it gelatin prints, I think.  And before, befo- before the book was finished, the paper that Christine was printing on, she had to buy all that was left in the country because they weren't making anymore.  That's how fast things were changing.
Speaker 1: These were what they call silver gelatin prints?
Speaker 2: Exactly.  And if you--I have some of the original prints I can show you, it's--was quite wonderful.
Story_ID: 647935
Speaker 1: Then I started thinking about okay, who do I want to talk to and who's interesting and who's here in San Francisco [California]?  And, so the interview process [for 'Wise Talk: Wild Women,' Gwen Mazer and Christine Alicino] took that amount of time and then of course you know the process of interviewing, having these conversations, arranging for the photography, having the transcripts done and then writing from the transcripts.  And the writing is very intimate so that I--it's not all that different from some of what you might have briefly read in the Dunham [HistoryMaker Katherine Dunham] piece ['Katherine Dunham,' Gwen Mazer].  It's always atmospheric.  I always wanted to talk about the placement of--and a number of these women I knew.  I mean I knew Belva [HistoryMaker Belva Davis], I knew--I'd met Barbara Lee [HistoryMaker Barbara Lee] and she was right in the midst of the controversy because of the, her being the only person to vote against the war.  And during that period of time, you know, she had--her life was in danger.  And, so it was really a wonderful time to be able to interview her.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the--
Speaker 1: And each one of the women were so totally different.  Beverly Baker-Kelly who is an attorney and also a special lawyer for children who have been abduct, abdu- abducted and Beverly is a quite a unique person.  She has been teaching at the university at Oman [Modern College of Business and Science, Muscat, Oman] at this point in time.  She's been there a couple of years and she's so clever.  She said she couldn't bear the idea of the men and the women being segregated and, so she was trying to figure out how can I get past this, you know, 'cause it's the law.  And, so she finally told them that she couldn't remember the names and that they had to sit in alphabetical order, which automatically mixed everybody up.  I thought that was very clever.
Story_ID: 647936
Speaker 1: Now what's the reception to the book ['Wise Talk: Wild Women,' Gwen Mazer and Christine Alicino] been like?
Speaker 2: Wonderful.  Wonderful.  Unfortunately, my publisher had a great change in her life.  The book is published by Council Oak Books [San Francisco, California].  And I have to say this off the record truly--
Speaker 1: I mean did you want us (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Simultaneous) (Unclear) turn off.
Speaker 1: Do you want us to pause?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Because this is on the record.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh, all right, never mind.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: At any rate, the book did very well as long as the publicity was rolling.  Once the publicity stopped, then the book didn't do very well.  But we did well.  Did a lot of book signings, a lot of television, did not do countrywide because there was not the budget to do that.  The budget disappeared.  And my publisher now, everything is kind of reformatted itself, is asking about the idea of the book being done in paperback so we'll see.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But if you were to ask me what was the most--being able to write this book and publishing this book for me has been the most important thing I've ever done.  I mean I knew that I was going to write a book.  I didn't know what the book would be.  And the feeling of accomplishment when I saw that first copy was one of the most exciting moments of my life.  And it made, and what was important to me is that it really made a difference in the lives of so many women who were inspired by it.
Story_ID: 647937
Speaker 1: Do you have any plans for writing another book?
Speaker 2: I sure do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have two--one is, one is a fashion book that I'm, that the blog is sort of the beginning of, so that's why I'm excited about the blog.
Speaker 1: So you got a website and a blog?
Speaker 2: The book (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: What we've just done and it's not up yet is that the blog has become the first page of the website.  So the website is being totally formatted so that it looks almost like a magazine.  So it's, I thought it would be done in two months and I'm now almost at the end of a third month and it's still not done because I had to do all the stories to get it started and hire, you know, get the photographer and--I mean it's been fun because it's like doing another book, doing another book in a way.  And out of the book came the 'Wise Talk' lecture series which I started and then did in collaboration with the California Institute of Integral Studies [San Francisco, California] because I wanted to be able to further this conversation; and that--the lecture series has been both with women in the book and not in the book.
Story_ID: 647938
Speaker 1: I just had a question about con- consulting in terms of garments.  There's a--I was just thinking about a gentleman we interviewed in Detroit [Michigan], Judge Strong [HistoryMaker Craig Strong].  I can't think of his first name right now but he's famous for dressing in the very, very vibrant colorful suits--
Speaker 2: Oh, really?
Speaker 1: --that the, that men of Detroit are known for wearing, red, leopard--
Speaker 2: Seriously?
Speaker 1: --yellow, yellow hat to go with it, gold shoes, gold gaters that go with a gold suit.  And he dresses like that all the time and--
Speaker 2: Is he on television?
Speaker 1: No, he's actually a judge, a circuit court judge in Detroit.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: Yes, and he, and he does this and I mean I don't know if he could get away with that in another town other than Detroit but he's, he dresses like that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, he--
Speaker 1: He's a serious judge and he dresses in--
Speaker 2: Well, if he's in Detroit it, probably because of the music business it would be more acceptable than someplace else.  I mean that would be my take on it.
Speaker 1: And I--
Speaker 2: I could be totally wrong but, you know, you've got a history of a certain kind of look in Detroit and he sounds like a pretty flamboyant guy, otherwise he wouldn't be wanting--running around in leopard suits.
Speaker 1: But when church gets out in cities, in black communities all over the country you see, you know, very, very bright, you know, apparel on--
Speaker 2: Is that true?
Speaker 1: --on--yeah.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Men wearing very, very bright clothing.  My father got into it in the last ten years of his life.
Speaker 2: No kidding
Speaker 1: He had blue alligators with a processed blue suit with covered buttons on a vest came almost to here.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: I mean really, I mean he hadn't dressed like that before but somehow he got into that.  But--
Speaker 2: What do you think the impetus to that was about?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  Some have speculated that it's a, it's a some sort of reverberation of African sensibilities of style.  I mean, I mean there are different notions of it, you know, but--and I was thinking also of people that have, women who have actually been, you know, it seems like every ten years someone's--there's an attempt to fire a black woman for wearing braids or something.
Speaker 2: I can't imagine that that's the case anymore unless it's in some (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you would think.
Speaker 2: --small town somewhere.
Speaker 1: Yes, you would, you would think it wouldn't be.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can't imagine it being in a metropolitan city.
Speaker 1: There was a case in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Really?
Speaker 1: --in the paper last year of something like--
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: --yeah, which it shocked me.  I said the same thing, really, you know like--
Speaker 2: Missed, I missed that one entirely.  And because I live in a city like San Francisco [California] and we have such a small population of African Americans, I have not seen that and I've, you know, I'm obviously not spending time at Baptist churches since I left at the age of sixteen, so I don't know.  Maybe, maybe it's happening here and I'm not aware of it.
Speaker 1: But it's a cultural expression amongst African Americans and an issue that you've had to deal with in terms of--I mean now that is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: --just another wrinkle to the--
Speaker 2: No, you mean in terms of companies--
Speaker 1: Right.  I mean as--
Speaker 2: No, I've never had--
Speaker 1: --you know when you were talking about the woman in the lime green kind of suit.  Well, she's probably not, she's not doing it out of any cultural reasons, she's just--
Speaker 2: No, no, just ignorant.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (laughter).
Speaker 2: Just, I'm--that's a terrible way of saying it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But just totally unaware that there's a protocol or that there was a protocol for business appropriate.  But to my, in my experience, I have not had anyone call me in regard to an inappropriate hairdo or what they would consider, what the company might consider an inappropriate hairdo or manner of dress for an African American.  I have not had that experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.  As a cultural (unclear) expression.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I haven't, I haven't had that happen.  And I see many women here in town with all manner of hair.  And I don't think that it creates any major issue.
Story_ID: 647939
Speaker 1: I worked at a, at--for a city government at one point and there was an issue with a supervisor, black supervisor of a department who would often have to--and this is in the early eighty- late '70s [1970s], would send some women home for wearing things that were too revealing in the, for the work place.
Speaker 2: That's the biggest problem.
Speaker 1: And he, you know, to the dismay of many of the men he would send some of these women home (unclear).
Speaker 2: Appropriately so.
Speaker 1: Or tell them to put a sweater on or something, you know, because it was the age of the--
Speaker 2: Well, my feeling is that television and media and the publicity around quote, unquote, the people, like a Kim Kardashian, create an environment where young people especially think that that's what's appropriate because they are getting their clues from television and the magazines that are the publicity magazines for movie stars and so on.  And we don't have movie stars anymore that present a particular kind of example as we might have had in the '60s [1960s] and the '70s [1970s].  And so I think a great deal of the inappropriateness simply comes from not knowing and not having any way to know be--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: I was just going to say so what would be your philosophy of dress I guess in--a situational philosophy of dress?
Speaker 2: Situational, well, here's for me the bottom line.  If you--there's a distinction between having a job and having a career.  So what do you want?  Do you want a job and you want to, you know, just be one of the pack or do you have intention for a career?  If you have intention for a career or even if you have a job and you really have the desire to move up in your job, then you have to find out what is appropriate for the position not just the one you're in but the one that you're aspiring to.  And then if you emulate to some degree the person who might have that position, that's one of the ways of finding out how you should present yourself.  But in terms of the overall, one of the things that I often am dismayed by is I'll see young women who are a pretty healthy size and I think that it's really important to look your best.  It doesn't matter what size you are but it does make a different when you're wearing things that are really inappropriate for the size that you are and I see that a lot.  You know, with young women who want, who just want to be fashionable or what (air quotes) quote, unquote (air quotes) is fashionable.  Style has changed so incredibly much now that it--if you're in the tech business you can be much more casual and much more relaxed than it is in many cases if you're overdressed they're wondering what's wrong with you or what they consider overdressed.  If you're in finance, if you're in, if you're an attorney, then there is a format of dress that you have a fairly broad range in.  There's no longer the little strict suit and skirt.  I mean there's a lot of variation and it depends on your body shape and your coloring and what really can work for you within the genre in which you're working.  So there's not one philosophy of clothing that works across the spectrum.  I'm working with a woman now who happens to be an eye surgeon and she's about to go off for a business conference but she also consults with clients in her office.  She wants to look professional as well as be somewhat comfortable.  I have another client that I've worked with for thirty years who started, when we started thirty years ago we were laughing about this the other day, her hair was auburn and now her hair is silver white.  And we would, we were actually in her closet going through, getting rid of clothes and we found a few things from way back when and we were talking about the transition, not only the transition in how clothing had changed but how she had changed, how she had become so successful in her field and also she had grown so much in stature and she--we still work together.  She said, "I still want your touch.  I still want your eye."  But the clothes that she wears now truly represents her from the inside out.  And that to me is one of the most important things: that your clothing is authentic to who you are and suits what you do.  Does that make sense?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 647940
Speaker 1: Can you explain that one because you spoke earlier when we started about--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: --psychology as a, as a tool for determining what--
Speaker 2: When I'm working with someone, I have, I'm not asking just, I'm asking them a variety of questions; how do you feel about yourself, what's the goal, what kind of business if you're in business, what makes you feel comfortable, what makes you feel like yourself.  And the range of answers can be really, really broad.  And also more often than not, a woman looks in the mirror or a man looks in the mirror, you men look less but we look all the time.  We don't really see who we are.  So I'm your eyes.  I'm your eyes that reflect back to you.  See, I believe absolutely every woman has her own special beauty, but the way that we are trained through the media now is to only see what doesn't work.  We're only trained to see the flaws.  So you ca-, if you cannot see, you cannot dress that which you cannot see.  And, so for me it's working with the esteem, it's working with the feelings of self worth, it's working with the body shape and getting past, well, my breasts are too small and my hips are too large and my, you know, the whole litany of story.  And also there's always a story in there.  There's a--I think of a woman who was a client who said that her father used to come home and greet her by saying, "Where's my fat tub of lard?"  Now can you imagine no matter what you do, you're still going to see that fat tub of lard.  I have had other women who really felt they could never, ever be attractive and when we're, when we're in the dressing room and they see themselves in the mirror I remember this one woman bursting into tears and saying to me, "I never thought there was ever going to be anything about me that could be attractive and I feel beautiful."  I've also had women curl up on the floor in the dressing room into a fetal ball at the idea of actually spending money on themselves; and a lot, so a lot gets tied into it.  It's not just the image, it's the self worth and the self worth is a huge piece, do I fit in, huge piece.  How can I be attractive?  Nothing--I mean all of these pieces are what come into play; it's not, let's just go buy some clothes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Did that answer your question?
Speaker 1: Yes, it did.  Yes it did.
Story_ID: 647941
Speaker 1: You have other books planned--
Speaker 2: I have--
Speaker 1: --that you're working on.
Speaker 2: --one book that will be a fashion book; and another book because the whole idea of wisdom is, pervades 'Wise Talk: Wild Women' [Gwen Mazer and Christine Alicino].  That's why it--one of the reasons it's called 'Wise Talk.'  But there's something else germinating in my mind now about growing into age and expressing that wisdom in a, in a, in a deeper way; and I'm not sure what it's going to be yet.  It's just kind of bubbling.
Story_ID: 647942
Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you've done to this point and it's been very purposeful for the most part, but is there anything that you wish you had, you could do differently or change?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I wish that I had taken the time to total- totally investigate from the, from the point of view of education, other options.  I was so focused on the direction I was going in and there's a part of me that would have loved to have been a psychologist.  So yes, I would say that having self determined what I was going to do, I didn't leave myself open to the other options and possibilities that I might have been very good at and would have enjoyed equally as much.  I've met women who have moved into the area of diplomacy.  I would have loved to have been in the diplomatic service.  That's something I feel that I could have been good at and that I didn't, didn't see the opportunity to engage in because I didn't, I didn't have my eyes open wide enough.  My eyes were open to the work I was interested in, but it would have been great to have been not so focused, and to have had the opportunity to explore more options.
Story_ID: 647943
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: (Sighs) I have so much concern for our youth, es- both the young women but especially the young men.  And as a woman who has been in the business of presentation and image, when I see these young men with their pants below their butts, more than once I've taken the courage and spoken to them about presentation and about image.  And I feel like we have so many young people who have done really, really well and it's exciting to look and see a CEO here and a president here and, you know, representations and I look at my own nephews and think that it's incredible what they have accomplished.  But I think there are so many wasted, brilliant minds that have not been exposed, that haven't been able to be educated to the world and who see the world so narrowly and that really concerns me.  There's a part of me that wonders if in many ways these last twenty five or thirty years we've lost ground because we haven't had as many strong African American communities with examples that were from generation to generation.  When I think of my growing up, you know, if your mother didn't tell you, Mrs. Jones was going to tell you and I don't know that we have that anymore.  I don't, I think that the, I don't think that the Civil Rights Movement that happened in the '60s [1960s] could happen today because we don't have that same cohesion of neighborhood, of church, of family, of--that glue doesn't hold us together anymore.  And I look at the things that hold--I think also that after African Americans overall are still suffering from something that is never spoken of and that is the result of slavery.  I still, I feel that, you know, when you've been victimized for so long but you've never--the conversation is just beginning to happen.  I have psychologist friends who are really talking about post slavery syndrome and I think so much of this victim on vic- you know race on race violence has its underbelly in a lot of this never being explored.  And I think that the violence comes from that unexpressed anger and sadness and lack of understanding of what happened to us.  And there's no, you know, we've got with the Jewish people whether it's the Holocaust or having been slaves in the past, I mean all these years but that expression has come out where we don't have even the avenue and the opportunity for that expression.  It's kind of well, it's time to get over it you know that's passed.  But the fact is that that's in the, in the DNA.  And, so when I see a young mother slap her child, it just, it's so upsetting to me, but I know that's what happened to her.  And if there's anything I would like to see change it's the, it's what brings all of this, what creates all of this.  And as I said I see that beginning to happen and I also see that there's this, like the rest of the country, there's this huge division of have and have-not and it's not getting any better in many ways.  Now last night I was thinking about this because there was a program on NPR [National Public Radio] of a young Korean fellow who happens to be rather well known as having this restaurant.  I had never heard of him before.  But he said something that was so specific.  He said that he lived in the broader world but that his roots were within his Korean community and within his Korean family food.  He was talking a lot about food 'cause he was a chef and how that was his root.  And I thought about that and I thought, you know, we don't have that anymore.  We don't have those communities in the way that we used to where, you know, some of these things get passed down.  And I think that in Asian communities, no matter how much they are out in the world, they still come home to a certain clan or tradition.  I see that with Latino families.  I don't see that in our black families across the board.  Does that make sense?
Story_ID: 647944
Speaker 1: Now when you look back on everything you've done to this point again, what today--and you addressed it earlier, would you consider to be your legacy or your gift?
Speaker 2: Well, as I said my proudest accomplishment is the, is writing 'Wise Talk: Wild Women' [Gwen Mazer and Christine Alicino].  Certainly I feel a sense of having in some small degree, opened doors to other ethnicities, women of color, by cracking open the editorship at Harper's Bazaar.  However, there I did notice in some of the issues around that period of time there were African American women at least in photographs and on the cover there were some models.  I would say it's the book and I mean of course it's, it--I have loved my work.  I have enjoyed the work that I've done and I used to think that it was very trivial work, but I have stacks of letters from women telling me what a difference my services have made in their lives.  And, so to that end, if I could make a difference in anyone's life, that's a good feeling.  And, so I have to acknowledge that I think I made a difference in a few lives, and that's really important to me.  And beyond that, for me what I hope to grow into more deeply is that is a woman of spirit.  That my spiritual life is really very important to me and I have a lovely spiritual community, both a spirit in business group that I see--we gather every month.  And in place of a formal church, we are a group that meets every single month for spiritual connection and then my own private practice of spirituality is really important to me.  And when I fall off the mark I don't feel good.
Story_ID: 647945
Speaker 1: Now do you have children?
Speaker 2: No children.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No children.
Speaker 1: And you're not married at the present time?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what would you consider to be your family at this point?  Your--
Speaker 2: My brother [Theodore R. Goodman], my nephews, my sister-in-law [Sandra Goodman], that's--I mean there are very few of us left of my immediate family so with my brother, it's--my brother is the only sibling I have and, so that is my immediate family.  And then there are what are my family of friends and I have really, I am fortunate to have some really close and wonderful friends.  And I think as you grow into age, that is some of what happens be--it was kind of shocking to find that oh, my god, I'm the oldest one left in my mother's side of the family.  You know, when my mother [Edythe Winfred Goodman] passed it was--that's a strange feeling to realize that you are, you're like the last one standing in the line there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, is there anything else I need to ask you before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I haven't, I can't think of anything at this moment.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, the last question is similar to legacy but a little bit different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a woman who made a difference.
Story_ID: 647946
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead and tell us about this photograph please.
Speaker 2: This photograph is of [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham, the famous dancer and anthropologist and she's at her home at Habitation Leclerc in Haiti [Port-au-Prince, Haiti] and this was during a period of time that I was working with Ms. Dunham on a book about her life.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of Katherine Dunham and myself in conversation in one of the gardens at Habitation Leclerc.
Speaker 2: In Haiti, right?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Oops, can we--before--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That's a mess.  I just have to remember which aunt this is.  Okay.  This is a photograph of my [maternal] grandmother's sister, Aunt Sally [Sally Johnson].
Speaker 2: And this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) My maternal grandmother.
Speaker 2: This is what probably--what do you think?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  The year?
Speaker 2: Probably, well, if my grandmother was born in 1908--
Speaker 1: Around 1930 or so?
Speaker 2: I think it--no, the clothes or earlier than, a little earlier than that.
Speaker 1: In the '40s [1940s]?
Speaker 2: Earlier.
Speaker 1: Oh, earlier, okay.
Speaker 2: I would say the late '20s [1920s] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Maybe the '20s [1920s]?
Speaker 2: Probably late '20s [1920s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is my, another of my grandmother's sisters, one of my favorite great aunts that I actually knew.  This is Aunt Florine [Florine Johnson] and she's a young woman in this photograph.  I'd say she was probably, this is probably around 1930 looking at the hat.
Speaker 1: This is another of my grandmother's sisters [sic. paternal cousin].  This is Aunt Evie [Evelyn Bell Reaves], so again these were all my great aunts and this is probably with the look of the clothes, from the '20s [1920s].
Speaker 2: This is my Aunt Evie in 1914 working in the office of the, the post office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service] in Chicago [Illinois].  And as you notice, she's the only woman in the room and I believe she was the secretary.
Speaker 1: And the only black person.
Speaker 2: And the only black person.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right.
Speaker 2: This is my grandmother and from her Gibson girl hairdo, we can tell that that's the earlier part of the century.
Speaker 1: And what's her name?
Speaker 2: That is Lucy.  Lucy Belle [Lucy Johnson Winfrey].
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my mother and my father [Theodore Goodman] on their way to a black tie event in the 1940s.  They belonged to an organization called the Benedicts [Bachelor Benedict Club] and this is one of the formal dances.
Speaker 2: This is my mother, Edythe, Edythe Goodman [Edythe Winfrey Goodman] at the wheel of a car that probably belonged to my [maternal] grandfather that she definitely could not drive because she never learned to drive, but probably enjoyed sitting in.
Speaker 1: This is my mother again.  She was an early childhood educator and she was the director of Victory nursery school.  And this is a photograph of her at the school working with the children and this is probably, I can't tell, it might have been the early '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of me as a little girl and I already had a very strong sense of what I wanted to wear.
Speaker 1: I think that's the same photograph.  Do you want to check?
Speaker 2: No, it's not the exact same.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, another photograph of me and I'm probably three or four years old.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of me when I had bangs and (laughter) and it's probably about 1955.
Speaker 1: And this is a photograph of me (coughs) probab- in high school [Evander Childs High School; Evander Childs Educational Campus, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Once again a photograph of me as a young woman, probably the same time period around 1955.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my pride and joy of my first book, 'Wise Talk: Wild Women' [Gwen Mazer and Christine Alicino] published by Council Oak Books [San Francisco, California] in 19--excuse me, in 2007.  Can we take those out of the frame?  I can't stand the fact that my mother wrote all over them.
Speaker 2: Well, we can shoot past it but that's (unclear), I'll take them out.
Speaker 1: It's a portrait of my grandmother, probably I'd say in the early '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Can you name her?
Speaker 1: Yes, Lucy Belle.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Lucy Belle who?
Speaker 1: Lucy Belle Winfrey.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is my grandfather, my--the man I just have adored.  This portrait of him is done by my former husband in our studio [Advertising Images] in New York [New York] and this is probably around 1966, Roger Winfrey.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of me from my store [Gwen Mazer Collection, San Francisco, California] in about 1987 or '88 [1988].
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of me on vacation in Santa Fe [New Mexico], 1985.
Speaker 2: It's a photograph of me at my office that I designed for the Italian company, Nazareno Gabrielli.
Speaker 1: My grandfather being honored by the New York's, New York Railroad [New York Central Railroad] in probably gosh, I don't know when that was.  Let me think.  Somewhere in the 1970s I guess.
Speaker 2: Another photograph of me, same time period, 1950s.
Speaker 1: Photograph of me, Gw- do I--am I supposed to be saying [HistoryMaker] Gwen Mazer here?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No, that's okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In my store in 1980s, 1980--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: 1988, '89 [1989].
Speaker 2: Photograph of me on location in Italy at the villa of an It- an Italian artist and that is from 1973, '74 [1974].
Speaker 1: With an ocelot.
Speaker 2: With an ocelot.
Speaker 1: Again, another photograph in the office of Nazareno Gabrielli in New York.  At--you don't need all of these.  These are all Nazareno Gabrielli.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Again Nazareno Gabrielli.
Speaker 1: This one too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that one yes because that was the portrait.  This is a portrait that was done by my former husband, Ira Mazer, for my introduction to Harper's, my introduction in Harper's Bazaar.  So this is 1968.
Speaker 1: A photograph of my grandmother and grandfather on the way to church or from church.
Speaker 2: Now their names again?
Speaker 1: Roger Winfrey and Lucy Belle Winfrey.
Speaker 2: It's a portrait of my mother from the 1940s.
Speaker 1: This is my [maternal] great-great grandmother [Nancy Blanton Johnson].  Hold on and I'll give you her name.  I always forget.  Oh, it's not on this one.  Oh, god, she's a Johnson but I can't remember her first name at the moment.
Speaker 2: This is a portrait of my mother being honored by the Victory Day Care Center [Bronx, New York] that she was the director of.
Speaker 1: I don't know all of the people in the portrait but this is my father, this is my brother, Ted Goodman [Theodore R. Goodman], my mother, Edythe Goodman, obviously me, and my husband, Ira Mazer.
Speaker 2: I love that photograph.  This is my dad.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: This is my mother upon receiving her master's degree from NYU [New York University, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: It's a portrait of my mother and father for their wedding in 1934.
Story_ID: 647947
Speaker 1: Once again, a portrait of my parents [Edythe Winfrey Goodman and Theodore Goodman] at their marriage; and I can name some of these people.  This is my mother's brother, Sol Winfrey [Sol Winfrey, Sr.].  This is my aunt [sic. paternal cousin], Pauline [Pauline Johnson].  This is a little flower girl, her name is Charlotte Johnson [ph.] and this was one of my mother's closest friends.  I always think of her as Aunt Winnie [ph.] so I can't think of her last name either.  And this is a very close friend of the family, Uncle Herman [ph.].  And I don't know who the little boy is.  I love those old portraits.  Everybody looked so serious and--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Are any of these Van Der Zee [James Van Der Zee] portraits?
Speaker 2: No, but, you know, that's a part of my life I didn't talk about.  I did an interview with Van Der Zee and ended up doing a lot of--I--he wanted a book too (laughter).
Speaker 1: I got a chance to meet him in '74 [1974].
Speaker 2: Did you?
Speaker 1: Yeah, they showed his work at the Antioch College in Yellow Springs [Ohio] outside of (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh, they did?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of me in my store, Narcissa [New York, New York] looking out of the window of the second floor.  I can tell you who the other person was as well.
Speaker 1: Oh, who is the other person?
Speaker 2: Marty Vargas [ph.].  She worked for, she worked at the store.
Speaker 1: Now what's this?  Where do I go from here?  I don't think--
Speaker 2: Well, you haven't done any of the Esprit [Esprit Holdings Limited].  I don't know, it looks like you ended up photographing everything.
Speaker 1: Not everything.  We haven't--some of these we were going to shoot.  We were going to shoot the cover of Urbanite.
Speaker 2: Urbanite and this is the Esprit--
Speaker 1: Let's shoot that and then--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I think we'll shoot--
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: I'll figure it out.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We'll set that up--
Speaker 2: Oh, I keep forgetting I'm attached to this thing.  Sorry, did I undo me?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No, you're fine.
Speaker 2: Okay.  The Death Valley is the one with the blue, bluish cover, that's it.
Speaker 1: I got it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is the photograph of the first issue of the Urbanite magazine in 1961.  And I was the fashion editor.  It was my first job as an editor.
Speaker 1: This is the first, the photograph of the first catalog that I created with--for Esprit Decor which ultimately became, that's part of the same catalog.  It must have fallen out.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that is from 1978.
Speaker 2: We're going to get it for the, for the credit line.
Speaker 1: You want to have a credit line from the one from Nikki [HistoryMaker Nikki Giovanni].
Speaker 2: Okay.  (Unclear).  We got a shadow on the (unclear).
Speaker 1: We could fold it the other way.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that might work.
Speaker 1: Oops.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Let's tilt it back a little bit.
Speaker 1: Do you want me to speak again?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is from my 'Lifestyle' column with Harper's Bazaar and a piece about Nikki Giovanni.  I would like to--I don't know how many more of these you're going to do, but I definitely want photographs from the store.  And I don't think we went through those.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we did.
Speaker 1: Did we?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they're here.
Speaker 1: With all the entry to the store with the thingy and--
Speaker 2: I have it here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is in front of, this is in front of the--well, it's not in front of the store.  It's actually in the street.  I'm in conversation with then Mayor Art Agnos and--
Speaker 2: May- mayor of San Francisco [California].
Speaker 1: Yes, mayor of San Francisco.
Speaker 2: It's one of the photographs of the Gwen Mazer Collection [San Francisco, California].
Speaker 1: Another photograph from the Gwen Mazer Collection.
Speaker 2: Another photograph from the Gwen Mazer Collection.
Speaker 1: Another photograph from the Gwen Mazer Collection.
Speaker 2: A photograph of Gwen Mazer wearing accessories from the Gwen Mazer Collection.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right on.
Speaker 2: That's the entry to the store on Maiden Lane in San Francisco.
Speaker 1: The Gwen Mazer Collection with a staircase that we had custom done to the second floor.
Speaker 2: I think that might be a duplicate.
Speaker 1: It's probably faster to shoot it and keep going then (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a duplicate for sure.
Speaker 1: Is it?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Seriously right now (unclear).
Speaker 1: This is at the Gwen Mazer Collection with my doing a workshop for a--clients.
Speaker 2: This is a duplicate too.  You did that.
Speaker 1: We did that one?  Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: We didn't do this one.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph for--on location in Italy for Harper's Bazaar for a piece that I was doing with Barbara Chase-Riboud, the sculptor and writer.
Speaker 1: It's a photograph of my mother from the 19--early--late '20s [1920s], early '30s [1930s] at a lake, little retreat that they used to go to in New York, Upper New York State.
Speaker 2: Cover of Harper's Bazaar.
Speaker 1: And this is a magazine that was very well known at the time that influenced me greatly as a young girl about being in the world of fashion because this was a very exciting magazine about the arts, about fashion, about style and so on.
Speaker 2: Okay, now--
Speaker 1: Oh, you know that last photo is--no, no, pick up that pile again if you don't mind.
Speaker 2: Oh, this (unclear)?
Speaker 1: No, no, no, let me--this one--the last one in the pile.  Yeah, that photograph is from the book.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That was one of the--this is one of the photographs of me during the pu- from the publication of 'Wise Talk: Wild Women' [Gwen Mazer and Christine Alicino] my book.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh, my god, do you really want that one?
Speaker 2: It looks triumphant (laughter).
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: You look triumphant.  I like it.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Oh, god, again as a young woman.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Some--is that about it then?
Speaker 1: You know, what you don't have might be--did you want that one of Essence or of--
Speaker 2: Oh, the cover of Essence, because, well, it doesn't mention Dunham [HistoryMaker Katherine Dunham] (unclear).
Speaker 1: No, it doesn't have Dunham on the cover does it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, unh-uh.
Speaker 1: So there's no point.  And then there's--I don't know what the other magazine is there.  Yeah, what's that one?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Encore.
Speaker 1: Encore.
Speaker 2: Oh, same thing, I mean the pieces are in there.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But they're not--
Speaker 1: I think it's a pretty good selection.
Speaker 2: Good.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh, I know what you need.
Speaker 1: Okay, what--
Speaker 2: Get that photograph that's against the wall and the photograph of my brother and sister-in-law.  Okay.  This--oh boy, are you going to get all those fingerprints cause that looks horrible.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Just on the frame.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we won't shoot the frame.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Do you want to know who that is?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  To the left is my nephew, my oldest nephew T.R. Goodman [ph.].  The next is my nephew David Goodman and next to him is Gordon Goodman and they are fraternal twins.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The photograph is of my brother and sister-in-law, Ted [Theodore R. Goodman] and Sandy Goodman [Sandra Goodman] when they first married and this is in celebration of their fiftieth wedding anniversary.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And this was one of the first major articles which really helped my career in San Francisco as an image consultant tremendously.  It was two pages that ran in The San Francisco Examiner in 19--what does that say, '85 [1985] or '84 [1984]?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Eighty-five [1985], '85 [1985].
Speaker 1: Eighty-five [1985].
