Story_ID: 27366
Speaker 1: All right.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My name is Sekazi, S-E-K-A-Z-I, Kauze, K-A-U-Z-E, Mtingwa, M-T-I-N-G-W-A.  Sekazi Kauze Mtingwa.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, now, is there a story behind your name?  I know it is.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Right.  Yes.  I was born in Atlanta, Georgia, so I was born Michael Vern Sawyer.  But when I was a graduate student at Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], I had heard a lot of the great things that Julius Nyerere in Tanzania.  So I decided that once I finished, I wanted to go to the University of Dar es Salaam [Dar es Salaam, Tanzania] and teach.  So I had a friend in Princeton named Shadu Chamangwana (ph.), who is from Tanzania.  And I had him to draw up a list of names, and based upon how they sounded and what they meant, I picked them out.  So Sekazi is "hard worker."  It's "male hard worker."  "Kazi" is the "work" part of that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's right.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: I have a daughter who is Makazi, which is the female version, my older daughter.  Kauze means "sort of inquisitive," you know, "go and ask."  It's sort of a strict translation.  And the last name, "Mtingwa," is--means "someone who is confronted with many problems, but yet overcomes them."  And I think literally it's translated as "breast bone" for strength.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was my intention.  But I really didn't make it to Tanzania until 2009 (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is--all right.  So this--you changed your name in the year--
Speaker 2: I was a student at Princeton; it was around 1973 that I changed--
Speaker 1: 1973.
Speaker 2: --it, from my early time as a graduate student.
Speaker 1: All right.  And--okay. (Unclear). So I just want to--and, well, I guess we'll touch on that again maybe in '73 [1973].  But what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was born October 20, 1949, in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Now, I'm a retired physicist.  I worked for many years as professor of physics.  I was a former Chair of the Physics Department in [Greensboro] North Carolina, A and T State University.  I left there in 2001 and went to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] as a visiting professor, Martin Luther King Jr. Visiting Professor.  And once there, my--I went only for one year, but why I'm there, my wife, Ms. Stella Johnson, got a great job as Director of Economic Development for the City of Cambridge [Massachusetts].  So I decided to stay.  So I stayed at MIT as a MLK [Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.] Professor for one year.  I went to Harvard for a couple of years, then I came back to MIT, and I taught in one of the Special Independent Learning Communities as a senior lecturer, and then I returned in June--past June 2012.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I know you described yourself as an accelerator physicist?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.  My main area, I study beam dynamics and accelerators so that--and when I was living in Chicago [Illinois] a few years back, I worked at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory where I was helping to build the accelerator systems that discovered the top quark.  So since that time, throughout the--I, from to time, go back and work on beams and its problems.  Although in recent times, I've gotten extremely interested in a lot of political--not political, but policy issues relative to nuclear energy.  I've spent considerable amount of times on nuclear energy issues, and I've gotten involved in science and technology development in Africa.  So I do a lot of work in Africa nowadays.  So--but the--but once I retired from MIT, my wife and I have established a consulting firm called--it's a long name.  It's called Triangle Science, Education and Economic Development, LLC, and abbreviate it as TriSEED, LLC.  And through this I am able nowadays to do consulting to national laboratories and universities and other places.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Even if I was in South Africa (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is Monday.  I think it is May 6th, if I'm not (laughs)--.  When you retire, the days all kind of come together there.  You kind of lose track (laughs) of no longer being on a Monday through Friday routine (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.  May 6th--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.  May 6th, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?  And you don't have to give your address.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Right.  Yeah.  You're in my home at the present time.  Yes.
Speaker 1: In?
Speaker 2: In--between the piano room and the dining room (laughs).
Speaker 1: (Laughs).
Speaker 2: You're in the foyer of my room--of my house.
Speaker 1: We're in North Carolina, right (laughs)?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Yes, yes, yes, obviously, yes.  In Hillsborough of North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 2: Which is a small community just west of Durham [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.  We just ask people because oral history, you know, in oral history, we have people tell us who they are, what day it is, and where they are--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --to establish authenticity of it.
Speaker 2: Oh, I see.  Oh, I'm sorry.  Yes, yes. yes.  I believe that's the most important (laughs) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --that's why, that's all (Unclear) (simultaneous).  I know it already, but I ask them.
Speaker 2: Right. Right.
Story_ID: 27367
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight questions that we always ask people--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --that only require a short answer.  And they're kind of a warm-up.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Sure, sure, sure.
Speaker 1: The first one is:  Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I think Mediterranean Sea Bass is my favorite, grilled Mediterranean Sea Bass (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Throw a few potatoes in there (laughs), and some broccoli, and I'm set (laughs).
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I think my favorite color is red but not too red, and somewhat between pink and red, if that means anything.  Because my wife, I think that that's the color that she looks the best in.  She looks great in any color, but I love her in pink to red and that--
Speaker 1: Like a salmon-like or--I don't know?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Sort of like that, like a salmon color.  Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes.  The favorite time of the year is the fall, because it's so beautiful in the fall with the trees changing colors, and especially since I lived in New England for the last eleven years.  I mean, there's no more beautiful place than New England in the fall.  But it's great here too, but we don't quite--you don't have quite the beautiful foliage of the trees to match New England.  But that part I like.  The heat is over, you know, it's nice and cool, it's not cold yet; so, no, the fall is great.  That's my favorite.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Favorite vacation destination.  I would say Cape Town, South Africa.  Now, I have not gone vacationing there without going there for a number of business trips.  So, you know, if I think of a place that I really would like to vacation, if I didn't have to work--although, I do spend some days when I'm out on trips to just go, you know.  Cape Town is, I mean, you have the two oceans that kind of meet in that area, so, you know, when you're in Cape Town, you have the Atlantic Ocean on one side and behind you, you have the mountains, and if you drive along the highways you see these rolling vineyards that go right up to the mountains; and the food is fantastic, the people are fantastic.  It's just a great place to be.  I think it's--to me, and I've traveled a lot around the world, to me it's the most beautiful--naturally, most beautiful city in the world, meaning as far as architecture and manmade city, you can't beat St. Petersburg in Russia.  I mean, the architecture just floors you.  And when you go downtown, you at the buildings, all the intricate sculptures and it's just amazing.  The Hermitage Museum, it's so beautiful on the outside, I don't need to go on the inside to see the art.  I mean, it's--so St. Petersburg for the man-created type of beauty, Cape Town for the God-created beauty.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, do you have--the last question is:  Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I think it would have to be for me, "To stay yourself." And I say that because my mother worked for a doctor who always told me--this is interesting.  This is in the Jim Crow South, and he was a white doctor.  And when I would go in to see him, he'd have a room full of white patients, and he would just stop whatever he was doing, because he knew I was doing well in school, and he'd sit down and talk to me and keep saying, "Stay yourself."  So as I progressed through life, I try to do that.  I like to stay connected so--that's one of the reasons why I always sort of stayed away from going into administration.  I mean, that's great and for people who want to do it.  But I like project-oriented things.  I mean, that's who I am.  And I also staying connected to the young people.  And so to me, that's my "staying yourself."  You know, just do what I feel most comfortable doing.
Story_ID: 27368
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, I'm going to talk about your family history.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: We're going to get that far.  And I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But separately so we don't get them mixed up.
Speaker 2: There's not a lot on my father's side that I remember (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That part is going to be a little weak, since my mother and father divorced when I was very young.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I have a stepfather.  But, okay.  Go.  Continue (laughs).
Speaker 1: He's significant with, you know--that, we'll get him in there too.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Sure.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My mother's name is Dorothy, D-O-R-O-T-H-Y, middle name, Elizabeth, E-L-I-Z-A-B-E-T-H, Green was maiden name, G-R-E-E-N, and she married my stepfather, Graves, G-R-A-V-E-S.  So, Dorothy Elizabeth Green Graves.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth was October 5, 1927, and she was born in College Park, Georgia, which is just outside of Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace them, and what are the stories about what they were doing, their occupations, or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.  My new--we--when my mother was divorced, we moved in with our--with her parents, our grandparents on her side.  And my grandmother's name, we call Big Mama, was Ollie Mae Green, O-L-L-I-E, M-A-E, is the middle name, and Green; and my grandfather was Luther Green.  I don't remember his middle name, but, L-U-T-H-E-R, and G-R-E-E-N.  So we stayed there from around the second grade--I mean, when I was in the second grade in school, up until my eighth grade when I--we went into high school.  At that time, my mother married David Graves, and we moved into a different house.  But I have good memories.  Unfortunately, my grandmother died when I was in the fifth grade.  She had very serious diabetes, so she died from complications of diabetes. My grandfather lived to be around eighty-nine years old.  He lived quite a good life.  He was very active.  He worked in a company that I think manufactured paper bags, so he--I don't know exactly what he did there, but I do know that he worked for such a company in Atlanta.  I don't know what my grandmother, other than being a domestic worker, I think--I don't think she had any other job except domestic worker, which was big in those days in Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, are there any stories on that side of the family about emancipation or the nineteenth century?  Any of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I don't know.  Unfortunately, I just don't know the history.  We never--I have an uncle, my mother's brother; he's the only one of the family of that group of siblings who's still alive.  He was a professor for many years at Albany State [University], [Albany] Georgia, and he's retired down in Albany in Georgia now.  And he's been working off and on a family history.  And I, unfortunately, have not read what he has developed up until this point.  So, I, unfortunately, don't go very far back in terms of my ancestry.
Speaker 1: So, what is your uncle's name?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My--Uncle Edwin, E-D-W-I-N, Green, G-R-E-E-N, okay.  Edwin Green.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, when I moved--when we moved into my--with my grandparents, it was in a duplex.  On the other side of the house was my aunt, Charlotte, and her name is, C-H-A-R-L-O-T-T-E.  And she had five children, one son and four daughters.  Do I have that right?  Yes.  Four daughters.  And so we all actually grew up, you know, just like brothers and sisters, so I had--we had a big group of youngsters there (laughs).
Story_ID: 27369
Speaker 1: So how many siblings did you have?
Speaker 2: Oh, I have two brothers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Two--I have two brothers, and I do have one brother by my father before he married my mother.  So I don't--I hate that term, "half-brother" (laughs).  So to me he was my brother.  He was my old--he was a little considerably than the rest of us, but my older brother, who was the son of my mother, Dorothy, his name is Graham, G-R-A-H-A-M.  He is one year older than I am.  Graham Sawyer.  And then the younger brother, who changed his name from Larry Sawyer, L-A-R-R-Y, to Les Star; and that's L-E-S, and then S-T-A-R.  And I haven't really quite understood how he came up with that name, but--
Speaker 1: Is he a performer or a poet or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  Well, he is a poet.  I must say, he writes poetry.  Yes, he writes poetry.
Speaker 1: I wonder, you know, because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It could be something connected with that (laughs).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Poets and performers do that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Right, right, right, right.  Could be.  Could be.
Speaker 1: So.  Les Star.  Okay.  So that's your--is he older than you or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He's four years younger than I am.
Speaker 1: Four years younger.
Speaker 2: I'm in the middle.  So they used to, you know, bicker and quarrel, and I would just observe (laughs).  That's the middle.  Keep my hands clean.
Story_ID: 27370
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Dorothy Elizabeth Green Graves] have any stories about growing in Atlanta that she--or your grandmother [Ollie Mae Green] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, I never heard.  No, no, not really.  I know my mother always wanted to go to college, you know.  That's the main thing that she always told us, that she got married--she started Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] and got married during her first year; at the end of her first year.  So she only completed one year.  And she always regretted that, and so she really preached to us over the years the importance of going to college.  So she was an extremely important influence on me.
Speaker 1: Now did your mother grow up in Atlanta [Georgia] or did she grow up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: She grew up I think mostly in College Park, which--well, okay, it's all Atlanta, really, 'cause College Park is just like a suburb of Atlanta.  So, yes, her whole life was there in Atlanta, in that metro area.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So did your mother--now, she worked as a nurse, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My mother was a nurse.  Right.  Yes, yes.  She worked as a nurse.  In fact, she became a nurse when she--when we moved in with our grandparents.  Before that time, she didn't work.  She was home with me and my brothers.  But when we moved in with the grandparents, she got a job as a nurse.  And early on, she was employed by this Dr. John R. Walker in Atlanta.  And his name is just, J-o-h-n, and W-A-L-K-E-R.  They always called him John R.  Always the "R."  It was in there (laughs).
Speaker 1: Now, this is a black doctor?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  He's a white doctor.
Speaker 1: White doctor.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes.  And so she worked for him for her entire life, actually.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is the one who said "Stay yourself."
Speaker 2: That's the same doctor, yes.  Doctor.  Yes.  The doctor she worked for.  Yes, yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So this is a good, you know, I guess a good position, I guess.
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--all right.  So, Now, did your--if your mother stayed in school, did she have another goal?  I mean, you know, did she work some--another occupation she wanted to pursue that preceded--
Speaker 2: Wanted me to pursue?
Speaker 1: No.  Herself.
Speaker 2: Herself?  Oh, no.  She loved being a nurse.  No, she definitely--which was kind of hard on us.  She used to practice on us (laughs) doing blood pressures.  But, no, no.  She loved being a nurse.  But in her final days, she eventually died of breast cancer at the age of fifty-six.  But at that time, she was going to school to become a registered nurse.  See, all that time she was not a registered nurse.  Okay.  She was, I guess--she wasn't even a li...--she was not--maybe she was a licensed practical nurse, whatever they called it before, you know, the rung before being a registered nurse.  But anyway, she, in the end, wanted to become a registered nurse, and she went back to school; but, unfortunately, she passed away before she had an opportunity to finish that.
Story_ID: 27371
Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side.  Tell us what you know.  Well, what was your father's name, full name (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.  It was Frank--I don't know if I can spell his middle name, okay, but the Frank is, F-R-A-N-K.  The middle name was Mackoroyal.  I've never heard that name before, so I just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Wait a minute.  Say that again?
Speaker 2: Mackoroyal.  Okay.  Let me try to spell it.  M-A-C-K-O-R-O-Y-A-L.  Mackoroyal Sawyer.  And he was a musician.  He was a professional musician playing the guitar.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was his--you know, about when he was born?   Was he older than your mother or?
Speaker 2: He was older than my mother, maybe by about ten years older.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, as I say, I never knew what his birthday was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Maybe about 1917 or so?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I would say roughly that.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he was a--
Speaker 2: Professional musician.  And he played.
Speaker 1: Was he from Atlanta, too?
Speaker 2: He was from a place called Fairburn, Georgia, which is not--just not far from Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And that's where he grew up until at some point in his life he moved into the city.  And he played for a group that was led by Graham Jackson, who was a very famous--especially in Atlanta--very famous musician and band leader.  And he actually was a favorite of Franklin Roosevelt, believe it or not, and played at Franklin Roosevelt's funeral, I'm told.  And my older brother Graham was named after Graham Jackson.  So my older brother's name is Graham Jackson Sawyer.  His middle name is Jackson.
Speaker 1: Now, that's something.  He played at--so, was your father with him when they played at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I suspect he was.
Speaker 1: So, yeah.  I was going to ask you if your older brother was named for him.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Right.  Yeah, he was named for Graham Jackson, the famous--
Speaker 1: Now, what did your father play?
Speaker 2: Guitar.  He played guitar.  I never heard him play, unfortunately (laughs).  Since we divorced--ever since my mother and father divorced at a very young age---I mean, after they became divorced, you know, my father would pick us up, I mean, about once a week and take us to movies and things of that nature.  But I never heard him play. But he actually instilled an interest in music in the rest of us.  My brother, older brother, he bought him a trumpet.  And so he started playing the trumpet when he was in the fifth grade.  And so, I want to do like my older brother, so I started playing trumpet too (laughs).  But the thing is, that the band--teacher in elementary school tricked me.  Because he had--I didn't have a trumpet, but the band teacher had a trumpet.  So he told me, "Come on out here.  I'll show you how to play my trumpet."  But what he really wanted to do, he needed a baritone player.  Okay.  A baritone horn looks like a small tuba, okay.  But, you know, it has the bell facing outward.  So he switched me over very quickly (laughs).  So the rest of my time in elementary through junior year of high school, I played the baritone (laughs).  Well, I played--it worked out well.  I enjoyed it.  I loved the horn.
Speaker 1: It takes some of the same skill, but--
Speaker 2: Same--
Speaker 1: --for some reason, a baritone just isn't a popular culture (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It's not.  It's not.
Speaker 1: It's not popular (unclear) (simultaneous)--you don't see anybody in the band step forward playing the baritone solo?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: You just don't do that.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  'cause, general, like in jazz, the trombone would be the equivalent of horns.  So, yeah.  So it's just not a popular horn, but I love it.  It was a beautiful horn.  The tone that comes out of it is very mellow.  I love it.  But I was tricked, but it was for a good cause (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, your father was in Atlanta--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --and was involved in your life--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, growing up.  But he kind of drifted off as we hit our teen years.  We didn't really see him much more of him.
Speaker 1: Is he still alive?
Speaker 2: No.  He passed away back around 1973, actually.  He was run over by an automobile.  Real tragic accident.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In Atlanta there?
Speaker 2: It was in Atlanta, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  In Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is 1973, isn't it?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Around 1973.  Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And now, his mother, we always called her Miss Stella, okay.  I think it's really interesting that I married a Stella (laughs).  That's my wife's name.  I don't know if there's any hidden connection of a subconscious connection with that, but the same name.
Speaker 1: There was a popular radio show in those days called 'Stella Dallas.'
Speaker 2: Oh really?  I don't remember that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've read about it.  I never (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Never heard it.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: I'm not aware of it (unclear).
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: It's a popular radio program.
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: Your father's side of the family now, they were all in Atlanta [Georgia], too, or?
Speaker 2: More or less, but still based more in Fairburn, Georgia.  And it's F-A-I-R, Fairburn.  B-U-R-N.
Speaker 1: I think it's--yeah.  I think it's B-U-R-N.
Speaker 2: B-U-R-N, I think, something like that.  Fairburn.  I have to look it up.
Story_ID: 27372
Speaker 1: Now was your stepfather [David Graves] a big part of your life?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Now.  Okay.  So, my mother [Dorothy Elizabeth Green Graves] married David Graves when I as in the eighth grade.  And so it was a very nice--I mean, it was a nice, wholesome family, so I did grow up with a father.  Grandfather [Luther Green], when we lived with the grandparents, so I always had that senior father figure in the house, and then stepfather.  And so--well, he let my mother do more of the disciplining of us. You know what I mean.  He would just tell on us (laughs).  That's probably from a wise political decision.  But, yeah, we have, you know, a nice, wholesome family.  And then I graduated and went away to college, and you know, eventually, my mother and father divorced.  That happened right around 1980ish or so, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what did he do for a living.
Speaker 2: He was a plumber.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He used to take us out during the summers when school was out to, you know, help and try to learn the business, but I wasn't that good at it.  I just (laughs)--I was not.  I guess, 'cause things just didn't seem natural for me.  I didn't really take a serious interest in it.  But I did go.  I had fun doing it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  So he and his brother actually owned a plumbing company.
Story_ID: 27373
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother [Dorothy Elizabeth Green Graves] and father [Frank Mackoroyal Sawyer] met?  Now, he was a musician and she went to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah.  That I don't know.  He was a Spelman--he was at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So I think they both were in school.  I think they had--they met that way.
Speaker 1: All right.  That's important.  So he's--okay.  So he was at Morehouse at the time they met?
Speaker 2: That's my understanding.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  But they--
Speaker 2: My mother didn't talk that much about that. So that's why I, you know, I don't know a lot of the details of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, when you think about your, I guess, all the influences around you, especially your mother [Dorothy Elizabeth Green Graves] and father [Frank Mackoroyal Sawyer], and their--you know, what they were interested in, how they looked, how they walked, talked, and behaved; who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  Probably my mother.  I think I have a lot of her qualities.  I have a lot of opposite qualities to her.  My mother was very outgoing.  She's a lot like my older daughter.  My older daughter is extremely outgoing.  Even though I think a lot like my mother, I'm more shy.  I'm a very shy person.  I grew up very shy when I was young.  And I have a younger daughter who's like me.  She's shy.  My younger daughter Sharifa (laughs).  But we worked on it, you know.  It's--I think I overcame a lot of it, but I realize I was very--I was a very sensitive child, and I could see that in my younger daughter.  And I remember once in church, during the summer, what do you call it, the bible schools we have in the summer; there was one of my favorite teachers there who was teaching me, and you know, people were drinking water out the water fountain and I was the last in line, and when I got ready to drink mine, he told, "Every get--" he didn't we were all--we weren't supposed to be there.  He told me to go back to where you was sitting, and I cried (laughs).  And later in the day I realized, "Why did I cry?"  So then I realized that I'm a very sensitive person.  So I've been working on that my whole life (laughs), trying not to be so sensitive.  And it took a lot of toughness to try to survive in the physics world as a physicist, because as an African American physicist, you have a hard time.  So you really have to be tough.  So this whole thing of being sensitive and shy, I've always tried to work on.
Story_ID: 27374
Speaker 1: Let's go through your childhood now.  Can you give us, I guess--do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory.  Yeah.  I think probably when I was--when my mother [Dorothy Elizabeth Green Graves] and father [Frank Mackoroyal Sawyer]--first my, my biological father, were married, and I remember my brother and I were waiting on the school bus--no.  I was ahead of my brother waiting on the school bus.  He hadn't come out of the house.  And the school bus came, I didn't know what to do.  I just go on the bus and went on to school (laughs).  So my mother gave me a hard time, you know, about standing up and speaking, you know, saying, "You should have told him your brother is just coming out the door."  You know.  So that's still part of my shyness, you know.  I didn't know what to do.  I don't know why I didn't tell him, "Just wait a second."  (laughs).  I got on the bus and went on.  So I think that's my earliest childhood memory.
Story_ID: 27375
Speaker 1: Now, you grew up in Atlanta [Georgia], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: I never left the state of Georgia before I went to college (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in Atlanta, now, what neighborhood did you live in, and can you describe, like--
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, yes.  I grew up on what was then Ashby Street.  Now, it's been remained the Joseph Lowery Boulevard.  So, I'm losing a lot of my history.  It was Ashby Street that runs right into Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and the AU campus center, Atlanta University Center [Atlanta, Georgia].  So I lived about--if you go north about, say, five miles; that's about where we were.  Our house as on Ashby Street.  It was a fun community that we lived in, you know.  I think economically we were not so well off, but I never knew anything.  I mean, all I remember were great days.  We were wealthy as far as I'm concerned.  You know, I mean, we had a fun time.  We had a lot of children in the neighborhood about my age.  So we played ball all the time.  In fact, that's why I always hated rain, 'cause rain meant we couldn't out and play ball (laughs).  So it was a great neighborhood.  And also, that neighborhood was very interesting, because it produced a number of the leaders among the black, you know, the politicians of that time.  Maynard Jackson actually lived for a while in a house that was basically right across the street from where I grew up.  But he's in a different generation, so I didn't really remember him.  One of my close friends, Julius Daugherty's father was a prominent attorney in Atlanta, who became a state representative, and I think eventually the state senate.  His name was Dau--now spelled Daugherty. D-A-U-G-H-E-R-T-Y, the way they spelled it, but pronounced it "Dautry."  And then there was another state senator, African American, who became a state senator, who lived a little up Ashby Street from me.  Unfortunately, I can't recall his name.  It should come to me.  It was Theodore-something.  Teddy.  The name escapes me.  But it's interesting.  And if you were to just look at era, just take my house and just draw, like, a half-a-mile around there, you could see the merging leaders, political--African American political leaders, that came from that community.
Speaker 1: Do you think it had something to do with the presence of--you know, the university complex of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That may have contributed to it.  I'm not sure, but that may have contributed to it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So I, you know, I was wondering, you know, universities often bring in speakers and--
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, lecturers, and you got the, you know, the (simultaneous)--in the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.  Yeah.  That could be.  Could be it played--probably played a big role in that.
Speaker 1: And you were growing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry.  Another person.  Marvin Arrington.  I should remember this one, 'cause they were--they were members of my church.  He was my Sunday school teacher for a while, and he was Atlanta City Councilman; very famous in Atlanta and other places.  He became the president of the City Council.  He ran for mayor unsuccessfully.  But he ended his career as a judge in Atlanta.  I think he--I heard recently he retired.  But he was a leader in Atlanta's political scene.  Marvin Arrington.
Speaker 1: That's, H-E-R-R?
Speaker 2: Marvin--okay.  The first name is M-A-R-V-I-N, last name is, A-R-R --
Speaker 1: Oh.  Arrington.
Speaker 2: Arrington.  Right.  A-R-R-I-N-G-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So we got a lot of heavy hitters from that community.
Story_ID: 27376
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sights and sounds and smells.  Okay.  Sounds that were constant were cars going up and down--Atlanta's [Georgia] a pretty busy city (laughs).  And we stayed right on the--right on the street there.  So used to even, you know, have to--we would make up games about the cars. You know, "You pick Ford," you know, "I pick Chevrolet."  And we'd count and see who wins (laughs).  So, we used to do all of that kind of thing.  So, yes.  So that's--the food smells.  Oh, you know, the Southern--good Southern cuisine that we all grew up on down here, you know, from fried chicken, and, you know, the roasts, you know, biscuits and syrup.  All of these were favorites, but they're killers and they're not good for you (laughs).  But, unfortunately, they'll kill you.  That's why call this area the "diabetes belt," because we down here in the Southeast.  I mean, we have great food, but that stuff will kill you for sure.  So one of the things I try to do is to form my own eating habit.  Because it occurred to me, you know, when I traveled from Boston [Massachusetts] or Chicago [Illinois] to Atlanta; when you get off that airplane in Atlanta or in this region, you can just see that everybody's heavier.  And the thing is, we eat too much salt, too much sugar, you know, too much saturated fat.  And so I'm trying to cut back on all that because my vital signs are on the border; like, my blood pressure is borderline, right.  You know, the sugar thing, it's kind of border line.  Everything on me is borderline.  So now, I'm trying to, you know, catch up with people like you, who are vegetarians, who eat healthy, to try to do better about that.  And I don't worry about weight.  You know, weight is--I think weight will take care of itself, right.  If you do the right thing--in fact, I like to think of this as a--you know, as a scientist and mathematician, S to the fifth power.  So it's salt, we need to cut back sugar, saturated fat, sitting too long without exercise; and one thing, right, that we--that kills us are seconds.  You need to fix your plate one time (laughs), and don't go back.  But another key is, let somebody else fix your plate, 'cause you're going to cheat if you fix your plate and you know you don't get seconds.  You don't eat too much on the first round.  So I tell people, "Let somebody else fix your plate."  (laughs).  So that's the thing that I--and I think the weight will take care of itself.  And there's a saying that I learned.  We went to Senegal National Society--not the National Society of Black Physicists, but another group called the, African Laser Center; also the National Society of Black Physicists.  It was a joint meeting of that and another organization called, The Lamb Network.  We met in Senegal.  We had a chance to sit in the president Senegal's meeting of his cabinet, and we met him afterwards.  But, anyway, during the meeting, he told people, "We need good ideas," he said.  "If the idea is good, the money will come."  And that kind of stuck with me in other areas in relative to the health issue.  If you take care of the lifestyle, these five--this "S to the fifth power," the weight will come.  Right.  I mean, you--if you're not supposed to be overweight, you'll lose weight.  I mean, we have different genetic makeup.  Some people are going to be heavier than others.  But I don't worry about the weight.  I think we just need to take care of the lifestyle.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So other sights and sounds and smells of growing up.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So sights, smells, sounds.  Smells, sights.  The best thing for me in sight is seeing my friends outside playing so I can go and join them.  I mean, those are some of my earlier memories, because my life--my world is pretty confined.  You know, we didn't really do a lot of traveling and all of this kind of thing.  Okay.  So to me, the sight of a beautiful day with the sun, no rain, and then able to get outside.  So I think that pretty much--
Speaker 1: What about sounds?  I don't think we heard anything about sounds, but--
Speaker 2: The sounds of cars.  I guess that's what I said in the beginning--yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: (simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: Because that was a constant thing.  Constant thing with the cars going by.  Yeah, I remember.  Also, I remember not liking to--something I didn't like to see was night and having to go to the store.  And that frightened me and my brothers to death.  Because there was a store only a couple of blocks away, but you know, when the night came and my mother said, "Go to the store," and we were frighten, but she said something that always stuck with me that's kind of--you know, it's kind of funny.  She said, "If you don't get to that store," she said, "Nobody want you."  She said, "I wouldn't want you if you weren't mine."  And I would think, and that makes plenty of sense, so I'd go (laughs).  Nobody wants me.  So, anyway, yes, that's one sight I remember, the darkness and went to the store at night.
Speaker 1: Did the streetlights--I guess there weren't many (simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: There were streetlights, but to a child, you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's true.
Speaker 2: --you're young and still it's dark, you know.  But, yeah, I mean, we did have streetlights.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, you know, you worry about things, you know, like ghosts and, you know (laughs).
Story_ID: 27377
Speaker 1: Did you only go to one elementary school, Herndon [Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: I went to two.  I went to one called, Clement.  I think it was Clement.
Speaker 1: What was your first one?
Speaker 2: That was Clement.  I was there from kindergarten through part of the second grade.  I think the early part of the second grade.  E.C. Clement [Emma C. Clement Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], I think the name of it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I went to Alonzo F. Herndon High School [Atlanta, Georgia].  And so it--that's named after A. Herndon was the founder of Atlanta Life Insurance Company.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And I was there from the second grade through finishing the seventh grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Second through the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, seven.
Speaker 1: Through the seventh grade?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because they didn't have the middle school concept then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So you went to school from kindergarten to seventh grade.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Herndon was a, you know, a big figure at Atlanta [Georgia]--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --life.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Did you ever go through his home when you were a kid?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  I never went to it.  I do know it was a--
Speaker 1: The reason why I'm asking is because I know [Paul Laurence] Dunbar is from my town, and we never went through his house when we were kids.
Speaker 2: Oh, you did.
Speaker 1: It would sit.  They had preserved the house, but never went in.
Speaker 2: Right.  Never did that.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I don't know if it wasn't open or if people weren't--I mean, nowadays I bet you can go through the Herndon House.
Speaker 2: Right.  I'm pretty sure you could then.  But it's the kind of thing, when you live in the city, I've learned, you take things for granted; you don't do things.  So I find myself trying to get a lot of stuff done before I leave.  Like, when I was in Chicago [Illinois], I never went to the top of the Sears Tower.  So was one of my projects my and I had to do.  We had been there, you know, ten years and never went.  And by Chicago, you know, there are certain things that people do, like, they have this Duck Tour where you ride on land and the thing gets down in the river and do all that.  So we got that in before we left (laughs).  But I never went on the Freedom Trail there, where you sort of relive, you know, the whole American Revolutionary War.  I never quite got to that, but it's the kind of thing, when you live in a place--
Speaker 1: That's in Boston [Massachusetts], right, the Freedom Trail?  (simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: In Boston.  Yeah, that's what I mean.  In Boston.  Yeah, and that Duck Tour thing was in Boston, too.  Yeah. so.
Speaker 1: They had one in Chicago, too.
Speaker 2: Oh, you have one in Chicago?  Oh, okay, now.  All right.  Okay.  In fact, when I lived in Chicago, I never went to Navy Pier.  But once I left, and on one of my trips back, I went to the Navy Pier at last.  That's a beautiful thing that they did there.
Speaker 1: So, Atlanta, you--did you, as a child, did you get on the campus much, or Atlanta U [University of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia] or Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], Clark [Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] or any of those--
Speaker 2: Well, one thing I did after my tenth-grade year--you know, Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], Spelman had this summer program for, you know, students; and the idea was to try to identify talented students, and try to get them, offer them admission early.  So I could have gone to college after my tenth-grade year.  And there are a number of people who did, like, Maynard Jackson, the first African American mayor of Atlanta.  I understand he went after his tenth-grade year. [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] went there, I think, after his tenth-grade year.  So a lot of people, a lot of prominent people, did that.  But even at that time, I wanted to go to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology], which is where I eventually ended up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, let's explore--now, I take it you liked school--
Speaker 2: Yes. I liked school.
Speaker 1: --from the beginning.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: And in--at Clement, were there any special teachers or any--
Speaker 2: I don't remember the teachers at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  So I don't really have any good, special memories of Clement.  So vague at this point in time.
Speaker 1: Now, what about Alonzo F. Herndon?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I had great teachers there.  Yeah, I remember that--tremendous teachers.  Ms. Garrison, my fifth-grade teacher.  In fact, I met her many years later when I was a science ambassador for the National Society of Black Physicists.  Every time we have a meeting in a location, we would try to set up visits to the local schools.  So I was the one who visited, so it's interesting after many decades to go back to Herndon and to see Ms. Garrison again.  So, yeah.  So she was--I had great teachers there, great teachers.
Story_ID: 27378
Speaker 1: I read that they, under your old name, Michael Vern Sawyer--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --some of the kids called you Von Sawyer (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think that's why I got interested in science.  Yeah. (laughs).
Speaker 1: (simultaneous) (unclear)
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Von Sawyer.  You know, you had this image of a great German scientist with the white lab coats and all that.  That was the image we got from books.  And so they used to always kid me about, you know, being, you know, "Von Sawyer, Von Sawyer the Scientist."  So if I could think of anything that was the biggest influence on my wanting to go into science was probably that.
Speaker 1: And so you weren't really doing any doing any science then.  They were just kidding (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, didn't do any science.  No (laughs).  No.  But I had to go and try to figure out what that meant, you know, to be a scientist.  So, you know.
Speaker 1: So, what did you think a scientist--well, what was your impression of what a scientist was in those days?
Speaker 2: You know, that's kind of a person or something far off, you know.  It wasn't anything you could reach out and touch, which is one of the problems in the African American community.  We just have a dearth of people with these types of expertise and careers.  So to me, a scientist was somebody on some high level somewhere else, right.  I couldn't make a good connection to it, but it was something to investigate.  So I tried to learn more about what science was all about.
Speaker 1: I know, I read the "mad scientist" thing.  I was thinking about the popular culture image of science and the, and, you know, comic books and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Probably played some role--but I wasn't a big comic book reader, actually.  My older brother read a lot of--I've never really cared for comic books so much.
Speaker 1: Because he didn't have the image of the guy with the wild hair, you know (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: No, no.  I didn't really have that so much, 'cause the only images I had we were like, you would see scientists in books, you know, like textbooks and that kind of thing.  And so that was my image of the scientists.
Speaker 1: So, what was your favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Okay.  At different phases, okay--in high school and in elementary school, mathematics; since you always took the math, and I always enjoyed the mathematics. There was music also.  I always loved music.  I played in the bands, in the concert marching bands in the high school.  In fact, I wanted to be a music composer or a scientist.  So I had saw two options on the table.  But as I progressed through high school, I went more toward the science point of view, and I took physics as a junior, which was unusual, because most people kind of delayed it.  They always say that's the hardest--it's the hardest.  I took that as a challenge, so let me take it as a junior.  So I did, and so that was the area of physics that I tended to gravitate toward.  Even though I worked on science projects in high school, and the science project was biology.  But I knew I wanted to be a physicist.  One of the things that happened, during my tenth year, tenth-grade year, they integrated the Georgia State Science Fair for the first time, and my biology project won first place.  And so one of the--and it was a--biology studying whether or not, for space travel, you know, humans and green algae could subsist in a closed system where the algae would use human waste to develop and reproduce, and humans would eat the algae for their food.  And also humans give off the carbon dioxide that the algae would be use, and they would give off the oxygen.  So it was that type of a thing.  But one of the prizes was a big, boxed--not a big, but, you know, reasonable size box of books; a lot of small paperback books on all different fields of science and some mathematic books, and they had a number of them on relativity.  So I had a chance to really read, you know, sort of the layman's version of Einstein's theory, and I was--just fell in love with it.  So physics is--it was really solidified as to what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Although, when I went to college, I still enjoyed mathematics, so as I progressed through college, I double-majored in physics and in pure mathematics, as opposed to applied mathematics.
Story_ID: 27379
Speaker 1: So you said in the fifth grade, Ms. Garrison was your--(simultaneous) favorite teacher--
Speaker 2: Right.  She was a very influential teacher.  There were other ones who were great.  Owens, Ms. Owens from the second grade; my fourth-grade teacher, Ms. Carter, I think her name was.  Carter.  And my--I remember my seventh-grade teacher, Ms. Ponder, was a big influence.  So I had great teachers, great teachers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were you involved, growing up, in the Boy Scouts [of America] or any of those kind of--
Speaker 2: I didn't really do Boy Scouts.  I did it for maybe a month (laughs). I did it for a very short period.  But I didn't do that.  In elementary school--I may have done it for a little while.  I remember being a Boy Scout for a little while, but when I got to high school I spent most of my energy on science projects and band.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But as far as organized things, like, Boy Scouts, I didn't do a lot of that.
Speaker 1: Now, were you--you say you were shy, but did you do anything, like, run for office in high school or--
Speaker 2: Oh, in high school, yeah, yeah.  I ran--in fact, I was president of the junior class, as I recall.  Because I remember this.  We had a--the junior-senior prom and they had this globe that have in nightclubs that reflect, and I had my hair shaved off (laughs), so they said I was under it, and people were--really made--you know, they were laughing because 'cause the light was scattering all over my head (laughs).  So I remember that very, very vividly.  So, yeah.  I held positions like that, you know.  But I was--
Speaker 1: You know, I was just thinking, I say, early light scanner on you (laughs).
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  That's true.  (laughs) That's what it was.
Speaker 1: Yeah. That's-- so we did mention, you went to Henry McNeal--
Speaker 2: McNeal Turner High School [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Named for--
Speaker 2: --named for Bishop Henry McNeal Turner.  Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Now these are--these are--it's--these historic names are really amazing.
Speaker 2: Yes, amazing.  But that's what we grew up with, you know.  If you go back to the old "Jim Crow" style, then, you know, you were Washington High School or Turner High School.  Always named--you know, Carver High School; they were all named after these very famous people.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think he's the one that said, "God is black," or something (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right (laughs).
Speaker 1: --from the pulpit.  So, McNeal Turner, so, you were president of the junior class.  But this science fair project, this is a big deal.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a big deal, you know.
Speaker 1: First integrated science fair.
Speaker 2: First integrated.  It was at University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] for the first time.  And, yeah, that was amazing.  That was amazing.
Speaker 1: And you win this?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I won it in it--
Speaker 1: --over everybody--
Speaker 2: --in biology.
Speaker 1: --in the state.
Speaker 2: In the state, yeah.
Speaker 1: Not just in Atlanta [Georgia], in the state.
Speaker 2: In the state, right.  Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was big (laughs).  I was--I was on cloud nine.  That was a great, great thing.
Story_ID: 27380
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a mentor that helped you with the--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Definitely.  Probably my most influential teacher in high school.  I had two, but one who was even--I think was even more influential, her name was Dorothea Jackson, D-O-R-O-T-H-E-A.  Dorothea Jackson.  She taught me chemistry, physics, and she was my science project advisor.  But she was just a great mentor in general.  She knew I wanted to go to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and she encouraged me to do that, which--and we had never sent anyone from my high school to MIT.  So people were concerned, you know.  Some people were a little bit--I think my counselor at the time was really concerned whether or not I would be able to survive there.  But Ms. Jackson, you know, "Go.  (laughs)  Go North, young man, if that's what you want to do."
Speaker 1: So she suggested MIT?
Speaker 2: I don't know if she suggested it, but she certainly supported it.  I don't think she suggested it.  I think I came up it.  I think I just sort of looked around and said, "What is the best place to do physics?"  And so MIT to me was the number one place.  You could certainly do it at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you know.  It's possible.  So I did apply.  In fact, I applied to MIT, Harvard, and I don't remember some of the other schools.  Lafayette College [Easton, Pennsylvania], Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology], I applied to.  I got into everybody but Harvard.  I did not get into Harvard.  But at that point it didn't really matter to me, because when I got into MIT that was all that I needed (laughs).
Speaker 1: Now this is--this is really something.
Speaker 2: That was big for (me?).
Speaker 1: It's big.  This is big.  And do you--can you tell us what you think about Ms. Jackson's background?  Do you know (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I don't about it, but no, I haven't.  I have no idea of where she went to school or anything like that.  Yeah, I'm not so good on my history.  I need to spend some time trying to go back and dig a lot of this information out.  I know she must have an interesting history.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  So many--I know we hear the stories of teachers who, you know, were--had to go out of state to get their advanced degrees.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: Teachers of the public schools in cities a lot like Atlanta--
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: --who had Ph.D.s.
Speaker 2: Had Ph.D.s.
Speaker 1: You know.
Speaker 2: But in her case, she--Ms. Jackson just--we were her life.  I mean, she stayed after school late, you know, sometimes 'til five o'clock working with us.  She was also the Girl Scout person for the school; the teacher who ran the Girl Scouts [of America].  So she did all this stuff for her students.  It's amazing to me that what she did to push us ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And another teacher I had for mathematics was Ms. Mary Burnside, B-U-R-N-S-I-D-E.  She was always pushing me.  There's where thing I remember that I did.  I wanted to study math over the summer to kind of get ahead on the next year and maybe move on, you know, to the next level.  And so I did that over the summer.  I worked hard.  Then when I came back to school, I took the course again.  I don't know why I decided to just stay in the course again, and I wasn't doing very well, you know.  I was doing well, but I wasn't working.  And so Ms. Burnside just pulled me aside and said, "Son," she said, "What you're doing is next door to nothing."  (laughs).  She said, "You should be ashamed of yourself."  She thought I was going to, you know, go home and work and really take off.  But what I was doing, I was a distraction to the other students because I knew it all right, and all I was doing was causing problems in the classroom.  So she really was on my case.  And so I owe a lot to her to never to sort of slack off, right, to always push, push ahead.  And so ever since then, I've done that.
Story_ID: 27381
Speaker 1: So when, by the time you were a senior, you had, you knew you were going to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you had the encouragement of--
Speaker 2: Of Ms. Jackson [high school teacher] and, you know, my mother [Dorothy Elizabeth Green Graves], my parents, you know, stepfather [David Graves], everybody was so proud.  I'm sure they were worried, but.
Speaker 1: Now, did your older brother [Graham Sawyer] go to college, too?
Speaker 2: My older brother didn't finish.  He started Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia], and he did like my mother; he got married after his first year of college.  So, and he never really went back and finished.  My younger brother [Les Star] went to Illinois Institute of Technology [Chicago, Illinois] for a year, and here, again, just stayed for a year.  So I don't know what to make of it, but my mother really pushed us, you know, to try to get all the education that we could.  Everybody has to do their own thing, though.
Speaker 1: Were your brothers talented in mathematics, too?
Speaker 2: My younger brother was, yes.  I know he really loved mathematics and science.  My older brother, I think, just liked everything, sort of more general.  I don't know if he really had a particular thing.  I know he loved music.  He loved it.  He played trumpet, and he pursued that.  We were in bands together, you know, through high school 'til time he graduated.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So MIT, then--so you graduated from high school in 1967.
Speaker 2: '67 [1967], right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And then--so MIT in the fall--now, did you do anything special over the summer?
Speaker 2: Before I went to MIT, just basically to study hard.  You know, I took a physics book that I used in high school and just--made sure I understood the part that we didn't have a chance to cover, just to sort of get me, sort of, you know--but I was frightened when went to MIT.  I mean, you know, I knew that was going to be a lot of work.  So when I went there, I worked extremely hard, and that--it paid off.  In my first semester there I got "Bs" in everything.  So that was, you know, I was used to.  I graduated.  I graduated from high school with all "As."  There were four of us with all "As."  We were all valedictorians.  And so when I went and got the "Bs," I wasn't going to be satisfied with that, so I worked very hard, and then I started making "As" in just about all of my courses so that I ended up with an "A" average in the end.
Story_ID: 27382
Speaker 1: I think this is the age when the black student union was formed at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  We formed the black student union during my second year there.  But we were starting to organize my first year there, you know, so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about that.  How many black students were on the campus, (simultaneous) (why did you want to?)--
Speaker 2: Well, those were some interesting days.
Speaker 1: --organize yourselves instead of just getting--remaining separate in the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughs).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Those are some interesting dynamics.  MIT admits about a thousand students roughly.  That's always been the case, although, recently they've gone up a little bit maybe eleven hundred.  Okay, so, out of a thousand students, we may--we typically had, maybe, four to six African American students per class.  So there were not many of us.  The social dynamics among us was not so good.  MIT is constructed--it's a huge building with extremely corridors.  Did you have a chance to go there when you interviewed--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --Professor Harris?
Speaker 1: Yes.  They called it the "endless corridor."
Speaker 2: Right.  The "infinite corridor."
Speaker 1: "Infinite."
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.  So, you see everybody at some point.  So, if you're approaching a black student, you don't know whether to look away or (laughs) something.  Always (making you say?) that to look at them to speak, and you'd be surprised, I would say 80 percent of them would kind of look away; don't want to make eye contact.  But there were a few of us who were able to get together and to form politically, and to develop into the Black Student Union.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a common--common occurrence.
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: Black folks get together in some kind of professional, scholarly--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --situation where there's no--they're the only ones there.  Should they congregate?
Speaker 2: I think it's good, not only (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (simultaneous)with each other--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or should each other or should they--I mean, but that's the question.
Speaker 2: I think it's good.  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  I think that's the thing.  But I think when--I think that--that's something to do with this thing about "birds of a feather flock together."  You have a common cultural experience.  I'm not saying you should just limit yourself to that, but I think you should get to know one another well.  In fact, my wife and I were talking about that, because on our way to church there's a farm.  On that farm, they have ducks, they have, what do you call--ostrich; they have all of these things.  And sometimes you go by, you see all the ducks sitting over here (laughs), you see the ostriches over here.  But other times, they're all among each other.  Right.  So, but I think that's a natural impulse.  So, no, I have no problems with that.  But I don't think you should look away.   You know, no, that's not good (laughs).
Story_ID: 27383
Speaker 1: Tell us about the beginnings of the black student union at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Okay.  So we had a group, maybe about ten students, who would get together informally to meet.  And you have to understand that the context of that period, with the Vietnam War, protests going on all over the place, you know, the Black Liberation Movement was in full swing.  So, some of us, you know, were a part of that type of way of thinking, and we wanted to try to move MIT ahead.  So we formed around 1968, probably the fall of '68 [1968].  The first co-chairs were Shirley Jackson, and I think The HistoryMakers did an interview of her.  She's now president of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute [Troy, New York].  And James Turner, who was a graduate student--in fact, at that time, they were both graduate students.  Shirley was three years ahead of me.  So my sophomore year, she was a first-year graduate student.  James Turner, I think he must have been about a third or fourth-year graduate student in physics; they were both in physics.  And James Turner actually most--he went on to become a top official at the Department of Energy, and most recently, I think, he's been at the Department of Commerce.  But he had quite a career at the top levels of federal government.  But, yeah, we basically met and we decided, "Hey let's just do this."  And so we formed.  And we tried to--one of the biggest initiatives was to get more black students into MIT.  So we worked hard on that.  And so, at the end of my sophomore year going into the junior year, that entering class went from the typical five-ish to fifty-three.  And so the numbers have been big ever since.  And, in fact, to this day MIT, again, admits only out of a thousand, eleven hundred students; about 20 percent of those are African Americans; and another 20 percent or so are Latino-Americans.  So that we've (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: --come a long ways.  Yeah.  But it's interesting.  One of the interesting things that helped the African American presence is the students who are immigrants or who are children of African Caribbean immigrants, because that's one thing that you note from the names when you meet many of the students.  So that has really helped us intellectually.  The black community in this country intellectually has been tremendously enhanced by immigrant students.  They come here with a parent wanting a better life for their children, and so they come with that, you know, "Go to college, get your degree," and all that.  And you can see the pay off.  I don't think we could hit 20 percent of the students, African American students, if we didn't have the immigrants.
Speaker 1: They have a good observation.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's a great thing.  I tend to be a Pan-African, is to me, whether you're from the Caribbean, the continental of the U.S., we're all African peoples.
Speaker 1: Is this something you learned at home or something that you--
Speaker 2: No.  I got so much at home, but just as I developed as a graduate student--really as a graduate student, I really became, you know, convinced that, you know, we're all the same.  And then having traveled to Africa, you know, so many times.  I think that the way people colonize, it's just--it's very similar to--the stories you hear are very similar to the stories of people like me out of Jim Crow South.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Just in a different location.
Speaker 2: Just in a different location.
Speaker 1: Similar situations.
Speaker 2: Similar situations, yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And--now.  All right.  So, the BSU [black student union] really made some gains (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Definitely.  Definitely.
Speaker 1: And I know it still exists actually.
Speaker 2: It still exists.  It still exists.
Speaker 1: Shot a picture of it when I was there (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, you did?  All right.  That was great.
Speaker 1: --I was walking down the hallway and I saw it.  And I said, "Oh, this is the famous BSU at MIT."  And I thought--I shot it on my phone (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, really.  Okay.
Speaker 1: --as to--yeah.
Speaker 2: (unclear), you know, it's still alive and well.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  So many of the people we met were a part--
Speaker 2: It was a part of that, yes.
Story_ID: 27384
Speaker 1: So in terms of the science that you were--now, you become an accelerator physicist, but what were you focusing on as an undergraduate at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Okay.  MIT was more general.  Okay, so it was just basic general.  There was no focus in terms of a particular subfield of physics.  But when I went to graduate school at Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], I majored--I was a theoretical physics student, and my major was high-energy physics.  I basically was studying the constituents of protein--not protein (laughs)--protons.  I always get protein and protons mixed up.  But studying the constituents inside protons and neutrons, you know, the most elementary particles in nature.  And I pursued that for about five years as a graduate student.  I had post-docs at the University of Rochester [Rochester, New York], University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland]; but then when I got to MIT, I made the transition over using the theoretical techniques that we used to study elementary particles to beam dynamics.  And I was in the right place at the right time, working with the right person to develop this theory called "intrabeam scattering" that has become really, you know, a classic in accelerator physics.  So my specialties happened going into graduate school and shifted somewhat later on at Fermi National [Accelerator] Laboratory [Batavia, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, and then I want to point out that you were both a physics and math major.
Speaker 2: In college, right.  Because, again, I didn't know--even though, physics--I was always leaning toward physics.  I loved mathematics, and I didn't know if I really wanted to do one or the other.  But I made a decision that, at that time, with the revolutions going on, math sounded like it was too detached from reality.  See, I was doing the pure mathematics as opposed to the applied.  Applied mathematics is very similar to physics in many ways, but I was more interested in the pure side of mathematics; you know, worrying about abstract, you know, vector spaces and all these things that mathematicians worry about.  But then I said, "What relevance is that to the movement that's going on out here?" (laughs).  But I knew physics had a direct, you know, connection to the way we lived and the kinds of things that engineers' knowledge they can draw upon to invent computers and so forth.  So that's why I decided, hey, physics has to be the way it will go.
Speaker 1: And, I'm curious as to why you didn't choose engineering (and that stuff?)?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't have the time for engineering.  One thing I learned, I had a brief period at Fermilab [Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory] when I did some hands-on.  It really was engineering and physics, you know, building accelerator equipment and so forth.  I worked extremely hard at it.  I think I did an excellent job, but it wasn't a part of me.  If you get involved in something, you have to work so much harder than the next fellow, you know.  It's just, everything you're learning, that's not--you're not.  So I knew I was not an engineer by heart.  You know, engineering is not really inside me.  So I decided, hey, I'd better stick with theoretical physics (laughs).
Story_ID: 27385
Speaker 1: Tell us about Dr. James Young back at MIT back in (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  James Young.  Okay.  So he was hired in my junior year, 1969.  They bought him from, I think, Los Alamos National Laboratory [Los Alamos, New Mexico].  Jim was a mentor to those of us who were physicists at that time.  In fact, as an undergraduate, I would--he was always available.  But then there're two other people who became famous; Shirley Jackson was his--she stayed at MIT.  She was his physics--she was his graduate student advisor--thesis advisor.  And then Jim [James] Gates, who was a very--another very famous physicist who was another one of his Ph.D. students.
Speaker 1: Now, was Gates there at the same time that you were there?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We all go to lab.  He was in that class that I mentioned, that first class of fifty-three students back in'69 [1969] that entered.  So he was a couple of years behind me.  But, so Jim, not only did he produce, you know, outstanding physicists, he was a mentor to so many others of us.  And even when I went to graduate school, we communicated.  As a matter of fact, I remember when I was leaving graduate school and applying for jobs, he even, you know, gave me his personal phone, credit card number, to use to call if I needed anything.  I mean, he was just amazing.  He was an amazing guy.  And he said, "You don't owe me anything."  He said, "You pay me back by doing for the others, for the young people coming on behind you."  So I always remembered that.
Speaker 1: So is--was Young an African American or--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  He was an African American.  Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Oh.  Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Yes, he's an African American physicist.
Speaker 1: And he--I guess he really had a lonely time in school (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It must have been tough.  It must have been tough.
Speaker 1: Did you--do you know where he went to school?
Speaker 2: I don't know where he--I think he came out of one of those HBCUs; one of the historical black colleges, but his Ph.D. may have come from MIT.  I don't remember.  I'd have to check that.  But I suspect his Ph.D. came from MIT.  But he became, you know, a theoretical high-energy physicist, and that's what he was when he came to MIT.  So Shirley Jackson, Jim Gates, myself and some others, we all--Benny Ward was another one, who, (over?) was ahead of me, and he went to Princeton, he ahead of me at Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey]; now he's a professor at Baylor University [Waco, Texas]; extremely brilliant guy.  I mean, he's--he has the record, I think, for finishing Princeton in the shortest period of time.
Speaker 1: This is Bennett Ward?
Speaker 2: Benny Ward.  Benny Franklin Leon Ward, W-A-R-D.  I mean, the guy finished in about two-and-a-half years.  I mean, hell, he was amazing.  I remember I entered Princeton, he was in his second year.  His advisor took off to spend a year at Fermi National [Accelerator] Laboratory [Chicago, Illinois], but Benny would work, you know, at a distance with this advisor.  But I remember a summer after his second year; so he was two-and-a-half--no, it was the summer after his--okay.  At some point I remember I asked him, "How was your thesis going?"  He said, "I'm writing it up."  I mean with within two-and-a-half years, this guy had finished--I mean, it's just amazing (laughs).  He was a brilliant guy.  But he's always been--I think he was more quiet than I am.  He's always been sort of--sort of, you know, alone.  He never really connected to the bigger physics community through the National Society of Black Physicists.  But he was just a phenomenal guy.
Speaker 1: Oka.
Speaker 2: And, yeah, he was--you know, he was a mentor to me as a sort of a colleague mentor; because he was always a year ahead of me, so I could learn from him what it is that he did to survive the system.  So we've always been great friends.
Story_ID: 27386
Speaker 1: Oh, at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you graduated Phi--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Phi Beta Kappa [Society, an academic honor society].
Speaker 1: Phi Beta Kappa.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  I was in the first group.  That was the first that they brought a chapter on to the campus.  To be a Phi Beta Kappa, you know, there are some--there's more than just, you know, being in an "A" student.  There's some other things.  Like, you have to have studied seriously foreign language and so forth; and languages have always been a big hobby of mine.  So I took three years in Russian in as an undergraduate student.  So I sort of covered all my bases (laughs).  So I was ready to be inducted once they founded the chapter there.
Speaker 1: Now, three years of Russian back in those days, especially, you got a black physicist who can speak Russian.
Speaker 2: Speak Russian, yeah.
Speaker 1: This is a powerful combination, I mean for Cold War era (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I've enjoyed it.  It opened up a whole new world for me.  And the reason that that happened, you know, back in high school--before I started my science fair project, I went, I guess it must have been my freshman, my eighth-grade year, Ms. Jackson took me to the science fair in Atlanta [Georgia], and it was in--at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia], and there was a professor there who told us, "If you want to be a scientist," and this is when he got all the students together.  "If you want to be a scientist, you got three languages that are import."  He said, "Russian, German, and French."  And he said, "Unfortunately, they're in that order of difficulty."  So I said, "Okay.  I want to take the most difficult and learn."  So that's why I got proficient in Russian in those days.  And so I studied and it paid off, because many years, I had a chance to go to--at that time, the Soviet Union, for six months.
Speaker 1: Have you been able over the years to read Russian and (simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I studied Russian.  In fact I--my hero is Alexander Pushkin.  So I studied Alexander Pushkin.  He had so much, and see, he's an African Russian.  Most people don't know about this guy.  But even more important, people don't know about his heritage.  His great-grandfather was an African slave, twice slaved.  He was enslaved from--scholars nowadays think it's a region in the Cameroon area; although, historically, people always say Ethiopia.  But, Cameroon, he was either brought by the Turks to the Sultan, right, in Constantinople, to be a slave, and then some Russian emissaries bought him from them and presented him, his brother, as a gift to Peter the Great, who was the Czar of Russia.  And Peter the Great fell in love with this guy, and his name later became Abram Petrovich Gannibal.  And this guy wrote--Peter sent him to France to be educated and adopted him as his own son, godson.  No, it's probably even more than that.  He'd adopted him as his son, gave him his name, tried to convince him to be called Peter, but he didn't like it.  So every time people say "Pyotr", which is Peter in Russian, the boy would cry.  So Peter the Great said, "Leave the boy alone.  We'll call him Abram, that's what he wants."  And so the guy went on to become a full general in the Russian army.  He became--he was an engineer, right.  And he was in charge of fortresses throughout the whole Russian empire, which was the biggest, contiguous empire in the whole at the time.  And so he had sons who became Russians who won great battles; some won against Navarin, the Battle of Navarin against the Turks.  His--he had a granddaughter, I think her name was Orlita [sic, Nadezhda Ossipovna Gannibal], who had a son who was Alexander Pushkin.  And Pushkin is father of Russian literature.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I read Pushkin as an undergraduate student at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts]--
Speaker 1: I seen that, now--well, tell us why, because--
Speaker 2: Why what?
Speaker 1: --this is very--this is important.
Speaker 2: But why?
Speaker 1: Why he's the father of Russian literature.
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.  Because, you know, in those days, Russians were not so proud of themselves culturally.  So if you're a Russian upper-echelon, you spoke French; you wrote French, right.  And so it was not serious writing in the Russian language.  Pushkin had the advantage.  When he was young, his parents didn't really spend much time with him.  But he was more or less raised by one of the serf, a serf woman.  And she would fill his head full of these serf fairytales.  And so that left an impression on him.  So when he went to school to study as a young boy, teenager, he took to writing, and he would reproduce some of these fairytales, and he became as a young man, like twenty years old, he was, like, you know, the strongest writer in Russian.  And he made it legitimate to do in Russian what they were--to make Russian the language, high-class language for doing poetry.  And so after him, people say, "We want to study," so he was like the Harlem Renaissance.  Then people started writing in the vernacular.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I think he--yeah.  From what I understand, he actually developed the rules of grammar for written Russian.  That's what--
Speaker 2: Well, maybe.  I don't know that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That's what--
Speaker 2: That I don't know.  It may have played a role, but, yeah, he's considered the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They never really write it in a formal agreed upon (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Not so much.
Speaker 1: --style.
Speaker 2: Right. You're probably right.  He really standardized it.  And the thing--interesting thing is--now, I like to ask, "Why don't we know about Pushkin?"  We know about Dostoevsky, we know about Tolstoy and all these others.  But--and these people all studied Pushkin.  They were younger than Pushkin.  Right.  They were, in fact, Dostoevsky's life may not have even overlapped with Pushkin.  But they all--Pushkin gave them the tools to become great writers.  And so people wonder is it the African part of his ancestry in the U.S.  The Russians have no trouble with--no problem.  When we were in Russian--in Russia back in the, you know, in 1989, you walk down the street, people are reciting Pushkin poetry out on the street.  So he's like the god of poetry in Russia.  I mean, the guy was just absolutely amazing.
Story_ID: 27387
Speaker 1: And then he [Alexander Pushkin] lamented the fact that Russian people--Russians were not proud of being Russian.  So his most famous work, I think, is 'Yevgeny Onegin,' which is 'Eugene Onegin,' was this Russian guy who reads all the great books of European literature, and he can spout them out.  Right.  But when he's in a crowd and doing the room--when the conversation got serious, he had no content.  He got quiet.  And then he would, you know, flirt with the women.  So this was the Eugene Onegin.  But, then so, Pushkin is a famous--in Eugene Onegin, Pushkin makes this comment, (speaking in Russian)--okay, I'll just say it in Russian--but what he's saying is that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, say it in Russian. Go on and say it (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 1: --in writing--okay.  Now, how does this say?  (speaking in Russian), which means, "Enlightenment hasn't stuck to us.  We read all of this stuff coming from other places, but it didn't stick.  The only thing we got from it, okay, is just put-ons, fakes, you know, affectations, like Eugene Onegin."  So that's (Speaking in Russian).  (Speaking in Russian)--what we got from it is (Speaking in Russian) just affectations, nothing, nothing deep.  And he says, (speaking in Russian), nothing more.  (Speaking in Russian).  So I always remember that.  So Eugene Onegin was--his attempt to try to tell people, you know, be Russian, use Russian, put it on the, you know, pedestal, and you'll strive to express yourself in Russian.  He created in this novel this woman, Tatyana, who for generations has been the model of the strong, Russian woman.  Tatyana had a sister Olga, who was sort of the typical beautiful woman, right, exterior--externally beautiful.  But Tatyana had that internal beauty.  She didn't jump and play around like the other children.  I just said that, (speaking in Russian), which means, you know, "she was," you know, "she was a child herself, but in a crowd of child--children, she didn't like jumping and playing, like, she thought."  She would sit by the window, she'd read, and she fell in love with Onegin who just this guy.  I told you nothing deep, just so he just wants to imitate the West; fell in love with him.  He'd spurn--he'd say, "No, I don't want to do with you."  But then you roll ahead, you know, years, she'd marries this general, who she doesn't love.  But, you know, Onegin comes on the scene, he wants her then, right.  So he tries to flirt with her, and she basically tells him off, "You didn't want me then."  You know, basically, "I love you, but I'm married to this man."  So that to the Russian women, here's a strong Russian woman who will just put love aside and to execute her responsibility as a wife.  But it was just beautiful, I mean, Pushkin was just a fascinating character.  Unfortunately, he died when he was only thirty-seven in a duel.
Speaker 2: Really.  Okay.  Yeah, I thought he was killed.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was killed, unfortunately.  But the guy left volumes of poetry and, you know, prose.  But it was mainly the poetry because he thought it--poetry to him was the highest, right.  But in his mid-twenties, prose became more and more popular.  So he did do some prose.  But he always loved poetry.
Speaker 2: Now, this is interesting.  And another--it seems to parallel--I mean, his role in Russian parallels some of the black poets in--
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  He was the fa--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (simultaneous)--who tried to blaze--
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: --black literature and (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 1: He was an inspiration for the Harlem Renaissance.  People don't realize that.  They had Pushkin Prizes during the Harlem Renaissance, 'cuz the writers in the Harlem Renaissance looked at him as the possibility of what someone with African blood could do.  And he was--he was worshipped among the Harlem Renaissance writers.  So these Pushkin Prizes, the first two prizes were won by Arna Bontemps.  But, yeah, I mean, Pushkin was well known.  I mean, he was, like, them.  That gave them more inspiration to write in the vernacular and not in the standard English.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is interesting.  We're getting more than we expected out of you (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 1: (Laughs.)
Speaker 2: --talking more about physics or they'll kill me in the office if you don't talk more about this--
Speaker 1: Oh, really.  Physics?  Okay.
Speaker 2: No, but the--this is really something.  So Phi Beta Kappa [Society, an academic honor society], and we have just gotten an example of what that means.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 27388
Speaker 1: In your graduate studies, let's go to Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: '71 [1971].  Now, why did you choose Princeton?
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, again, this--it's similar to my going into college, I looked around, I said, "Hey, Princeton.  Hey, [Albert] Einstein lived there; of course, he had died in the '50s [1950s], but still, there was a tradition there.  And then you have this famous physicist who is no longer with us, named Richard Feynman, who got his Ph.D. there; then there was another physicist who was really not during the time I was a senior at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  It was a professor there named Steven Weinberg.  Steven Wein--so I'm looking around saying "Hey, all these people went to Princeton."  I said, "That's where I want to go."  (laughs).  So that's why I applied to Princeton.  I applied to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  This time, I got into Harvard, and I had a chance to turn them down this time.  So, anyway, so I went--that's why I chose Princeton.  I thought that was the best place to do high energy physics--theoretical high-energy physics.
Speaker 1: And you certainly had the lineage here with the people you named (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah, yeah.  Strong tradition.
Speaker 1: Einstein, Feynman, Weinberg.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, you go, like many scientists, you go straight through to the Ph.D.  You're not--did you take any time and savor a M.A. [degree] or?
Speaker 2: No.  They were--what they do, they give the M.A. in route.  And so at Princeton, once you passed those general exams, you can petition and they will give you the M.A.  Benny Ward told me he didn't bother.  So I said, "Why should I bother."  But then I found out Benny tricked me.  Benny got his Master's (laughs).  So before I left, I petitioned to get mine, so that's why it looks funny on my resume that my master's and my Ph.D. are both 1976.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I would have gotten it after my first year, 'cuz I took--like Benny, we both took our general exams a year early.
Story_ID: 27389
Speaker 1: What was your [doctoral] dissertation about at Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, it was one that studied the scattering of particles like protons at extremely high energies, and to try to derive what we call, symmetry principles; try to derive the kind of, you know, machinery that you can use even for neutron, neutron scattering; you know, something that would translate not only to proton scattering, but to neutron and other types of particles.  So I guess that's sort of a good way to sort of put it.  I mean, like, going into the details of it, it's probably not so useful, but basically--
Speaker 1: No. No.  Go into the details.
Speaker 2: (simultaneous)--I'm talking about.  Quantum field theory (laughs), renormalization group (simultaneous) and all these things, but it's basically--
Speaker 1: --in a way that we can--
Speaker 2: --but it's basically it.  I mean, you know, protons, you know, collide.  And they're certain properties that protons have that they share with particles like neutrons when they collide, or other types of collisions that--and so, the basic apparatus you can use to study the other types of scatterings as well.  And you're also trying to look in what's happening to the quarks inside the proton.
Speaker 1: So you were--just slow down a second.  So you were working with the accelerator, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no.  That was no accelerator.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was--this is theoret--but the--it was theoretical work based upon results from accelerators.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So it was strictly theoretical work.  And so we're always trying to understand what's going on inside protons, right.  And so protons and neutrons are composed of things called quarks.  So when--so a proton, you would think principally as two up and one down quarks, and so when they collide, these things come together and the quarks scatter off of each other, and they are held together by other things called gluons; like as glue of the quark.  So when it scatters, or quarks were scattering off quarks, gluons were scattering gluons, and so it's a rather complicated mess.  So you try to make some kind of sense out of what goes on.  And it's amazing.  I mean, a proton is an elementary particle, but I think of it it's almost like a bag of garbage, right, when they form--maybe that's not--that may be not so pleasant, but you can think of two big trucks hauling chickens together, right.  So when they collide, chickens fly everywhere, and you're trying to understand, you know, what's going on.  The truck is the proton, the chickens are the inner constituents, and you try to understand (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (simultaneous) (unclear)--you try to understand things--
Speaker 2: --yeah, the quarks and the gluons are the inner constituents of the protons and neutrons.  And so, you're trying to, by scattering the protons, you--I mean, you get debris.  It's like these chickens, you get a hundred chickens going in different directions.  But you try to understand from that, some fundamental ideas of what these chickens are all about.  And so, that's the goal in accelerators when you do these types of scatterings.  So one of the things you try to do is to create particles that have been seen before.  And this is often done in proton-proton machines, and most recently at the Large Hadron Collider at CERN [The European Organization for Nuclear Research, Meyrin, Switzerland].  You know, people are scattering protons, protons and discovering, or the last of the really long sought out particles, the Higgs boson, that they are saying that they have discovered now and trying to analyze that data.  So what you do with the protons is to create particles never seen before, and then you can take other machines.  If you know what the mass of this new particle, like the Higgs, you can create--you can take electrons and positrons or--a positron is an--just like an electron, but opposite charge and opposite other things about it.  But you can tune these things to the energy of that particle you're looking for, you can produce many of it, because they don't have--electrons and positrons are like the quarks.  These are like the minute things, but without a lot of internal structure that we've seen.  Maybe one day, people will see the internal structure, but our machines nowadays are not able to probe inside these electrons and positrons and quarks, so what you do is scatter the electrons and positrons at just the right energy, and you don't get so much of all the other debris.  And you can produce lots of these particles you're looking for, pin down masses and so many other properties of those particles.  So that's how we play off proton-proton machines versus electron-positron machines.  And, in fact, there's a big international collaboration now to build an electron-positron machine that will be tuned to the energies to see these new things coming out of CERN now.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So anyway, so that's--that was the kind of thing I was doing; trying to understand the scattering processes.   Now, there were several years later when I went to Fermilab [Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Batavia, Illinois] that I actually made the transition from studying those kinds of scattering processes to actually building the equipment that did the scattering, building the particle accelerator.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, yes.  So, at that point, you're basically doing the theoretical work as a (simultaneous) mathematician--
Speaker 2: Theoretical work (simultaneous), right.
Speaker 1: --looking at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Looking at the scatterings (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --the results of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --of what can we learn.  Yes.  Right.  What can we learn from the scattering.
Speaker 1: So, you basically had the data from other--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --from collisions, so you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: From collisions.  You take the data and you try to understand; make sense out of it.  Does it fit the standard model that physicists say describes these objects.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so people are looking for deviations from the (laughs)--that's the thing about science, you know.  You never--science, you never stop.  What I mean, [Albert] Einstein's theory of relativity way back in early-1900s, people still today trying to look for violations of it.  They--if you work on projects, some people are hoping to substantiate it, others are hoping to look for violations, because you win a Nobel Prize when you find (laughs)--when you find the violation.
Story_ID: 27390
Speaker 1: Is there anything else about Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] that you--oh, there is something else about Princeton I know.  Oh, that's where you changed your name.
Speaker 2: That's where I changed my name.
Speaker 1: Ending an experience of--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Shadu--
Speaker 2: Chamangwana.
Speaker 1: Chama--
Speaker 2: Chamangwana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In Tanzania.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Right.  So when I was a graduate student at Princeton around '73 [1973], I wanted to go to Tanzania when I finished and teach at the university there.  So I wanted to get everything in order, right.  So I changed my name.  I had a friend, Shadu Chamangwana, who was a graduate student; unfortunately, he's passed away now, but he was a good friend.  And I had him to draw up a list of names, and based upon how they sounded and what they meant, I chose my name, and so, Sakazi means "hardworker of a male sex"; the "kazi" is the worker part, and "Sa" is the male part; and my daughter is Makazi, which is the female version, M-A-K-A-Z-I.  So I did that.  And so the main reason, though, I really liked what President Julius Nyerere is doing in Tanzania.  And so I wanted to be a part of that.  And also, I guess, I should also say, at that time, many African Americans were changing their names to African names.  But I wanted to do mine permanently, so I went home to Atlanta [Georgia], and there was an attorney there, Marvin Arrington, who eventually became the president of the City Council, he was a former Sunday school teacher of mine, and he was an attorney.  So he helped me to change my name legally with the State of Georgia.  So I never wanted to go back.  Unfortunately, many of my friends have changed their names back (laughs) to what they were before.
Speaker 1: They changed their names back to what they were?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you didn't have a sense of family--that you'd be betraying your family or anything by changing your name?
Speaker 2: No.  But it was a little bit.  I mean, but I had the advantage of having a stepfather [David Graves], okay.  I would imagine it would have been more difficult, you know, with my father [Frank Mackoroyal Sawyer], because he died about the same time.  I never got into that point, of having a father who, looking at his name disappearing, right.  But my mother always called me Michael 'til the day she died, so it was okay, you know (laughs).  You know, I have a younger daughter named Sharifa, who doesn't like her name. Sharifa.  She wants to be called Daisha, which I don't like, so I still call her Sharifa (laughs), just like my called me Michael.  I guess I should change, though.
Speaker 1: Is Daisha a name that she--
Speaker 2: You know, it's a common name, you know, you hear among friends.  You know, it's kind of one of these, you know, like, Teneisha and a lot of the names you hear among young African Americans (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: But her friends call her that?
Speaker 2: --so she likes that.  Yeah, Daisha.  She has everybody--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the reason she doesn't like Sharifa is that children used to make fun of her, you know, "reefer," right.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: You know, you smoke reefer, you know, Sharifa (laughs).  That's why I think that she decided--she never grew, you know, grew back to liking it again.  So.
Story_ID: 27391
Speaker 1: Did, did you get a--ever go to Tanzania for--?
Speaker 2: Unfortunately, I didn't go until 2009.  I went there during the summer of June 2009 to help them to establish a new university of science, technology, and innovation, in one of the political regions called the Mara, M-A-R-A; the Mara Region.   So I had a great time.  I was there for about three weeks, and I traveled throughout the different--all the districts of the Mara Region, talking to educators, talking to the political leaders.  And I left with them my best idea of a design to address the needs.  It occurred to me that they needed something other than a centralized university.  You need to have a home base, of course, that will house your liberal arts, and sciences, and so forth, and some engineering perhaps, but each of the districts was confronted with a different economic problem.  For instance, the--one of the districts had fishing right on the Lake Victoria, and the fishing yield had gone drastically down.  So I was proposing that they establish an aquatic school of technology there.  They had overfished, and then they also had a gift from Egypt of this type of fish that took over the other fish that was indigenous.  And so they just had some--so they needed to have some scientific studies of that.  And then another district was out of what--the Serengeti, the beautiful plain that you see, where I had a chance to go and just see thousands of wildebeests, thousands of zebras.  That region, you need to have an animal science department, not only for helping to take care of the wildlife, but also the domestic animals were big in that region.  So that's basically why I tried to do, to try to give them something that would address the economic, social needs of each of those different districts.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Tanzania, they point out in the '70s [1970s], was considered one of the more progressive of the African countries.
Speaker 2: Oh, it's extremely.  Oh, [Julius] Nyerere was a visionary.  One of the good things he did, he made everybody learn Swahili in the elementary schools, right.  So that unified them.  It was amazing how much language unifies a country.  I mean, Tanzania doesn't have the strife of next-door Kenya.  And a lot of it, I think, is because of what the kind of foundation that Nyerere put in place.  Everybody speaks Swahili.  Everybody in high school had to study English.  I find that the English was not learned so well, but the Swahili, everybody speaks the Swahili all over the country.  So that made a tremendous difference.  While I was there, I had a chance to meet his son, and we actually look a little alike; quite a bit alike.  He's taller than I am.
Speaker 1: (simultaneous) (unclear), I was thinking that--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --you know, it was (simultaneous)isn't it amazing you seem to resemble--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --some (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: So an interesting thing happened (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --so.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  An interesting thing happped.  So one of things I wanted to do was to go to downtown to the farmers' shop, the market are.  So I was just strolling around, you know, doing that.  Okay.  So the next day, we went to Julius Nyerere's house where his son was, and he said I had gotten him in a lot of trouble, because there was a very important meeting that he was not able to make, and somebody reported to me and him he was seen downtown shopping (laughs).  So that's so funny.  They thought I was his son (laughs).  Oh, it was interesting.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I can see that you sort of resemble--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Julius Nyerere--
Speaker 2: Oh, really.  Man.
Speaker 1: --so I can imagine his son (simultaneous) yeah--
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yeah.  But I mean my resemblance is much closer with his son.  He's taller, but we look a lot alike (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, there were a lot of American expatriates--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Sure.
Speaker 1: --in Tanzania in those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I know the Center for Black Education had a group over there in those days.
Speaker 2: Oh, really?  Okay.
Speaker 1: Former SNCC [Students Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] members, Bob [Robert] Moses was living (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: --and all the people--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  A lot of people went there.  Right.
Story_ID: 27392
Speaker 1: Tell us, what did you do right after then, you know, getting your Ph.D. from Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey].
Speaker 2: Right.  Okay.  After a Ph.D. from Princeton, I went to the University of Rochester [Rochester, New York], where I was a research associate.  My first semester, I basically did research.  But my second semester, the chair asked me to also teach, so they gave me an assistant professorship part-time.  And I did that for the next year and a half.  But most significantly, when I arrived at Rochester, that's where I met my wife, Estella.  She was already there.  She had been there a year before I arrived.  She finished Connecticut College [New London, Conecticut] in '75 [1975] and immediately took a job there.  So she was an academic counselor in the dean's office.  And so, it's an interesting story because we have a very close friend named Jessie Moore who was a professor of history.  And he wanted to us two together.  Okay, so I had met Estella.  Jessie gave me her phone number, and I saw him a couple of times, "Did you call her," and I said, "No.  No."  I'm kind of bashful.  I said, "No."  The second time, he, "Give me your number."  (laughs).  So he gave it to her.  So somehow, you know, I don't know if she ended up calling me or I calling her in the end, but we got together, and our first date was 'Car Wash,' the movie, 'Car Wash.'  So it always has a special place in my heart whenever I hear 'Car Wash' music, and you hear it quite a bit nowadays.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah.  At basketball games, they play part of it--
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah, you could hear it all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, University of--this is like a postdoc [post-doctoral position] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: It was a postdoc, right, right, right.
Speaker 1: At the University of (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: And then I went to the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Was there anything significant about your research at Rochester?
Speaker 2: Well, Rochester, I basically started to continuing with theoretical physics research, still looking at--there was a new type of particle that had been discovered called the psi, P-S-I, and, so I did theoretical work trying to understand some of the ways that it decays.  And so I was continuing to apply the kind of apparatus that I learned from graduate school to problems like that.
Speaker 1: The decay, that's the--
Speaker 2: You know, when it changes.  When it gives off--it disappears and gives off other particles.  And that's what often happens when you create these.  In fact, it essentially always happens except for the proton and a few other ones, that they only live a certain period of time.  So you want to see what is--what are the decay products, what particles come out of the decay.  And so I was studying things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And you were at the University of Rochester in 19--
Speaker 2: '78 [1978]--'76 [1976] through '78 [1978].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  And then in '78 [1978] you went to--
Speaker 2: University of Maryland, College Park.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was nice, so we got married in '77 [1977], and so throughout our career, we never really had a problem trying to merge two professional careers.  When I left Rochester, my wife wanted to get her master's in public administration.  So she went to American University in [Washington] D.C., so we moved and she did that, and my appointment was for two years, and her degree was a two-year program.  So it worked out perfectly.  But there, I was a postdoc again, in the Center for Theoretical Physics.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where Jim [James] Gates is today, though.  He's sitting at the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I was going to ask if he was at the university then.
Speaker 2: --yeah, he was (simultaneous) (unclear).  No, no, no.  He wasn't there then.  He was a graduate student probably at that time still.
Story_ID: 27393
Speaker 1: Were you still looking at the psi [subatomic particle] at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: No.  At the University of Maryland, I changed and started looking at other proper--other particles, pions; there are so many elementary particles to be studied, so tremendous task.  But I started looking at some other types of particles.
Speaker 1: Now, pion is a--
Speaker 2: A pion is a--it's composed of quarks, right.  It's composed of two quarks.  All particles that are composed of quarks we have a general for them called, hadrons.  And so, like, it seems that in most of career I tended to study hadrons.  These are the things that I think of as almost, you know, the big trucks with all the chickens, you know, a lot of internal structure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, with the Hadron Collider they're studying these kinds of particles?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  When they call it the Large Hadron Collider, they mean protons getting into protons.  It's a hadron.  Anything composed of quarks, we tend to call hadrons.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the other thing is, electrons, the little speck particles, we call leptons.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So.  All right.  So.  So, you're there for two years.
Speaker 2: Two years.  Two years.
Speaker 1: At the University of Maryland.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Then what?
Speaker 2: Then I went to the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory.
Speaker 1: So this is 1980 then?
Speaker 2: That's 1980, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We tend to call it Fermilab for short.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's--Fermilab is in Chicago, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It's about thirty miles west.  It's in Batavia, B-A-T-A-V-I-A.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Batavia, Illinois.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And named for Enrico Fermni.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: From the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And Fermilab, is there a collider there?
Speaker 2: Yes.  But there they have a proton--well, unfortunately, I guess--technically, is the program has been terminated.  But at that time, it was a proton-antiproton collider that I worked, and I was in the department that supplied the antiprotons for the collision in the big accelerator.  So most of these accelerator complexes really are more than one accelerator, because you're doing things in different accelerators.  So the bigger accelerator that they called Tevatron, T-E-V-A-T-R-O-N; that's the big one, like four miles around.  And you want to have protons circulating in one direction, and antiprotons circulating in the opposite direction, and at strategic locations they collide with one another.  But the beams are not destroyed when they collide, so they just go right through.  You got, you know, some collisions each time with the same beams.  But the antiprotons don't exist in enough abundance, at least in our part of the universe, so you have to create them.  And so there's a series of steps where you extract protons off of that main accelerator ring, and they hit targets.  When the protons strike the targets, lots of stuff comes out, and a few of those things that come out are antiprotons.  And you take those antiprotons and send them into rings, that is, you call them the accumulator ring, so that every burst of protons that hit the target, you get more into proton.  And you just continue to do that until you get lots of antiprotons.  Once you get enough circulating, then you take those antiprotons and you send them back out into the main ring so that you have enough to collide with the protons, and then you study what happens in that collision.  And it's that collision that discovered the last of the quarks to be solved.  And that's the top quark.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: So I've worked on the part--the antiproton part of that is where I worked.  I worked on--I developed a method to make final corrections to the magnets that guide and focus the antiproton beam.  And also, I worked on the system called stochastic cooling that shrinks the beam sizes down, because the beam, if you look it in cross-section, it's big.  You want it to be very small so when they collide with the protons, you get more collisions.  You won't have a huge beam, right, because it's too diffused.  So those split stochastic cooling systems were set up to shrink the beam sizes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So you were there when the top quark was discovered, right?
Speaker 2: I had left--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --at that time.  No, I had left.  So, I left in '88 [1988] because I got interested in new types of accelerators of the future.  So I went to Argonne [National Laboratory, Lemont, Illinois] in 1988.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But we're talking, we're going to get to that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (simultaneous)Oh you are-- Okay.
Speaker 1: But through the '80s [1980s], there's so much is--goes in on Chicago here.
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: So, you're--so is this where you actually build an accelerator?
Speaker 2: Yes.  At Fermilab, right.  It's a big team, you know.  It's a big team, because every component has a group of people; small teams on each component.  So I guess in my group, there may have been about four or five physicists trying to build the system to shrink the beam.  And then you have a core of engineers.  You have a group of--you have the laboratories that assemble the equipment, technicians.  And my main job was to go out and to insure that the beam cooling equipment that they put together met our specifications.  So I had to supervise the assembly, the quality control tests, on those sub-system components.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this work that you did there, you know, contributed to the discovery of the top quark?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 27394
Speaker 1: You know, you alluded to the Higgs boson a little while ago.
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: Now, this is like the--what was the relation between top quark and Higgs boson?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, the Higgs boson is--that is the thing that gives mass to all of the particles.  So if a particle is going to have mass, it has it through its interaction with the Higgs.  Okay.  It's kind of complicated in terms of what interacts--every particle is created by a field that exists everywhere, okay.  So this field creates the Higgs particle.  And so when other particles interact with this field that supplies it's particles, they interact and they add mass.  And there was a great analogy that people give, because we're talking about inertia mass.  And inertia mass is sort of the resistance to motion, right.  So people like to give an analogy.  For instance, if you have ah party going on with people scattered all throughout the room socializing, but President Barack Obama enters the room and tries to get from one side of the room to the other, right.  If the people weren't in the room, he would have no resistance to his motion, right.  But the fact he enters the room, everybody converges.  So that's what the Higgs' field does, right.  It sends all of the interactions of Higgs' particles to interact with the top quark or anything that it gives mass to.  And that's how it works.  This is the particle people have been--I mean, that's--it's been the pillar of the standard model of elementary particles for decades, but has never been discovered.  And so, finally, it seems that they discovered the Higgs over in CERN [The European Center for Nuclear Research, Meyrin, Switzerland].  And so, so that's what the Higgs was about.  And so, there would be other particles.  There will be surprises, and that is the most interesting thing to me, because you build an accelerator trying to do anything, and then you get surprises.  And there's some other big--there's some big anomalies out there people are trying to understand.  Like most of the mass in the universe is called dark matter, that we haven't observed it at all.  I mean, the stuff that we observe is only a few percent.  You know, I'm looking at you and all around us, it's ordinary matter, which may be only three or four percent of everything in the universe.  Most of the matter out there we haven't observed.  And you know it exists by studying the structure of galaxies and so forth.
Speaker 1: Why do it call it dark matter?
Speaker 2: Because it hasn't been seen before.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: When we were in physics, we get things simple (laughs).  Like the top quark (laughs).  Bottom quark.  And the family of quark: one is the top and the other is the bottom.  We just call it that.  So dark matter, in a sense that we haven't observed it yet.
Speaker 1: It could be--well.  So it's not invisible, but it can be observed, but it's (simultaneous) it hasn't been observed yet--
Speaker 2: Well, we would have to see it through some other mechanism.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Infrared or something like that, or if you can discovery some particle and somehow understand how to interact with it.  But, things we don't see, we call dark matter, but even worse than that, about 75 percent of stuff out there is some type of anti-gravitational thing going on.  Because we know the universe is accelerating in its expansion.  Okay.  And it doesn't make sense if you just have everything wanting to attract, you would think things would--even though there may have been a big explosion, the Big Bang, at some point, you would think it would sort of slow down because matter is attracted; but no, things are blowing apart at an accelerated rate.  So that's some anti-gravitational thing that's going on, and that's called dark energy.
Speaker 1: So, they are stronger than the--
Speaker 2: It's even stronger than--.
Speaker 1: --than gravity.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  Because gravity has not even slowed this expansion.  So there's some big things going on that we really need to get a better handle on.
Story_ID: 27395
Speaker 1: So you worked in the Fermilab [Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory] in Chicago [Illinois] with--now, you got involved with the Harold Washington [first African American mayor of Chicago] Campaign in 1980.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was interesting.
Speaker 1: Well, now, tell us about that, because this is a big part of (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a good experience.  When my wife and I first moved to--okay.  When my wife and I were in Washington, D.C., we used to listen to the Larry King program when he would come on.  And so when we went to Chicago [Illinois], I was searching for Larry King and hit upon Lou Palmer, okay.  And he was a guy in Chicago who was a strong political motivator.  Right.  He didn't have a high political office or any of that.  But we listened to him.  He had an organization called, The Chicago Black United Communities, CBUC for short, and so he had political education classes, he and his wife, Georgia.  And so I graduated.  I took that class, I graduated, and I joined--you know, they taught us all about campaigning, all about, you now, the 'Machine,' how to defeat the 'Machine.'  And so based upon that, I, you know, got involved; my wife and I entered the campaign.  She was expecting our second child at that point, so she was not able to get around as much as I did.  But we were co-chairs of the West Suburban Coalition for the Election of Harold Washington.  And so we would have sort of parties in different people's homes to try to raise money for the campaign.  And so I did a lot of poll watching and, you know, distributing literature, and so, it was an exciting period.  Harold Washington, at that time, was in the State Legislature; state senator, I guess he must have been, or was he a congressman.  No, he was a congressman at that time; I'm sorry.  He was a congressman.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And he wasn't convinced that he could win.  The 'Machine' was too strong.  So he said, "Get me fifty thousand signatures, and then I'll run."  So Lou Palmer led the charge.  Right.  We were able to gather six-- fifty thousand signatures.  And he said, "I'm still not convinced.  Give me fifty thousand more."  Because he was basically saying, "I don't believe this.  So I'm giving you an impossible task."  We got him over one hundred thousand signatures.  And he decided to run.  But then--and then the rest is history, because you can draw a direct line between that whole movement, President [Barack] Obama, being president, of Chicago, because he got his political grounding there.  And the--you know, the foundation was set by Harold Washington.  And then other ones.  Carol Moseley-Braun became a senator.  She was big in that movement.  So, the kind of thing that happened at that time set the stage for, I think, blacks in Chicago to be liberated politically.
Speaker 1: Well, it didn't--well, it didn't last long (laughs).
Speaker 2: It didn't last, yeah.  (laughs).
Speaker 1: It lasted longer that it should have but people in Chicago were watching us and said, "We're liberated now?" (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: Right. Yeah.
Speaker 1: But for a while, it sure certainly seemed like we were on our way.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We're on our way.  And then people, like, Clarence Page at the 'Chicago Tribune' started being a major editorial writer.  And so now he's a prominent journalist, or he got his--I mean, he owes it to the Harold Washington Campaign.  That gave him his break.  President Obama's Senior Advisor--I can't--what is his name.  Boy, I can't call his name.
Speaker 1: Axlerod?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  David Axelrod.
Speaker 1: Yeah, David Axelrod.
Speaker 2: Who was a reporter.  I mean, he got his--I mean, he got his--I mean, he rose in prominence during the Harold Washington Administration.  So, so many people benefited.  And then, we also had a glimpse of another form of racism called, I like think of obstructionism.  That's kind of like a high flown form of racism.  No matter what Harold Washington said, the leaders in the city council said the opposite, the white leaders of the city council.  They gave him a hard time.  And so when [Barack] Obama became president, I was--I had an open ear to this kind of thing.  And sure enough, it happened again.  No matter what he--if he takes their point of view, they're against him.  So obstructionism is really just another form of, to me, my Jim Crow upbringing, that I've seen, in sort of a sophisticated way.  Because, I mean, if you look, when he was first in--when Obama was first elected, people were saying, "I do not want"--and I don't want to call any names, and we all know who these people in Congress--is their number one priority is for Obama to fail.  But then that didn't sound too good to them.  So they changed it.  "Our number one priority is to make Obama a one-term president."  (laughs).  But they had recently said to fail.  And that's treasonist.  I don't see--I mean, that to me is treason.  Right.  And we have governors talking about seceding; that's treason.  But when our good friend Jeremiah Wright says, you know, "Damn America for this--."  He was vilified from end of the country to another.  I mean, that doesn't make sense to me (laughs).  But that's, you know, that's the new racism that we have to deal with.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this was a period of time when, yeah, there was a lot of strong political activity, and even from the western suburbs.
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: You were living in the suburbs.
Speaker 2: I was in the suburbs.
Speaker 1: You're not even going to be (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (simultaneous) No, I wasn't.
Speaker 1: --directly, I guess, impacted by Harold Washington.
Speaker 2: No.  I won't, not actually.  No, no.  But after he was elected, though, we moved into the city.  My wife became Assistant Commission[er] of Economic Development in his administration.  So we really did get into sort of the middle of--of life in Chicago in trying to improve it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he won a second term.
Speaker 2: He won a second term, but then, unfortunately, he passed away soon after that.
Story_ID: 27396
Speaker 1: You're at Fermilab [Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Batavia, Illinois] for all of this time, and eventually you moved over to Argonne [National Laboratory, Lemont, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  In 1988.
Speaker 1: In '88.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: And why did you go to Argonne now?
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, at that time, I got interested in new types of accelerators that would be more powerful than those that exist now.  They would take much less real estate, because the kind of ideas of ideas that people talking about, accelerators would--could fit inside the room we're in now, but be as powerful as the one that Stanford had, which was--it was just a two-mile shot; just straight; accelerate electrons as hard as you can.  The thing that got me interested in that is, people were developing fear of this new wakefield accelerator.  It's called plasma at the time; plasma wakefield accelerator.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: And they were assuming that the chamber that held the plasma, which is a cloud of electrons, was infinitely long and it would figure out how much you could accelerate electrons.  You would send one electron through that plasma, and it's called the driver; it would set up electric fields that would accelerate the trailing bunch of electrons.  And the point is, there was a Nobel Prize winner from CERN [The European Organization for Nuclear Research] who made this comment at a workshop that I attended, that, "How do you know that the driver will set these electric fields up in time before these things leave that finite length plasma chamber?"  Because people always assumed infinite because it's easier politic--theoretically.  But I decoupled from that workshop, went to my hotel room and actually I solved that problem over several days.  I wrote out the theoretical proof that, in fact, finite length chambers work very easily for plasma wakefield acceleration.  So people at Argonne--there was physicist there who was--his name was James Simpson, who had a group studying developing plasma wakefield accelerators.  And so he hired me to come over and to join that group.  And so that's how I--why I went to Argonne.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I stayed there for--that was only three years that I stayed.
Story_ID: 27397
Speaker 1: This is 1988 when you go with Argonne [National Laboratory, Lemont, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And this--now, I believe Carl Spight was there; is that true?
Speaker 2: He wasn't at Argonne.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  He was already working for a private firm.
Speaker 1: Right.  That's right.  That's right.  Yeah.  I know the name of it, and I can't think of it.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They were developing chips of--
Speaker 2: Probably.  I don't know the details.
Speaker 1: Sonicraft.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. yeah.  That's it.  Sonicraft.  Right. Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, were there any other African American scientists there?
Speaker 2: No, they had none.  I don't think they had more in a sense (laughs).  It's kind of funny.  I laugh about that.  Maybe I'm so bad (laughs) (unclear).  That's interesting, 'cause I was the--my friend, Benny [Bennett] Ward, was the first African American to get a Ph.D. from Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], and I was the last one (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you know a Hunter Adams?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I knew Hunter Adams, not that well, though.  I mean, I met him.  I should put it that way.  I have met him.  Yes.
Speaker 1: I know many thought he was a physicist, but he--
Speaker 2: I had never knew he was a physicist.  I never thought of that.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But he worked at Argonne.
Speaker 2: Oh, he did?  Okay.  I didn't even know that.
Speaker 1: He did at one time, yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, really?  Okay.  I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now in '88 [1988], you were featured in--or '87 [1987], you were featured in 'Jet Magazine?'
Speaker 2: I was featured several times in 'Jet.'  I don't remember the exact dates; about three times.  But I remember '85 [1985] there was a nice feature in 'Ebony Magazine.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think that was in 1985, when they were talking about blacks in science and what to expect in the future.  And they sent a team over to Fermilab [Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Batavia, Illinois] where I was working and filmed me with some of the stochastic beam cooling equipment that I was building.
Speaker 1: Now did you--were you featured by 'Black Collegiate' at all in those days?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  Not "Black Collegiate."
Speaker 1: I know they did a few--
Speaker 2: Well, I don't--there was another magazine that did an article on me, but I don't remember the name of it.  It may have been 'Black Collegiate.'  I'm not really sure.
Speaker 1: I know they did a lot on the black scientists.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: That's where I learned a lot about who was doing what reading 'Black Collegiate.'
Speaker 2: Oh, really.  Okay.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: It seemed to really focus on it in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Oh, really.  Okay.  There was another magazine; could have been 'Black Collegiate.'  I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But certainly in 'Ebony.'
Speaker 2: In 'Ebony,' right.
Speaker 1: That's in August of '85 [1985].
Speaker 2: Right.  I think it was.
Story_ID: 27398
Speaker 1: You went to Ghana in '88 [1988], too.  Is this true?
Speaker 2: Okay.  So in '88 [1988]--no, it was '91 [1991], 'cause in '88 [1988], I was invited to go to Ghana.  They had this lectureship for--called the Sierra Lincoln Lectureship.  Unfortunately, it--the students went on strike and it had to be canceled.  But soon after that, I was invited to go back again.  And this was for something called the 'DuBois-Padmore-Nkrumah Pan-African Lectureship' in '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: Okay.  In '91 [1991] there was--
Speaker 2: It was the same, the same type thing, actually, but it was sponsored through the [W.E.B.] DuBois Centre in Ghana, in Accra [Ghana].
Speaker 1: Okay. We have--now, does this sound familiar to you, the Aggrey-Fraser--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.  That's what he was.  The Aggrey-Fraser-Guggisberg [Lectureship].  Right.  Right.  That was the one that the students--
Speaker 1: That's it.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That was '91 [1991]?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.  That was the first one, around '88 [1988].
Speaker 1: On the first one.  But the one you couldn't attend?
Speaker 2: Right.  The one I couldn't attend.  But, then '91 [1991], it was at the DuBois-Padmore-Nkrumah Pan-African Lectureship that I went and talked about science and technology.  I visited universities, the main university campuses, as well as a number of secondary-primary schools.
Speaker 1: And, you were also, in '88 [1988], a founding member of the Edward Bouchet-Abdus Salam Institute [EBASI].
Speaker 2: Right, in 1988.  We had our first meeting, and we decided we want to have African Americans and Africans on the continent collaborating on projects; and so we started that.  Out of that, my involvement led me into be one of the founders, sort of representing advisory of a later organization called the, African Laser Centre.  And that was much later, of course.  I mean, that was in 2003.
Speaker 1: Now, Edward Bouchet, tell us about him.
Speaker 2: Edward Bouchet was the first African American to receive a Ph.D. in any field and it happened in physics.  And he received it from Yale University in the mid-eighteen hundreds.  I don't remember the exact date, but in the mid-eighteen hundreds.  So to honor him, we decided to call it the Edward Bouchet--at first it was just Edward Bouchet, the name of the group.  But then Abdus Salam, who's a Pakistani physicist who founded this tremendous International Centre for Theoretical Physics in Trieste [Italy], passed away, and to honor him, we called it Edward Bouchet-Abdus Salam Institute or EBASI, which we though sounded African.  I don't know why, but (laughs).  It sounds African.
Speaker 1: EBASI, yeah.  It does (laughs).  Okay.  So, now, did the organization meet--have an international meeting?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We had several.  We had a number of national meetings.  We had then in Benin; we had them in Accra in Ghana; there was one in Gaborone [Botswana]; I think those were it.  We would meet, like, every several years.  It wasn't an annual meeting.  Funding is kind of hard to come by for these international meetings.  So we had about three or four total.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Does the organization still exist?
Speaker 2: Oh, it still exists.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  There's a physicist named Milton Slaughter, who is the Chair of the Governing Council [of EBASI], where the council is composed of several African American physicists and several from the--Africans from the continent.  Milton Slaughter used to be at the University of New Orleans [New Orleans, Louisiana], but, unfortunately, [Hurricane] Katrina, well, it's just, you know, it's so devastating.  He eventually moved right after that to Florida.  I don't remember where in Florida he's located.  But he took a retirement, then he and his wife relocated.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us about the Saltpond Redevelopment--
Speaker 2: Redevelopment Institute.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Redevelopment Institute
Speaker 2: Yes.  When we lived in Chicago [Illinois], my medical doctor, at the time, Andrew Agen Davis, is from Saltpond [Ghana], and he told me that the town used to be in better economic shape.  It had a ceramics industry there, but when that shut down, things just went really badly, and he wanted to do something for his hometown, so he asked my wife and I to join the board.  And so over the years--okay.  We stayed on the board until we left Chicago in '91 [1991].  But during that time, you know, we were able to establish a backup generator for the hospital, because you had bad situations where a surgeon could be in the middle of surgery and lights go out.  So we got  a backup generator, water reservoir, we donated many books to the library there, and so many great things; and they've continued, of course, long after we left there.  Although, I have recently--Andrew now has gotten me to reengage with them.  He established a task force for development to try to chart so the past--for the, you know, the path for the near future.  And so I'm on that again.  So I've sort of gotten back involved in it again.
Story_ID: 27399
Speaker 1: Tell us about some of your experiments in the--at the wakefield accel--for wakefield acceleration, I guess.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, yes.  So the wakefield acceleration, you know, as I said before, some of the theoretical things that I did, was first proving that it is a viable method of accelerations, and before the government sinks all the money into it.  When I was in the Soviet Union, I collaborated with a professor by the name of [Leonid] Gorbunov at the Lebedev Institute in Russia in Moscow.  And we showed how to position the drive and the trailing bunch in such a way you could specify the density of the plasma to maximize the principle.  'Cause you can think of the--they call it wakefield because you do a graph of the electric field that's like that (motioning with hands).  It's like waves on an ocean.  So when the electron is trailing sits at the maximum, that's where the field is greatest.  And so we specified for the plasma what density you need in your plasma so that when they go through, you fix this trailing bunch at the maximum accelerating electric field.  Okay.  S. that was sort of a second theoretical contribution I made; and then, being in the group that was building the apparatus, to do first the principle test of these.  So I was a part of, you know, the things that--that group; some of the experimental work.  I mean, plasmas were one thing, we had other types of materials called dielectric materials that we were using.  So I was a part of that, you know, doing the first early experiments on this new idea.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I did it for three years, but at that time, I wanted to try to get to an HBCU [historically black college and university], which is why I cut my time short there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is--we didn't talk about how you got to the Soviet Union to Russia.  So what was the--this is--you were there under the auspices of--you were the Interacademy--
Speaker 2: Right.  Exchange Scholar.
Speaker 1: --Exchange Scholar.
Speaker 2: Our National Academy of Science, and the Soviets' Academy of Science--they had these exchange programs, man-months, so I--one person times twelve--six months, I used six of those man-months.  And so we would exchange people.  So that gave me an opportunity to go, and we took the whole family--my wife went with me, we had two little girls; one kindergarten and one third grade; and so we had a chance to go, and I was able to do research at the Lebedev Institute on wakefield acceleration.  That was the first thing I did.  We were there for a couple of months.  Then we went to what was then called the Leningrad Nuclear Physics Institute, [LIOPH? St. Petersburg, Russia] is the short--Leningrad Nuclear Physics Institute before the name of city was changed.  And so I worked with a physicist there by the name of Mark Strikman, and he actually has since immigrated to the U.S.  He's a distinguished professor at Penn State University [Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania].  Then, two months there; we went to the Yerevan Physics Institute in Armenia for one month.  And then we went back to Moscow for the final month.  So we--that was a great experience.  I had a great time doing research.  It's interesting.  You know, one thing I think about that, because I never knew what white physicists felt like, because in this country, as an African American physicist, you know, you have all these problems; people try to ignore you and all kinds--but it was amazing that the Russians treated me like one of them.  So I said, "Ah-ha!"  So this is what it feels like (laughs).  You know, to be in--wish we had that atmosphere here.  People would come, you know, ask me my opinions, everybody wanted to work with me on projects.  When I hit the Lebedev Institute, Gorbunov was just ready for me.  And we immediately started working.  When I hit the Leningrad Nuclear Physics Institute, Mark Strikman was ready.  You know, they were anxious for me to get there and to work with them.  It was amazing.  It was a completely different phenomenon that I'm used to.
Story_ID: 27400
Speaker 1: You mentioned this in the beginning, too, and I guess we didn't really ask you any details about it.  But what--what is the American side of that like?  You know, from--I mean, for someone who is as talented as you (simultaneous) you know--
Speaker 2: It's very difficult.  People are very (unclear)--okay.  I'll give you a classic example of the kind of experiences you have.  We had a professor who came and visited the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] from the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington].  And he had copies--he gave a talk; after the talk, we're all sort of standing around, about three, four, or five of us; he had about three copies of his paper.  Okay.  So he gave one to one person, one to the next, and gave me one; he realized he didn't have another one, he took it out of my hand and gave it to one of my colleagues, without thinking.  And afterwards, my colleague, he was just apologizing; but it's not for him to apologize for this guy's ignorance.  But it's that kind--it's constant, you know, belittling you and putting you down, and not willing to hire you.  I mean, it's a struggle.  It really is a ma--even though you go to the same schools they go to.  In many cases, you outperform them in schools, but once you finish school, the politics sets in.  And it's completely different.
Speaker 1: Do you think it's conscious behavior or just--
Speaker 2: Much of it is unconscious.  Some of it is conscious, but some of them are just mean people and conscious.  Okay.  But in many cases, people like this guy--I don't--he didn't of--he just felt he needed to get his paper in the hands of somebody where it's going to make a difference (laughs).  So it's that kind of thing that you're dealing with all the time, you know.  So it's just--I mean, it's a struggle.  It is a major struggle.  And many fields, I think, have done much better.  But I think mathematicians are better than physicist when it comes to this.  I think we are the worst, actually, in terms of these kinds of conscious and mostly subconscious things that go on.  Because I don't know why physicists they're the smartest people in the world.  I don't know.  I think they're smarter than mathematicians, and (simultaneous) somehow--
Speaker 1: I think they do, yeah.
Speaker 2: --yeah, for some reason.  And it's hard for them to come to the realization that you might be as smart as they are.  And it's something there that's just not right.  But, yeah, so I had a very difficult time at Fermilab [Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Batavia, Illinois], but it, you know, I had some extremely positive relationships with some of the white physicists at Fermilab.  In fact, the director of our laboratory, Leon Lederman, who is a Nobel Laureate, I mean, he made the situation possible for me to go there in the first place.  I was able to get a Ford Foundation postdoc [post-doctoral position].  And I don't think without his intervention--you know, some of the--there were about two other black physicists at Fermilab when I got there.  They went to see him personally, and I think that's what made it possible for me to take my Ford and use it at Fermilab.  And once I was there, I was sent to, you know the theory group, I don't think they really wanted me.  I mean, they treated me really badly.  And, but Lederman made it possible for me to stay, work on this system, that, you know, I was able to be a part of the whole discovery of the top quark.  He also made the possibility for me to work with a very famous physicist there by the name of James Bjorken.  And I owe Lederman and Bjorken, you know, the world for what they--I mean, they were just beautiful to work with.  I mean, Bjorken is just a fantastic guy.  And I remember I was complaining to him about the way people treated me and the prejudice--and he made an interesting point.  He said, "We all have our prejudices.  That's not the important thing.  The important thing is how you deal with it."  And so I thought about that, because even here, I have prejudices.  So, if I find that I'm treating people unequal, I always think about what Bjorken told me, you know.  It's how you deal with your prejudices that's important.  Right.  So, yeah, it's difficult.  So any youngster coming along, you know, I do all I can to help them, and just pray for a better day.  But the better day is coming fast, because the young whites are much better than they are.  I mean, I can see the turnover, even among the undergraduates.  This is why they are so accepting of gay marriage and, you know, friends of all ethnic groups, because they are all undergraduates together.  And it wasn't that way before.  I mean, my generation, as I said, I was in the transition period, so that a typical white physicist would not know anybody black from the undergraduate days.  So I think the beauty of the U.S., and the hope for the future are the young people.  The fact that we have, now, people of all races studying together, people are more open-minded about things.  And the older generation, I think, is extremely unhappy (laughs).  But the hope is being the youth.  I see the difference.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I thought I'd ask you about that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But in Russia, you say, you were--
Speaker 2: They loved me there.
Speaker 1: They sought you out.
Speaker 2: In fact, it's interesting.  Before I went, okay, people were so concerned about how I would be treated, and so I went to the National Academy in Washington, and they were so concerned trying to sort of give me some pointers, what to look out for.  When I hit Russia, man, people just loved us from the very beginning; loved our children.  I remember one day I was taking my younger girl to her kindergarten class, and this older Russian woman--they call the older ones "babushka."  And like we say, "babushka," it's not; but it's "babushka" in Russian.  This woman was just waving and running, and I'm like, why is this woman running and waving.  And she came up, and she just grabbed my daughter and just hugged her and hugged her, and tears coming; she said, "Oh, beautifully."  You know, (speaking in Russian), which is "good girl," you know, "beautiful child."  It's amazing.  They just embraced us.  It's amazing how well they treated us when we were there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That is--that's quite a story.  Now, you were there for six months?
Speaker 2: Six months, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, from the end of December 'til June.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That was kind of an interesting year because my children had two Christmases in a sense, because we had Christmas here, and they don't celebrate Christmas, at least at the time in the Soviet Union; but they celebrate that--the children got their gifts on New Year's (laughs).  So we had to get gifts again (laughs).  So they had two Santa Clauses (laughs).
Story_ID: 27401
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about--now, what is the heavy flavor factory?
Speaker 2: Okay, so, the different particles were up, down are sort of two flavors, of quarks, basically; or top, down.  Those were the two flavors.  And so there are particles that are composed of, say, you know, two bottom-type quarks.  And so, it's called the B-zero-B-zero bar, and the idea is to tune your electron and positron beams to the energy of these B.-zeros so you could produce many of them.  And so that's why I was saying, before they used the protons to discover things, and if you understand what mass to sit on, you set your electron-positron to that energy, and you produce many of them.  And so we call those "factories."  So that's a heavy flavor--bottom quark is a heavy--it's a heavy--one of the heavier quark; so it's called a heavy flavor factory.  And so Mark Strikman and I, and that was the thing.  I was saying earlier when I hit the Leningrad Nuclear Physics Institute [St. Petersburg, Russia], you know, he was ready to work with me on some ideas of using the next generation electron-positron collider, which is going to--it's--there's a huge collaboration internationally, and Japan looks to be on a fast track to be the winning country to build it.  But they're going to a build electron-positron collider, and sit on the Higgs, or sit on, you know, it's some heavy flavor quarks or whatever.  But that type of thing is called a factory.  So we had an idea of using this International Linear Collider as a heavy flavor factory in sort of a, you know, not the usual sense.  We had a different scheme for doing it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Where is the International Linear Collider located?
Speaker 2: It doesn't exist yet.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: So it's decentralized all over the world.  We have research groups everywhere.  You know, I've been involved in it for a number of years.  But Japan seem--we don't have the appetite in the U.S. right now for investing, you know, several billion dollars into a major--which is unfortunate, 'cause we've lost our edge in high-energy physics as well as in some other areas.  So Japan is sort of the favorite right now, I would think, despite what happened in Fukushima.  Fukushima.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What happened there?  Tell us what happened?
Speaker 2: Oh, they had the problem with a nuclear reactor, which had nothing to do with the physicists, right?  But still, the amount of resources that go into trying to clean up when they had the tsunami, and they had the meltdown, and the big mess there from that nuclear reactor; the government having to put a lot of money into solving that problem.  So despite having to put the money into solving that problem at the reactor site, dealing with so many people who have been displaced, they're still willing to put money on the table to land this International Linear Collider.  There's no reason U.S. cannot do that.  But, unfortunately, the Congress, it just wants to cut, cut, cut, cut, and it makes no sense whatsoever.  Other countries are doing worse than we are.  I mean, the European economy is in very bad shape, but they are still going full speed ahead with their Large Hadron Collider in CERN [The European Organization for Nuclear Research, Meyrin, Switzerland]; there's a big fusion project that's an international project that's located over in France; they won that.  So we are not building a major international laboratory on the scale of what the Europeans and the Japanese want to do.  And it's really unfortunately, because these laboratories take ten to twenty years to construct.  They take a long time.  They're very expensive.  So if you don't get in the ballgame now with one, I mean, you're out of it.  So I don't know what the U.S. is going to use in terms of, you know, physics at least, you know; plasmas and--not plasmas, but fusion and high-energy physics.  I mean, what are we going to be--what are we going to do?  All of our scientists are running abroad now to do research.  And we've led in these fields.   I mean, just about all of the quarks--in fact, they all were discovered in the U.S., right, so why are we giving up that leadership now?  (laughs).
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's--
Speaker 2: It makes no sense whatsoever.
Story_ID: 27402
Speaker 1: In 1991, you went to North Carolina A & T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technological University, Greensboro, North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: I'm not skipping over anything major, am I (simultaneous) (unclear) in '91 [1991]?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, tell us how that came about?
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, when I was at Fermilab [Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Batavia, Illinois] and at Argonne [National Laboratory, Lemont, Illinois], during the summers I would host students, college students, and even we had a few high school students, that would come in research groups, we'd work with them.  And I had gotten more and more interested in working more with African American students.  I just didn't feel that limited time in the summer was enough.  So I say, "Hey, let me just pick up and relocate."  And I heard that North Carolina A & T was looking for a chair of their physics department.  So I called Dean James Hicks, and from then on, you know, it did work out well.  I went down to North Carolina A & T; my wife was ready to make a move as well out of Chicago, and she was able to do down there and to start an economic development corporation, which basically revitalized that whole area around Bennett College.  So it was a great transition for the both of us.  So I was able to there.  Now, one of the things that they were in the process of doing, A & T, was to start their first two Ph.D. programs; one in electrical and other in mechanical engineering.  The consultants had told them that you don't want to do that if you don't have a graduate program in physics.  So they wanted a Master's program in physics, so that was my goal, is to lay the foundation for a Master's program in physics.  And so that's what I did, as well as helping them to get the Ph.D. program on the road there.  I worked very close with the dean of engineering at the time.  His name was Harold Martin, who went on to become vice president of academic affairs for the whole University of North Carolina system, of which A & T is a part.  There were sixteen campuses in that system.  And he now is the chancellor back at North Carolina A & T.  But what we did, we constructed something called the Interdisciplinary Research Center, which later became the Edward Fort--B. Fort Research Center; named for the chancellor during that period.  And so the idea was to have a central focus of research so that these professors could have modern laboratory space and equipment to do the research to get those Ph.D. programs up and running, and also our physics program up and running.  So that was, like, I think, my major contribution to A & T, was starting the--helping to start the Ph.D. programs, the Master's in physics, and starting the various research groups.  I basically went in and hired quite a few new physics professors.  One person I hired, Sam [Samuel] Danagoulian, I met in Armenia when I was there.  So he immigrated.  And so he led our Nuclear Physics Group that we established.  Then I had some other people who did chemical physics, condensed matter physics, and so forth.  So the department, I think, we were able to put on a whole new level by the kinds of foundation that we put in place.  So then, you know, I eventually, I just guide the young people's way.  You know, put them, you know, hire them, and get out of their way, which is what I did.  And that was about the time that I went back to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] as a visiting professor.  That was in 2001.  So I was on the ground at North Carolina A & T from '90 [1990]--from '91 [1991] to--let's just say ten years, '91 [1991] to '01 [2001]--I mean, '91 [1991] to '01 [2001].  However, two of those years, from '97 [1997] to '99 [1999], I went to Morgan State University [Baltimore, Maryland].  They had a professorship that was funded by the Department of Energy called the J. Ernest Wilkins Jr. Distinguished Professor of Physics.  I did that for two years, and then I went back to A and T.
Speaker 1: Now, that's named after the math genius, or the negro genius (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous)--genius, J. Ernest Wilkins, from Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: J. Ernest Wilkins. Got his Ph.D. at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] at the age of eighteen.  He went on to have an illustrious career.  And interesting enough, even though he was a mathematician, he actually became a big star in the nuclear engineering profession.  It's like he was a president at one point of the American Nuclear Society.  And also, he was the head of a nuclear engineering design company.  So he quite a distinguished career.  And then he ended his career at Clark Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia].  But yeah, that chair was named in his honor.  And it was funded out of the Office of Nuclear Energy--at the Department of Energy.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And that's how I got involved in nuclear energy, 'cause I had no experience in nuclear energy.  But being that chair, the Office of Nuclear Energy was headed by a name by the name of Bill Magwood, William Magwood, who's now a commissioner with the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.  But he really got me connected into, you know, all of the politics going on relative to nuclear energy.  They established this thing called the Nuclear Energy Research Advisory Committee, and I was appointed to that committee, and I still am involved.  I'm not on that, but I still work on one of the subcommittees that advises on research; what to do about the radioactive waste that we have sitting all around the country.  That is a big problem, and it hasn't been solved.  And so, yeah.  So it's been quite an experience.
Story_ID: 27403
Speaker 1: Tell us about what your activities were at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's right.  Morgan State, what I tried to do was continue working with the professors that I hired at A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical University, Greensboro, North Carolina], trying to write proposals, and trying to help them to get their research off the ground.  So during that period at North Carolina A and T, and Morgan State, I kind of backed away from my own research for about eight years, and just spent my time trying to help them, and help the new programs, the graduate programs to get off the ground.  So that's what I did.  And then, after that, I went back to A and T, and then I served again for a year as Interim Chair of the Physics Department and became interested in the International Linear Collider and decided to just take a year off and go to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] as the Martin Luther King, Jr., visiting professor.  So that's what took me to MIT, to try to get--I needed to get back into the research mode to just, you know, free up a lot of my time so I don't have to teach so much.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, you were the chair at A and T from--
Speaker 2: I was the chair from '91 [1991] to '94 [1994], and then I was interim chair--that was '99 [1999], I think it was, to 2000.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or 2001.  I can't--I have to go back and check to be precise.  But it was a short period at the interim chair.
Speaker 1: Now, during--in 2001, now this is--I don't know how this fits in the timeline, but you were involved with the African Laser Centre.
Speaker 2: Yes.  2001 when I started getting involved, and that takes us back to EBASI [Edward Bouchet-Abdus Salam Institute], the group that we talked about before, trying to get Africans and African Americans to work together.  I proposed to that group that we do something about lasers in Africa.  And so I went and connected with people in South Africa who were in the process of doing the same thing.  What happened is they had a uranium enrichment program that used lasers.  So South Africa had all this state-of-the-art laser equipment, and somehow, that collaboration with the French broke down.  I never quite understood what happened.  And so when the French pulled out, South Africa's left with all this laser equipment.  So they developed a long program that they would give to their professors at the various universities to use this equipment.  And they still had more equipment than even that.  And so they wanted to have a more continental dimension to what they wanted to do.  And so they wanted to try to help other countries, maybe loan equipment to other countries.  So when I sent e-mails out about my interest, the people there--there was a physicist--I don't know if he's a physicist, but a person who was there working in South Africa, read it and connected, you know, with what we were doing; they tried to put the two together.  And so at the time, they had something called the National Laser Center in South Africa, which it still exists.  There was a man by the name of Philemon Mwjara, who has been a very important person in this.  His is--Philemon is spelled, P-H-I-L-E-M-O-N, Philemon, and his last name, Mwjara, but it's spelled, M-W-J-A-R-A.   And he is now the Director General of Science for the Government of South Africa, and he's been in that role for about five years or so.  But--so he headed the National Laser Center, and he was the main driver there to make this happen, to get monies from the South African government to get this organization up off the ground.  So now we have over thirty institutions around the continent, who write to apply to us for research for funding, money for conferences, workshops, student scholarships, fellowships.  So we do all of that.  We've established ourselves as a non-profit that's based at their National Laser Center.  So the African Laser Centre is more sort of a network of laboratories.  And it's based there, but it is a separate non-profit entity.
Speaker 1: But many of them have laser equipment from that initial South African--
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.  Absolutely.  Absolutely.  But also to help them to get other equipment.  We don't really fund them purchasing new equipment so much.  But most of what we fund are the conferences, and workshops, and research projects.  But since most of the money is coming from South Africa, you have to form South African collaboration with someone from another country.  So that's been the way it is for them.  There's still time to get more countries to invest.
Story_ID: 27404
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you go to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], not--what was it like being back on campus as a [professor]--
Speaker 2: It's interesting, because not a lot changed.  I mean, I had been away for decades, and the programs that students were--that seemed to be, you know, made major differences, they're now flourishing, but the ideas were planted back when I was a student.  As an example, I ended up being the senior lecturing in one of the--the Independent Learning Committees, and it's called Concourse.  And so these are freshmen who come in and they want to have a more liberal arts experience, because MIT, you have a thousand students.  You might have four hundred in one lecture hall taking the physics together.  Some students don't want that experience.  They want to get to professors much more--more closely at the beginning.  And so, we have about fifty students, up to about fifty students in this program.  And so it's just a--it's just a fabulous program.  And so that's one.  There're other ones, pass/fail.  They started that and they came of the revolution (laughs).  It still exists.  Still at MIT to this day.
Speaker 1: Now, I think that's for freshman?
Speaker 2: Only freshmen, only freshmen.  They backed off a little bit when I was there.  Well, they have pass/fail now only for the first semester and not the second semester.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But still, that seed was planted back there.  Another big thing, this thing called UROPS, Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program, it started back there, but it's flourishing now.  They was not on this scale now.  I mean, it seems that most students nowadays do UROPS, where they, you know, work the professors on research very early on in their undergraduate years.  And then, now, because one big thing that's different, the globalization is a major thing among the students; going to other countries to spend, you know, summers or a year or whatever.  So in many respects the institute stayed the same.  I was really surprised about that.
Speaker 1: And to see that the changes that your group made are still (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Still--still--
Speaker 1: --(influencing?) in the university.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.  Right.  And then they also went backward in many cases as far as faculty hiring.  Right.  Because they did not have a black--after Professor [James] Young retired, they haven't had a black physics professor since then.  So--
Speaker 1: They still don't have one?
Speaker 2: They still don't have one.  No, no.  That's it.  So in some respects things have gone--have gotten worse.  It's interesting, because, I mean, to the outside world, university professors have the image of being liberal; very liberal.  So it's been my experience that that may be the case, but it seems when it comes to faculty hiring (laughs), it's not as liberal as it seems to--you know, the image that it has.  And that's a real problem I find.  Now, some fields have done better than others, but I would say physics professors--if you'd go around the country, the physics professors, chemistry, math, certainly these hard sciences; they have gone backward.  I think they probably had more at these Ivy League-type places when I was an undergraduate than they have now.
Speaker 1: Did you think--is there--what do you think the reason for that is?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the pressure was off over the years.  The pressure, so when people retire, you know, the pressure was no longer--I mean [University of California at] Berkeley [Berkeley, California] had a--had several.  And I don't think they have any black professors on Berkeley's faculty any more.  I know you probably interviewed some of them--but anyway, yeah, it's a problem.  But, again, I guess I have to just have hope that the youth will do better.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, so you were there until two--for a year, right, as the Martin Luther King--
Speaker 2: I was there for one year, and then my wife got the great job with the city of Cambridge as Director of Economic Development.  And so I asked MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] to give me another year in that position, which they did.  And then after that, I got two years at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] as a visiting professor.  And then I worked out an arrangement back at MIT that I would go back there and be the lead senior lecturer in the Concourse Program.  And I stayed in that for six years until we retired and moved back here.  My wife could retire after ten years, so that's why we were able to both retire.
Speaker 1: Now, did you spend a year at Stanford [University, Stanford, Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't spend a year.  But I used to--I did research out there, especially as regards the International Linear Collider, and there was summer I was director of their summer internship program that they ran from the Department of Energy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  I see, it's like the director of the U.S. Department of Energy's--
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: --Energy Research Lab.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.  So I spent my summers there and at [University of California at] Berkeley [Berkeley, California] in Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory doing work on the International Linear Collider.
Story_ID: 27405
Speaker 1: Now, in 2003 you went back to Russia, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah. That was an interesting experience.  The National Academy [of Science] sent a team of people.  There were about five of us who went over.  And while there--oh, we had a workshop in Moscow--but, while there, we had a very interesting trip to a city way far east called Krasnokomensk, which used to be a closed city.  It's probably the biggest uranium-mining city in the old Soviet Union, and they realized they were running out of resources soon.  And so what they wanted to do is to convert their city into an international repository for spent fuel coming from other countries in addition to the U.S., because they have all this mining infrastructure, all the equipment, they have--I mean, the whole town would get involved in this.  And so they won it.  Their major competitor, we were told, was another Russian city in Siberia called Krasnoyarsk.  They're Krasnokomensk.  And so they say that Krasnoyarsk has a phobia against nuclear reactors among the population.  So they figure they had a leg up since its population not only wanted it, their futures depended on it, because once they deplete their uranium and coal reserves, they're out.  And so we went there and they wanted to get an analysis--the international team to analyze what they're doing and get recommendations that they could make to the government.  So they were basically hoping for a good report.  We gave them a reasonable report.  We pointed out pluses and minuses of what they were trying to do.  That was my first time going down into a mine, and I realized that I am not one cut out for doing mine work.  You went down, and you went down, and you went down (laughs).  That is not a good feeling.  It was interesting, interesting trip.  But we had to fly a long ways to this city called Chita in Siberia, and we had this super-long car trip to get to Krasnokomensk.  I mean, it's almost like they're cut off from the rest of the country.
Speaker 1: Now, this is Siberia, I guess?
Speaker 2: In Siberia, far Siberia.  Near the border of China.  We went through Mongolia, the Mongolian region.
Speaker 1: A lot of territory.  I guess it's like driving out West, but even further.
Speaker 2: It's true.  It's further.
Speaker 1: So, you mentioned before like the problem of storing nuclear waste here in this country?
Speaker 2: Waste.  Yes, yes, yes. yes.
Speaker 1: You know, I think it was the end of the third reel or something, we were talking about that, or we mentioned it just before we made the cut.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: Now, what is--I mean, so this is a city that wants what's good.
Speaker 2: They want it, right.  They want it because they're worried about their future, what will they do, and how will they make money in the future.
Speaker 1: So what is the danger of this spent material?
Speaker 2: Well, you want to be able to encase it in geology such that it seals completely and will be there for hundreds of thousands of years; that's the idea.  So in this country right now, the waste, much of it--most of it--is stored right at the reactor sites.  We have a little over a hundred, maybe a hundred and three, I guess, reactors in operation.  And so the spent fuel, when they take it out and they use it, they store it in what they call wet ponds; wet pools to keep it cool so that it won't--because otherwise, it would just--the fission would run out of control and the rods would just melt.  And so that's what happened in Japan.  They lost their coolant, and they had no--so they--so the rods just overheated and melted, and so they had explosions.  And it's just a mess.  So in this country, what to do about all of that wet--all of that waste?  Okay.  So there's intermediate things you do, is to take it out of the pool when it gets cool enough.  You know, if you let the spent fuel elements, you know, fission and they will cool down over time, and then you take them and put them in what's called dry storage, and you seal them inside these concrete housing units.  And then after some period of time, you want to take them and bury them permanent in a repository.  And that's where the U.S. is in trouble, because for a long time, Yucca Mountain, not far from Las Vegas [Nevada], was chosen as the repository.  But now the senator from there is the--what do you call it--the lead senate--senator in the Senate?
Speaker 1: Harry--
Speaker 2: Harry Reid, right.  And so the whole program at Yucca Mountain has been sort of squashed.  So now we'll have to go back to the drawing boards.  So President [Barack] Obama appointed a blue-ribbon commission to go back and rethink these things, and to try to put some scheme together that will lead us to a new repository, and maybe analyze other sites around the country or whatever they decide to do.  The point is, where will we finally put ours.  I mean, it would be to ship it to Krasnokomensk, they want it, but that's a growing problem now, what to do with it.
Speaker 1: Would that be difficult to transport?  I mean, and not have--
Speaker 2: Well, you have to worry about transporting, yeah.  I mean, you have to have special casts and all that; you have to, in this country, to be built, and to encase it so that can safely be transported from one place to the other.  That's another whole scenario that's being studied now, how to transport it.
Speaker 1: And once there, their proposal is to put it in the old mines--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --where other materials have been excavated--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and there's space under the ground.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, right.  They'll probably built new holes, but they have the equipment.  I mean, they have just so much equipment.  They know all of it, that's probably, probably the number one mining people in the whole Russia.
Story_ID: 27406
Speaker 1: You worked on intrabeam scattering studies--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --the 2000's.
Speaker 2: Right.  That's what I meant--what I was mentioning earlier when I worked at Fermilab, I worked with the physicist named James Bjorken.  He was one of the--one of the most fantastic people I've ever met and definitely worked with.  And so we developed this--see the thing is, an accelerator is, as I mentioned before, you want beams to be tight.  You want them to maintain their small size so that when they scatter, you get more collisions.  But since the particles all have the same charge, you know, the protons are all positive, there's a tendency for the beam to want to expand.  So you have to control that.  You have to understand what you need when you design your system to try to have control of that.  So intrabeam scattering is the theory that shows how it wants to spread so that you can work around it.  So it's become a theory that accelerator designers are using all over the world.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you were part of, I guess, this is while you were at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], you were a part of the 'African Review of Physics.'
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's a new journal that was established.  If you go back where EBASI [Edward Bouchet-Abdus Salam Institute] was created at the International Center for Theoretical Physics in Trieste [Italy], there's a group there that started this new journal called, 'The African Physical Review.'  And so I've been on their International Board of Editors for, you know, since it started.  And then--and right after that, there's another group that started called the African Physical Society, and that was started around 2010.  So all of this stuff, much of it, is facilitated out of that International Center for Theoretical Physics.  This was Salam's dream, is to try to get these kinds of initiatives in motion.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So 2008, you became a Fellow of the American Physical Society.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: This is important.  Those of us who are not physicists--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --don't understand what that means.
Speaker 2: Right.  It's just--
Speaker 1: But tell us what that means to become a Fellow?
Speaker 2: Okay.  So they limit the number of fellows--I don't remember the exact number, but, say, only out of a few percent of the total membership of the American Physical Society [APS].  So it's difficult to become a Fellow.  I mean, it's based upon your research contributions mainly.  And so, when you become a Fellow, in their directory, is they'll be an asterisk by your name, and so if you pick a directory up, so many physicists in there you see, you know, as not to many on a given page.  So it's quite an honor to be a Fellow of the American Physical Society.  In fact, they have--periodically, they have parties where they'll invite Fellows to come, and the reason--when I was at Harvard, for instance.  Actually, my thesis advisor, Curtis Calvin, was the president of the American Physical Society, and they hosted sort of a cocktail reception for Fellows in Boston [Massachusetts].  So it's quite an honor to become a Fellow.
Speaker 1: And then a lot of people don't get to be--
Speaker 2: Yeah, don't get to be Fellows.
Speaker 1: --Fellows.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So it doesn't mean you're just a physicist, but you are a (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: You're recognized as one of the top few percent of the entire membership of APS.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, now, you were also--you were a finalist in a Lifetime Achievement Award for the Benjamin Banneker Institute.
Speaker 2: Right.  That was out of [Washington] D.C., yes.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: John Slaughter, who actually won it in the end, who was previously president of the National Society--National Science Foundation.  But it's quite an honor, you know.  I mean, it's the kind of thing just to be a finalist.  That's good enough for me (laughs), to be recognized for having done some good things.
Speaker 1: It's interesting that you were like a Fellow of APS the same year.
Speaker 2: (laughs) yeah.  Right.
Speaker 1: (simultaneous) but you were just a finalist in the Benjamin Banneker--
Speaker 2: Finalist.  Right.  (laughs).  Well. Take what you can.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 27407
Speaker 1: Now, you were on the Nuc-- the 'Readiness of the U.S. Nuclear Workforce.'
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah.  So that was a study I did because I'm--we have a real problem with training, you know, the next generation of nuclear scientists and engineers.  And at one point, the Department of Energy, DOE, was cutting back funding the university programs, so I was concerned.  You know, if you start cutting back, who is going to operate?  Who's going to design the next generation of nuclear reactors if the people are not being educated?  So we did this study, and we pointed out to them, you know, how many people are graduating, how much money is going into the university programs.  And this report turned out to be extremely important in convincing DOE to turn its attitude around toward university education.  And so since this report, their 20 percent of the nuclear fuel--Research and Development Budget--nuclear fuel cycle, Research and Development Budget is going to universities.  So, I mean, that's like a big flip from not wanting to give in until now, 20 percent of your funding is going to universities.  And that's important.  Most of the money goes to the National Laboratories to work on the big problems of nuclear waste storage and so forth.  But you need to have university professors and students working on new ideas.  You know, turn them loose and let them dream and pursue blue-sky research, because you don't know what major revolution they may start up; what major breakthrough.  And so that was the point of that whole story, to try to get more money going to universities to promote students and new ideas.
Story_ID: 27408
Speaker 1: Now, in 2008, did you--were you a part of the [President Barack] Obama Campaign at all?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My wife and I both campaigned.  I like--see, again, I don't like being, you know, administrative, a head--but I like getting out on the ground, right.  So my wife and I campaigned in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], you know, going around the churches, and talking to people after church.  I went down to North Carol-- here, in North Carolina, because we had a house before in Garner, just south of Dur--of Raleigh.  And so I came down here, and I went all throughout the neighborhoods, you know, handing out and knocking on doors, campaigning.
Speaker 1: He won then too, didn't he?
Speaker 2: Oh, the first time.
Speaker 1: 2008.
Speaker 2: The first time, yeah, yeah.  The second time--now, the second time, my wife was more involved in the campaign than I was.  Unfortunately--I tell her all the time, I don't think my vote counted.  I think they threw it in the garbage (laughs).  That's when all this funny stuff was going on, you know, with voting and trying to shorten the time that you could vote early.  We voted the first day when early voting started.  So I joked to her a lot that they probably threw mine (laughs)--because mostly it seemed that the black people were voting early, which may not be good; so I was saying they--all these--they could just throw it away.  And then they had the complicated system where you could vote, you know, straight party, all but for the president.  Why are you doing that?  If I want to vote Democratic for everything, why can't I do that?  But if you do that, you messed up your ballot, right.  So you have to vote straight party Democrat, and you have to go separately and vote for president.  Now, I don't know if something's fishy to me.  I don't know.  It--maybe that's all legit, but that sounds like kind of fishy to me.
Story_ID: 27409
Speaker 1: Now, you were a part of a nuclear fuel cycles study in 2009 to 2011, right?
Speaker 2: That's the--oh, that's the one at Johns Hopkins University [Baltimore, Maryland].  Yes, yes.  The Nuclear Fuel Cycle Study.  Yes.  In fact, I was asked to do that by Bill [William] Magwood, I mentioned to you before.  He was the one who got me originally involved when he was the director of the Office of Nuclear Energy for DOE [Department of Energy].  He's now--at that time, he was going to chair that study, and then he was appointed to be commissioner, one of the commissioners of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, and he asked me to step in to chair that study.  So I pulled in a good group of people from a top person over in France, Japan; people from around the country.  And I think the group was so good that when Obama, President [Barack] Obama named his Blue Ribbon Commission to study the whole question of waste.  One of the people on my panel was appointed to that Blue Ribbon, so we lost her.  Her name was Alison MacFarlane, who is now Chair of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.  And then another person was pulled off to be the Executor Director of the Blue Ribbon Commission.  So that just--it makes me proud that these are the people who were working with us, and they were on the panel long enough for us to receive their important input into the process.
Story_ID: 27410
Speaker 1: So you went back to Tanzania in 2009, right?
Speaker 2: But it was the first time, I went back, it was the first time (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (simultaneous) Oh, you went to, that's the first time--
Speaker 2: --to help at the university.  Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And the university is actually named after Julius Kabarage Nyere (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Right.  President--(simultaneous)  Right, right, yes.
Speaker 1: So, were you there for a year or--
Speaker 2: No.  That was six months--
Speaker 1: Six months?
Speaker 2: --during June.  But I'm still in contact with them.  So I'm still, you know, monitoring it.  It's a long, slow process.  I mean, we talked about what would be a good design, but it's going to be a process.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, you know, in terms of-you're assisting in terms of their technology and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, trying to--
Speaker 1: --science and technology.
Speaker 2: --right.  As commissioner, I toured the whole Mara region and tried to understand what the needs were from the various districts.  And so that was why the design that I proposed to them would be decentralized to address those different problems.
Speaker 1: Now, did you--there's a--friends of mine were in Tanzania a few years ago, and they shot a phenomena I've never--that people were trying to figure out.  It was something called the shifting sands.  Did you see this?
Speaker 2: I've never heard of that.
Speaker 1: It's only in Mount Meru, there's this black sand that--it's a pile of it and it moves together around the country.  I mean, it--the grains stay together and they kind of swirl and it moves.`
Speaker 2: I ain't seen that.
Speaker 1: And they actually shot this on video.
Speaker 2: Really.  I never heard of that.
Speaker 1: Two guys were there explaining it, and they were shooting it.  They shot it with good video equipment.  I mean, it's like well-shot.  You could walk up--it's big enough a pile where you can walk to the top of it, but it moves around the mountain and the vicinity.  It shifts.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: It's never in the same place.
Speaker 2: I have never heard of it.  I have to look it up.
Speaker 1: You can see it one hour, then you can see it another hour.  It's black, so maybe it's got ferrite iron in it or something; I don't know, and it moves.  So I thought I'd ask you about it because I don't--
Speaker 2: Okay.  But I have never heard of that (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 1: My friend who shot it couldn't explain it.
Speaker 2: Oh, really.
Speaker 1: You could still--you could see it, you know.  Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  You've given me something to look for when I go again(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: When you go back (simultaneous) (unclear) for something that's interesting.
Speaker 2: I'll definitely look for that.
Speaker 1: Any rate.  So you were there six months, and you're still in touch, still working on the project?
Speaker 2: Yes, right, yes.
Story_ID: 27411
Speaker 1: You're a member of the Synchrotron Research Roadmap Implementation Committee--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in 2009.  This is--is this in--this is in Tanzania?
Speaker 2: No, no.  That's South Africa.
Speaker 1: South Africa.  Okay.
Speaker 2: So, you know, we talked about particle accelerators.  The real big--one of the really big excitements about accelerators--now, if you have an electron accelerator, the beam is going around, if you use magnets to wiggle the beam, it shoots off very intense bursts of x-rays that you--that scientists, biologists, chemists, physicists, so many are using to understand the structure of proteins, for instance, to make drug discovery much more, much quicker, and more efficiently.  In the U.S., I told it might take over a billion dollars from the time when an idea for a drug is conceived until it actually survives all of the tests and make it to market.  So this machine is really revolutionizing the study of proteins.  Now, South Africa has a small, but growing synchrotron-user community.  They mostly do their research at a facility in France.  But they don't have one on their own, and they want their own synchro--it's called a synchrotron light source.  So they asked me to come and chair the writing of a strategic plan, how to move their community to the next levels.  So we wrote that plan, submitted to their funding body called the National Research Foundation, and their Department of Science and Technology.  It was approved, and they've asked them now to come up with a more detailed business plan.  And so they've asked me chair the writing of that business plan.  But that is an extremely important scientific instrument that they need so they don't have to travel all the way to Europe or the U.S. to do experiments.
Speaker 1: Okay.  There's also something in 2010 called INCREASE.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  That's--right.  Right.  That's the--.  It's a long name.  It's the Interdisciplinary Consortium for Research and Educational Access in Science and Engineering.  And so, what--this is a group that was formed at Brookhaven National Laboratory [Upton, New York], and the idea is to get more of the historically underrepresented groups to come, and faculty and students to use things like their synchrotron light source.  And so these are African American students, Latino-American students and faculty, Native American faculty and students; and so I'm the vice-chair of that group.  And so, we've been trying to do all we can to get them not only to go to Brookhaven [ National Laboratory, Upton, New York], but to use the big research facilities at Stanford Linear Accelerator Center [SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, California], [University of California at] Berkeley's laboratory [Berkeley, California] and so forth.  So this is a recent phenomenon, trying to get more of the historically underrepresented faculty and students to use those big facilities.
Story_ID: 27412
Speaker 1: Okay, you alluded to the establishment of the African Physical Society.
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: And that was in 2010.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And this is--now this is, you, Francis Allotey, Ahmadou Wague?
Speaker 2: Wague.
Speaker 1: Wague?  Okay.  Paul Woafo and John Adedoyin.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Right, right, right. So we met in Senegal.  At the time of that mission, we met the president of Senegal.  And so most--there's a European Physical Society, there's the American Physical Society; so we wanted to have an African Physical Society.  So the main driver behind this is Professor Francis Allotey, who is a physicist in Ghana; and, in fact, he's from Saltpond [Ghana], interestingly enough.  Another interesting thing about him is that he's the first African person to get a Ph.D. in physics from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  I mentioned Bennie Ward, it was Francis Allotey, who attended Princeton during the '60s [1960s] when my thesis advisor, Curtis Callan was there.  But Francis is probably the most well-known physicist on the continent.  And another person, Ahmadou Wague from Senegal, he's the president of LAM, which is the Laser and Atomic and Molecular Science Network.  So the two of them, as well as some others--I don't want to call all the names; you mentioned the main ones there--started the African Physical Society in Senegal.  And so I'm a member, and I'm the liaison officer to the Americas--Special Projects to the Americas.
Speaker 1: Now, it's interesting that the largest university there is named for Cheikh Anta Diop--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --who was a physicist--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --as well as an anthropologist, but he was a physicist.
Speaker 2: He was a physicist, right.
Speaker 1: So, and there's a physics laboratory at--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Oh, yeah.  Sure, sure, sure.
Speaker 1: Now, what about the African Institute for Mathematical Science?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Because the African Institute for Mathematical Science is--there's a guy named Neil Turok, who's a white South African, whose family probably played a big role in the Anti-Apartheid Movement.  He's now head of the--he's in Waterloo, Canada.  What is it called?  Is it the Waterloo Institute?  Okay.  But he's the head of a big theoretical physics institute in Canada [Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada].  And so he's establishing these centers in different countries.  The first one, I think, Cape Town, South Africa.  The next one is--is Senegal about a year ago.  This year, I was on a steering committee that started the one in Ghana, which started last fall.  And the idea is to bring students, after they finished their undergraduate education, and to a center, allow them to hear from guest lecturers, leading, you know, scientists from around the world, to talk about--and it's more mathematically-oriented, right--to give them some exposure and hoping that they will find something they will be interested in, to go on and pursue a Ph.D. somewhere.  So that's sort of the purpose of that.  So the steering--my work with them has concluded now, since the steering committee was disbanded once it started.
Story_ID: 27413
Speaker 1: So you retired in 2012--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --from?
Speaker 2: From teaching mainly, because I haven't really retired.  I'm still--I just finished a textbook of my lectures that I was giving in the past, over the last ten, fifteen years, on electricity and magnetism, and I'm publishing it.  My wife, and from our company that we started, we're publishing it on our web site.  So it's an introductory calculus-based electricity and magnetism course.  And so the next thing I want to do is to finish my book from my lectures I gave in Ghana in 1991 (laughs).  I wrote about two-thirds of that book and sort of put it down.  But I want to go back and do that.  And then after that, I want to finish a textbook on mechanics.  So that's why I wanted to--I thought I need to step back from teaching, because these things I want to do; I just don't have time to do it.  Because I don't want to back down on my activities in Africa.  Something had to go.  I'm not getting any younger, so something--that's why the teaching; I retired from the teaching.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, so these are your future goals.  You want to get these textbooks out.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I want to get these books written.  That's my immediate top priority, or my immediate goal.  And also, to get the company going, because I want to continue to help universities.  So I've already set up appointments to see various educators around, to see where I can make a difference, because I love working on projects, and then the Synchrotron Project, the business part ends for the South African Synchrotron Community, that's something that's on the near--something to be done soon on the near horizon.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, do you see, like the electronic books as being the future of--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  They're moving--
Speaker 1: --of culture?
Speaker 2: --that way.  Oh, yeah.  I can see it.  It's all over.  Especially in biology and some other fields.  But it's coming to physics, too.  So I've figured--and another thing I want to do is publish myself so I don't have to deal with publishers.  And so, another thing I like about electronically is, if you want to make revisions, it's immediate; you know, anything that you want to add, you can immediate add it.  So it's--to me, it's beautiful.  It's perfect for my purposes.  Yeah, this next book on my Ghana lectures will be electronic as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, hopefully, I'll have that finished within a year.
Story_ID: 27414
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the community is splitting.  It seems that the have-nots are getting in worse shape rapidly, okay.  And the haves are actually moving up, I think, quite rapidly.  So I guess it depends upon of what you are best able to impact.  I don't feel I can have the impact on the ones that are going down so rapidly.  And there are people who have the skills and resources to address that, and I hope they certainly do that.  But I do want to try to help those who want to success, who may not have the opportunity; and one of the first things I want to do, and my wife and I have talked about this, we want to try to get it started through our churches, non-profit, is to establish something called the Gannibal-Pushkin Academy, Saturday academy, where we bring students from kindergarten to twelfth grade--not kindergarten; the first through the twelfth grade, all day Saturday, and we will start with karate.  I'm a black belt in karate, and I will teach them, you know, karate; I would teach them physics, but I won't use the word physics because it has a bad name.  People say it's impossible.  I would teach them the science of motion (laughs).  We will study motion (laughs).  And then we will help them with their homework, and we will help them with--languages are very big hobby of mine, so we will help them mainly in Spanish.  If anybody is interested in Russian or Italian or French, I can certainly help them with that.  My younger daughter is fluent in Spanish.  She would help with that.  She teaches biology at a charter school.  So we want to do all of that.  My wife does yoga, so she will do yoga.  So we want to do that.  So the idea is to identify people early, try to get them interested in the sciences and engineering at a very early age, and, hopefully, we can get them into the MITs [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Harvards [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or wherever they want to go; North Carolina A and T [University, Greensboro, North Carolina]; anywhere they want to go, we want to do that.  So that's why I feel I'm best suited to make a difference.
Speaker 1: And what's the group going to be called--I mean the--
Speaker 2: Oh, its name--we've talked so much about it--
Speaker 1: Yeah (unclear).
Speaker 2: --Gannibal and Pushkin.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 2: So it's be the Gannibal-Pushkin Saturday Academy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  These two people, I mean, the whole Gannibal clan needs to be better known in this country.  I mean, it's not only Pushkin and the original Gannibal, but like I said, his sons, I mean, he has a highly-achieved family.
Story_ID: 27415
Speaker 1: Also, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your professional legacy?
Speaker 2: I think--okay, intrabeam scattering from an academic research point and view; work in Africa from another point of view, because I spend a lot of time in Africa--a lot of energy in Africa, as well as helping.  Like I said, the INCREASE [Interdisciplinary Consortium for Research and Educational Access in Science and Engineering] organization in this country, and the Saturday Academy, so those are the main three things, I think, you know.  The research ought to be known as intrabeam scattering, for work in Africa trying to help that community, as well as trying to get more of our faculty at HBCUs [historical black colleges and universities] and Latino serving institutions to use these big infrastructures at the national laboratories.
Story_ID: 27416
Speaker 1: Is there any major thing that you would change--if you could go back and change something you've done?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  I generally don't have regrets, you know.  I just try to do the best I can no matter what I do.  My mother always told us that, and they used to say it in the old days, "Even if you're going to be a thief, be the best thief you can be."  And I think about that a lot because I (laughs), there's this guy called Autolycus in the 'Winter's Tale' by Shakespeare, and he was a no-count, no-good, but he knows his craft, you know.  He tells you, he says that, "To have an open ear, a quick eye, and a nimble hand is necessary for a cut person."  That's like a pickpocket.  And he also says, "And a good nose is requisite also to smell out work for the other senses."  So this guy is a no-good, no-count, but like my mother said, "If you're going to be a thief, be the best thief that you can."  (laughs).  So Autolycus symbolizes that.  He says, "I am not an honest man in general, but sometimes I can be honest by accident."  (laughs).  So I liked that.  Just be your best, it means, you know, to me, is to "whatever you do, be the best at what you do."
Speaker 1: It seems like he had thievery down to a science, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  (laughs).
Story_ID: 27417
Speaker 1: Well, tell us something about your family, again.  You said you've got two daughters?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  We have two daughters, yes.  My older daughter, Makazi, who will be thirty-three in June.  Both of our daughters are in June, so we were on the academic year plan (laughs), my wife and I.  So the older daughter is thirty-three in June, and she is a--she got a Master's degree in computer--graphics design, computer, something like that, from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], and she now works at IEARN.  It's an I, and it's spelled, E-A-R-N.  IEARN, which is a non-profit that works with--forming collaborations between school children--among school children around the world to work on projects to better the planet--could we stop for a quick second?  Is it possible?
Speaker 1: Sure.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: I'm ready.  Yes, yes, yes.  Okay.  I made a mistake.  My daughter actually got her master's degree from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], I'm sorry.  She's a Harvard woman.  And so she works at IEARN, and they do a lot of work with students, you know, young people, getting collaborations started between those in the U.S. and those in other countries, and among, you know, as many as they can.  My young--and they're both single.  So if you know any, you know, eligible bachelors, let us know.  My younger daughter, as I mentioned before, she teaches biology and she's an assistant principal in a charter school here in Chapel Hill, North Carolina.  She went to Elon University [Elon, North Carolina] and finished her bachelor's degree in biology, and she has a master's from the University of Scranton [Scranton, Pennsylvania].  I failed to mention, my older daughter has--she's always been computer-oriented, so she has an undergraduate degree from here in North Carolina State University [Raleigh, North Carolina] in Computer Science.  And my wife [Estella Johnson], as I mentioned before, she's really big in economic development.  Most recently, she retired as the Director of Economic Development for the city of Cambridge [Massachusetts], and played a big role in helping to bring some of the big companies that have flooded into Cambridge, as well as helping those small businesses that exist to improve their profit line.  She did that for ten years, and prior to that, she worked in Greensboro [North Carolina] for eleven years as the president of the Gate City Community Development Corporation, which was responsible for leading the charge to revitalize the community around Bennett College [Greensboro, North Carolina].  When we arrived at Bennett College, it was really bad because you had, you know, people just hanging out on the streets, all around the college; they had a couple of liquor stores right there, and you could just imagine--I mean, most of the men there tended to be somewhat older.  They were fairly harmless, but can you imagine, you know, you bring your daughter to a college you don't know anything about, and you come in and see all these people out on the street with wine and--and so anyway, she played--she was on the leading edge of turning that whole thing around.  So it's just the four of us actually.  My younger daughter is living here in Hillsboro [North Carolina].  She's staying with us now.  She--and my older daughter is in Brooklyn working in Manhattan [New York].
Story_ID: 27418
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered?  I would like to be remembered as someone who took on problems, pressing problems, and worked towards a solution, you know; not even directing other people to do it, but actually getting involved and getting in the middle of doing it myself, because that's what I enjoy doing, solving problem; whether it's physics or social problems, whatever.  So I would like be remembered as somebody who, as the doctor asked me "to stay yourself."  Right.  "To stay yourself.  Don't change.  Stay connected."  You know, I find--it hurts me when I see so many, especially African Americans who have become really successful, and they lose contact with the young people coming along, and they'll are of no use to them.  That to me is awful.  So I would like to be remembered as somebody who always stayed with my feet on the ground, helping younger generations behind me while I'm trying to solve these problems.
