Story_ID: 82119
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name, Thomas H. Miller, T-H-O-M-A-S, the H is for Howard, H-O-W-A-R-D, M-I-L-L-E-R, Miller.
Speaker 1: And can you give us your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is December the 24th, 1920.
Speaker 1: Okay and sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation is a graphic artist, I was until I retired [clearing throat] a graphic artist.
Speaker 1: All right, you, you were involved in fine arts too, right?
Speaker 2: Fine arts, in the, in the arts in general.  But I specialized in graphic art because that was my vocation, my occupation.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is a tough question here: what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Thirty-first.
Speaker 1: Right, March 31st--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry I--
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: I, I have to think.  I told you--
Speaker 1: I should have told you.
Speaker 2: --this would happen.  Thirty-first in March [March 31st].
Speaker 1: Two, two thousand and three [2003], right?
Speaker 2: Two thousand three [2003].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in the nursing home in the, in the Washington & Jane Smith Nursing Home.  I don't know.  You want the address or what?  I could (unclear)--
Speaker 1: No, just is it in Chicago?
Speaker 2: In Chicago, Illinois, yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: Um hmm.
Story_ID: 82120
Speaker 1: Okay, before we go into depth, there are five kind of lightweight, "People" magazine-ish type questions we always ask.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they just require a short answer.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: The first one is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food would be turkey and dressing (laughter).  I, I, that's all I--yeah, that, that would be it, no fast food, turkey and dressing, I like it.
Speaker 1: Sir, what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: All right, now, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Christmas Eve 'cause that's my birthday, and I like Christmas, Christmas Eve.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, I don't because I, I didn't have the privilege of going on a lot of vacations.  But when I did go, it was to Florida, because I had relatives there.  But I'd have to say, maybe to answer your question, Florida might be my favorite, although, I went fishing in Wisconsin, and I liked Wisconsin; it's one of my favorite places--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --other than that.
Speaker 1: Now, sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: The one that guides me in my spiritual life and my, or in the life is: do unto others as you would have them do unto you.  That's my favorite.
Story_ID: 82121
Speaker 1: Okay, now, let me ask you about the origin of your family.  I mean I want you to tell me how far back you can trace your family, and name those individuals that you can trace.
Speaker 2: Well, I can trace my great-grandfather, who was a slave.  His name was Miller.  His first name I don't recall.  I think it was James; and my grandfather, his name was Thomas, as mine is; and then my father, Edward, Edward Miller--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and my mother, Rosa Miller.
Speaker 1: Now, you can trace your, say on your father's side back to your great-grandfather?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And he was a--
Speaker 2: He was a slave.
Speaker 1: --he'd been a slave.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the one--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --picture--
Speaker 1: --can you trace your mother's family back to--
Speaker 2: No, unfortunately I don't have any, any record of her family, except for her sister, and that's all I have.
Speaker 1: Did you meet your grandparents on, on that side at all?
Speaker 2: I met my grandfather once.  And by the way, he seems to have been the one that I gained my art experiences from 'cause he was, he cut gravestones, chiseled them out.  So I guess his artistic abilities sort of rubbed my way, but I met him once, very old man.  They say, he lived to be 105 years old.
Speaker 1: But he didn't live in the community that you were raised in?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, he lived far out from there.
Speaker 1: And well, in Virginia still?
Speaker 2: In Virginia, but it was--I can't think of the name of the little town or city there (unclear), but he was not in Bristol [Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, now, let me ask you about your great-grandfather.  Are there any stories that, that he's handed down through the family about what slavery was like and what, what he had to go through?
Speaker 2: No, not to me.  I'm sure he must have had some, but it was not to me, because my thoughts and my visions of him are very, very--I, I didn't see him too much, in fact, I only saw him about once or twice.  And he, he was just not a household person.  I just didn't see him too often.  And he didn't have a chance to relay to me any of his experiences or his life as a slave.  I wish he had.  I would like to have heard it, but I was very young.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, none of your relatives passed down any stories that they heard him tell or--
Speaker 2: Not, not to me, no, no, I don't recall any.
Speaker 1: Did they have any idea of where he was a slave at or?
Speaker 2: No.  Unfortunately, the pictures that I have, there's no record that goes with them.  I, I wish I had a record, but they don't.  And where he was a slave is unknown to me.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, and your grandfather, are there any there any stories about him that, that you remember?
Speaker 2: No, he wasn't a slave--
Speaker 1: I know.
Speaker 2: --but the only story, as I said, that I know about him was that he was a very devoted artist of creating tombstones, that he earned his living doing that, chiseling out the, the names of the deceased on the tombstones.
Speaker 1: Now that's your grandfather on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: On your father's side.
Speaker 1: On your father's side?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's about the only thing that I know about him, really I--it's a shame that I don't have a lot of information on my great-grandfather and my grandfather, but I don't, really don't because my father--well, you'll get around to asking about him--he was killed.  He was a brakeman on the Norfolk and Western Railway, and he was thrown off the train and the road between the train and the platform of the station, and then flipped out.  And so he was accidentally killed on that.  And he would have relayed to me a lot of things about his father, had he lived.  And this was in 1924 when he was killed by an accident, and I was only four years old then, so I wasn't privy to any information about my grandfather.
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Story_ID: 82122
Speaker 1: Okay, well, can you tell us a little bit about your father [Edward Miller] that you--what was his name, and how do you spell his name, and what--
Speaker 2: His name--
Speaker 1: Yeah, go, go ahead.
Speaker 2: No, go ahead.  I'll let you finish.
Speaker 1: Well--and when, when he was born and where?
Speaker 2: Date of birth I can't give you, but I can give you a little about him in the way of when he was--as I said, he was--I have an article, paper, in the newspaper that was printed about him.  And he was killed in 19--as I say, 1924.  And I didn't see him to remember him but once.  I remember him holding me on his knee at one time, and that's a very vivid memory, but I didn't have much contact with my father.  As you can see, I was a very young boy when he was, when he was accidentally killed.
Speaker 1: Did, well, did, did other relatives talk about like where he went to school or where he was raised and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: I have to answer negative to that because I just haven't had any contact with--I didn't--our relatives weren't that close.  And those who could have relayed that kind of information to me were very few, and they didn't live in the same little city that I lived in, Bristol [Virginia].  So, my information about, about my relatives is very sparse, unfortunately.
Story_ID: 82123
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your mother.  What is her name, and can you spell that for us, and--
Speaker 2: Yes, I don't know, did I spell my father's name for you there?
Speaker 1: Yes, you did.
Speaker 2: I did?  My mother's name was, her maiden name was Rosa James, J-A-M-E-S.  And, and what else did you want to know about her?
Speaker 1: Well, do you have her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't have that.  I was never given that, but it had to be around 1890-something.  And she passed away in 19--around 1960.  And be more specific than that, I can't--I, I, I have little tales that I knew about her.  And I don't know whether you want me to--
Speaker 1: Sure, that's--(unclear)--anything you can tell us--
Speaker 2: Well, she was one as you--your mother was or anybody's mother, was one wonderful lady.  And she, she raised five children and sent three of them to college by herself.  And she worked practically every day of her life.  And some little comical incidents that I remember, not really funny, but they were funny now.  I remember she'd taken me down a hill in, in my hometown in Bristol [Virginia], to, going to the store to get me something.  I don't know what she was buying for me, but we were walking down the street.  And I'll make this very short.  And all of a sudden a whole big bucket of water came down on her head.  And here she was, was all drenched, you know, and a string had been strung across the sidewalk behind a big hedge, with three little boys back there, little white fellows.  And they pulled the string, and the water dumped on her.  When the string hit her nose, rather--and they held the string--when the string hit her nose, it tipped the bucket of water over.  Now, why I say--I jumped over the--I was about four or five, five, five, six years old--I jumped over the hedge when they were laughing, and I got the stew beat out of me.  They just, they beat me badly.  And my mother was calling for me to come back, come back, and I came back over.  The little guys ran away.  And when I came back over, she began to wipe the blood.  I had nose, nose, my nose was bloodied.  She began to wipe me off and, and fuss at me at the same time for being so stupid as to jump over, and not know what was over there.  But believe me, she, she had a tear or two in her eyes.  I think [clearing throat]--excuse me--I think she was proud of me, in fact, I know she was.  But she had to fuss at me because that was a crazy thing--but I was a boy, and I loved her a lot, and thought this was the right thing to do.  As I say, some incidents I could tell you like that, that would, would give you an idea of what kind of woman she was and why I loved her so much, one of the few women in my life that I just loved completely.  There are so many little things that, as I say, that happened when I was coming up, and she was involved in just about all of 'em.  She encouraged me in art, even though she couldn't do it.  She would let me do it at night, anytime I wanted to.  In other words, she was encouraging me, and as I say, little incidents that I know about, she was pretty hard on me, discipline-wise.  I would do things like climb trees if I wasn't supposed to climb, and do things that boys do.  But there were a lot of them that I wasn't supposed to do.  So she would discipline me for--'cause usually it was somebody else's cherry tree I was up in, and she would discipline me.  So, and the good thing about my mother was that she, and my father, were not very, very poor people.  My father had bought a home and a farm.  Now, in the South where I was they had the Ku Klux Klan and all the other negative organizations.  So his farm, he had a white family living on it, so we would get our produce, fruits, vegetables, and everything, from there.  I would go out in the wagon, four-wheel, you know wagon, and we would get them and bring them back.  That was our food supply for--from the farm.  And, and she and my father, they were large people.  Like, Nathan, my father was a 33rd degree Mason, and my mother was civic-minded, and although she didn't finish high school, but she was very civic-minded with (unclear) thing.  She could drive a car, which my father had, and this I'm talking about in the 1920s.  She--
Speaker 1: That was special in that era.
Speaker 2: That was special.
Story_ID: 82124
Speaker 1: And my father [Edward Miller] didn't have just a T-Model Ford.  He had a, he had a car called a Flint, which was like a Packard, had the two big wheels; it was a shiny car.  He used to polish it all the time.  So he--she [Rosa Miller] would drive us to church and Sunday school.  And that's why I say she was not no ordinary woman, because very few people were driving cars at that time, you know.
Speaker 2: And fewer women, I guess.
Speaker 1: Yeah, very few, very few.  And that's what I meant (unclear).  And you know, little things like that I remember.  And as I say, it's, it's easy for me to--I have recorded them in my mind and--
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: Go ahead--
Speaker 2: Did your mother have a story about, or, or, or about how she and your father met?
Speaker 1: Larry, that's one thing I never--I often wondered how they met, you know.  But not knowing my father too well, but knowing my mother, I, I often wondered how they met, but I never asked her.  You know, during the time, you could be nosy when you--a person, during the time I was coming up.  Parents wouldn't confide in you as they do today.  And I was kind of afraid to ask my mother things like that.
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: It's amazing.
Story_ID: 82125
Speaker 1: Now tell me, now, now you grew up in, what was the name of the town?
Speaker 2: Bristol [Virginia]--
Speaker 1: Bristol?
Speaker 2: B-R-I-S-T-O-L, Bristol.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was a, a kind of, it was an interesting kind of a strange town, right?
Speaker 2: It was, it was an interesting town.  It had all of the, it had everything that a city would have.  It wasn't country, you know, no wagons going.  I mean, they had ice deliveries and stuff like that, 'cause that was during the time.  But the streets, had paved streets and department stores, you know, it was a city.  Yeah, that was, that was Bristol.
Speaker 1: Now was the black community paved too?
Speaker 2: All communities were paved, yeah.  We lived on what they call--the name of the street was Buchanan Street, 417 Buchanan Street.  That was the place of my birth.  And all the streets were paved.  We had an alley, garage, an office.  So, when I think back on it, it was not bad living.  It was not complete poverty, you know, and nobody in my family would have been on relief, had they had relief, but they didn't have that either.
Speaker 1: Now Bristol's on the border of Tennessee.
Speaker 2: Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Exactly whereabouts is it in--is Bristol, Virginia, right?
Speaker 2: It's, yeah, it's right on the border.
Speaker 1: Bristol, Tennessee.
Speaker 2: It's, it's called Bristol, Virginia, Tennessee.  But if you were born in the city, you, and you were on the Virginia side, naturally it would be Bristol, Virginia.  And if you were on the Tennessee side, obviously, Bristol, Tennessee.  And it's, it's quite a ways.  It's from Richmond [Virginia].  I--well, it's right on the border, so I'd say, if I had to describe where it was, I'd say it was on the, in the southeastern section, north section of Virginia, State of Virginia.  If you had the map of Virginia--I mean--excuse me--southwestern section--I should have said southwestern section, way down on the borderline.
Speaker 1: Kind of in the panhandle part of it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right down at the border.
Story_ID: 82126
Speaker 1: Now, now you had five siblings--I mean, or, or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --four other--
Speaker 2: I had, I had, I had two brothers and two sisters; it was five of us all together.
Speaker 1: Can you name 'em for us and--
Speaker 2: I sure can.
Speaker 1: --and tell us where you fall into the--
Speaker 2: Well, I am the, I'm the fourth child of, of, of five.  My oldest brother, his name is Raymond Miller, and he attended Hampton Institute [Hampton, Virginia] and, and graduated as a mechanic, auto mechanic in auto mechanics.  His, his--the one that was close to him, Paul, his name was Paul Miller.  He was a teacher and then a professor finally in, in Fairmont, West Virginia, in a school there.  My sister, who was one year older than I, she attended--I can't think of the name of the school in Virginia, but she did.  And I have another younger sister named Anna.  Did you ask me to spell these?  I could, if you--I think I could--
Speaker 1: Well, you could, yeah.
Speaker 2: I didn't know whether you--well, Raymond is obviously R-A-Y-M-O-N-D, Miller; Paul, P-A-U-L, Miller; and Virginia is my sister, the one I'm just talking about, her name, V-I-R-G-I-N-I-A; and Anna is my youngest sister.  She is still alive.  The other ones that I previously just named are all deceased.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's just you and Anna--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Anna, and she was--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yes, and she was two years younger than me, so that would make her about 80 now.
Story_ID: 82127
Speaker 1: Okay, now, can you sort of reflect back on, on growing up, and give us some idea of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Bristol [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Well, as you know, the, the, the idea of children as they are today, running around and doing things, you, you had to be a homebody; you had to be--you couldn't go out like the kids today and do things.  So, my mother [Rosa Miller] was very strict on what I did and where I went.  But I can--some of the things I did, like, for an example, it's funny, and another, another funny thing--oh, our home used to have a blind that rolled down.  It was long--they have wooden labs (ph.), they--you'd roll it down and pull it and roll it up.  That was to keep the sun off of you, if you were sitting on the porch.  Well, these labs are very light, lightweight, and when I was a young boy, just when [Charles] Lindbergh flew across the ocean, my friend and I constructed a plane.  We thought it was gonna fly, had seat in it, and wings, and propeller, had rubber bands stretched from the front to the back.  And I know this is terribly funny, and it's terribly stupid.  But it was stretched from the front to the back.  And the idea was my little buddy would wind this up just as tight as we can.  We took this up on top of the garage, and he wound it.  And when I say go, I wanted him to push me, so I'm gon' take off and fly over the city like Lindbergh.  Well, well, you can guess, when he pushed me I went straight down and hurt my arm and everything, and I couldn't fly.  I was trying to do what Lindbergh did, you know, and obviously you couldn't fly with that kind of little apparatus, just some kiddish thing. But my mother, being the woman she was, and after telling me what not to do, when she came from work and found that I (unclear), she gave me what they called a whipping.  Because even before she bandaged up my arm and everything, because she told me not to, not to do things like that--and I'm just showing you how disciplined they were on--we had--there're so many things that, that would happen, but never because, because there was a lack of teaching from your parents.  It was because you just wanted to do something, you know, and get away with it, as all little boys would do.  I, I remember my next door neighbor, they had a home there.  And the two little girls were friends of mine, and we all were about the same age.  Well, they caught the measles, I think it was, or something like that, and I couldn't see them, 'cause we always used to play together.  So I tied a rope from my house to their house, and put a wagon (laughter)--(unclear) and went down, down over to their house, and I got to see them.  My mother found that out, and of course I had to go through the discipline thing for that.  That was stupid.  So I'm just saying (laughter)--
Speaker 1: You were genius though.
Speaker 2: Oh, I, (laughter) I was either crazy or a genius.  That's the way it, that's the way it looked, I think more crazy than anything else.
Story_ID: 82128
Speaker 1: But I took enjoyed doing things.  In, in, in, at, in my home it's, oh, shoot, Thanksgiving, all the holidays, they were celebrated with family, with, with, with all the things that could--that, that were expected of you in those days, or in these days too, turkey and the whole thing.  And holidays were, were celebrated, Christmas particularly.  As I say, it was my birthday, so I never did have a birthday party.  'Cause who's gonna give me a gift when the next day is Christmas, see?  So I, I was minus the birthday party thing, but the Christmases were great.  I received, I'd always get--we'd all get one gift if nothing else, and that was always, always a nice thing that my mother would see to us--see to it that we got.  Like I'd get a scooter, or a pair of skates, or a football or something like that, you know, whatever she could buy.  Because, to tell you the truth, in the '30s [1930s], that was the Depression, and you know about that of course.  And times were very hard, and I was 10 years old in 1930.  And times were very hard during the Depression, which followed that, that--so you couldn't buy things like, for an example, I wanted to draw and draw badly, but we couldn't buy paper.  So I would go down to the Bristol Herald Courier, which was the newspaper.  And you'll have to excuse me for referring to this.  I'm not trying to make this a racist thing, but they were white, it was white-owned.  That's just the way it was in the South; it was a fact.  And so I would go down and pick up the newsprint that they had thrown out that was ruined in the printing.  And I'd get it in my little wagon, and then I'd take it back and cut it up, and that's what I used to learn to draw on.  Well, the fellow saw me doing that in the window, some of the typesetters and printers and so.  So what they did was cut up a bunch of that, that paper themselves, and bundled it up, and wrapped it up.  And so when I went down, here's all these bundles of neatly wrapped paper.  I thought I was stealing something.  (Laughter) I didn't know they had done it.  So I'm looking around, and they were up there watching me.  And I put it on the wagon 'cause it was near the trash thing.  And so I took it away.  I later learned that they did this on purpose.  They knew I was trying to draw.  And it's one of the nicest things that, in my life, that helped me so much.  And to think that they thought enough of me, doing that, struggling to get this little wagon (unclear) paper home, and they helped me like that.  I, I, I remembered that.  I remember, remembered now because it was one of the starting points in my drawing and art career, because since I couldn't buy anything, and they helped me to get it.  As a matter of fact, I worked for one of those fellows.  He, he opened a service station, and he's the one who relayed this information to me.  And I've always cherished that little bit of, how, how they helped me, yeah, (unclear) of art that I did.  It's quite wonderful.  For sure all people aren't bad.  You know, people help you; particularly they'll help you if they see you're helping yourself.  I mean this is, this--some of the little nuances and things that happened.  I, I could go on obviously, but you said just to hold this short,
Story_ID: 82129
Speaker 1: Let me, let me ask you this--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We were talking about the beginnings of your interest in art.  Now, now when did you really first get a chance to produce art, or what inspired you to try to do art?
Speaker 2: What inspired me was, there was a gentleman who was a boarder.  My, my aunt had a pretty large house.  Her husband was a minister, and so they had (unclear)--so they would take in boarders.  And this particular fellow's name was Mr. Franklin.  And he introduce--he saw that I was interested when I was a little boy, interested in trying to do art, and I had no teacher, of course.  So he was the first person to show me how to draw.  He, he showed me a landscape with a windmill on it and water.  I must have drawn it a thou--a hundred times, because I, I liked the idea of drawing.  And he's the first one to give me an oil paint set, a little tiny, little tubes of oil paint and a brush.  He showed me how to use it.  I'd say he was the beginning of my art career, if I can say that, because I then knew how to, how to paint the little windmill thing that he showed me how to--and I painted a stairway.  I started using it for what he gave it to me for, for, and that was my beginning in, in art.  He was just a simple man, but he could draw a little bit.  And he saw that I was interested, and he helped me like that.  So that would be my, really, acquaintanceship with, with art.
Speaker 1: Now what age, what age were you (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I then was about, I'd say it was before nine, so I had to be about six, something like that.  And, and then from then on up I was drawing--you know, I, I got very serious about it when I was about nine or ten years old, see.  But I had to have a beginning, and I didn't have any help, and he was the one who helped me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I, I never will forget him because my whole life is built on art, so he was one of the starting points.
Story_ID: 82130
Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell me about school?  Now, now what was the name of the school you attended in Virginia?
Speaker 2: The name of the school was Douglas, D-O-U-G-L-A-S, Douglas High School [Bristol, Virginia].  I guess that was named after Frederick Douglass, I would imagine, but it was Douglas High School.  And I attended the--from, from first grade on up.  And there are a lot of things that happened to me in that school.  The teachers, I can remember each one of them, which is something you wouldn't wanna know here, but my memories of that school is just unbelievable.  They--as I say, we had no art school, but I was involved when I was small--I'll say in the second grade rather, not small--in the second grade we had a very strict second grade teacher.  Her name was Mrs. Mayo (ph.).  And we had to remember, memorize all of the Presidents of the United States starting from George Washington on up through whoev--I forget who the president was when I was that age, but on up through there.  And we had to memorize that, and all the times tables, like one times one and two ti--on up through twelve.  She was death on memory.  You had to, you just had to memorize stuff, and in the second and third grade.  And although I did it, I--it was hard, but I did it.  And I don't know whether you've ever heard of the DAR or not.  The DAR is the initials for the Daughters of the American Revolution.  They asked me to memorize--I was in the third, fourth grade then--to memorize Lincoln's Gettysburg Address in its entirety.  And they gave me this typewritten page, and that's the longest thing I ever tried--but you had to memorize.  They always wanted you to use your memory.  So I memorized it, and I had to recite this thing on stage with the mayor of Tennessee and the mayor of Virginia on the (laughter) stage, my parents and everybody out in the front.  I'm this little fellow trying to recite the Lincoln--but I, I, I did it.  I was told if I began to forget, they wouldn't step forward, and that would help me remember.  But I came pretty near walking off the stage.  I broke down one time (laughter) and said, and said--so, so I--but I said, I said--you know, until this day, as old as I am, as I say 82, you know I can recite that entire Gettysburg Address.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: It's amazing I, I didn't forget it.  But this was one of the--in, in the school that I was in they had prayer in the auditorium every day, and it was one of those kind of schools, you know, the auditorium (unclear) sports.  I play football and basketball, ran track, and, and then did my art always; that came foremost of everything
Speaker 1: Now with, with you, now how old were you when you delivered the Gettysburg Address?
Speaker 2: I'd say about, I was about 10 or 11, something like that.  Because if I was in the fourth grade, that would be, so that would be about 10--
Speaker 1: Nine--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --fourth or fifth grade, something like that.  It's around 10 or 11.  I can't remember specifically, but I was a younger, you know, I was young; I was a boy.  And I didn't think I could do it.  Obviously, somebody gives you a (laughter) typewritten (unclear)--my mother [Rosa Miller] made me do it too.
Story_ID: 82131
Speaker 1: But the follow-up of that story is kind of sad to the point that the Daughters of the American Revolution [DAR] refused to let Marian Anderson, who was a black--you know Marian Anderson, a sopran--singer, sing in Washington, D.C.  And they're the ones who gave me the medal, little gold medal with my name on it for reciting the Lincoln's Gettysburg Address.  And I, like a fool--and I say a fool, because my mother [Rosa Miller] was so angry with me--I didn't like it because they wouldn't let Marian Anderson sing.  And somebody told me--when they told me that the DAR prevented her from singing, I threw the medal in the river.  And I wish I hadn't, but I hated the fact that they wouldn't let her sing.
Speaker 2: And that's sometime later, you were, you were grown proba--when Marian Anderson was prevented from singing right--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: Well, I wasn't grown, but I was older (unclear) older.  It's just that at the age that I was, I just didn't want to hold on to something.  And that's, that's why I say now I wish I had used my sense--but that's hindsight--and I would, would have kept it.  Because that couldn't have helped the situation, and it's just something that was gonna happen anyway, and they'll never know I did it.  The people that do know I did it think it was a stupid thing, and I think it was stupid.  But it was my feeling at the time.  I, I, I, I just, I just felt that way.  So, at any rate, that was, as I say, in high--it was in school.  That was probably in high--I have a hard time relating the dates of things like that, but it's happened, believe me.
Speaker 2: So you, you threw it away when you were in high school?
Speaker 1: Wherever--whatever the age I was, I discarded that medal in a place called Beaver Creek, which ran right through the city [Bristol, Virginia], 'cause I remember crossing the bridge and, and throwing it in, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, this rates as interesting, the Daughters of the American Revolution were actually interested in the black schools in--and did things in the black schools?  'Cause you were in a segregated school.
Speaker 1: I was, yes, but--
Speaker 2: Right, so they actually came over to the black school and promoted different--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: --activities.
Speaker 1: --to my knowledge, Larry, they, they, they must have.  Then the real reason why they were there, I don't know.  I don't know anything about them other than they were obviously [burp]--excuse me--a little bigoted.  Because the reason they didn't Marian Anderson to sing was because she was a Negro.  And it was a particular hall [Constitution Hall] that she was scheduled to sing in I think.  But at any rate, they didn't let her sing.  And apparently, to give me an award for saying--they must have been going to all schools, and including--(unclear)--I think that's what hit me the hardest, when I heard that they were very prejudiced.  'Cause they seemed to be so nice, and I was glad to get the medal.  But that was just one of the incidents that happened while I, while in school, grade school, high--you know--not the high--it may have been high school.  As I say, to be specific on the time, that's, that's a little more difficult for me right now--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but it happened. Um hmm.
Story_ID: 82132
Speaker 1: It seems that you were pretty, a pretty popular student, and probably a good student if they let you speak in front of the mayor and everything.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, well, at the risk of, of sounding egotistical, and I'm not gonna do that, but I was a pretty good student.  The fact is, when I graduated from this, graduated from this school, I was valedictorian of the class, only because there were only 12 graduates.  And it wasn't that I was so smart; it was that they were so dumb.  I just don't know how I ever managed to be valedictorian of a class.  But it helped me, because I got a scholastic scholarship to the college and an athletic scholarship to the college, and that helped me pay my tuition and all like that.  But, yes, I, I was made by my mother [Rosa Miller] and the teachers to do things that, that eventually in life helped me, and they were hard to do, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now are, are there any particular teachers or people in the community that stand out as role models for you that you really looked up to?
Speaker 2: It's amazing that I was, I would--I could name the teachers in the school that were--Mrs. Simon, Mrs. Mayo, Mrs. Map, Mrs. Morris, Professor Boyken (ph.).  He's the one who would hit you in the hand when you were sent to his office for doing something silly--and all those names, to me they were great people because they influenced me in, in my learning.  And I can remember their names, and I can see their faces even now.  That's a long, long time ago, but I can.  And so, those were my--now if you talking about a real role model in art, I'd have to mention the greatest genius the world has ever known, Leonardo da Vinci.  There has been no one to top him, including [Albert] Einstein, Madame [Marie] Curie, you name 'em.  He was the greatest, because he was a genius in so many different fields.  And the man that I referred to who had gave me the paint brush and so forth, he had three pages of a book that was on da Vinci, and he gave them to me.  And I must have them (laughter) practically all my life because I read 'em until they became so dog-eared and so forth I couldn't read 'em.  And I know he was my role model.  In the city itself was the teachers and the minister and people that, that I knew, you know, as a boy.  But as a role model for my life, it was da Vinci.
Story_ID: 82133
Speaker 1: Now, now did the church play a big part in your upbringing?
Speaker 2: I was required--and to answer that, I'd have to say yes, only to the point that at that time all kids were required to go to Sunday school and to church.  And I had to walk to church on the Tennessee side.  So in other words, I'd go from my home on the Virginia side and my two sisters and I would walk over to, to the church on the Tennessee side.  Now why, I don't know, but that was what we had to do.  I guess my mother [Rosa Miller] and father [Edward Miller] must have belonged to that church on the Tennessee side.  So that--the church played I'd say an important part.  I was, I had to go to church.  Some of the things that's happened (laughter) in some of the plays the church gave--I, I was mischievous little boy too.  You know, I mean I, I did some things I, I look at now and say are very, very, very stupid.  Like, when we were going to depict the tomb in which Jesus was, and they were gonna roll the stone away.  Well, I rolled it real fast and let it go off (laughter) the stage.  I thought they were gonna kill me.  And I, I, I  (laughter), yeah, I did some foolish things.  But yeah, the church played a very important part in my upbringing.  And after I became a man and chose my way of life, I, I chose my way of religion too, very special I am, but not, not a person who goes to church every day, every Sunday and all that.  I just don't do that.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was, was this church the Baptist church or the--
Speaker 2: No, it was a Methodist, A.M.E Zion Methodist Church.  That's, that was a Methodist church.  And that's the only church I ever belonged to.  We had Sunday school and church there.
Story_ID: 82134
Speaker 1: Now, what, what, what other activities other than art were you involved in in high school or--and, and did--well, yeah, what, what other activity--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, my, my high school [Douglas High School, Bristol, Virginia], if you were to compare my high school with high school today, there's no comparison 'cause it's just a little school at the--but I did [clearing throat]--excuse me--I did participate in, as I, as I said, art.  They asked me to do a lot of art things because it wasn't anybody else.  But my sports life, I lettered--you know, when--at that time when you're in high school, if you excelled in a sport like in football for three year or the four years you're in high school, they give you a sweater with a big "D" for Douglas on it in orange.  So I lettered in football and basketball, so I had these two sweaters.  And that made it easy for me to get girlfriends and all that kind of stuff (laughter), because I was popular in that, and I, I loved it.  Other than that in, in the school, other than the art and the athletics and--our school, I had participated in everything like on the maypole wrap.  You know, all the kids had to participate in that.
Speaker 1: We used to have, actually I had to wrap a maypole--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the pole, the maypole wrap would be about 20 kids out around holding the ribbon, and then you'd have to weave in and out and then we wrap--it would, it would end up on the pole woven.  And that's the way it was called, you know, May Day, as you know.  It was very popular for--and particularly in the South it was very popular.  I think it--if I'm not, if I'm not mistaken, that was of Russian origin, the May Day, May--I don't know.  I'm not sure.  But anyway, we were required to do that, throw--
Speaker 1: I don't think children do it anymore.  I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: They don't, no, they don't, they really don't.  The fact is, all I'm telling you now most of it didn't--they don't do that anymore.  Schools are completely different now from what it was then, even in the--I had no library.  The library in the schools that I was in was in each room they had a few books, but there was no big main library.  But if we wanted to research on something like when I was in high school, we'd have to go to a white library--white (unclear) school and use their library, so I did that.
Speaker 1: So they--there was no problem using their--
Speaker 2: Oh no, they would--I guess the principals got together, but they, they invited us.  We could go.  Yeah, that was something we could do.  And I, I don't think I was--I wasn't a real smart guy.  You know, I just loved art.  Art to me didn't require you to be any kind of genius.  It just required you to have talent.  And so I--as I say, I think God gave me enough talent that I built on it.  And I didn't--some of the things like arithmetic, calculus, geography and all, I was not interested in it, only just enough to pass the grades.  So (unclear)--the--it worked out for me.  I feel sorry for myself for not taking advantage of some of the things I could have, but that's past.  You didn't have to know calculus to be an artist, so I never learned (laughter).  And I just assumed that my ability [clearing throat] that--with what I was doing didn't have to have a lot of learning, which is a mistaken idea.  But I could have been much smarter, much more intelligent, had I applied myself I'm sure.  But I didn't because I loved art, and if you can draw, that's the name of the game.
Story_ID: 82135
Speaker 1: Now, now when you were a senior in high school getting ready to graduate, had you planned your next move?  Had you planned to go to college at that point?
Speaker 2: Well, with the help of a teacher, apparently I--as I say, that's back in--that's a long time ago.  It's kind of hard to remember, but I know I wanted to go to, to an art school.  And the only school that, that was recommended to me was Virginia State College [Petersburg, Virginia], and that was not an art school, although it had an art department.  But when I graduated from college I was supposed to teach art, and I didn't want to teach.  I wanted to do it.  So, yeah, that, that I--I had that in my mind, that I wanted to go, go to college.  My mother [Rosa Miller] sent both my older brothers--they were older than I, much older--to Hampton.  They both had graduated from Hampton Institute [Hampton, Virginia].  And she wanted me to go to college too, and so I, I made the effort.  And by doing--getting the scholarships, scholastic and athletic scholarships, which wasn't much money during those times technically, but it did help on my tuition and everything.  That enabled me to go to college.  My artistic ability didn't help at all.  But when I got to college I met some awfully good artists.  And the fact is, my art teacher used to--was an artist in New York until she was transferred to teach at this state school.  And she was so good, she was like a mother to me.  And she helped me when I went to--had to leave my home to go to Virginia State College in Petersburg, Virginia.  And she helped me so much.  They, the kind of took me under their wing.  And for a while there I was the college artist at Virginia State College.  I did just about everything, and--until other men came in--students came in rather, and they took over.  But my art experiences in college were a little different than what I thought it was gonna be.  I became acquainted with a man, you know, man by the name of Johnny Borigan [John Borigan].  And Johnny Borigan was a hell of an artist; he was just good, and I envied him because that's what I wanted to do with my--he would paint the big portraits and all of that.  And I, I didn't know how to do that.  He taught me a lot.  In fact, he took me under his wing and he taught me so much.  Now Borigan was a big guy, about two hundred and five or ten pounds.  He was a track man, captain of the football team in college, and track team, and he ran in the Olympics, in the same Olympics that Jesse Owens ran when he broke those records.  And, and his name was Johnny Borigan, and he was an artist and an athlete.  And naturally I felt right at home following in his footsteps, and particularly he was giving me so much good information and teaching me so much.  He actually was teaching me more than the art teacher really.  And that was a--he died.  He was 98 pounds when he died.  He had this disease called something anemia.  I can't pronounce the medical name, but you lose weight.  And for a man who was 215 pounds and look at him weighing 98 pounds, I can, I can still see him.  But he was a marvelous influence on me, because he was such a good artist and an athlete, and that's what I liked.
Story_ID: 82136
Speaker 1: Now, now, what, what positions did you play in basketball and football?
Speaker 2: Now that would be kind of hard to answer because I'm not too sure the positions are the same.  Like, in football, we played half back, two half backs, a full back, and a center.  And we used the Knute Rockne shift or the [Glenn] "Pop" Warner shift.  And practically all the students in the country, no matter who they were, used those two shifts.  And so I played half back, and at times would be full back, because I had to punt the ball, kick the ball.  And, and, and I remember once, on a snowy Thanksgiving Day, playing basketball against that team that I was telling you about that's on the Tennessee side of Virginia and the Tennessee side, and that was our biggest rival.  And I remember making two touchdowns, and that was another historical part in my life [clearing throat], in my life, because they wrote this up in that paper that I was telling you about.  It's a very segregated paper.  And I noticed in 1937, '36 [1936], I think--but anyway, they wrote it up.  And I, I cut it out, and I had it for a long time.  But football was very important to me because my brothers played football too.  But then the basketball end of it, you--I played forward, but it was not like they play today.  In other word, you couldn't tou--you know how, how they jam--what do you call it?
Speaker 1: Dunk.
Speaker 2: Dunk--you couldn't touch the basket, not only the rim, you couldn't touch the basket.  Any, any basket you made had to be shot from the outside or, or put in without touching--you, you touch the basket, it was a foul.  And every time a basket was made you had to go outside and start all over again each time.  And that, that was some, that was the method of foot--of basketball that they used then, you know.  And I lettered in, 'cause I loved it.  Basketball, it was a slow sport at that time, slow, not like it is now.  And plus I--that's, that, that I enjoyed a lot, basketball and football because it, it gave me something else to do that was athletic, and, and it was different from my art, which was always very sedate and, and quiet.  And you know, I can do that to myself, but football and basketball were two--I played football when I got to college, but only about a year and I stopped because I was ruining my hands, and I didn't wanna do that, do that.  Well, it--I'm glad I did because I have--see that finger right there?  That's from football.  It got hooked in the, you know, the trunks and--you got one too?  (Laughter) I know you know what it is.  And I didn't want my other hand to be like that (unclear).  So, but that was my--there are a lot of things obviously that I can remember about football, but they wouldn't be something that--I'd have to go back a long ways to try--
Speaker 1: No, you'd probably have to get--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's what I'm saying, I couldn't do that.
Story_ID: 82137
Speaker 1: Now though, a war interrupted your college career.
Speaker 2: It kept me from graduating, the War [World War II].  I was supposed to graduate in 1940--'41 [1941] I think it was.  That's when they bombed Pearl Harbor.  So I got out; I quit school, and--because I had to earn money.  So I, I, I quit school and became a manager of a postal exchange in the camp, Camp Lee, Virginia.  And that way I thought I [burp], I would be exempt--excuse me--be exempt from the war, but it didn't work.  I still got my (laughter) (unclear).  It didn't work at all.  And so I did, I went to the, to World War II from college, and I spent three years over--two years overseas, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you didn't wanna go?
Speaker 2: Oh no, no, no, me, me and a million other guys didn't wanna go.  We just--it was not unpatriotic not, to not wanna go.  People just didn't wanna go, no matter--but you knew if you lived in this--one of the reasons why I didn't wanna go, frankly, was, and I have to bring this one up was the segregation problem, they, the [U.S.] Army at that time, when I went in, was very segregated.  And I didn't want to be giving my life for the country who wouldn't even allow me to go where they let prisoners of war go.  I've imagined you've heard this, but I, I, I--this is the truth.  I was in a, in a camp where the prisoners of war, Italians and Germans deemed white go in front.  I had to go to the back, and I was in uniform.  Say over 500 grown men--I had--I cried.  I thought that was unfair.  So, I, when I say I didn't wanna go, I really didn't, but I knew it was my duty to go.  So I went and I served, and was dishonorably dis-dis--honorably discharged, not dishonorably, honorably discharged.  And that was it--yep.
Story_ID: 82138
Speaker 1: When you were in the--you, you were in the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was in the Army, Quartermaster.
Speaker 1: In Quartermaster Corps?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Which one was it, do you remember the name of it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was 3437 Quartermaster Trucking Company.  Yeah, that's the name of it.  I was a first sergeant in that company.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, and you served in Europe?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I took my basics here of course.  And I applied for OCS, Officers Candidate School, but they weren't--another quota there--they weren't taking but either three or four percent of negroes in there, so my application was turned down.  But fortunately, I, I was in Texas at the time that I applied.  They, they sent me to South Carolina--that's across the country--as a first sergeant, so I got to be without any going from order up through the ranks, without going from private to sergeant to tech sergeant to first sergeant.  I went right to first sergeant.  So the whole time after basic I was a first sergeant in the company, which was good.  It, it in a way was better than being an officer because I, I didn't have to buy my own clothes, didn't have to pay my, for my food, and I got a good salary, you know, as a first sergeant.  So I, I eventually liked the whole idea.  I only wanted to become an officer because I thought that I would be of more help.  And it was a challenge; everything was a challenge to me, and I wanted to do it.  Maybe I would have been a bad officer, but I wanted to give it a try.  But since I didn't make it, then...
Story_ID: 82139
Speaker 1: Now, now did you have black officers or--
Speaker 2: White officers.  That's the part that I was telling you.  I had five white officers.  Only one of them turned out bad.  The others were just super guys.  They, they used me, being the mid, the mid-person between 200 men and them, I was used as sort of the intermediary.  And they were just (unclear) as me.  There was one, one officer was from Texas I think, but he, he, he was, he was, he was very prejudiced.  And you put a prejudiced captain in charge of 300--200 black men, it's got to show up, and it did.  Example, we go on 30-mile march.  He wants me to take everybody in the company, and I had some men in my company that were on restricted duty.  They were older men who couldn't walk 30 miles, had feet bad, knees and everything.  So I tell him--ask him--couldn't we leave them in the company.  He said no, make 'em walk, in, in so many words.  I can't tell you how he said it, but, make a long story short, we go out on a 30-mile march with men who weren't capable of doing it.  And so one time I, I did it, I got tired of it--'course I was a young man then, a little more hotheaded--and I told him I was gonna pick the men up that were straggling, these old men, they couldn't make it.  So I got a jeep, went back and picked them up.  He told me before I, before he--before I did it, he told me, he said I'm gonna recommend that you, you be busted from first sergeant, reduced in rank, if you do that.  Well, I didn't care, I, I really didn't care.  So I went back in the jeep and, weapons carrier, and picked all the men that's straggling, who couldn't make the march, and I brought 'em back.  It was in the morning around 12:30, 1:00 in the morning when I got in, but I brought 'em in.  And sure enough, that next morning my papers for reduction was on the desk, and he sent 'em to headquarters.  But luckily, he was on record with somebody else, and they had a report on him.  This wasn't the only thing he did.  I could tell you some real bad things, stories.  But in headquarters, the colonel there, I had helped the colonel on the rifle range, so he knew me.  And so he judged what the man was saying by what I had done.  He knew me well enough.  So, he was removed from the company.  I regained my rank as first sergeant, so we lived happily ever after.
Speaker 1: A victory.
Speaker 2: Yeah, a victory, of some sorts.  But no, it was good to get rid of him.  He, he was not suitable for leadership as the rest of the men were.  The rest of those officers were very good men.
Speaker 1: So we could conclude that if--had, had you not stood up for principle at that moment in time, he would have still been--
Speaker 2: He'd still been, he'd been leading men overseas.  I would've, I would've been a private, oh yeah.
Story_ID: 82140
Speaker 1: Now, now you met your wife [Anita Miller] in the service too.
Speaker 2: In the service.
Speaker 1: Now can you describe what, what--how you met her?
Speaker 2: Well, there's some humor attached to that too, but I'll tell you how I met her.  My tech sergeant was a motor pool sergeant, and he was below me.  I was a first sergeant.  And so he was dating my wife.  And we were in Camp Gruber.  I'd come from overseas, and we were in Camp Gruber, Oklahoma, and he was dating her.  He had two or three dates with her.  And when I met her, I grew very fond of her right away 'cause she's such an intelligent person.  She was my kind of lady, you know.  And so, to go out with her--where the humor was--to go out with her, I would always give him some assignment in the motor pool (laughter).  I know it's, it's dirty pool, but I was (laughter) always told all is fair in love and war.  So I just make sure he was assigned to the motor pool, and I would take her out on dates.  And eventually he no longer existed for her, and I--we got married, yeah (laughter).  I'm not the bad fellow that you think I am, but I had to look out for my own cause.  That was, that was a humorous thing.  We, my wife and I, often laughed about that, we did, yeah.  She, she was working.  She was teaching school, give her--a little history of her.  She was a school teacher in Florida, and when the war broke out, a lot of the--I call 'em negroes.  Because they're African Americans now--but the negro teachers were sent to turpentine farms. For some reason, turpentine was a part of something in the war effort.  And she, being--she had a degree from Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  She didn't wanna go to no farm.  So she decided they're gonna do something with her, and all of us, so she decided to enlist in the service and she became a WAC [Women's Army Corps].  And she was in there--I don't know how long she was in there, but I only met her when I came back from overseas.  So, yeah, we got married.  And I, I--if I had to say that--other than my mother [Rosa Miller]--if I ever had to say that a woman spurred me on, influenced me, and gave me the will to fight and go ahead, it was her.  And my mother, of course, (unclear) passed, but I'm talking about my wife.  As I say, I was with her almost 54 years, and, and she was a good inspiration.  That's why the children all doing things that they should be doing.
Speaker 1: How many children did you have?
Speaker 2: Oh, I had three, I had three.  My oldest died about four months, four or five months before my wife, something like that.  My, my, my memory goes bad on that, for dates.  But anyway, I had three children.  My son, who is a paralegal, and my other daughter, who is a social worker--no, my other daughter who is a schoolteacher.  I was thinking about social work with my wife.  That's what she do.  She's the one who's teaching in DePaul [University, Chicago, Illinois].  So I had one daughter--two daughters and a son, [clearing throat] and a son.  My son is about your height, and weighs about 285.  He's a huge individual (laughter).  Yeah, he's--but that's what he's doing.  And so I think they both turned out pretty good.  I'm proud of them [clearing throat], proud of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 82141
Speaker 1: Now after the war [World War II], you, you went back to school and finished?
Speaker 2: Yeah, after the war I was supposed to go--after the war and you--after I came from Europe I was supposed to stay in the United States for 30 days on a furlough and then be shipped to Japan because the war hadn't ended there.  And within that 30 days they dropped the atom bomb, so I didn't have to go to Japan.  And so, so I--your question was about school.  That's why I was almost forgetting what your question was, yeah.  Since the war interrupted my graduating from college, I decided the best thing for me to do, and with my wife [Anita Miller]'s encouraging you see, to get my degree.  I'd--you know, it's a shame you go three years, almost four and not get the degree, so I, I went back to college and got the degree.  And that was in '41 [1941] I think, and, and that's when I was making my efforts to get into an art school and so forth.  And I got--came to Chicago [Illinois] and--
Speaker 1: Was that in '41 or '51 [1951]?  What--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Forty-one [1941], forty-one.  I, I went in, I went in college at--in '36 [1936]--36, 37, 38, 39--I was supposed to graduate in '40 [1940], but I didn't.  And so I, when I went, when I went--oh, you mean when I went back to college?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, when I--excuse me--I went back to college it was '45 [1945].  It was after I came out, that's (unclear).  See, I get mixed up.  I thank you for asking me that because I didn't know I'd said that, but now, that was wrong; it is, it, it was '45.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and then I opened a service station.
Speaker 1: You opened a service station?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, because I wanted to make a living.  I took it over from a guy who had opened a standard service station.  And I ran it for a while, maybe about six months.  And fixing tires and using the line, it was when my hands like the football was, so I had to give up the station.  That's when I started seeking a school to go to.
Speaker 1: Now was that the same guy that used to work at the newspaper that, that, that, that opened the station?  Was that the same one, or was this--
Speaker 2: Used to work with--oh, no, this--
Speaker 1: It's a different--
Speaker 2: This was a, this was a, this was a, a negro.  I, I call, I say negro because it went in those steps from colored to negro to black to African American.  So when I was coming up, it was--
Speaker 1: I understand.
Speaker 2: --negro, that's why I mention it sometimes.  So he, he, he was (unclear)--he asked me to work with him and then something happened to him, and I took over the station.  And I held it, and it was good money; I had very good clientele, and--but I had to give it up, and so that's when I came to Chicago.
Story_ID: 82142
Speaker 1: You came to Chicago [Illinois] to go to, is it Vogue School--
Speaker 2: Ray Vogue, Ray Vogue.
Speaker 1: Ray Vogue, okay.
Speaker 2: And that, that, that magazine, that book just went out, that just got some people in there went to Ray Vogue too.
Speaker 1: V-O-G-U-E, right?
Speaker 2: V-O-G-U-E, Ray Vogue School of Art [now the Illinois Institute of Art-Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  I don't know whether you interviewed all those people in there or not, but there's two of 'em I did read that, that they went to Ray Vogue School, the lady and somebody else.  But that's the only one that I could get in, you know, and believe me, I took full advantage of it, everything they had to offer.  Aside from learning anatomy and all the necessary things, I took up extra things, like airbrushing.  I became, as [Leroy] Winbush [HM] says in that book--he was average--but I became very efficient with an airbrush because I thought I might need it.  And all the equipment I could be--all the talent that I could be--could have at my disposal was, was a plus.  In other words, I didn't wanna be able to say I can't do that, because I knew I was gonna have a hard time, and I did, which was pathetic.  But that happened in--in Chicago at that time.  I--you wouldn't think that would have happened in '48 [1948], but it did.
Story_ID: 82143
Speaker 1: I couldn't get a job.  I opened a little office of my own, a temporary office.  I rented a little space up on Cottage Grove.  I was gonna do things like letterheads and, and collateral material, but I cou--I couldn't do it because I couldn't--I didn't have the backing.  Nobody would patronize me as a commercial artist.  So I went and did the job that you see me in there now, all--no, no blacks.  They, they even told me things when I went to get--I was walking the streets with my portfolio, trying to get a job.  I was told that I couldn't work there, of course, and this was in, in Chicago, as I said, in the '40s [1940s], late '40s.  But I, I stuck with it, and this gentleman, Mr. [Morton] Goldsholl, wonderful man--he's a wonderful man if he hadn't hired me--but he hired me, and I worked with Goldsholl Associates.  It was not--I won different awards at this job, Larry, but I was always--and the men that you see, there's about six of us, we were always Goldsholl's associates, not a person working for Goldsholl.  And that made us all recipients of many awards and rewards, didn't all just go to the man who hired us.  He had the collective bunch of about 10, 8 or 10 people, and they were all designers, graphic designers.  And that's what I wanted to be, and that's what I did end up being.  But Mr. Goldsholl was (unclear)--he's dead now, but he was such a wonderful guy to work for.  And he would do what other, other people in Chicago wouldn't do, he took a chance.  And that picture you see, my best friends, one was a Japanese, and one was a German, and one was Italian, and they were all people, who were just good and earned a living.  So that kind of broke, broke down a barrier of prejudice.
Story_ID: 82144
Speaker 1: And we would go through like the STA.  That's the Society of Typographic Artists--no African Americans.  I got in it in the '50s [1950s].  And [Leroy] Winbush [HM]--in that book--and I were the only two at that time in there to go.  You know, that's, that's, that was an accomplishment.
Speaker 2: You're talking about LeRoy Winbush.
Speaker 1: Yeah, LeRoy, LeRoy and I.  And we'd go to these meetings.  You had to go to meetings or you'd go to exhibits, wherever you went, whether a group of--he was more advanced than I was, and, and, and more forward than I was.  He, he was president of the Art Director Club.  At one time they wouldn't even let us in that, but he became president of it, and he went to Aspen [Colorado].  So he did a lot of things that I didn't do because I was pretty laid back, Larry.  I was a guy who was trying to do a job.  As [President Theodore] "Teddy" Roosevelt said, I, I walked softly.  I didn't carry a big stick, but I carried a stick, but I walked softly.  And I didn't make--
Speaker 2: Big rush.
Speaker 1: Big rush, that was a better, better analogy.  So I didn't make a lot of waves, and I didn't get too much publicity, but I did the work anyway.  I was in a lot of publications and won a lot of awards, which were ruined in the--when I told you the basement flooded.  And it, it, it was very rewarding.  You don't get into things like that just for rewards, but they come, and you know, it's appreciated.
Speaker 2: Now you had to drive a considerable distance to work every day, right, with--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I drove, I drove 80 miles a day for almost 40 years, for 30, 30-something years, almost 40.  I drove from Chicago [Illinois] to Northfield [Illinois].  'Cause Mr. [Morton] Goldsholl built an office from the ground up, designed office, and that's, that's where I worked, 420 Frontage Road in Northfield.  And at that time, too, I was the only African American on the table for all that time.  And it was just a fine experience for me.
Story_ID: 82145
Speaker 1: Now, now, now one of your clients was 7-Up I think and--
Speaker 2: 7-Up, yes.
Speaker 1: Who, who were some of the other clients?
Speaker 2: Well, they wasn't my clients.  They was the [Morton] Goldsholl's clients.  And I have to make sure that there's a separation made.  Now I worked for Goldsholl.  He was a designer; we were designers, but not of his caliber.  He was one of the best in the country.  And he would get a job like, say, 7-Up.  It was for us; we were associates; we would all work on them.  I worked on 7-Up a long time, worked on Motorola a long time, IMC [International Minerals & Chemical Corporation].  It's just a lot of na--national trademarks and international trademarks.  And this was what we did: annual reports, collateral material, trademarks, packaging particularly, all kinds of packaging, and we added the design aspects to packing into everything we did.  It wasn't just commercial art as it's known.  But anyway, yeah, I worked on 7-Up.  It was in, in 1974 I think, somewhere around there.  And my job at that time was to help the Goldsholl Design Associates produce an image for 7-Up, all the little dots.  And I don't know whether you recall, but in the '70s [1970s] 7-Up had a, had a bunch of little, little dots that identified them, and, and that was a mark.  Those dots were ef--effervescent bubbles, you know, and it was taken from that.  And as opposed to, like, to give you an idea of how a trademark and how special it was and specialized it was to do it, the Motorola M, you know the M, well, it was taken from the same kind of like an angiogram, you know, they recorded the thing when the--well, that's what it was.  It was an oscilloscope that measured sound, and so it went up and down, the needle.  We picked one of those that was almost perfect, put two ovals underneath it, and that's the may--Motorola trademark.  It's, it's some, some of the ways the--we didn't do it, but this gives you an idea of some of the ways that those marks were created by design, graphic design.  The International Harvester mark is a big H, and in the middle is an I with a dot over it for International Harvester.  Those two verticals on the H were wheels.  The one going across was a tractor seat, and the thing in the middle is a man sitting on it.  And that was in the inspiration for doing International Harvester's trademark.  I only mentioned these because, being in the design field, graphic design field, your job to do trademark couldn't be ordinary.  You had to, you had to be a little special in your rendition of a trademark, or the clients wouldn't hire you.  Saul Bass was one, Paul Rand, Morton Goldsholl.  These were some of the leading trademark designers in the country, and that's what I wanted to be a part of.  I wanted to do this in lieu of being a--although I did--didn't mind.  I would have done newspaper ad artist or you know, a person who does nothing but sign--you know, I, I, I wanted to get beyond that.  But I knew it would be tough because competition was very strong.  And it proved that way with me being the only African American for forty years on the board.  And I knew it would be, it would be tough, but I have nothing but good memories.
Story_ID: 82146
Speaker 1: A few things happened that I expected to happen.  Like, give you a rough example, and, and it's more than this, but you--there was a time when I was with Goldsholl's [Morton Goldsholl Associates] where we were working on a peanut can, mixed nut can, not peanuts.  Peanuts were in it, but it was a mix nut can you buy.  We were gonna do the label and the mark.  So the man who called me--I was working on it--would explain the contents of the can.  He said now there, there are peanuts, and there are cream nuts, and cashews, and there are nigger toes.  I said hold it, back up, what is that?  He said there are nigger toes (laughter), and he was laughing.  He had never see me though.  I says okay, I'll write that down.  And I knew what it was [brazil nuts].  See, he just--it was announced that, that they wouldn't have hired me in the first place, but that was his, his mindset.  But anyway, a couple of weeks later he had to come up 'cause I was working on the project.  And he asked for me.  And when he came in, at my desk where, where I was working, he said you Tom Miller?  I said yeah.  Well, he turned about six different shades of red because the things he had talked to me about on the phone he shouldn't have.  And, but I took it because I'm used to things like that.  You know, it, it didn't bother me.  It bothered me, but it, I didn't let it make any difference, you know.  He was apologizing of course for saying all those things, but he didn't have to.  Those incidents were gonna happen if I chose this to be my, my life's work.  I knew it.
Speaker 2: I heard there were--I, I, I was working on one, one design for Sherwin-Williams.  I was in line.  I'll make this short.  I was in line, and they was--the cafeterias like that give you a tray and you know--and it was only myself, and, and another guy who was working with me over there, in line.  And you know, when I got through the line up there, there was a lady standing and she stood back and folded her arms, said she wasn't gonna serve me.  Now I got all these people behind me, all them people sitting out there who had been served, and I'm standing there, all alone.  And why she wouldn't serve me was because I was a negro, and she didn't--they didn't serve negroes in there she said and so she wouldn't.  So somebody called the head of the Sher--Martin's you know at that time was with Sherwin-Williams, and he came down.  And she still refused to serve me, so he got somebody else there to serve me.  I'm just showing you how embarrassing this was, but I expected it.  And I knew I'd have to undergo this to succeed in the field that I was in, and I was, I think, successful in it.
Speaker 1: And this is in Chicago [Illinois].  This isn't in--
Speaker 2: It would be different if it was in the South maybe.
Speaker 1: --Mississippi or--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --the Carolinas--
Speaker 2: This was, surprisingly it was in Chicago.  And up on the Erie in the Loop, I could go there and I could tell just as good when, when I go to eat with someone, the maitre d' or the headwaiter, you know, he be shaking his head.  I knew they weren't gonna serve me in there.  And I'd tell him we can't go there 'cause--it's amazing how they would do that, but that's all gone now, of course.  But those things I had to endure, and that's why I was so low-key.  Because if I made a lot of waves, I wouldn't have had a job.  Because the opportunity to make waves was always there, but I had to use my brains and not my anger, just and I'm glad I did.
Story_ID: 82147
Speaker 1: Now, tell me, I'm, I'm trying to--I was thinking about some of the advertising images of the, of the early part of the century.  And you know they, they were like images on, say, Sunlight Soap, Black people--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --sometimes and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and, and well--
Speaker 2: Like Aunt Jemima and all that--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: --kind of thing.
Speaker 1: And they had something called "Darkie Toothpaste" at one time--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --with the--I mean did, did--do you know about how those images started changing?  I mean were, were--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --you aware of how--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --not, not all of them, but I, I know they dressed up, say, Uncle Ben's rice.  It doesn't look like the old Uncle Ben.  We worked on for, we worked on for Quaker Oats, was one of our clients, and we worked on Aunt Jemima; in fact, it's--I did the airbrush on her face, 'cause they wanted to change it from that old mammy-like look to a very (laughter), you know, housewifey like.  So we, we, we dressed that up.  And you know, they very seldom got rid of the entire name or image, because that was the history of that product, so.  But they did dress 'em up, and they're dressed up almost beyond recognition now.  But that's, that's the way it was done.  We didn't have too many clients like that.  Usually our clients were new or internationally know, and they were like Arthur Andersen, and you know, just corporations--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --corporate identities is what we were interested in, yeah, and those kind of things.  We'd take any job.  Mr. [Morton] Goldsholl would take any job, if it was, you know, and that might have come in, like Aunt Jemima came in.  'Cause Quaker Oaks was one of our clients, and they wanted us to change it, so we changed it.  You wanting something, and we went out seeking to do is what I'm trying to say.  I was glad to do that.  The images were originated with, with a very, shall we say negative look, and, and, and description of, of a black woman, cook.  And it seems like when it was originated they used the most horrible looking person they could.  And--but that was the way life was during that time.  And so, I don't have--I didn't have much to do--we didn't have much contact with that kind of imagery.  Ours was mostly, as I say, with corporations of--and their, and their image.
Story_ID: 82148
Speaker 1: I better ask you on camera about the absence of images of black people I guess in the '50s [1950s], and '60s [1960s] especially, I think there were hardly any that you saw in the national media in the marketing campaigns.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, to the best of my knowledge, to answer that, Larry, to [clearing throat]--excuse me--to the best of my knowledge, we didn't come in contact with too much of that.  But I, I was aware of the abundance of negative images that referred to the black people.  It seems like they pulled out of the stock photos, the most horrible looking people that they could, and they would advertise--nowadays they have beautiful people all over.  It's, it's a complete different scene, have people's cars.  And you look at television, it's nothing now to see any, any, any black or African American on, on any kind of product and beautifully done, you know, exercise machines and everything.  But during the '40s [1940s], '30s [1930s], and back on beyond that you can almost forget it 'cause it was very derogatory, the kinds of images that were on packages, to say one, like you said, the (unclear) (unclear), that was--there weren't too many to begin with, but those that were on packaging were not given the aesthetics of beauty that they should have been given.  They, they were made to look almost like homespun, old folks back in the South, that kind of thing.  So there was no room it seems like in--it's like that book I have there, the pamphlet that I have that--negroes just didn't fit into the clean world of graphic design.  Like, let's say in Chicago [Illinois], for an example, they had clean work; they had manual labor; and they had servants.  This is for, like, three categories.  The clean work were all 78 percent white.  That was your designers, your people in the upper echelon on; manual labor were your foreign-born people who came in and did these; and two percent was me, that means black people.  And I'm just showing you how the percentages were, which means that I didn't have a chance to do anything contrary to what was being done in art even if they did have a negative image that I didn't like.  I, I wasn't in it; they wouldn't accept me in it.  It was not until 1948, or '50 [1950] rather, that I could get in there to do anything about it even if I wanted to.  It was all run by, you know, by the white establishment.  And, and they, a lot of them, as I said, I a lot of 'em like good--Bruce Beck--well, a lot of people, a lot of designers, they're good people.  And they didn't wanna do that, but they carried on what was already being done.  And in a lot of the cases they changed it, as [Morton] Goldsholl tried to do.  It took a lot of doing to change.  It, it takes a lot of doing to change someone's way of life and someone's mindset about prejudice and that kind of thing.  And those images just stayed there until now it's obnoxious to see the (unclear)--(unclear).  It was obnoxious then, but now it's really, you don't see that kind of thing because of the, obviously, because of The Civil Rights Movement and a lot of other things.  But I guess I can't answer that question directly because I didn't come in direct content--con--contact with products that had--I, I was aware of them, as you are or anybody else.  But we, we didn't come in contact with trying--with clients who wanted us to change their image.  We didn't get that kind of work.  And so I don't have too much of an idea how many there were or who they were, except the ones we just previously named.
Story_ID: 82149
Speaker 1: Now, now the, the, speaking of The Civil Rights Movement, did, did you--I suppose you were following The Civil Rights Movement fairly closely.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yes, I was--I was not an active participant, except for my race.  I, I, you know, I remember, obviously, I, I, I didn't get into it 'cause in my profession I was trying to make a, a way for other people to come in.  So, I didn't time to go out and do the marching and--but I met a lot of the civil rights workers, you know.  And that was a plus for all of us.  But the funny part about it is when [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was a little boy, I, I was marching in, in, in Virginia.  We had a little place called Ettricks, Virginia [sic, Ettrick, Virginia], near the school, the college.
Speaker 1: How, how, how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: E-T-T-R-I-C-K-S, Ettricks.  And you have to pardon my spelling if I didn't--I think that's way it was.  It's been many years ago.  They had a, a place there where the, us students go to eat, and they'd have to eat on the side door and that kind of thing.  So it was boycotted, and that was before King ever started.  And this was in Ettricks, Virginia.  They threw rocks at most of us and that kind of thing, but the clothing store was the same way, you couldn't go over in there; yet, you support it.  And so they--I didn't do this when they boycotted that and marched in front of it, and they were stoned at that.  And (unclear) I'm trying to tell you is that the Civil Rights Movement didn't, didn't obviously just start with King.  It was going on long before that, because a lot of mis--people were being mistreated, and unnecessarily so, and so they protested it.  But they paid a big price (unclear)--for it. But I wish I could have been more active in The Civil Rights Movement, but I followed it.  I did what I did, and--but I couldn't, I couldn't be in it and earn a living too.
Speaker 1: So things were--I mean, did the war you think change some of those relationships and when the soldiers returned from World War II?
Speaker 2: I think it changed, it changed somewhat, and obviously it's better now.  But the (unclear), the fundamental prejudice, it's, it's still in existence right now and--but it's not as intense as it used to be.  I mean that would be my assessment of what The Civil Rights Movements--I couldn't sit and do what I'm doing now, say, 60 years ago, but now you can you do a lot of things that you couldn't do then.  So that, that's a plus, and that, that helps us, yeah.  I was glad The Civil Right Movement came by, came along, really.  It, as I say, it couldn't hurt; it helped.  A lot of people were, you know, injured, people died, but that's the price you have to pray for progress.  The article in the, that pamphlet that I have there it said segregation is, is degradation, and silence is approval.  That's, that, that, that's, that's saying something, because that means a lot of people stay quiet, and I'm guilty of that.  I didn't, didn't make the waves like Dr. King did.  Nobody--I was reciptent--a recipitent [sic, recipient] of his efforts.  But I was in his corner, but I, I didn't make the waves.
Story_ID: 82150
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now tell me when you look back over your career with [Morton] Goldsholl [Associates], what, what, what projects that you participated in are you the most proud of?
Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you the reason why I'm hesitating is that the ones that I told you about, like 7-Up, Motorola, International Minerals and Chemical--I can't remember the names of all--you take 40 years of doing graphic arts, it's kind of hard to remember.  And I, I frankly was proud to work on almost on any one that I--that's a fact.  On any of the projects we had it was a pleasure of me to work on 'em 'cause it was a challenge, and, and I knew I was doing something that you're sitting here talking to me about; I was making some kind of history because I was alone sort of.  The men who were active in the commercial arts field were all on the South Side, Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois], that kind of thing.  And what they were doing were things that were advertised in the Chicago Defender, Pittsburgh Courier, those kind of African-American newspapers and stuff.  It's nothing wrong with that, but I'm saying the job that I had, like with Goldsholl and all the projects that we worked on, I was happy to work on any one of 'em.  I was glad to because I learned something.  You are continually learning something on each project.  So when I took up airbrushing, I took up calligraphy, I--the things that I didn't have to do I did, because this I thought would be a plus in any job that I was on, and it was.  See, I could stay there because there are a lot of things I can do that some of the other designers in there couldn't do.  And that was the whole ef--the whole effort that I made just to be, I guess you'd say just a little bit better.  And that sounds like a cliche, but that's the way it worked.  You had to do something, otherwise somebody would take your place, and, and, and somebody was always wait--with a, with a, a group like Goldsholl, the design--a good design group, there's always somebody waiting to come in.  And I could have been the first casualty of that kind of thing, but I wasn't because I always kept up to date.  I did the kind of work that I was supposed to do 'cause I enjoyed it.  This is not a job for me.  This is Bauhaus of graphic design.  This is great.  So, and I'm earning my living, and so I, I--to pick out any one thing, I'd have to say, Larry, that I, I, I--and I know it sounds weird, but I just enjoy it all, my, all of my jobs, I can put it--I'll call 'em jobs--but everything that I put effort in, that, that the, that the company was doing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 82151
Speaker 1: Now, now tell me, now you retired after 30--
Speaker 2: Yeah, around, after--it's close to 35 years because you see I worked at someone else.  Before I went to [Morton] Goldsholl [Associates] I worked at Gerstel/Loeff, another or--commer--commercial art organization.  I worked just before I went there, so I, I'd say I retired after about in--I was 65, so I retired after about 35 years from Goldsholl.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was in 1985, somewhere around 1980-something.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now, at that point, you were able to do art work for yourself basically.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I, I chose--
Speaker 1: And how did that, that, that change your life?
Speaker 2: Well, in light of the fact that that's always been my life, art, it was just a case of continuing what I, and doing what I always wanted to do.  But I didn't have to do it for money, so it didn't--it, it just gave me contentment, gave me an outlet for what I wanted to do all my life and couldn't do because I had to earn a living.  And so I'd say my gallery showings and, and art fairs, and I won, I, I won awards on them; I won--in, in, at, at Goldsholl all kinds of publications, you know.  I don't have them now because they were destroyed.  But anyway, it, it, it changed my life when I retired, to the point that I had a more freedom.  I didn't have nobody asking me to do anything.  I was doing what I wanted to do, and what I chose to do, and could be as creative as I wanted to do.  You know, when you're doing graphic art that's a very specific kind of profession.  You're gonna reproduce work, it's got to be there.  There's no second-guessing it.  So, it's very specific, and so I, I was glad to do art work for galleries and like the DuSable Museum.  That, that was a joy to be able to do all those mosaics and having it put up in the museum.  It's posterity (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, let's, let's dwell on that a minute because all the visitors now, or anyone who visits DuSable Museum, when--in the first room, the entranceway, you--in the lobby you see these mosaics around the, the top of the--
Speaker 2: No, that's something else as you walk in, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, as you walk in, and there, there, there's Margaret Burroughs [HM], there's--
Speaker 2: I did those, yes.
Speaker 1: --there's--
Speaker 2: I got the names.  I can't--
Speaker 1: Mr. Hammurabi [Robb]--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Hammurabi.
Speaker 1: --Hammurabi.  Did you know him by any chance?
Speaker 2: No, I did not know any of the founders except Margaret.  And--because they're all, pra--practically all deceased now.  But when they had, when, when the DuSable was on Michigan Avenue, that was a long time ago, when I first came there, when the museum was on Michigan Avenue, until they moved to that, to where they are now, all the founders other than Margaret and her husband [Charles Burroughs] I, I had no--they, they were--they weren't, weren't around, they just weren't around to my knowledge.  And I--that's why I guess they're trying to keep their image alive.  But they were not, not over there.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And Margaret's commissioned me to do these, and most of 'em I had to do from rough photographs.  And trying to do a mosaic from a photograph, a rough, small photograph, is not an easy job because you do have to have the line of the mouth and the eyes and everything.  They have to be done with big squares.  You see, originally mosaics were done to look at far away, far away because you have these big squares to make your eye.  When you look at it far away, it becomes a line.  But when you do 'em like I did, close up, and all these like [Mayor] Harold Washington, and Margaret, and all that I did that's around the wall, they're fairly close up.  So I had to cut real thin lines of material in order to make all these, because I couldn't depend on distance giving me the image as it did--as the Byzantines did, and, and Romans, and the Greeks and so forth.  But, but I was glad to do it.  Now that, that was a labor of love because I was doing all those people that you're talking about.  And, and then I don't know whether you went down--ever have been downstairs, but the big one of Harold Washington, that's the bigger than any of 'em.  And was I wanted to do that one because he was the first mayor, black mayor, in Chicago, and I was glad to do that.  I was glad to do all of 'em, and I thought it was an honor.  I'm glad she asked me to do those.
Speaker 1: They're beautiful--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, thank you.  I--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You, you've seen 'em.  I can--see there I thank you.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right.  And, and I wondered who, who the artist was until--so now I finally found out.
Speaker 2: Oh, well, that's--as I said--
Speaker 1: Yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --it was a pleasure.
Story_ID: 82152
Speaker 1: There's one of [Jean Baptiste Point] DuSable too, discovering the city of Chicago [Illinois] that's not up yet, but it's gonna be installed soon, right?
Speaker 2: Now that's the one I was telling you about that I was commissioned to do, took me a long time to do it.  It's a very large--I mean it may be 30 or 40,000 chips in each one of those.  I did 'em for the west wall and for the east wall, and due to some electrical fixture problem they had that ComEd was supposed to--this was to supposed to have been unveiled last year, and Margaret has been trying to get that done.  And I don't know when they're gonna install it, but they will I'm sure, because it's a lot of work.  I went from, as I say, from the Chicago River where, where DuSable first came and had the trading post, from that, the Indians, the everything in the history was done in mosaic form.  And she commissioned me, and that was--they paid quite a bit for that.  That was, that was quite a job.  It was good, a good, a good experience for me [clearing throat], for me, and I enjoyed that.  I, I wish they'd put it up though.
Speaker 1: Yes, I do too.  How long does it take to do, say, one of those panels in the DuSable Museum?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd say it'd take me a month.
Speaker 1: How large are, are they and, and how--
Speaker 2: Well, the one of [Mayor] Harold [Washington] is probably about four feet or five feet.  The ones in the oval shape, I, I would estimate they're about maybe four feet.  And you know, into an oval shape, I don't, I don't know the specific oval amount it is, but I do know that if you could take it from top to bottom, bottom in the oval, it'd be about four or five feet in size.  In that book I, I show size relationship of 'em, and if--I'd say they'd be about this high from the floor, and how I'm going through--I can't express it in numbers right now 'cause you're looking at the world's worse mathematic, mathematical guy.  I, I ducked mathematics all in school too.  I can just give you an estimate to what I thought they were size-wise.  But I do know the, the ones on the wall they're from ceiling to floor.  That's, that's, that's pretty high.  They're about over six feet wide, and then they go up to heights to the ceiling.  I did know at one time.  I had the measurements.  But I'm trying to think of how they--you know, off the top of my head I can't think of what the exact measurements were.  They're still up I think, or half of 'em are.  And one day, they got--they, they are cov--they're covered now.  Did you go over there?  You didn't see nothing underneath those veils 'cause they had a, they had a cover over the half that's up of, of that same one that you're talking about.  They never have.  They were gonna put the other half up later on, but they haven't gotten to doing that yet.  So I guess they will one day.  I hope they will.
Story_ID: 82153
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now you've experimented with some other media that most artists have not been involved in, in the city, or a lot of--I mean experimental media like--
Speaker 2: Foam board.
Speaker 1: Foam board and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the mone--
Speaker 2: Monotype, monotype printing.
Speaker 1: -mon--monotype prints and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the foam board was (unclear)--shouldn't be a moneymaker for me.  I just like to do it.  It was different too.  In other words, my whole--it was different; it was a different kind of art, but it was more realism, and it was three dimensional, and it was cutout paper sculpture; it was different.  So I did that for about maybe two years and then I stopped doing it.  But my monoprint, monotype printing that was done, I learned that--I went--I learned that from a gentleman that lived on, that lived in Evanston [Illinois] on Ridge Avenue.  I, I went there for about six months every night to learn how to do monoprinting.  The old masters used to do it, Raphael.  You know, all the old masters used to do it, and they, they use it as a background.  But I chose to do it, at his request and because he liked to do it that way--the man that I say he, means the man that I was learning this from--to do landscapes, and seascapes, and rocks, and canyons, and, and anything with foam board.  You could even do portraits, but I never did but a few, and most of them were African masks.  And--but, but, but other things could easily be done with this foam board--I mean with the monoprints.  So, he taught me everything he knew about, I guess, or at least most of everything he knew.  And I, and I went back and I started doing it.  So I had exhibits in galleries that only had monoprints in them--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --which was entirely different from what most people (unclear)--oil painting and watercolors, I'd been doing that so long.  And most people will resort to that, you know, to express themselves.  But I wanted to do foam board, mosaics, waterprint, you know--what, what else--there's, there's mosaics, and foam board, and monoprints, monotypes--and it's another thing I used to do, but only because it was different, and it's a challenge.  There was a Spanish designer.  I think his name was Jose Nannes (ph.).  And he said when somebody gives you ruled paper, like you got there, turn it and write the other way.  That's creativity.  So my, that was my philosophy always, write the other way (laughter).  No, I'm probably just different, and you won't find too many people doing it.  So, that's what's creativity.  That's sort of like a guiding light for me in my philosophy.  I just try to do something nobody else is doing, and, and, and do it good, but be creative.  So I got--that's why I did these, these kinds of things other than just doing oil paints and water coloring, acrylic. Because a lot of that's been done since time immemorial, you know, since the Renaissance and before, oil paintings, and some of the best in the world have done that.
Story_ID: 82154
Speaker 1: Now, there was some debate in the '70s [1970s] about what makes black art, you know, black art, or if there's any such thing as that.  And then some people, you know, some people say well, you know, all art is the same.  And then, but then again, is it, you know, I mean, you know, I mean, what--your art expresses your experiences.  And what, what do you think about that?
Speaker 2: Well, I think black art--personally I hate the idea of labeling.  That was one of the pain--things that I hated most was labeling my art black art only because a black hand did it.  And, and, and I had people who didn't particularly look at my work because it was not, say, African enough.  I, I never believed in that.  I, I, I always believed if God gave you talent, it didn't have to be a black hand, or a white hand, or a red hand, or any kind of hand.  You got the talent, use it.  And so that was my philosophy, to use it, not to classify it as, as African or, you know, Indian or something like that.  And it didn't work too well with me because some of my art fairs, I have the kind of stuff that I've shown you there, and black people will pass, wouldn't even pay attention to it because I didn't have African-like images.  And let me tell you when I was a boy and when I was coming up, there were no African-like images portrayed to schools and to kids like it is now.  Fact is, the only thing you saw in schools of African heritage would be pots with people being eaten 'cause of cannibalism and that kind negative stuff, but never the kind of things you have here like, you know, the, like you have in the museums and in the schools now.  I was asked to join an organization, not the OBD, the, the Organization of Black Designers.  It wasn't that one, but I was asked to join an organization because they wanted to do nothing but black people's art.  And I was working for this studio that I was working in.  So I wanted--I asked the man what was black art.  And it seems like the only definition that he could give would be African inspired art, you know, very crudely done or, or very--some of the best in the world was done by African art because that was the beginning of civilization.  So I'm not knocking that and didn't knock it, but I hated to be classified just because my skin was a certain color.  That's the kind of art I had to do.  I think, I thought I should be able to do any kind of art.  And to tell you the truth, when I was coming up, the competition in art was not from black people.  It was from white people.  And for me to excel in it, I had to compete in it.  In order to compete in it, I had to do the kind of jobs that I did, you know.  There were very, very few black men--E. Simms Campbell.  He was with "Esquire."  He was a cartoonist, the one who used to do the Saltons (ph.) and all, he was black.  I--O--Orr (ph.) Harrington, he did the--for the newspaper, black newspaper, TV's (unclear)--H.O. [Henry Ossawa] Tanner, he, he was one of the greatest American oil painters.  He went to Hampton Institute [Hampton, Virginia].  He painted in Paris [France], and he was like the, the old master's kind, the Renaissance man, and he was a black man.  But I didn't get a chance to have a lot of his work--a lot of exposure to his work when I was coming up.  And the, and E. Simms Campbell, only when I became an adult and when I came out the service.  He was with "Esquire."  I learned, I learned about a lot of black artist, but I hated that classification of being a black--I'm a black man who was doing art, that's what it is.  But there is no black art to me.  Art--if, if landscape is done by me or it's done by someone that's Caucasian, how you know the difference if they're not standing there doing it?  See, one of the things that was told me when I was looking for a job, and I had my portfolio--and I thought it was some--and it was some good work--one of the things one of the persons told me was that I, I can't hire you.  I know what he was talking about.  They weren't gonna hire me anyway.  But he said I, I would hire you if, if, if they could distinct--distinguish your work.  For example, he said, you being black, if you did a piece of work, when the readers open the catalog or whatever--oh, this is interesting--
Speaker 1: Finish your thought--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: --open the catalog, they're gonna know that a black artist did it.  And I said they, they can't know.  I'll, I'll tell you why they can't know it.  How are you gonna know?
Story_ID: 82155
Speaker 1: Now, sir, tell me what, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: Are you talking about socially or an artist, artistically--
Speaker 1: Socially, politically, you know, you are an artist, so you would have a certain viewpoint, but I just want, wanna know what, what some, some, some of your hopes and concerns are for the black community.
Speaker 2: Well, actually, I think they're coming to fruition, the things that I've always wanted.  It's certainly an advanced step from what I used to know and what was before me.  You can live where you want to practically; you can--we couldn't even shop; you couldn't even go to theaters without going into [points upward]--so I'd, I'd just like to see continuation with more just as it is right now, because you can ruin a situation by trying to improve on it sometimes.  And by that I mean if you've already, say, established that people can ride on the bus in the front, what else can you do?  And, and, and I'd, I'd just like to see the things that are happening just, just improve more than that, 'cause they have improved about 80 percent from what they were.  They're not 100 percent obviously, but they have improved so tremendously than what they were.  And I'd just like to--I can't give you any specifics.  Most African Americans are, are involved in colleges, they're intelligent, they're involved in, in, in all of the higher--how can I put that--where at least they're, they're made available to them, and they are spreading at that, spreading at their own behest.  The kinds of--as I told you, I can get these words in my mind and they won't come out.  But I know exactly what I want to say.  But I can only answer your question by saying, I mean, make a, a comment on what you just said by, by saying I just hope they can keep doing what they're doing now, all black people.  Because there's gonna come a time when, except for the, the color, you won't be able to know what black people are.  There won't be--at one time, if a black person called me black I'd be mad, it'd be fighting words.  That ended; you don't have that anymore, see.  Now, and, and white people couldn't call you black.  But now you have African Americans.  That was, that's an improvement over black and over negro and over colored.  Colored is what I came up with, so that's why I say it's at a stage now it would seem like a very good thing if it could keep the way it is, only improve a little bit more, in other words, become a little more norm.  I don't wanna be just like--I'm not saying we gotta be like white people, but there are certain standards you wanna hold up for your children, for you, your grandchildren that they, that they should be able to speak well, read; they should have their, their schooling, and most black people are in school, you know.  They aren't the, the ones that you see pictures out in gangs and that kind of stuff.  The majority of them are being educated in school, and they're, and, and they're coming up and making a place for themselves.  That's all I wanna see, that's all I wanna see.  I'd just love, just love it if, if they would just be able to dispense with the segregation end of it.  And a lot of people could do just what they're capable of doing.  Now that is ideal.  I, I wish I could be more specific, but I've always been told that an artist is just supposed to draw.  He's not supposed to be smart, so (laughter).  But, you know, that's something, that's a good question, but I'm, I'm sure if you were to ask someone else in, in, in, in maybe in the education field or somewhere, they could give you a more specific answer.  But mine is I just want 'em to keep like their--keep doing what they're doing, only improve on it as much as they can from where they are.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They've all, yeah, they've already gone a long way.
Story_ID: 82156
Speaker 1: Now tell me now who are your favorite artists?  Now what artists do you admire the most?
Speaker 2: Well, my favorite artist is a--it's--I'd have to go with the ones that I grew up with and the ones that I admired.  And it had nothing to do with race.  It had something to do with ability.  The artist I admire, especially because of the Sistine Chapel, you know, Michelangelo Buonarroti, Raphael, Titian, Bonatelli (ph.), [Sandro] Botticelli, Parochio (ph.), [Leonardo] da Vinci, of course, greatest of them all; [Vincent] Van Gogh; I loved [Claude] Monet and [Edouard] Manet, both of them, even Salvadore Dali.  These are my favorite people.  They, they were skilled pe--Dali was one of my least, but he was the most skilled draftsman of, of all of them, but everything was erotic and it was not too good to look at a lot of times.  But he was a surrealist, so he could get away with that.  But my--I don't have anybody that, other than the ones I just mentioned to you, that I hold up.  And above all was Leonardo da Vinci, that--he's my favorite.  And I, I have to say that because I admire the man.  I'm reading him right now.  I read him when I, when I, I, I was introduced to him when I was what, 10, 9, whenever?  And, and, and here I am 82 and I'm still reading him, and learning something each time.  He's a brilliant, he's a genius; he's a top genius, and not that the--that is what's so admirable, admirable about him.  It's just he was talented; he could invent.  I invented things; in fact, I patterned my life after him.  I used to invent things, give you an example real quick: a circle is when you--oval--compass, when you put (unclear) and make a circle with, right?  I could never understand why you couldn't take the same apparatus and make an oval with it.  So I put two points in and invented it, two points into the one.  I put two and you couldn't move it, see.  And then I put an engraved plexiglass of all the sizes of oval on top and identically on the bottom of engraved oval.  And you could put it down and make all different degrees of oval just by turning it, like you would a compass.  That is the kind of challenge that da Vinci was doing that I--he, he, he impressed me a lot with doing that kind of thing, you know.  I did a standpipe.  Like, I invented a standpipe you could put right into your basement.  And if water was coming, sewer water was coming out of the street and flooding, it would go up into that transparent standpipe.  And water seeks its own level.  Archimedes proved that, and he was from the old school years ago.  And it would come up, and I had that to happen.  I sold those.  But this is not something I'm trying to brag about, what I did, but I did love to invent.  That's a part of, of, of my artistic achievements.  And I never could patent anything, but I sure invented them; I invent--just like Charles Harrington, his, his invention of the View-Master and the improvements on the View-Master, that's, that's was trying to do in art, you know.  And I never could--obviously I, I applied for patents, you know, and all those things, but you always have to have money and pull and that kind of thing.  But I guess, getting back to your question, I, I, I, I'd have to say I was influenced by so many people, even E. Simms Campbell.  I used to try to cartoon like him.  My favorite though, still, so far is, it would da Vinci.  I, I, I can't move away from him because he's inspired me.  And I know people will look at this, they'd say it's gotta be some black artists that's inspiring you.  All black artists inspire me.  I, I love work that--I could name some of them, but you said who was my favorites were.  That's, that's why I answered that.
Story_ID: 82157
Speaker 1: Okay, now, of the work that you've produced, what's your favorite work?
Speaker 2: That's, that's kind of difficult because I've drawn all of--produced work all over the world.  Like I was in, when I was at (unclear), I was sitting under the Eiffel Tower, painting in, in London, and I was painting the Arc de Triomphe - those I love, but I sold 'em.  I had an attachment to those things.  Even in a war, I was able to do that.  I had down time, as they call it, because I had a mobile company that I could send out everywhere.  And I was the first sergeant, and we'd stay in the company.  So to occupy my time I would paint, and I'd paint wherever I went.  And I sold paintings all over the world, after I went in the war.  To pick a favorite one, it's kind of hard because I, I just, I'm, I'm just proud of all of them that I did, and that's not an ego trip I'm on.  I, I just--and my, my job was not oil painting or, or any of the fine arts.  And I assume you were asking me about fine arts, because there's no way to tell in graphic art what my favorite one was because that, that's, that's a whole slew of, of, of design pieces, and each one of 'em had to be executed.  And I had no, no favorites, I really didn't.  And it sounds rather odd, but I didn't.  Now that you asked me, I never thought about it.  As far as fine arts is concerned, most of the fine arts that, that I had, I did things when I first started drawing that I would be very proud of.  And I could name some favorite pieces that I did, except I was real young then and it wouldn't have the--it, it isn't like what I would do now.  I had no knowledge of it, but I was proud of it, more proud of it than anything.  Like the man who played the part of King of Kings.  I'm trying--as I say, I, I forget the names.  But anyway, I did his portrait when I was young, very young, and didn't miss a pimple on his face.  In other words, I was--it was so realistic, and I was so proud of that.  But that's hard to explain to anybody who has--his name was Richard B. Harrison.  He was in--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Richard B. Harrison.
Speaker 1: He was a black actor--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, that's why I said I did it, you know, and--but this was when I was learning and when nothing would stop me.  I'd stay up all night doing that.  I, I can't say--if there are some paintings that I did, and let me tell you how I did them.  In my house there was a hill up beyond our house called the Heights.  The Ku Klux Klan used to walk up in front of our house and go up on that hill and burn a cross.  And I used like the fire when I was young.  I didn't know--here I am, didn't know any better.  I would sneak out of the house, see what--look at that fire.
Speaker 1: You'd, you'd go up--wait, wait, wait, you'd go up and look at the fire or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, watch 'em burn the cross.  And my mother [Rosa Miller] would have killed me.  In fact, she did catch me and I--(unclear)--burning the fire.  I didn't know the meaning of all that at that time, and, and so I would go up to look at it, and sneak out after night.  But I'm only saying that to say that on that hill was a lot of rich people.  And I would draw things in my house, and then go out of that same window and, during the day or night, I would stick those in the doors of some of the rich people, hoping they would discover me, 'cause I would sign it.  I, I've gone through a lot of weird things in my--here I am, I'm doing this now without the knowledge of anybody, because if my mother had seen it, she would have been against it, of course.  But I wanted to be discovered by somebody, and there's no way you can discover a black boy in the South, you know, a black man.  I wasn't a man, young man then.  I was, I was at home when I used to do that.  So, I--when you ask me about the favorites, some of those were--I had to do them so good 'cause I knew they would be criticized.  So I'd say, I worked so hard.  They would be some of my favorites, which I'd like to have a couple of them now to see what they look like.
Speaker 1: Did you ever get any feedback from any of those?
Speaker 2: Larry, no, and that's what was so sad.  I, I often also wondered who got them, where they are, and I'd loved just to see what now--no, I never got any feedback at all, not one.  But then I didn't expect it, really, 'cause the social situation in the South, you know, wasn't conducive to anybody patting me on the back.  But no, I never did, never did see them, any of 'em.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 82158
Speaker 1: Now, tell me now, what would you consider at this point as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, it was my intention from the get-go to be one of the best artists in the world.  I couldn't be that, but I tried.  I'd say, just, just being an artist and, and being a father, I'd say those two things are foremost in my, in my mind.  I have to put artist before all of 'em because that was my, that was the thing that carried me, my family, and the thing I admired to do the most, and I made a lifetime--I made a lifetime career out of it.  But it, it, it's sort of a difficult question to ask, particularly since my memory isn't as good as it used to be.  I used to be able to respond to a question like that a little faster than I am now.  I have think now, and I'd come up probably tomorrow with an answer with a lot of the questions you're asking that I can't come up with now, and I feel kind of badly about that.  (Unclear) say you're an idiot.  You should be able to answer the questions like that, but sometimes I can't.  My mind--I forget.  And that question you just asked, I should be able to give you a pretty direct answer on that, and I can't.
Story_ID: 82159
Speaker 1: Sir, this is slightly different: how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd like to be--how would I like to be remembered?  I, I have never given that any thought, but this would be a part of it, maybe being--having some people to know that, that I underwent a very rough time in the history of, of negroes in this country.  And I overcame it, and, and, and used it as a tool to raise my family and to live like I was supposed to, like it was required of me to live, and like you're to supposed to live, and I'd say just the opportunity to be able to do this.  And I have left a lot of work in this world.  I wish I knew where it was.  And I'd say I'd like to be remembered as a person who, also is a person who, who did his work but did it thoroughly.  I did not ever intend to half do a job or let it go without completing it.  That's just my nature.  I had to do a good job.  I'd like to be remembered as a person who did that, who, who accomplished what he set out to do.  I set out to be an artist and a good artist, and I set out to work in the most sophisticated kinds of art that was a, that was available, and that would be graphic design, as opposed to just drawing and painting, illustration.  I guess I just wanna remember--be remembered by, by, by the fact that I, that I tried, made up my mind what I was gonna do, and I succeeded in it.  And success was--is not, of course, as I've told you, is not measured in the amount of money.  I'm talking about successful in, in the field that I chose.  And I was competitive, and, and, and, and I, I did all that was required, as a man should do, to exist in this particular country, in a capitalist country, and I, I'm proud of that.  I'm proud of the family I have.  I'd say I wanna be remembered because of, of being the kind of father and husband that I was because I also wanted perfection in that, and my desire for being one of a kind.  I wanna be remembered for what I did in, in my art attempts, I really do.  I, I've got so much art out in the world.  I can't put my fingers on it, but I know it's there.  And I think I'll always be remembered a long time for, for my art because the people will have it, not only all over the world, but all--and they won't--they know who they got it from.  Maybe other people won't know.  But it's a living legacy for a long time, particularly in the [DuSable] Museum, and that is a permanent thing.  And that'll be there for school children to look at and admire.  And, and I've been there when school children have come in, and they see nothing they like better than just to shake my hand, and, and for me to write my name.  And I, I, I always thought that was--you know, I never cared much for that, but I'm just saying, but for children, I liked to do it; but I'm remembered for the kind of work that I (unclear) dedicated myself to do.  That's, that's probably what I wanna to say.  And I hope I can be remembered as being a good man too, that also, a, a good human being.  And by good, I mean one that didn't, that, that did unto others, as I told you, that he would have them do unto him.  That's the primary philosophy that I would like to be remembered by, I really would.
Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you, sir.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 82160
Speaker 1: Well, that I cannot tell you when and where it was taken, but I can tell you that's my mother [Rosa Miller] and her sister, my aunt.  And it was taken in Bristol, Virginia, but I can't tell you what date or anything like that.  This, it's very difficult to remember the dates that they were taken.  I honestly can't.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA-DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's, that's yours truly, that's Thomas Miller, and that's when I was a little baby.  And it was taken in the, around, I'd say around 1921 or '22 [1922].  And the only thing I can say about that is take it off the easel right now (laughter).  No, it (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA-DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is, oh, this is a portrait of myself--I mean a photograph of myself when I was in art school.  This was, this was probably around 1940--around 19--let's see, '49 [1949], something like that.  I'll have to guess, see, the time, but I was in art school at that time.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Was that Ray Vogue [School of Art, now the Illinois Institute of Art-Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Ray-Vogue art school, I, I should--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Is that school still operating, do you know?
Speaker 1: It, it is I understand.  I haven't been there in a long time, but I understand it's still operating.
Speaker 2: It would be impossible to tell the date of when this was taken, but that was a slave.  That's my great-grandfather, who, as I say, was a slave now.  The only person that I can think of who would have taken that picture, and I know he didn't, would be Abraham Lincoln's photographer.  What's his name?  I can't think of his name now.  But this is so far back, I don't know who took that picture.  That's my great-grandfather.  He lived to be a hundred and--a hundred and seven [107].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA-DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That would be my grandfather.  The other one was my great-grand--this is my grandfather.  And I think he may be where I received some of--his name is [cough]--excuse me]--Grandfather James.  And he inspired me in art, I guess I would say that, one of the people.  He was a tombstone engraver.  He chiseled people's names on the tombstones.  I kind of guess that was where I got my art ability from.  But now the date that that picture was taken, I have no idea.  These were very, very--
Speaker 1: That is my father [Edward Miller], and his name, of course, his name was E.J. Miller, and he's the one who was killed in the railroad accident.  And that was taken, he must have been about--I don't know--about 25 years old, or 20 years old.  But it was--what year it was I can't tell you.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA-DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is my siblings.  This is my sisters, and the little fellow with the bald head, that's me.  And I, at that time I was about, I'd say about 10 years old.  My sister was about eight, and the other one was about 11 or 12, so.  That was taken from side--aside--on the outside of my home in Virginia, Bristol, Virginia.  And the exact date I don't know, but--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA-DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: For this picture, these are two of my friends, Fred Nomia (ph.), Japanese, of course; John Weber, German, and me.  And we all went to work for [Morton] Goldsholl [Associates] at the same time, all three of us.  We had previously worked in the other studio [Gerstel/Loeff], and he hired all three of us at one time, so.  The date that this was taken, I'd have to say somewhere in the 19--late 1940--or in the early 1950s I'd say.  I can't be specific on that.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA-DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my co-workers also, typical ones: Fred Nomia, John Weber, Thomas Miller, Zeke Ziner, [James] "Jim" Logan, Fred Ota, and Victor Ing (ph.), the Chinese fellow.  So it's a compiled, com--a whole bunch of different nationalities here.  But we're the ones who worked at Goldsholl.  This was taken at the--I think at a art showing by the gentleman, Zeke Ziner, at his house.  And we all were there that night.  The two men at the bottom is Zeke Ziner, and, and the tall Italian fellow, John Siena.  He ended up being a, a--changed his religion to what do you call--Buddha, Buddhi--no, to Muslim.  He was a swami, he was a swami, and went from John Siena to Kalik (ph.) Kalanda (ph.).  And so that's, the, the date of that is--that's about all I know about--
Speaker 2: This one of course is me working on the 7-Up trademark along with John Weber.  And I'm at my desk in the studio.  The one in the, in the middle we used to call it the, the, the hurrah, the happy bunch.  What, what, what, what's done here, we had just finished a big project.  I don't know which one it was, but we decided to show our glee, and help and having this, by all jumping simultaneously and having someone shoot, and that was the result.  So that was a happy bunch of people.  It was a good project.  Of course, the bottom one is just my co-workers together, the ones that I just named to you on the previous photograph.  I could name them again, but.  Okay, it was Mort[on] Goldsholl; Wayne Boyer, photographer; Millie Goldsholl, Mort's wife; John Siena; John Weber; Tom--I'm trying to see--oh, Fred Ota, Susan Keig, Jim Logan, Thomas Miller, Fred and, and Mr. [William] Langdon.  Yeah, that's about the number of new ones down at the bottom.  I can't tell you anything other than the fact that they were, they were my co-workers in the studio for so many years, and that's--just like the others.
Story_ID: 82161
Speaker 1: Well, this picture here is Mr. [Morton] Goldsholl.
Speaker 2: He's on the left?
Speaker 1: He's, he's the one in the center; John Weber, Thomas Miller; and this fellow here was one fellow here was one of the housekeepers, that's Roy Neal, Roy Neal.  He wasn't on the, on the studio, and he wasn't an artist.  He was, you know, he took care of the place.  But this was at a party at Mr. Goldsholl's house.  And we were all sitting around the table and somebody said, I guess, smile, and we did, or say cheese, or whatever.  But anyway, we were--and that's just--yeah.
Speaker 2: That, that one, is all I can do is tell you that this was Thomas Miller, that's me, of course.  And I was at an exhibit showing foam board art.  And this--each of those things behind me are carved paper sculpture in a book carved out of foam board paper.  And this was at, at an art show on, on Wells Street.  It's probably, again, in the 1950s.
Speaker 1: The upper left, that's [clearing throat]--excuse me.  That's an oil painting, and I use the words "after [Paul] Gauguin" because that usually, denotes that it's a replica, a, a reproduction.  It's a reproduction but an oil painting of the reproduction.  And it's called "Day of the God," that's it's name.  It was done by Gauguin.  And the person who asked me to paint that was a person who had the print but wanted an oil painting, so I did it.
Speaker 2: And below that is, is--has somewhat the same story.  The young lady there wanted a picture of her and her baby done in oil, and she wanted a large one, so I, I did that of her.  And I don't remember her name, and she's--this was a long time ago, and I don't remember her name.
Speaker 1: But the upper right is a painting I did that was in the, the Reece Gallery museum showing.  And it was a card--a checker game that was the subject matter of the painting, and it was in oil.  And I can't remember the date on that either, sorry.
Speaker 2: And the one below are African masks, as you can see.  And they were done out of foam board.  And I, I carved each one of them.  And they were sold.  I don't know right now who bought them, but they, they were done for an exhibit and they were, they were sold.  Now when they were done was in the 1950s too, or '60s [1960s], I'm, I'm not sure.  It, it was in a gallery showing, and that's about all I know about that one, that one.  I'm sorry I can't give you too much information on these 'cause they--
Speaker 1: You're doing fine.  That's all we wanted.
Speaker 2: That is a repetition of what I just told you.  That's a foam board carving.  And it was done for a person who want, who, who had a feeling for the Old West, and asked me to depict it in my way with foam board, and I did.  The time is in the '50s [1950s] or '60s [1960s] when it was done.  And it's--that's about all I can say.  It's the same three dimensional, you know, foam board art.
Speaker 1: The one on the bottom is a mono--monotype, monotype oil painting that I learned, as I told you, the technique from this Mr. Ziner (ph.).  And it's a snow scene that no one requested that, but it was in an exhibit and it was bought by one of the people in Wisconsin.
Speaker 2: The upper right is mosaic done of Mr. Hammauraba--Hammurabi [Robb]--who was one of the founders of the DuSable Museum.  And it's--(unclear) interior of the museum, as you can see, was old, which is a picture showing the interior of the museum.  And when that was done it had to be in the '90s [1990s], 1990-something, and that's as much as I can give you on that.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DECISION)
Speaker 2: The upper left, that's a picture of Pat McGrill (ph.) and that's a picture of me, and that's an exhibit in the Beverly Art Center, and the next
Speaker 1: About what year is that?
Speaker 2: --Beverly Art Center on 111th Street.
Speaker 1: Yeah, no, no, about what year is that?
Speaker 2: Oh, the year of that was, was 19 and--around 1990.  I'm trying to think--9--say 1996 I'm gonna say.  I'm not sure, it's somewhere.
Speaker 1: Upper right, that's Dr. Margaret Burroughs [HM], one of the founders of the DuSable Museum, and that's a mosaic of her.  And that was done the '90's [1990s], 1990-something.
Speaker 2: And the one below is of Harold Washington, the first black mayor of Chicago.  That was done around the same time, 1990-something.  I have to put it like that 'cause the specific date I don't know.  That's a mosaic, and it was hung in the, in the [DuSable] Museum.
