Story_ID: 633597
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns. Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] George L. Miles, Jr., and it's G-E-O-R-G-E, L period, Miles, Jr. And let's look at you, and I'll definitely do that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: I'm not over there, I'm not over there, I'll try Larry. I'll try to do what I can--
Speaker 1: All right, all right I'll try to--
Speaker 2: I'm all over the place man.
Speaker 1: I'll try not to be as ugly as I usually am.
Speaker 2: Yeah I know (laughter), that's what I was gonna tell you man (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) All right so, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Orange, New Jersey in--November 13, 1941, a few weeks before the Pearl Harbor.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and sir what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm the president and CEO of WQED Multimedia in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Right, this is a, the famous public television station in Pittsburgh.
Speaker 2: It's famous, but it's also the, the first public television station in the country, founded in April 1, 1954 and it's the first one to go on the air, community licensed station.
Speaker 1: Pittsburgh has a lot of first in that regard--
Speaker 2: Whole lot of firsts.
Speaker 1: KDKA [KDKA Radio, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and all, yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Pittsburgh's got a lot of first, it's got the first commercial radio station, the KDKA, it was the place of, it was the place of the Industrial Revolution in the, it was really the capital of the Industrial Revolution in the late 1800s. A lot of old industrialist money in Pittsburgh, it's got a lot of, lots of, a lot of, first place where the Ferris wheel was invented. The Big Mac was invented, a lot of first, the first oil gas stations were here in Pittsburgh, a lot of first in Pittsburgh.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Say it again?
Speaker 1: What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is, I think is Apri- August 12, 2008, you gotta speak a little louder, otherwise I gotta get my hearing aid out.
Speaker 1: All right, okay and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at--we're here in my office at WQED in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Story_ID: 633598
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that we always ask, management compels it, and they only require a short answer. The first question is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) One of my problems is a lot--I have a lot of favorite foods. And probably I'm a snack eater, these days I'm trying to eat a lot less fried foods, so, so kind of a snack eater. It's not good, not very healthy eating sometimes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is probably red.
Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: You know I think spring.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Spring is probably my favorite time, going into summer--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: --is my favorite.
Speaker 1: Now do you have a favorite vacation v- destination?
Speaker 2: I've been all over the world and, and it's really at different stages of my life I've had different places I favor. You know right now I love Hawaii. Hawaii's a great place, I love Bermuda, I love Florida, I have a place in Florida. So I go to Florida a lot, so. But I think all of, what they all have in common is sunshine and where I can get sunshine, put some sunshine on my face.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Wonderful, absolutely wonderful, fantastic, fabulous.
Story_ID: 633599
Speaker 1: Well, I'm going to ask about your family history. I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side [George L. Miles, Sr.]--
Speaker 2: Great.
Speaker 1: --but we'll start with your mother's side first.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My mother--full name Eula, E-U-L-A, Caesar Miles [Eula Caesar Miles]. That was my mother's name. And do you want me to tell you a little bit of history about my mother? (Unclear) (Simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you give us her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Well her date of birth is November 16th of 1918.
Speaker 1: Okay and--
Speaker 2: She died 2002.
Speaker 1: Okay and where was she born?
Speaker 2: Born in Blakely, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Blakely, B-L-A-K-L-E-Y [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now--well tell us what do you know about her side of the family, how far back can you trace that side and, and what do you know about them.
Speaker 2: That brings a smile on my face when I think about my mother, 'cause just about a couple of weeks ago I, on the date of her birth in July I went to visit her grave, and just had to kind of--just thinking about her a lot, and my mother was born in Blakely, Georgia, and some--where she was about five or six years old, so it's somewhere in the early '20s [1920s] when they had the Great Migration up from the South to the North. My grandmother took, I think six of her kids under her arms and they moved to New Jersey and it was really to escape the racism. And there was rumors in the family this--at least talk in the family, I don't know for fact, that they were escaping in, you know my uncles, uncles or somewhere in the family being hung, you know in those days in the '20s [1920s] so they, they were escaping that. And--
Speaker 1: So is there, is there a specific story they tell about it?
Speaker 2: Not really, nobody specifically you know it's kind of a, you know kind of a family kind of a tale I've heard when I was young you know. These are sorts of things when I was very young, I can't tell you anything specific--
Speaker 1: They don't, they don't say what happened or what might've happened (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, they were just escaping, getting out--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --getting out of the South, and getting out of Georgia. And my family, it's interesting in Blakely, Georgia, my mother, on my mother's side there is the Drinkard family. And I can't tell you specifically the, the, all the roots in the Drinkards, but if you take those roots and go all the way up in the Drinkards, it's off them--I'm on one branch with my mother's family and everything else. But then the other branch is of course [HistoryMaker] Dionne Warwick and [HistoryMaker] Cissy Houston and all or part of that family emanating from Blakely, Georgia. But on my mother's side it's really interesting because I've talked about this a lot, is that my, on my mother's side there is, she escaped, I mean she escaped but they kind of, I call it--it is an escape, they escaped from Georgia, came up to Jersey. But today my grandmother, Victoria was her name, Victoria Caesar, very strong woman who, who used to walk with a limp, 'cause she was kicked by a mule in, in, in Georgia. I didn't know my mother's father [Namon Caesar] they talked about him a lot, but I did know my grandmother really well. And here was a woman, brought these kids up and today--now she talked about the '20s [1920s]--today, we have a total community. And what do I mean by that, is that we have you know in our family, my grandmother ended up having, my grandmother had seven kids al- eight kids altogether, she had two more up here. Then my mother had seven kids, I had an aunt who had also fourteen kids, another aunt had six kids and another aunt, uncles had a lot of other kids. So my grandmother had about thirty-three, thirty-five grandkids, and then those kids have had kids, and now to where we are today, as I look around my family on my mother's side, there's all sorts of people. There's businesspeople, there're teachers, there, there are, there're drug addicts (laughter) there are plumbers, there are security officers, they're airline. So I look back and see what my grandmother did was to bring these kids up, these six kids and really almost started a community.
Story_ID: 633600
Speaker 1: And the other thing is at a funeral not too long ago my aunt, my last, next to my last aunt on my mother's [Eula Caesar Miles] side passed away. A lot of my cousins were there, first cousins, second cousins and third cousins now. And I, and I realized that it ca- that was the case, but I also realized that journey from Georgia to New Jersey brought a lot with them. They brought a lot of love and respect for family, because I, I see my cousins today and I, I feel so close to them. There's a feeling of respect, there's no jealousy within our family, people go different ways. There's a sense of each other helping each other, even though we sometimes don't see each other for a long time. I've now become very close with one of my first cousins in Florida and we see her a lot and we had not seen each other for twenty, twenty-five years, we--you see, you know she--but we're very close. And what--it was like we had never missed a beat and I, I really take that to, that back to that journey from Georgia to New Jersey. And the things that my [maternal] grandmother [Victoria Caesar] instilled in her kids and I think they instilled in us and all the way up. So and I, I see that happen, a very close knit family. My brothers and sisters, we're very, very close, I, I'm the one, only one that lives--I live in, in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania]. They all live in New Jersey, my dad [George L. Miles, Sr.] is still living he's about, he's ninety, be ninety-two in November. They surround him with all the love and care that he needs, he's an ornery old guy but I think that's what makes him so very special. But, but we're close, we try to get together you know a couple times a year as a family you know, and we'll just go, go to the nursing home where my dad is. We'll order in fried fish and fried chicken and stuff and we just joke around with each other and just be ourselves. And we'll--my brothers and sister we're all doing different things and so it's like and I think that's what this, that's why I--you know you talk about family and my grandmother and my mother's side, that's, those the kind of memories they get up to where I am today. And I, and I wouldn't be here today if I didn't feel this certain sense that I had support around me, I was part of something much bigger. And that was my family on--especially on my mother's side.
Story_ID: 633601
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Eula Caesar Miles] talk about growing up, what it was like to grow up in the East Orange [sic. Orange, New Jersey] and what it was like in--
Speaker 2: Well my mother (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in those days?
Speaker 2: My mother was a very quiet woman, she was, you know it's kind of under her moth- she was kind of the old fashion mom who you know wanted to stay at home. She ended up having to work for a little bit, she never got to finish high school. She, but she, one thing she always told me was a story and (laughter), and I always say it was probably, was a little kind of rebellious on my part, is that she had one of the great penmanships of all time, in fact I looked at it this morning, something that she wrote me, she had a really t- wonderful penmanship, she won some national awards for her penmanship. And I'm the worst writer of all, in fact I used to get straight A's, I remember getting straight A's in the sixth grade [at Oakwood Avenue School; Oakwood Avenue Community School, Orange, New Jersey]. And getting a big red mark for penmanship, and I always said maybe that was the way--my only way of rebelling. But she was just a nice quiet--and when, and what we've found out, the things that I've learned, especially since she's passed away, and I think about a lot, the things that she's passed on to me. She's passed on really a compassion for people, a love for family, she's also, in a funny sort of way, taught me to be a good politician. Because we used to joke around all the time, I said--in fact even on her death bed I remember saying, "Mom, who's your favorite son," I'm the oldest, "who's your favorite son?" She used to always say, "You are, you are," and, and everybody else would do the same thing. And you know what she would always say, "You are," she was a terrific politician. And she knew how to maneuver all that and her spirit still exists in my family. She was the spiritual, funny sort of the spiritual leader in my family, a very, very special woman.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did she have to work when she was, when you all were coming up or did she--
Speaker 2: Well she worked, she used to work in you know cleaning, you know maid, she worked in a hospital. In fact one time she got, years later she was working in a hospital, she fell, busted her knees all up. She had the big scars on her knees and--from mopping floors in a hospital and things like that. But she worked periodically, she had seven kids, but she had thirteen pregnancies. So she was (laughter) a pretty busy lady trying to raise kids and everything else. And so she, you know didn't work on a steady, didn't have a steady job all the way through. She worked six months, not work; it's all according to the family's needs. Or if she need- you know we needed money, she would go out and do some you know hustle, you know try to help support the family, with, along with my father [George L. Miles, Sr.].
Story_ID: 633602
Speaker 1: Let me hear something about your father, this is George Miles, Sr.
Speaker 2: George L. Miles, Sr.
Speaker 1: And, and what is date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth is November 19th, 1916.
Speaker 1: And where was he born?
Speaker 2: He's born in Orange, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father is a, another great person, and still is a great person, he is, I carried it, I carried my name, [HistoryMaker] George L. Miles, Jr., and I'm very proud of that because it's the way I continue to honor him with--by carrying Jr. because I always make sure that there was a Sr. and that's him. He's very proud of what I'm doing today and whatever I've done and proud of all of us, and our family. But my father was born in Orange; he was also a interesting guy, which gave me some interesting life's lessons. And first of all his, his dad disowned him altogether, didn't wanna have anything to do with him. And in fact he carried that, my father carried it still, he doesn't carry it today as much as he used to carry it and when my grandfather, when his father died, I remember I was in about the fourth grade. And you know I remember going to the funeral, but my father told me stories that he didn't wanna have anything to do with him. And his mother--
Speaker 1: Well, what happened, I mean I'm so- I'm sorry, what happened (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't really know what happened--
Speaker 1: His father just dis- disowned him, his father I, I--
Speaker 2: Didn't want anything to do with him--
Speaker 1: --I, I take it his parents weren't, weren't together?
Speaker 2: No, they weren't together.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: They weren't together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: His parents weren't together and so he had both on his, on his father's side didn't wanna have anything to do with him. 'Cause he had, he had other important things (unclear)--
Speaker 1: So it isn't that he didn't acknowledge that he--
Speaker 2: He acknowledged (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) was the father?
Speaker 2: --that he was his son.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He acknowledged his son 'cause he, he carried his name, his mother and father were married, but at the end of the day, you know he didn't wanna have anything to do with him. He was young, he was a young man, understand, very young man. But this is the key part of the story, is, didn't wanna have anything to do with him and he, so my father, then my mother--I mean and his mother really was also a person who was about the street you know. Loved running and partying and everything else, and so he was really raised by my, by his grandmother, my great-grandmother. Who I got to know, I was very young, so she was a, she was a strong religious woman. And she raised him, very strict woman and she was, and he would tell stories about, she would come home and take all the--and they come home and take all the mattresses and throw them out and say, "Get out and go find a job." And she was, she was a very tough, tough religious woman (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And throw the mattresses out?
Speaker 2: Throwing it, yeah, get, take the mattresses off the bed and say, "Get on out of this house and go, go find a job," or something. But she was a, she would whip their behinds when they needed, their behinds needed to be whipped. She was a strong, a strong woman, she really literally raised him, he always acknowledged that, if it wasn't for his grandmother, he would not have been, he would not have been able to survive.
Speaker 1: What, what was your grandmother's name, I mean his, his grandmother's?
Speaker 2: His grandmother was Mary Dawson [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and so she was very important to him you know.
Speaker 2: Very, very important and, and in fact he, she was closer to my father, than his mother, I mean she, my grandmother. He was, she was very close to him. That was a big loss for him when she died in the late '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about the family having another origin other than New Jersey I mean is it down south (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah it came out, I don't know much about that, but my father's side, they came out of North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Kinston, North Carolina, outside of the Rocky Mountains. I remember as a young man, I was probably four or five years old and just that's all I remember going to North Carolina with my great-grandmother, on the train visiting and coming back, I just I remember vaguely but I don't remember all the ends. But I know it was somewhere down in Kinston, North Carolina, I got family there somewhere.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so that's there.
Story_ID: 633603
Speaker 1: But my father [George L. Miles, Sr.], he's given me also some great life lessons. He's gotten--he, he taught me first of all to be a man, what a man should be like. But he also, the thing he's probably given me more than anything else is resiliency, how to hit a wall, can--you hit it, just go around it. How to get, that if you get knocked down, he used to always say get back up, get back up. And that, if you look at his life, that was what he was about, you know being able to kind of keep moving, getting through it. And he, oh he tells me one of the great stories, and I tell this story a lot about my father and how he was a survivor overall. First of all, he always said, which is the key to this when I talked about his father, he always said growing up that he would never, if he ever kids, he made a vow to himself, if he ever had kids, he would never ever do what his father, do what his father did to him to his kids. Never, and he never left us and I, I think about it now I start to think I ca- I start to tear up and think about it. He was very special that way, never would leave his kids.
Speaker 2: So did he have a chance to finish school?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He went to, went to high school and--
Speaker 2: You wanna take a minute here?
Speaker 1: (Pause) Excuse me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He, he was very special, and that he said he would never leave his kids, and he never did. He was always there for us, always. Strong man, but he always tells me this story even today whenever I go visit him. About the time that he was trying, he was raising six kids and he wanted to find, he wanted to get a job to raise his kids. And he said that what he would do, he, he wanted, he, he had a job working in a factory in, in Orange, New Jersey. And he could not, anyway, find a job 'cause he had, I said he had these six kids and he wanted to take care of them, get a decent job at Otis Elevator [Otis Elevator Company]. Every time he'd go down to Otis Elevator they would say, "No, no, no, you're black, you can't get a job here." So what he did was (laughter), he called up Otis Elevator, disguised his voice like a white man and said, "This is So and So, and I'm sending in a young man down there for a job to be a machinist." And they said to him, "Oh, well fine Mr. whatever it was, send him on down and we'll take care of him." So when he got down there, firstly he said to the personnel, "I'm So and--George," he said. "No, no, no we, we don't, we don't have any jobs open." He said, "But Mr. So and So," white man who (unclear) on, "sent me down to here for this job." So he sent him down there for the job. And he said, "Well, okay fine, he come, he sent me for a job for a, a machinist," so he went in, the guy said, "Well, we don't have any machinist job. We'll give you a job as a laborer 'cause the white man who sent you down wants you to have a job." So he worked as a laborer, sweeping floors and everything else. He ended working himself up to become a machinist, a top machinist there. He worked himself up to become a, head of the union, a top union guy, vice president of the union at, at Otis Elevator. He worked himself up and eventually they promoted him to become foreman of, of the shift. And, and all of this, you know, all that great--story is about, here's a guy who said he couldn't get a job. They wouldn't allow him to get there, he--and he along the way made it all the way to the top. And when he retired, I think he retired in, in the '70s [1970s], he was a, and, and he was retired as a, a supervisor or manager of a major area in Otis Elevator in Harrison, New Jersey. But that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's a wonderful, I mean that's a wonderful story, I mean that's really--
Speaker 1: I mean every time I think about the story it's, it's, it's a tough story for me to even think about you know. We laugh about it, but emotionally it's a, but it, but that's the gift he gave me.
Speaker 2: So he did have a lot of you know--
Speaker 1: He gave me a great gift and even to this day, anytime I'm in business today and I hit a wall you know, I don't think about that, it comes second nature, I know I can hit it, but I know I gotta get around it somehow. I'm thinking not, that I'm gonna collapse here and just waddle in my woe, but to figure out how do I get to the next level, and that's what he taught me. And so between the compassion and empathy of my mother [Eula Caesar Miles] and caring about folks and that resiliency that my father gave me, he could not have given me more. There's not enough money in the world for those gifts, there's nothing in the world like that, so.
Story_ID: 633604
Speaker 1: So when you, when you think about your parents' [Eula Caesar Miles and George L. Miles, Sr.] personalities and dispositions and their talents, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think I have both, both traits, I have both traits, there's some of us is in the family--and sometimes my wife [Janet Miles] will kid me when I'm doing something crazy. She'll say, "You're just like your daddy," you know, 'cause, he's, he's loud, he's big. All of, whole family they're all, they're all big guys, I mean five--four boys they're all big and my sisters [Maxine Miles and Gertrude Miles Bloomfield] are big. We're all loud and we all like to have fun and so--love to kid each other, that's something my father does. So that's something my wife will say, you know say that. But the other side of it is I have a lot of compassion for people and concern about people and I think that's a part of it. And so you know I think it's a little bit of both, little bit of mixture of both, being a man is clearly what my father taught me to be.
Story_ID: 633605
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents met, did they tell a story?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a great story (laughter). My father [George L. Miles, Sr.] was a hustler, also hustle- gamble you know and just shoot dice and he used to always brag about that. My mother was a little, quiet little young lady and, and daughter of Victoria Caesar, Neen [ph.] as we used to call her, and he used to always go in--but my grandmother didn't wanna have anything--didn't want her to have anything to do with him you know. And he, and he met her through my, her sister who's also another friend of, actually it was two, two friends. A man name Richard Dix- Raymond Dixon [ph.] who's a good friend of my father's, married my aunt and so he introduced him to my mother, so that how they all met. And he used to always say, "Aw man, try to, try to hit on Eula [Eula Caesar Miles]." So finally he said, he always tells this story, we all laugh about it today, that he finally got a date with her, took her to Coney Island [New York, New York] you know. And gave her some gin, went to the fun house, he says, "It was over after that son, she's all mine after that" (laughter), so that's the deal. That's how they met, I and I was, they got married in--March 17th, 1941, I was born November 13, 1941. If you do the math you know, it was you know and I always tease him about, I used to tease my mother about this all the time, I used to speak in, at their retirement village. I used to say I'm really mad at my mother and father 'cause they didn't save me any of the wedding cake. They knew I was coming, but they didn't save me any of the wedding cake, you know so they, my mother even in, you know when she was seventy, eighties she said, "Oh." But my father used to do this big chuckle laugh (background noise), he just loved that you know.
Story_ID: 633606
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memories?
Speaker 1: An, an earliest one?
Speaker 2: Say it again?
Speaker 1: An earliest childhood memory, I mean the first, what's the first thing that you remember in the family you know?
Speaker 2: I remember, we--living in a railroad flat in Orange, New Jersey, four rooms then all of a sudden I remember I had, start having four bro- brothers and sisters [Maxine Miles and Gertrude Miles Bloomfield] along the way, that's kind of my earliest memory. Actually I kind of really remember looking out the window one time and, and my mother [Eula Caesar Miles] was, and maybe my second sister was being born. I have four, four brothers and sis- four of us, I'm number one the two sisters and a brother. Now between me and this brother here, is three and a half years, so we had a lot (laughter), so that's what I remember very young. We always had a baby in the house, that's probably the earliest memory. The other memories I have, you know I lived, remember the biggest memory I have as a kid, probably the most, you know I have a lot of memories you know. Playing Little League baseball and doing things like that, but the biggest thing that happened to us was we moved out of that railroad flat in 1954, May 3rd, 1954 we moved into the projects.
Speaker 1: What do you mean by railroad flat?
Speaker 2: Railroad flat means like--railroad was like four rooms, they all like straightway, you know there was no si- it wasn't anything like you know go into, going to the dining room to the left. And going in, it was you go into the kitchen, you walk straight back you walk to two bedrooms, and you walk into the back and that's what it was.
Speaker 1: Like our urban shotgun house in some ways I guess?
Speaker 2: A shotgun house is probably what you call it today you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what they call it in the country, the shotgun house you know yeah, 'cause the rooms are just connected by, you just from walk from one room to the next.
Speaker 2: One room, just walk, keep walking, one connected to the other, that's what they call them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We call them rail- I call them rail- I call them rail- I don't know 'cause they were straight you know.
Story_ID: 633607
Speaker 1: Can you describe your nei- now where the railroad flat was, you said you all moved in '54 [1954] when you, you were about nine or so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I was about eleven--
Speaker 1: Oh eleven, okay then.
Speaker 2: --eleven years old, well you see I have two really--childhood memories--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --two really vivid ones. One is moving from that flat to the projects, it was like a brand new house. It was like brand new on the other side of town [Orange, New Jersey]; wasn't that far away, a half a mile away. And we moved into the projects, all brand new apartment, it was, it was really wonderful. We all, we, we still, I think, we may have one more extra bedroom, but you know we shared each--we never had more than two in the bedroom. So we stayed there from 1954 to about 1963.
Speaker 1: Now, let me just ask about this now, a lot of people today when they hear projects, they cringe and say, "Why would anybody wanna live in the projects?" But in those days--
Speaker 2: Shoot.
Speaker 1: --that was a step up, right?
Speaker 2: Big time, it was a huge step up, and that's the sad part about when you hear about the projects today. And I, I have a theory about what happened in the projects, but you know we were clearly stepping up. Other side of town, brand new, brand new and it was just wonderful. New neighborhood, a new school we were going to, I was in seventh grade at the time, I remember real well. But what happened was you, you, because your income was at a certain level, they let you in, and once your le- got to a certain level, you're becoming almost self-sustaining, they would kick you out. There was no sense of ownership and if they'd kept those families there, and you know after they got there and you maybe give them a little bit more rent, and let them stay there, I don't think you would have the problems with the projects today. That's what happened, when you got kicked out, and then another set of poor family get, and then what happens is then now, then the cycle continued within the projects. My family was there because we were trying to get up and out and do some other things. But that was not a, a very pleasant, you know that was, that was a very pleasant experience for us. We had, I lived in the projects where we had all sorts of people, we had Italians, we had Irish, blacks, but we all had--the common thread was we were all poor. And, but the good news is that we, I mingled with all sorts of different people; I was kind of--probably my life, also life lesson for me even today. And so that was good news, a great experience for me. The other memory I have is probably, is when I was still in the railroad flat is--before we moved into the projects, was when we had a, we're--my, 'cause as I said my father [George L. Miles, Sr.] was always hustling, so he was hustling on the side, not you know, not being--reporting income. Then he, then we were on welfare for a bit and those days you called them relief. And you used to get like a little, like a relief--and you used to take it to the A and P [The Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company] and then they used to get credit, so. And--
Speaker 1: Now this is before he started working for Otis [Otis Elevator Company]--
Speaker 2: Oh no, before he started working for Otis (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Before he started working for Otis, and he got a, he got a relief, we got a relief check and I remember going to the A and P. Gave me, my mama [Eula Caesar Miles] used to send me to the store, I went to the A and P and I had to order some chickens. I'll never forget, I said to the guy at the counter I wanted two whatever it was my mama wanted, and then he said, "Well little boy, do you have any money?" I said, "No, I got money." He says, "Let me see it," so I pulled out my relief check, give him the relief slip and he looked at it and he started laughing. He showed everybody in the counter about, "Hey, let me show you what this little guy has," this is, and that had made a huge, huge impact on me. 'Cause I say even today that probably said to me more than anything else, I wanna be more with my life than a person here holding a welfare check. I wanna make sure I never get humiliated like that again, and that's, that was, those are the kind of, that's a vivid memory for me. About that man behind that counter at the A and P, never forget that, and I, I've told this story I've said this, told the story a thousand times probably. But that, that's probably one of the things that help me continue to visualize, to vision myself being something more.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And then moving into the projects.
Story_ID: 633608
Speaker 1: We always this question, it's kind of perfunctory, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Of Orange [New Jersey]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess both places you know 'cause you were--
Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you it was, it was, the sounds, the sounds was--it was, it's concrete. You know it was urban, it was an urban, I'm an urban guy, I'm not a, I'm not a kid from the country. I'm not country boy at all, I'm an urban street kid, to the point was--I laughed about this not too long ago. That we used to have a post office on Main Street in Orange, behind the post office is lawn, a green grass. You know what we used, and we used to go behind there and play tackle football, we used to go up there and play football and tackle football. It's the only place you could play tackle, you couldn't play on concrete, you can't do it on concrete. And we used to call it the green grass, so think about this (laughter), in an urban environment, you call something the green grass and everybody knew where it was. So, so that tells you what, talk about what the sights was, it wasn't green grass, 'cause we only had one place, if I said the green grass, if I go to folks even today in Orange, the folks I grew up with. And I says, "Remember the days we had the green grass," they knew exactly where it was, wasn't somebody's lawn, it wasn't somebody's backyard it was the green grass in back of the post office. So that was clearly the part of it, we also had a great deal of things going on in our community. People, I knew everybody in the community. You know and all the families kind of all kind grew up together, you know so.
Speaker 1: Hm, oh other sights and sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: Well the sounds, the sound--the only smell, the biggest smell was my mama [Eula Caesar Miles] learning to cook Italian food. Because we had a, down--downstairs Mr. Silvestre [ph.] on the fourth floor, we were on the seventh floor, Mr.--on the fourth floor was Mr. Silvestre. And so we used to always get the smells of the different diverse cooking, especially Italian cooking. My mother learned to cook good Italian sauce from Mrs. Silvestre in, in, in Orange, and so you could always smell that. And that was a good smell and other than that was, you knew we had the brewery, which is down, I think it was the, I think it was Rheingold [Rheingold Beer], they had a brewery down the tracks a little bit, so you could sometimes smell that. You can also smell in our neighborhood, now you think about--it was the Italian bread. You know eleven and twelve o'clock at night, they used to cook the bread, and you could smell that. We used to go over sometimes and get the hot bread, put some butter on it and sit down at eleven o'clock at night on a stoop and eat. Sounds were what we, groups of us used to sit around and tell jokes and, and interact with each other, you know. I learned a lot from those kinds of experiences, about you know telling stories, people telling you stories, how to act. And the other sound was in my younger day, remembering some of the World War II [WWII] veterans, who used to come back and tell us stories about what it was like on the other side you know. You know, we didn't know much about, I didn't know much about the real segregation you have in the South. But the stories they told us about leaving Orange and what it was like, not only outside of Orange, but also overseas. And of course it kind of built a curiosity for me, but boy I was one day hoping to get to see these places that these guys have been to.
Story_ID: 633609
Speaker 1: What's your earliest memory of school, where, where did you start school?
Speaker 2: Started at Oak- a place called Oakwood Avenue School [Oakwood Avenue Community School].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In Orange [New Jersey], started in kindergarten, went through it, through all the way to the seventh grade.
Speaker 1: Okay. Did you like school?
Speaker 2: I loved school, loved school; I was a good student, always a good student. I was, I was--sometimes didn't work as hard as I should've worked, but I, I loved school. I loved, I just loved to be with, with people, I loved the people part of it, that's, and I think that is something that I see even today. I love being around people, com- I love the competition of getting grades and things like that. I wasn't really you know like the top kid in the class, but I always knew if I'd worked hard enough I could always be that. That's always felt back in my mind. I remember one time in the, in the eighth grade I got into a fight with this kid. And somehow, I don't know what happened, I was starting--I got kicked out of school for a week. And the teacher, the math teacher said, "Well, you got kicked out, we're gonna give you five zeroes, five zeroes for the week." You know every time we had to have a grade every single day, "We're gonna give you five zeroes you--so you're gonna have, you're gonna flunk this course." I came back, I maxed every exam, I worked hard, I think I got up to about a C or just below a C whatever it is. But I worked hard enough, because that's also part of it, she didn't (laughter) know I wasn't gonna allow all those zeroes to conquer me. So that was part of it, so I, so that's, that's the kind of memories of school I, you know. I, I wasn't that great of an athlete, but I love sports, I loved sports and that was also that kind of outlet. I worked, I worked the Little League, I played sports, you know a little bit of sports in high school [Orange High School, Orange, New Jersey].
Story_ID: 633610
Speaker 1: But I also worked, I worked, I worked at the hospitals, you know my junior year in high school [Orange High School, Orange, New Jersey], I was working at the Orange Memorial Hospital [The Hospital Center at Orange, Orange, New Jersey], I sho- before that when I was eleven. I was eleven, one of the great stories is that when I was eleven, eleven years old, my uncle--well I used to shine shoes, first I used to shine shoes. Get fifteen cents, go on Sunday afternoon and go to all the bars and shine shoes, get fifteen cents. And hopefully somebody give you another dime, so I did that, then I, from there, I delivered newspapers, had a couple newspaper routes. Did that when I was in the flats and I also did that when I was in the projects I did, I delivered newspapers.
Speaker 2: Well what, which paper did you deliver?
Speaker 1: The Newark Star-Ledger [The Star-Ledger] and also the Newark Evening News, I did--delivered those papers. I did, one of the biggest jobs I had, one of the big ones when I started really making money was when I started working, and my uncle introduced me to the bowling alley, setting pins in bowling alley. And, and I, I, I--was that was big bucks [dollars] for me, I can't tell you what the money was but I know it was, just felt like I had some money in my pocket. Plus it felt good, I get there and set pins and (unclear) it off. One of the classic stories was, and I loved working and I loved working and making something out of it. And then one day I met this league was--an overnight league, all night, all night league and I, I was gonna work it all night. And I'm setting pins and it's almost like two o'clock in the morning, I'm back and forth, back and setting the pins.  And all of a sudden I felt myself being lifted right out of the, the, pit. I looked up, it was my father [George L. Miles, Sr.], (laughter) said, "Where in the hell have you been?" I said, "Pop, I'm here working." "You didn't, number one you didn't tell me where you were," (laughter), "you know and I'm out here looking all over for you, and you're out here," you know. I said, "Pop, I'm trying to make some money," you know. I'm, but he you know that was you know that was him, he said, "You know, you got no damn business out here this time of night, two o'clock in the morning, don't know where you are and everything else."
Speaker 2: At twelve years old.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: At twelve years old.
Speaker 1: Twelve years old.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But I was, I was trying to hustle, make some bucks and that's, but that's, but that, but that said a lot about me, said also about my father you know. Cared enough, came out got me, and said, "Where in the hell are you?" He didn't, wasn't out doing what he had to do. He was worried about where I was. That meant a lot to me, you know meant a lot. And I don't know if I stayed, I think I finished up and went on home and you know we laughed about it, we laugh, even laugh about it today, laugh about it years and years so.
Story_ID: 633611
Speaker 1: Now did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Math. I loved math. That was probably my favorite. I love, I love relationships you know with numbers to numbers and what they all mean. I've always loved that, algebra, I loved that, you know I wasn't, I wasn't as good as on the, on the (unclear) side of the business, you know of the school. You know reading all the great literature, you had to do it, that wasn't fun to me, but figuring out problems, I thought that, I loved that.
Speaker 1: Did you have a, a particular teacher that showed interest in you or, or a favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: Well, I had a couple of them. One was black woman who I had in the sixth grade, Mrs. Minfey [ph.], beautiful woman. And I went to her, I ended up years later being on the board of ed [Orange Board of Education] in my city [Orange, New Jersey] and going to her retirement party. And telling her how much I appreciated her you know and her being such a great role model. I mean they were trying to get these little kids in the sixth grade to--black kids to sing all these gospels. She said, "No," she rebelled against that, she said, "you know, these kids are not, you only stereotype these kids." I'll never forget that. And she also got us involved in our local newspaper; we had a little local newspaper. I was the business manager, so I haven't changed my, I haven't (laugher) changed my stripes; I was the guy counting the money. And all the other kids were doing all the writing of the articles, I was the guy counting, I was the business manager. And we ended up winning some sort of award, I think maybe some sort of--I remember Columbia something like that. It was some of award but it was a big, it was a big deal, we were in a local--
Speaker 1: So Columbia University [New York, New York] had something to do with--
Speaker 2: It was something to do these local newspapers, I can't tell you exactly, but I know we won this big, it was--could, you know it may have been just a local award. But it felt really big to me, but I remember Columbia somewhere in there, and it could've been Columbia High School [Maplewood, New Jersey]. But I remember that, but we won this big award and I was the business manager, we, in fact I got a picture somewhere in my file somewhere, where I'm sitting there. I was in the center of all the other, all the whole staff and we--I had little holes in my little, you know little shir- my little sweater there. And but, but, that was Mrs. Minfey she, that was, I say one of my favorite teachers.
Speaker 1: That was a, was the school like integrated, I guess if the neighborhood, it's a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Oakwood Avenue those years it wasn't as integrated, no it was not integrated.
Speaker 1: It was all-black--
Speaker 2: Well, by the time I got to high school [Orange High School, Orange, New Jersey] you know it was on the other side of town, by the time we got to the other side of town we went to high school it was all integrated. We had one or two black kids--white kids in the school you know Jewish kids, especially who lived up on Berwyn Street lived there. Lived and, went to Oakwood Avenue School [Oakwood Avenue Community School, Orange, New Jersey], but not, not a whole lot, but that's, that's where we were, Oakwood Avenue. But the, and the other favorite teacher I had, was a funny sort of way was (laughter), I tell my granddaughter about this today, is Mrs. Sassal [ph.] and sh- that's where I learned fractions and math. She was a tough lady, she'd come down the aisle if you weren't--she would smack you across the face you know. And, and--
Speaker 1: They can't do that these days (laughter).
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: That's not done these days (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You can't do that these days, but--I know you can't do it these days. But for me it was probably the right thing 'cause if I went home and told my father [George L. Miles, Sr.] I got smacked, I'd get another beating, okay. So I can't get (laughter), can't get--so I was bad in school when the teacher beat me, and in these days the reaction is different. My father said, "Okay fine, well you got another one coming," and this is today (laughter). But she used to come down the aisle and smack me and whack me across the face, but that's what, I always say that's where I learned how to do math (laughter), that when I got it into my head.
Speaker 1: Yeah they say that fractions is like a crucial part of you know math understanding--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) if you get past that, you can--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah I got that--
Speaker 1: --do the rest of it.
Speaker 2: --one, Mrs. Sassal taught me that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I got the scars; no I didn't get any scars (laugher) to prove it.
Story_ID: 633612
Speaker 1: So you moved, when you moved you didn't change schools, or did you? Yeah you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, when we went from Oakwood Avenue [Oakwood Avenue School; Oakwood Avenue Community School, Orange, New Jersey]-
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --then we moved, then from the projects we went over to Lincoln Avenue [Lincoln Avenue School, Orange, New Jersey] from, then we went to a middle school, which was Central School [ph.] and that was the eighth grade; it was the only middle school, was eighth grade in those days. And then we went to high school in ninth grade, Orange High School [Orange, New Jersey], and, and the Central School was integrated, completely integrated by time we got to high school was fully, fully, fully integrated. 'Cause kids were--all parts of the community were there.
Speaker 1: Well, who were your friends in, in school during this period of time, who were, who were your friends, what?
Speaker 2: I had a lot of friends, I had white and black friends, I had, in fact one, couple of them I'm still friends with today, is a Jewish kid named Joel Shain, real good friend of mine, graduated high school then, he went to separate things. We, he became mayor of the town [Orange, New Jersey] years later and we became, did some things in our community. Walter Preston [ph.] ca- aka Butch Preston [ph.], good friend of mine, we still talk to each other periodically, but I, I had a lot of friends. I had a lot, a lot of people I knew and, friends I had you know across, across racial lines too. I used to play baseball with a guy named Joe McArnold [ph.], used to play football and a guy named Marucci [ph.], I, we had--really had an integrated community overall. Played football with them all, white and black so, I had a lot different friends.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you play sports in high school?
Speaker 2: I played football for two years, you know wasn't that great but--
Speaker 1: What did you play?
Speaker 2: Played tackle.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Non-skill (laughter), but I played, I, what I did also I, I, I played a lot of basketball, played Little League baseball. And did a lot at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], I end up years later working at the Y, got myself through college [Seton Hall University, South Orange, New Jersey] working at the YMCA. You know working there at the Y and supervising programs and things like that so, coached Little League football for six years. Even after I got married I was coaching Little League football for a couple of years in my community, so.
Speaker 1: Now, I see in your office a lot of baseball pic- pictures of--
Speaker 2: I love, you know I love baseball, that's good, it really got, I love baseball. I, I played baseball; I wasn't that good at it, but my father [George L. Miles, Sr.], you know once again, in the '40s [1940s] when Jackie Robinson came along he took me, he would take me with a couple of his buddies, used to take me over the, he used to me, look at, if you go back and literally, if you can't do it now, but if you, if you look back at the records in the late '40s [1940s] of the World Series when the Dodgers [Brooklyn Dodgers; Los Angeles Dodgers] were in the World Series, he would literally take me out of school. Not knowing he was giving me a life lesson, take me out of school that day and that--would be excused for the day, 'cause he wanted me to go to that game. He'd take me to the game; we would get up like four o'clock in the morning, go sit and by, in Ebbets Field [New York, New York] and sit there and wait and wait. 'Cause Jackie Robinson was there and that was a hero, he--and my father wanted to make sure I knew who he was. And, and his friend, all his friends, they were all going to the ballgames and wanted me to have that experience. We used to cut, 'cause you couldn't then, they used to cook up fried chicken and all those you know, and goodies and stuff. That was such a wonderful time in life and, and I was five, six, seven, eight years old going to the games with my father so. So he got us in I was '41 [1941], so Jackie Robinson broke in 1947, so you go from there. And everyone, so I think it's the '48 [1948] World Series, no not the '48 [1948] World Series, I think '48 [1948], '49 [1949] World Series, I was probably at one of those games you know, so.
Speaker 1: Did you ever see him steal home plate?
Speaker 2: No, I probably watched it so many times, like that little thing there but I, you know I've seen it so much I probably think I was there, you know one of those things. But I probably was not there, but Jackie Robinson was a hero, because I learned so much about--also from him, you know, life, you know I said I didn't know what was the lesson then, but you know, about coming into an environment that's strange. And being able to listen, being able to understand the environment, and then from that point on, then after you get the environment, you build up your own creditability. Then you can do a lot and say a lot of things, and you can start to mold things the way you want to mold. You just can't come into a place and say here I am and this is the way it is, 'cause you gotta build I think, build--that's what he was doing in my, in my estimation, I, you know and that's I, that was a great lesson in life. And the strength and I, when I read his life's story today and how he suffered in years, tears still come out of my eyes. 'Cause he was a great, I think he was the, one of the greatest.
Story_ID: 633613
Speaker 1: Now what about music, now you said you, you're related in some ways to [HistoryMaker] Dionne Warwick and [HistoryMaker] Cissy Houston and that group, group of singers. I mean, wa- was music a big part of growing up, 'cause I know you produced like a doo wop--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well--
Speaker 1: --show here.
Speaker 2: --the funny thing is this, the reason why I always mention now, I'm from the same period as, we didn't know each other. My mother [Eula Caesar Miles] knew her mother and all that family 'cause they never, but I was a--
Speaker 1: So they're cousins or some--
Speaker 2: Well, they're all cousin, we're all cousins, you know we're cousins, but, well the interesting thing is about how these things work. Dionne didn't know me, I, she lived in East Orange [New Jersey], I lived in Orange [New Jersey], and she, by time we got out of high school [Orange High School, Orange, New Jersey], she was on, you know on to be famous. So she wouldn't know me and but my fa- our families, my mother knew them, and you know we're all trying to do our own thing. And so Dionne and that whole family, Houston, were doing well, and my side of the family, we always say was not a--not (laughter) a person, they got all the talent (laughter), all, they took it all and didn't leave any, they didn't leave anything with us, but years later, I mean, I, I, I used to always kid my wife [Janet Miles], I say, "You know I'm related to Dionne Warwick and Cissy Houston," and what's the other one--
Speaker 1: Whitney Houston.
Speaker 2: Whitney, I went, my wife said, "Yeah right, right, right." We, and we just--so, it's always, it's always a family joke. Well, funny thing is now about seven, eight years ago, we were doing the 'Doo Wop' shows ['Doo Wop 50' and 'Doo Wop 51'] here in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and Dionne was one of the headliners, she was like the emcee. So, I, of course I'm the president of the company [WQED Multimedia, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], I can go back and I, I stopped her. I said, "Dionne," I said. She said, "Who are you?" I said, "I'm the president of the company and by the way, your cousin." She looked at me, you know I said, I said, "Well, let me just tell you some of the people I know that you know so you know that we are cousins. You know and, Aunt Flossie [ph.] and my mother," and I said, and she realized it had some creditability. So then she went back to the hotel and called her mother up and said, "I think I met my cousin," and then we, and then her son was there, so we communicated a little bit. You know, but you know she's a big time star and I'm, and I'm here in Pittsburgh and so but that, I thought it was, iron- ironic then 'cause then I brought my wife back. And, "Now Dionne, would you do me a favor, would you tell my wife that we're cousins." She said, "Yes, we're cousins." I said, "Thank you, that's all I needed, after all these, probably thirty-five years and finally got some creditability out of that," but, but she, you know we're family but I always laugh at--that's why I kind of joke about it. They, they got all the talent and we got, you know we got the, we're, we're the hustlers in the family.
Story_ID: 633614
Speaker 1: Well did you participate in the doo wop scene in those days on the corner (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No well the doo wop, the doo wop revival is really--comes right out of here, WQED [WQED Multimedia, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], we did that here and that was, you know I'm the president of the company. So you know I really didn't produce it, but we hired a young man TJ Lubinsky, actually was here last night, about eleven years ago, to come in to do something, he said to me one day, "Well, you know I wanna go do this doo wop--," and his father, grandfather [Herman Lubinsky] founded Savoy Records [Newark, New Jersey]. He knew all about the doo wop, so he knew all my music, he was twenty-six years old, and I'm you know fifty plus, I'm probably at fifty plus, way fifty plus. And fifties, in my mid-fifties and he, and we're, we could--talking music so I say, "Go ahead give it a shot." And then, and then TJ went and did, we did a special down, down in our studios here, and we aired it, it became a hit. And then right after that, we aired the rest of, our first 'Doo Wop 50,' now that was ten years ago, that was two- 1998, we had our first 'Doo Wop' show. It's the biggest hit I've ever been involved with, and production values weren't that great, but, but it just swept through the nation. And really became a huge, huge success, raised more monies for public television than any other program in the history of public television. That was huge (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 2: And then from that point on, you know then we had other 'Doo Wop 50,' you know we had Rock- 'Rock, Rhythm' ['Rock, Rhythm and Doo Wop'], we had, we had a lot of other programs. We had, we've had Aretha [Aretha Franklin] here, we had Lou Rawls here, we had Sam--the Sam [Sam Moore] of Sam and Dave, we had the reuniting of The Shirelles here with, I forget her name coming on the stage--
Speaker 1: Ronnie--
Speaker 2: Arlene [ph.].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Arlene coming on the stage with The Shirelles we, we had them all, we've had [HistoryMaker] Jerry Butler, so we, we've had them all. You know coming through here and we--with this series we have been able to revive doo wop music and also give these--also these artist who were involved in doo wop, who never made a lot of money a chance to kind of revive their career. I mean the, Speedo [Earl Carroll], "They often call me Speedo, but my real name is name Mr. Earl."
Speaker 1: Yeah, I saw that on when they did that.
Speaker 2: He was working, he's working as a janitor in New York City [New York, New York], you know after he, we did that show you know he's all--every weekend he's out doing it. Jerry Butler is out working every week, he's a councilman in Chicago [Illinois], he's working every single weekend.
Speaker 1: And county commissioner, yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it's great, it's great.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It's really fabulous you know. So but we started here, that's one of the things I'm, a lot of things of I'm proud of what we've accomplished. But that's one of the big things we've accomplished here and, and we're known by, you, you can see we got plaques on the wall for some of the great shows we've done.
Speaker 1: What I was trying to connect up was, now you grew up during the, the doo wop era where the--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --brothers just stand on a corner and you can hardly think of that without thinking of New, New York and New Jersey. Guys standing in the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --urban communities in Chicago other places stand, singing--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --together with their friends as teenagers.
Speaker 2: Well I had a cousin, now see you know there was some musicians and cousins that, is my first cousin Richard Dixon who's the same age. See my mother [Eula Caesar Miles] had, mama had seven and the other had thirteen, so there was always a connection with, so, right. The one set somebody's gonna relate, Richard was the same age as me, so he and I are very close. He used to sing with a group called The Kodaks and, and, 'Oh Gee, Oh Gosh,' and Richard, and he used to, he and I used to hang out together. So I used to go to New York and I used, and I used to go summer in Harlem [New York, New York] with him, he used to hang out with him. He used to sing at the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York] and I was always the guy in the backstage, I was always the--kind of the business guy I guess, I've always been a business guy. And he had--they, he and his buddies had these great dreams, I met like, I met Jerry Butler in those, in early days. And then when Rich, when, when Jerry came into town, we were kind of be able to talk about all those olden days. You know Frankie Lymon, all those great groups, so I knew--those are groups that I understood from the heart. So Richard even today, you know we'll talk about when he was on, he was really one of those great doo woppers. I was never one with talent. I was the guy, the guy you know I always kind of, I was the guy counting the money I guess, that's what my job was (laughter). I figured that one out after all these years. Could never sing, and every time we used to try to sing on the corner, the guys used to be singing, I never forget. The guys used to be singing and start breaking the arm, and I try to break in, and soon as I started singing they'd stop and look at me and say, "Man, you all off key." So I, I, can't handle it, so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 633615
Speaker 1: In high school [Orange High School, Orange, New Jersey], now did you watch television a lot when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, we had a TV but didn't watch TV a lot, we, I remember we did, only thing we did, remember in high school we had a, a local, before 'American Bandstand' you had the, a guy named Jocko [Jocko Henderson], rock show, we used to go down on Channel 13 [WNET-TV] in, in, in Newark [New Jersey] and stand on line to get on TV and dance on TV and something like that. But all of our friends, "Oh, I saw you on TV." "Oh yeah, I was dancing," and all stuff like that, that was fun, but. I, I always was fascinated by TV, you know always fascinated by the media business, and, but (cough) that was really it. In high school I did, you know I said I worked a lot and got out of high school in 1959 and on my way to figure out what I need to do next. And--
Speaker 1: Now, what were your prospects like in fif- '59 [1959]? I mean what were you, in high school were you, were you in Junior Achievement [Junior Achievement USA] and those kinds of things?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Now, you were working with a newspaper you said, when you were in the business (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Delivering newspapers.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but you--
Speaker 2: Not working with.
Speaker 1: But you were a business manager for another newspaper that went--
Speaker 2: No, I was a business manager when I was in sixth grade [at Oakwood Avenue School; Oakwood Avenue Community School, Orange, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Oh that's sixth grade, okay.
Speaker 2: Sixth grade that was like a--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --little local school newspaper.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was like a, that wasn't like a big time newspaper--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that was like a little school--
Speaker 1: So that's sixth grade, okay so you're only (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, sixth grade. I apologize if I miscommunicated--
Speaker 1: --twelve then yeah, I mean or e- eleven I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so in high school now, so you didn't get involved in any--
Speaker 2: I would, in high school I did a couple of things. I, you know played football one, two years but I also worked, I worked in the hospital [Orange Memorial Hospital; The Hospital Center at Orange, Orange, New Jersey] and--for one year. I used to work at the Y you know, counselor in the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], did counseling at camp during the summer. But I was always trying to figure out a way to make money, that's always my--was my goal. 'Cause it, it felt good to do that, not that I'm all, not (unclear), but I always felt that was something I needed to do. And, and it really helped me later on because it, it taught me a hard work, it taught me, and I was also, I was popular. Because I was always at, you know I'm always a, I'm even to this day, what I found more than anything else that I love to laugh, I love to laugh. Nothing like a good laugh and good joke, and good times and being with people, loved to go to dances, I mean I lo- that's, I love being around people. So that's always been a kind of a, that's, that is my kind of almost of thing that kind of turns me on, it energizes me. I can come into a room and be really exhausted and see a bunch of people that I like and, and get energize for that, that's, that's who I am. That's exactly who I am.
Story_ID: 633616
Speaker 1: Well, in high school [Orange High School, Orange, New Jersey] then, when you were on the verge of graduating, I mean when, did you, how did you rank in the class and what did, were you in the, in the--
Speaker 2: No, I don't know where I was at all (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were you thinking about college at all or what?
Speaker 2: Well it's a funny story all right, you know I, I'm a person who loves to try and do different things. And I think I was in my junior year, I ran into somebody that said they were in college. I met him a couple years--and they were off in college, he was telling me what college was like, had no idea what I was gonna do. Had no idea I was gonna go to college or anything, but I said in my junior year, "I wanna go to college." I went and told my counselor I said, "I need to get--." He said, "You need to make sure your grades are--you take the right courses." Had to take a prep course to do that, and then my senior year I went around you know to look for schools to get accepted. And I went to a couple of them, I wanted to go to Montclair State University [Montclair State College; Montclair State University, Montclair, New Jersey], (unclear), 'cause I wanted to be a teacher, I wanted to affect lives, I wanted to be a difference. And I couldn't get into that, my good friend Larry Ward [ph.] he got in, I couldn't get in. So then I went to see my guidance counselor, I really wanted to go to school and he says, "Well, why don't you think about Seton Hall [Seton Hall University, South Orange, New Jersey]," so I got the application for Seton Hall. And, and I went up to the campus and I walked around the campus, and I saw a beautiful, all this green grass. And everything few (unclear), beautiful, it's only about a mile away from (unclear). I said man this is pretty, I'd love to get in. Got my application, went back to my guidance counselor and I said, "I need you to write a recommendation for me." So he wrote a recommendation for me, I got in and I got in under provisional--that if--I need to get through the first semester. If I didn't get through the first semester, they were gonna throw me out. I went there and worked my behind off and I think I, I averaged over 3.2 or 3.4 average [grade point average] the first semester.
Story_ID: 633617
Speaker 1: Well, was it hard to pay for that 'cause Seton Hall's [Seton Hall University, South Orange, New Jersey] like a Catholic school, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well that's a--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --that's a very interesting thought, how do I pay for this? Once I told my father [George L. Miles, Sr.] I wanted to go to college, what he did was he worked a lot of overtime and saved enough money so that I could make it. And with the monies I saved, what he would do was help me pay for the first year. I mean help me--really got me the first year, after that I didn't know how I was gonna get, I didn't know how I was gonna make years two through four. But he must've known, and I always said that he gave me the, gave, put me in the right direction, gave me enough monies and said, "You go to college." Never knowing if I was gonna make years two, three and four. Two things happened, one is I always say my mother [Eula Caesar Miles] prayed for me, 'cause my mother must've prayed for me. 'Cause she always prayed for me, 'cause that's the only way I could've gotten through, and I worked my way through school. I wor- I was working jobs, it's--whatever it was to get, I was working at that time. By that time I was working at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] you know full time and then going to school and studying. But I also ran into a guy I think maybe within the first semester. I was sitting in the cafeteria one day thinking about next year, and someone said to me, and I asked somebody, this guy was on the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944]. And he asked me, what, how, you know I asked him how he was gonna pay for his college. He said, "Well, what we're gonna do is there, do you know about the student loan?" "Student loan, no." "Well, you go check it out." I went over to the student loan, checked it out, realized at that moment that I was gonna make it. 'Cause I could borrow enough money years two, three and four, work and comp- and supplement that, I can make it to year's end.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's when I realized I was gonna get out of there.
Speaker 1: Was this what they called the National Defense Student Loan [National Defense Student Loans; Federal Perkins Loan Program]?
Speaker 2: Exactly right.
Speaker 1: 'Cause your dad had been in the, the [U.S.] military?
Speaker 2: No, no he hadn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But then, dad was, no my dad was not in the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Not in the Army, so we had to, you know what, they gave you ten years to pay it off.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So when I, and it wasn't a national defense--I thought that's what it was.
Speaker 1: That's what they used to call it, and then I think it changed and later na- national direct but I, I know there was a, a, if your father had been in the service or your parent, one of your parents had been in the service (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, if you go into the service you got it deferred.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: If you go into teaching you had it deferred, but if you went out and went and got a job straightaway you had ten years to pay it off.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: So at that moment, I realized I had a way, if I worked hard enough, got the loan, put them together, thirteen dollars a credit, I can make it through the four years, I knew a way. But I had to ge- I had to get there, so that that's how I, that's how I kind of put it all together. It was kind of always like divine intervention, somebody walked and said, "Hey, by the way," tap me on the shoulder and said, "by the way, go over there and check this out." Because you get the loans, yeah, I mean I ended up you know in retrospect (laughter) it was great because I think I, when I got out of college I must've owed about two thousand dollars. That was a lot of money in 1963 to owe them, two thousand dollars, ten years to pay it off. And it's still (laughter) still took me a couple of years to pay it off, you know, but that's how I got through.
Story_ID: 633618
Speaker 1: And I worked, and I worked, and so between the jobs and that, but the, one of the classic stories is my father [George L. Miles, Sr.] in my senior year in high, summer of my senior year, after I graduated from high school [Orange High School, Orange, New Jersey], he got me a job at Otis Elevator [Otis Elevator Company]. And I used to work at Otis Elevator also during the summer, sanding the elevator doors and the ceilings and everything else, that was part of my job, and they call it the duck pond. And the duck pond was all this, you know it was all water and we just sand stuff, and I worked on trying to get, you know you work on com- not commission but on a time, timescale. If you get, if you did something in fifteen minutes, it was only scheduled for, for nine you got a bonus for it, and I worked. And then in the summer (laughter), my father said to me, he said, "How did you like the duck pond?" I said, "It was tough pop." He said, "Let me just tell you something, if you don't finish college, you're gonna be back at that duck pond." I said, "I got it." And I had no fingerprints at that time, my fingers were all worn off, but I knew man I didn't wanna go back to the duck pond. And I worked my behind off, so I worked and I worked, and I also lived, you gotta understand we lived in the projects [in Orange, New Jersey]. So I would- I didn't go away to school, I used to commute to school, and with seven kids by that time and this a projects there, and say well how did you do--where did I study? Why I just studied at odd hours, I used to get up, I used to come home in the afternoon get a nap, and when everybody had gone to bed, I used to study from like eleven o'clock all the way through the night. I used to sit there, have my little symphony set, used to be--jazz used to be playing, man I used sit and do my accounting work and do all that while everybody asleep. And then go on and get up the next day and go to school and then come home late in the afternoon. That was my schedule. That's how I was able to do it. Go the library, could never go to the library because I was, go to the library I'm always looking around at people, I'm always checking things out. So I needed where--a place where I could just be by myself, and I so, that's I how I did it. And, and my inspiration was not only, I was still living in my neighborhood in the projects you know. And guys used to say, "What you going to college for?" I said, "I'm going--." "Oh. You'll be out of there in a year." And I wasn't gonna let that happen, no way, used to go to the barbershop, "What you going to college for?" "Well, I'm going to college to be--." "You'll never make it out of college," and I said, ain't no way in the world--that's the worst thing you could ever tell me, I can't do something, and I did it, did it in four years, got out [of Seton Hall University, South Orange, New Jersey]. I had a tough time getting a job when I got out 'cause I wanted to be, by that time, I had, I had moved, I had wanted to be a teacher. Came out and wanted to be a CPA [certified public accountant] and be an accountant, it was 1963, nobody was hiring a black folks to work in CPA firms. And I was with a lot of white; I was with a lot of white guys, so--who graduated with me. So I knew a lot guys and I couldn't do it.
Story_ID: 633619
Speaker 1: At Seton Hall [Seton Hall University, South Orange, New Jersey] did, was there any particular teachers that helped you out or, or--
Speaker 2: It was, it was a couple of them that were kind of inspirational to me, the biggest one was, two of them was Mr. Ralph Ford; he was an accounting guy. Accounting man, accounting teacher, African American and he used to inspire me. It was a guy who was head of the statistics department, I used to work in the lab for him, and I can't think of his name off the top. But he gave me a break, you know working in the lab, making a little bit extra money in the lab. 'Cause I loved statistics and stuff like that, and a guy name Mr. Basar [ph.], who taught marketing, who's kind of role models for me, you know, they were two African Americans in this, essentially white school. And so they were kind of inspiring to me, always gave me encouragement, things like that. And then I had a few fr- you know, you know white and black friends, I learned, I learned at that time, that was the biggest lesson I learned going to Seton Hall was I was going back to my neighborhood [in Orange, New Jersey] every night. Down with, you know people who weren't, laborers and everything else in the neighborhood, going to Seton Hall were folks inspiring to be CEOs of companies. White wor- world and also mixed, and I found, even to today that was probably the biggest thing I learned, being able to make the adjustment between the white and black very easily. I don't have a, people know me, who know my personality knows that I, I have a personality that it's white, I, it's, it's not color (laughter), it's what you wanna call it. Because I can, I can talk white folks, I can talk black folks, I can talk to a CEO on one hand, and the guy who's the, who's the maybe the lowest paid person in the company. And I can relate to both of them, and that's, that's a strength I got, and the strength I got that from is the environment I grew up in, especially at Seton Hall.
Speaker 1: Okay now did, did you have time for activities at Seton Hall like--
Speaker 2: Well, I played intermurals, I was in, in the accounting club, I joined a white fraternity, business fraternity 'cause I thought that was a way for me to you know get a heads up on getting a job. Was an Alpha Kappa Psi, and did all, I did some of that you know, but as much as I could do. I got zac- I was very active, active in my, I say not only, I--I'm very active in my community, too.
Story_ID: 633620
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-three [1963] you graduated [from Seton Hall University, South Orange, New Jersey], and you're trying to find a job and nobody's hiring black accountants?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So what, what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, I went back to the lesson my father [George L. Miles, Sr.] taught me: hit a wall, you figure out a way around it. And I ended up going to work for, well first of all a lot of my colleagues, a lot of the colleagues who I used to work for, worked with in my accounting labs, and I used to give answers to just to help them out, they were getting jobs with some of the big firms. Arthur Andersen [Arthur Andersen LLP] and all of them, they all got jobs and I didn't get a job. But I ended up getting a job working for the Defense Contract Audit Agency. And so I went to work for the defense department [U.S. Department of Defense], I had one other jo- I think one other job offer, I got all, I used to, kept for years, I kept all these rejection notices. You know that I got for me, you know and you have the interview and you talk with them and they say, "Well, you know our clients probably will have a problem having you know a African American as, as a, as a--working on their account."
Speaker 1: So, that's the excuse not to have any is that--
Speaker 2: Exactly, said clients, clients wouldn't have it. So you know I, you know, I say you know that's, but that's what you deal with in those days, also you couldn't be a C- I wanted to be a CPA [certified public accountant] so you couldn't be a CPA unless you had experience, and if you didn't have, if you couldn't get a job you couldn't get the experience. So you couldn't, so at that time it was less than 150 black CPAs in the country, so I went to work for the government. Went to work for the government for a year, and then I got drafted, went to the [U.S.] Army, went to the Army for two years, was--spent six months in Vietnam. Came back went to work for the government, got married [to Janet Miles] and then, and then I, and then 1968, '69 [1969], when I was going, because at that time I'd given I almost given up the hope of becoming a CPA, because I said well I gotta do something else. I wanted, so I was going to school at night to get a master's degree, so I was working at night. Going to Fairleigh Dickinson [Fairleigh Dickinson University, Teaneck, New Jersey] got a, and I was under the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], so I was gonna get my master's degree. And then I ran into a guy at Fairleigh Dickinson and that, and he said to me, "You know the riots are breaking out all over this country. And with, with the riots we, the Corporate America is starting to open up their doors. And they are starting to understand, we had better start hiring some folks who look like you. Would you like to go back to public accounting?" I said, "Well look, I've been out almost six years. And I never had an opportunity, I wanna just see if I can make it, if it was really me or if it was them." So I said, "Let me go, let's give it a shot," so and I think in '69 [1969] I went to work for, I went got a couple of interviews. I got a couple of job offers, really great job offers at that time, 'cause conscious wakening up that we gotta do something. And I went to work for Touche Ross [Touche Ross and Co.; Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited].
Story_ID: 633621
Speaker 1: Now, I wanna stop here and let me go back to--
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: --the Vietnam [Vietnam War] thing, this is, I know the Vietnam story, the black soldiers of Vietnam have been, it's been written about. I mean what was your experience in Vietnam, what, what did you, did you go in as a regular enlisted man, did they give you special job where you could do some accounting and, in--
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: No, I was drafted.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: U.S. 5152450000 is my serial number (laughter) never forget that. I was drafted, spent eight weeks in at Fort Dix [New Jersey] and then I went to, I was sent out to Fort Sill, Oklahoma, to work as a postal clerk. And, and I, what I found at that time was many of the guys in my unit; it was only a unit of about thirteen or fourteen guys. But six of us were all accountants who had just graduated college, and we all were drafted. And we were in a, a postal unit which was called a STRAC [Strategic Army Corps] postal unit. Which means that you're ready to go out to the field at any moment to setup a post office, if war broke out you were there to setup the post office. So the STRAC units are also infantry you now, anytime a war breaks out, they're ready to go at any time. So we were in a STRAC postal unit, (unclear), but what happened was, when the war broke out and when the war started escalating in the, early 1965, yeah I mean in early as '65 [1965], '64 [1964] start really escalating.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then we moved towards getting a--more of the troops into Vietnam, our unit was called up to go to Vietnam and setup the postal operations, but it's called Qui Nhon, South Vietnam [Qui Nhon, Vietnam]. And we went there, went over there by ship and laid, laid in the rack, you can--laid in a rack where I can literally touch twelve people. You know that's how the close quarters get over there. But I was a postal clerk you know and, but in Vietnam you know you can be hit at any time. You can drive out and it was, it was guerilla warfare. So it was kind of scary, I never, you know and I left there I remember saying to myself, I'll probably never see my family again, 'cause you just don't know, you're going into a warzone. And, but God was with me, God, I'm here today to talk about it, and it was an experience that, that was life, not life changing, it was just more support given, giving me more character, giving me more appreciation for life today. And because of those experiences years ago, so that's what I did, did that for six months. Came back in January and then that June I got married, in 1966 I got married [to Janet Miles].
Speaker 1: Okay how, how, I mean, now this is first, this is the furthest you've ever been away from home, right, at the, the time?
Speaker 2: Vietnam, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Vietnam and then--a lot different from New Jersey (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to Oklahoma and that was the furthest--
Speaker 1: Fort Sill, okay.
Speaker 2: The first time I was one a plane. Yeah, Fort Sill, Oklahoma that was the furthest you know, I went to Niagara Falls [New York] as a kid, but that, that was--going to Fort Sill, Oklahoma was the furthest (laughter) and then going to Vietnam was, going to California for the first time. And then getting on that ship for the first time, going overseas, then somebody losing--you know in August. I remember in August the riots were going on in Watts [Los Angeles, California]--
Speaker 1: Yeah, in '66 [sic. 1965] yeah, that's, this when you came back (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was really something. It always tested my--also my character because if I think about it today you know a couple of things happened. One is the riots were breaking out, you say why am I doing this, why am I going over to Vietnam possibly to die for this country? That was, you know but I knew I had to do that, you know I wasn't as brave as or even as thoughtful as a person like Muhammad Ali. 'Cause I didn't have the talents of Muhammad Ali.
Story_ID: 633622
Speaker 1: The other thing is just before we left to ship out to Vietnam, our unit, I was the only African American in the unit. And we went to somewhere downtown Lawton, Oklahoma to celebrate, they wouldn't let us, they wouldn't let me in. But let all my, they would let my bu- my buddies, they decided not to do that, they decided not to go in. But because I was black, I think about this, here I am about ready to die, ready to die for this country, and I couldn't get into a place to go have a beer with my buddies. Who I--was also about ready to die for this country, so but I went, 'cause I knew that's what I needed to do. 'Cause you know all these things about we're gonna be there because if we don't do this all our families are at stake. And all the things you kind of buy into, so I did go to Vietnam and it was an experience being away from home. Understanding a lot about poverty, never seen poverty the way I saw them in Vietnam. Understanding a lot about American so called propaganda that we get, you know how we're here to help and, and seeing the capitalism at its best with Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company] and all the other American things just started to penetrate Vietnam. You know those the kind of eye openers for me, you know, and then also going over on that ship. And also great, I, I think I got a great respect for life you know after that you know. You know that's why if I look back on all the experiences I've had, if, if--one thing you will say about me is I enjoy life, enjoy it to the fullest.
Speaker 2: Were any of your friends hurt or killed in a--
Speaker 1: Pardon me?
Speaker 2: Were any of your friends hurt or killed in Vietnam?
Speaker 1: No, not in my unit.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Not in my unit, I had friends who died in Vietnam, but not within my unit, and I was there for just about six months. So I, and by the time I left, I'm not sure if anything happened after that. We got hit a couple of times on the, on the perimeters of our camp. But our job was really easy; our job was to support the troops who are out there in the jungle to give, to make sure they got their mail and things like that, so. And I, you know I made the best of it.
Speaker 2: Is there anything about the mail that uniq- I mean any stories about the mail, I, I, you hear stories about people's letters, you know during wartime not--you know being censored or edited or something or is anything--
Speaker 1: No, no, I, I did none of that censorship, the only thing you would see periodically come through, you know wedding, you know some things people sending maybe wedding bands. And a person getting a Dear John letter, sending, somebody sending their, their boyfriend or fiancee back their wedding ring, 'cause they've done something else, those the kind of stories you see. But nothing, nothing crazy like that, but the other things are you also saw the gift, you know the generosity of the American public, you know supporting our troops, even tod- I mean you see it today. But you know many packages coming over to Vietnam to, addressed to any soldier in Vietnam, you know. And that's, that was really heartwarming to see that the support you had at home, even though when we got home, I never thought about it 'cause I never thought about coming home to be welcomed, even today now. I get, I tell somebody--I see another Vietnam veteran, I say, "You're a Vietnam veteran?" And the, and I say, "I am too," and they'll look at me and say, "Welcome home." Because really--not got a welcome--I never, that didn't, that didn't occur to me and I got welcomed by my family. My family was really happy to see me home, so I didn't need a nation to turnout for me, but today, I think that still lingers with a lot of Vietnam veterans. Especially you know one's that may have been injured.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Fifty thousand young men died, over fifty thousand men died, I don't know how many are mentally scarred for a war that really made no sense.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's a real problem.
Speaker 2: At the time that you went did you have like a, how keen was your political analysis of what was going on?
Speaker 1: No, I didn't know, I thought it was, you know I bought into what--I really bought into what McNamara [Robert McNamara] and the rest of them were saying that this is trying to--place to save the world. And I was ready to die for it and when McNamara came out with his book ['In Retrospect: The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam,' Robert S. McNamara and Brian VanDeMark] many, many years ago, that you know basically saying it was not the war that hurt, that hurt a lot. And I see the same thing happening in Iraq again, that hurts a lot.
Story_ID: 633623
Speaker 1: Tell us about Touche Ross [Touche Ross and Co.; Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited].
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: It's Touche, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Touche Ross.
Speaker 1: Touche Ross.
Speaker 2: Touche Rosse in those days, I went to work for Touche because I wanted, thought that I was gonna be there to make--you know I wanted to prove to myself that I could do this. And I also wanted the chance to become a CPA [certified public accountant], and I did well, I worked my way up to becoming the first audit manager for Touche Ross. I spent eight, over eight years at Touche Ross, first black manager, on my way to becoming a partner. Could've become their first black partner at Touche Ross, and I, you know what happened was after I got to a point where I knew that I could make it there you know, I knew that that was not an issue anymore, I had proven to myself that I could work the clients, that I could do all the things you needed. Then I knew that my goal was to become a partner at Touche Ross, cross that finish line and then figure out what I was gonna do with the rest of my life. 'Cause they told me I couldn't do it before, I got a CPA, I got an M.B.A. and I'm there, I was on my way, I was about a year, I had probably about a year and half to becoming a partner. Had some good clients had the new--City of New York [New York] when they were going through their fiscal crisis, had the board of ed [New York City Board of Education; New York City Department of Education]. Had some nice clients and well respected in the office.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, the City of New York was a, was--
Speaker 2: Yeah it was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) was it, John Lindsay was mayor?
Speaker 2: Well no--
Speaker 1: Was that--
Speaker 2: No, it was Abe Beame [Abraham D. Beame].
Speaker 1: Abe Beame.
Speaker 2: Abe Beame because that's when they were going through their bankruptcy stuff you know, and I was, I worked on the team that did that. And so I had, I had some good clients and, and as I said the board of ed was my client, I had some, but then I got a job--then I got a call one day to go take a look--well two things happened, one thing, really one thing happened which is critical. I had a nice office, sitting next to the biggest, one of the biggest partners in New York, he was my rabbi. He was the guy, who was bringing me along, and I loved, I told you I loved to laugh, I love to have a good time.
Speaker 1: Well who, who was the guy that he, helped you--
Speaker 2: Had the name--Ed Weinstein [Edward A. Weinstein] was his name.
Speaker 1: Ed Weinstein, okay.
Speaker 2: And, and, and one day somebody walked into my office, another partner walked into my office and told me this great joke. And I laughed out loud, it was so hilarious, and I can't even tell what the joke was, this guy named Art Radin [Arthur J. Radin] was his name. He walked out, that after--maybe an hour or so later, my mentor, my rabbi, the guy who's looking out for me came into my office said, "George [HistoryMaker George L. Miles, Jr.] what was all that noise in the office earlier today?" I said, "Ah, Art told me this great joke," and Ed looked at me and said, "George, you know we don't laugh like that around here." I said, "Oh, wow," I said, "okay Ed." That afternoon, I got a call from a headhunter. I said, "You know, I may go take a look at some stuff," (laughter), "'cause this, this ain't gonna be me. I know--maybe it's time now," and I got a, somebody told me to come out and take a look at this job in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and work at KDKA as the comptroller or the business manager of KDKA-TV [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. I said, "Well, I got nothing to lose, Stealers [Pittsburgh Steelers] had won two Super Bowls, let me go on take a look at this city," came out of here and walked into KDKA-TV and QED Radio [WQED Radio, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] walked into those studios with the general manager and realized this is where I belong. I belong in the broadcasting media business. And that's, and that's how it happened, so I decided, went back home and said to my wife, I said, "Jan [Janet Miles], I don't know how we're gonna do this, but I think we gotta leave Touche Ross. Even though I could become partner in another year, and gotta go to work, this is my, this is the direction I wanna go in." So we packed my wife and my daughter [Tammy Miles] and we moved out here to Pittsburgh and became the business manager of KDKA-TV and did that for two years.
Story_ID: 633624
Speaker 1: Now, let's go back a little bit, now how did you meet your wife [Janet Miles] and?
Speaker 2: My wife and I--my wife is a southern girl, she's born in South Carolina, brilliant lady and she, she was, came up out, right out of high school in, in 1959, well no 1960 to work, to go to beauty school. So she became a ha- she became a hairdresser and she eventually became a hair colorist. I met her at a dance in my senior year in college [Seton Hall University, South Orange, New Jersey], and you gotta understand I didn't have a car, probably had one pair (laughter) of pants to my name, and I met this lady with another friend of ours, through another friend of ours, she had a car. She lived in South Orange [New Jersey] not too far from me, she had a job, I said my goodness this girl's got a lot of money, so. I always tease her about it, married, married her for money so we, we asked how we get together, she was terrific. She, she come by pick me up you know and, and we, we got to know each other, got to become real good friends, and when I got out of you know when, by the time I got of college and got out of Vietnam [Vietnam War], nobody had snatched her up and taken her off someplace else. And sh- and, and you know we'd become really close and that's how, that's how we met at a dance.
Story_ID: 633625
Speaker 1: We had you at Touche Ross [Touche Ross and Co.; Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited], you're getting ready to leave Touche Ross, right?
Speaker 2: Right, came in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What happened?
Speaker 2: Came in, came in after--
Speaker 1: To go to K- KDK--
Speaker 2: KDKA [KDKA-TV, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], I ended up saying I needed to do this, it just felt like it was the right thing to do. I didn't know it was the right you know, of course you never know it, but I, I have a lot of faith and I jumped off, I really, literally jumped off the cliff. And just went, came in to work for KDKA to learn a whole new business. And I learned the, the radio business, the TV business--
Speaker 1: So you came in as business manager and?
Speaker 2: And comptroller.
Speaker 1: Comp- comptroller, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Right, and I was the, you know first business manager, comptroller of any of the stations and they were looking, they were looking at that time to diversify you know. They had no diversity with all--within the departments, this is 1978, I guess, 1978.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I learned the business, I learned it well, but my goal was not to be the chief financial guy. (Unclear), my goal was to run, to be a general manager, I wanted to run my own shop, I didn't, but never had aspirations of doing--so when I came in I didn't focus on the financial side, 'cause the financial side was easy. It--my job was really focusing on understanding business, how all the things interact, how to move an organization forward, things like that. That's what I was more interested in doing.
Speaker 1: Okay, well what, what did you learn about the broadcast business, here?
Speaker 2: Well I, I came in it for a couple of reasons; one is that my, I always wanted to be about serving community. In broadcast, that's about community, that's my reason for being is about serving. I'm a competitor, you're really competitive about it, and you can make a decent salary. You're not, you're not gonna be fun, filthy rich but you know you can make a decent salary. And you can do things if you're right, so that's what I learned about it, and then just everything else follows in that. And it is a presence, you do have a presence in your community and that was, that really, that aligned--right what I was about as a human being. And that's why the broadcast media is where, that's why I'm here even to this day. And many years later, thirty years later I'm still in the business you know because of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, you are kind of a, you're a contradiction in terms, in some ways because you're a gregarious accountant (laughter). You know trained as an accountant lot, lot of accountants are even profiled by business surveys as being the kind of guy that works by himself. Doesn't really, you know can focus on that without associating with a lot of people, but you're gregarious, outgoing kind of person, so (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, well, well I'll tell you, my first two years in the accounting profession I had a tough time, 'cause I had to sit there and do all ticking and footing and all that. It didn't, that doesn't and I'm, I'm more, that's one, once I became a supervisor and dealt with clients, and understand the picture stuff, I was over, I was moving then. But the first year man, all that ticking and footing and that was like, it was hard work, but yeah I learned it. I mean I, I can turn that brain to a point where if I need to be that person who sits down and does that focus, I can do that. But the part of me that's really dominate, is my dominate, is being part of the community, being part of people leading people and things like that.
Story_ID: 633626
Speaker 1: What kind of things were, what kind of problems did you have to solve at KDKA [KDKA-TV, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] or, or I don't know if that's a way to phrase it. But what was the, what was some of the, the things that you had to deal with?
Speaker 2: Well, first thing, well first of all I don't think I solved many problems at KDKA, besides--there were a couple of things I was involved with. One is, in those days, the media business was so sales--it was such a lucrative business. Anytime you turn over a rock, money was there, I was a business guy, so I understood the business part of it, so I was, I brought a lot of business fundamentals. And I think the company was starting to change to become, understanding more about business and being run like a business as opposed to that. I learned a lot about the business, and so it allowed me to understand the business, then allowed me to go through other things and other places to solve other problems at other places. That was my foundation area at KDKA, so when Westinghouse [Westinghouse Broadcasting Company], and I was there for two years. And Westinghouse bought a station in Charlotte, North Carolina from Ted Turner, WPG Channel--WPCQ Channel 36 [WPCQ-TV; WCNC-TV, Charlotte, North Carolina]. I went there as, for, first Westinghouse employee to go there, and literally Westinghouse eyes this station. So that was my first encounter in trying--an organization development, getting at it, trying to change the culture a little bit. Understanding a little bit more of it, and becoming the, I was the station manager there working for a guy who was the general manager who was there previously. So my job was there to kind of mold the station into ways that Westinghouse--I was there for about a year. And I did that, so West- KDKA was a foundation allowed me down in, it allowed me to go through other things at other places. So when I left, when I went down, went down there to do that job, then I was down there, I was very happy in Charlotte, I loved Charlotte. Charlotte's a great little community, and we had a great house and then my wife, then I got a call from the head of the company what said, "We'd like you to come back to New York [New York] to become vice president of the television group at, at Westinghouse. Would you love to be able to do that? The head of the television group and head of the production company, to be the comptroller?" And I at first I said, "No, I don't wanna really do that." But then, then I was asked, then my wife, I was sitting at the kitchen table with my wife one afternoon and I said, "Jan [Janet Miles], they keep calling me about this job. I love it down in Charlotte," and she looked at me and said, with the key words says, "George [HistoryMaker George L. Miles, Jr.] are you ready to retire?" I said, "No." "So you better go and take the job, you gotta go move, you gotta move." 'Cause that's what this deal is about, so then I took the job in New York and I was there for literally did a lot different things for about five months. And then the job opened up in Boston [Massachusetts] as the station manager of WBZ-TV, the NBC affiliate in Boston, and the opportunity to do that or stay in New York, I always wanted to be at the station, not, and I wanted to run an operation, as opposed to be kind of the big vice president of control. Who knows it may have been, I think at the end of the day it was the right decision. So I went, I went that time, then I, and I got to understand the budgeting process while I was in New York. Then, then I went to Boston as a station manager, number two person there in Boston and, and at that time we're moving up, by that time we're moving out of Charlotte into New York. And we're there five months, and we've just built this house, then the company said, "Well George, we want you to move to Boston." So I said to my wife, "What do you wanna do?" She said, "George, I'm going to Jersey [New Jersey], going to New York, I'm not moving to Boston yet, let's wait a while." 'Cause we got a kid that's about ready to go to high school. So we ended up working out an agreement with the company that I would go to Boston and commute every weekend. They'd pay my way, pay for my housing and you know, so I did it, 'cause it was really the experience I needed to get. And I went to Boston and had a great time understanding the business. It, we came--became close as a family. My wife would come up when, my daughter [Tammy Miles] would come up on the weekends, I'd come home we found ourselves much closer together. Some weeks my daughter would come up and spend a week with me, just the two of us. Became very close, even today we're very close, so it was really a very positive experience. So I did that and it was there, it was also about cultural, our organizational culture changes.
Story_ID: 633627
Speaker 1: Then one day I got a call from a, the, my boss in New York [New York] asking me if I would go to Washington, D.C. for a six month stint to work for National Public Radio [NPR]. This is 1983. And would I, will I, if I would go and go to Washington, D.C. as a chief administrator officer for National Public Radio. Because they were going, they needed a temporary management team down there, 'cause they were going through these major fiscal crisis (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were going through a big crisis, yeah.
Speaker 1: Big time crisis.
Speaker 2: Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] I think cut it 90 percent or something.
Speaker 1: Well, it was about cutting back, but it was also about mismanagement, just mismanagement. A guy named Frank Mankiewicz and, chief financial officer there, and it was just like they had setup these great programs of 'All Things Considered,' 'Morning Edition' and, and there were just no business acumen whatsoever. So I went down there with a team headed up by a gentleman by the name of Ron Bornstein [Ronald Bornstein] out of Wisconsin, I was his chief administrator officer. Went down there for six months to get it back on track, we did a lot things. It gave me, first of all I didn't know anything about public broadcast, I didn't even know where it was on the dial. So that when I left Boston [WBZ-TV, Boston, Massachusetts] a friend of mine had to show me where public broadcasting was on the dial. And I went down to work there 'cause it was something new and, and I worked for six months and we got a lot of things accomplished. You know and they had all sorts of problems. Everybody had credit cards in the company, we had--took credit cards, we had to lay people off, we had to fire the president. We had to fire the chief financial officer, but I got involved with stuff, we had to put a budgeting process in place. I got a chance to, to testify before [U.S.] Congress, and many of Congress. Never would have had that opportunity before, and got to know a whole new business. After we finished, we put in an old, Mel Ming [HistoryMaker H. Melvin Ming] as a matter of fact.
Speaker 2: Yeah Mel--
Speaker 1: Hired Mel Ming, put Mel Ming as the chief financial officer down there with another guy and I left, went back to Boston [Massachusetts]. And I was in, and I was having a good time in Boston, then get a call, then they also, National Public Radio made me the chairman of their finance committee, on the boards. I sat on the board there and I was back up Boston, so now I was like straddling two worlds, I was straddling public broadcasting, I was straddling also public, public, public broadcasting on one side and commercial broadcasting. And I was in and out and I knew, I knew this, I could see the difference. Then one day I get a call from a headhunter in New York, wanted me to take a look at this job in New York as, as the chief operating officer of Channel 13 [WNET-TV] in New York. This company was going through some major fiscal crisis and major working capital deficits, it had all sorts of non- they were just not being run like a business. All, it was a major, hundred million dollar company being run like a mom and pop operation. So I said this is a great opportunity, my wife [Janet Miles] is in New Jersey, New York. I can move back to my house, and move into my house and then move down to this big entity, which I know nothing about and see if we can straighten those problems out. And we did it, came back, one of the persons I, first person I recruited to come up to New York was Mel Ming. Mel, bring him in, brought him out, NPR brought him up here to become my chief financial officer at in New York. And we spent, I spent ten years there, we moved from a company that was working capital deficits of about $7 million to a company that working in the red. To a company that was prospering, to a company that was built an endowment of almost seventy mil- had started an endowment process. Hired a lot of new people, put a whole new memberships in, to the place was really good shape after ten years.
Story_ID: 633628
Speaker 1: Tell me now, this is--how do you make public broadcasting, be it NPR [National Public Radio] or WNET [WNET-TV] in New York [New York] or, or, WQED here [WQED-TV, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], how do you make public broadcasting profitable? Or how do you, how do you get it out of trouble you know.
Speaker 2: Well, you know it's not about making it profitable as it is to make sure that you don't--
Speaker 1: Make it st- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) spend more monies than you bring in. If you can do that you become in the words of mom and pop it- profitable. You gotta make sure that you have an excess of revenues off of expenditures at the end of the day. And make sure that you're investing in sorts of things in the future. That's what you need to do, that's really the secret in business. I always tell my friends from the commercial side of business that their job is to make margins. And if there are about 10 percent one year and then on to 2 percent the next year, they're out of a job. But the good news for them they got margins, I got no margins, we're always on the edge. If we don't make margins and losses, we're off the cliff, we, we're there without a safety net. It's much timing as it is--much for business this way. At least that way you can say well we're not of, we're not of bus- business, but we just didn't make as much as money as we did last year. So that was, that's a, that's a real secret there. And lot of times not for profit people love to say we gotta be as creative--we gotta do this all these great things. We gotta, we can't worry about the money so much as we think about the creative process. That's a lot of crap, you need to consider, you know you put parameters up there, and you need to be able to be creative as you want within these parameters. You go over that, you're in trouble, you can't be in business anymore and that's where a lot of nonprofits get in tro- trouble. My, my basic philosophy in nonprofits is, I say it here and I used to say it at NET is that we are a, we're not a, a nonprofit company which happens to be in the television business. But we're in the media business, which happens to be nonprofit, that's a whole different premise that you start at. We're in the business which happens to be nonprofit; you gotta run it like a business. I say this to churches, I say to this any nonprofit; you gotta run like a business, even though you're not a business. Because there is a certain acumen you gotta bring to it, that's what I bring to a lot of these companies that I work at.
Speaker 1: So you have to make sure as you said you bring people like Melvin Ming [HistoryMaker H. Melvin Ming] and pe- people that have sound sense of what to do with the money and, and draw clear lines?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you gotta get you know it's you do strategic plans, you gotta do plans, you gotta do budgeting, you got to hold people accountable. You gotta know what the end product is; it's no different than any other business.
Speaker 1: Now in terms of the creative side I mean as a, as a general manager, or what input do you have in, I mean on the creative side?
Speaker 2: I have a lot.
Speaker 1: It's just--okay.
Speaker 2: I have a lot, I have a lot, I used, for example, this station here, I set the direction, I started, I put a strategic plan together many years ago, thirteen, fourteen years ago. It said that we are going to focus on local programming, we're not gonna try to be WGBH in Boston [WGBH-TV, Boston, Massachusetts], we're not gonna try to be WNET in New York, what we're trying to be is the strongest public media company in southwestern Pennsylvania. That sets the parameters, inside that folks can do a lot of different things, they got a lot of leeway, but that's the direction I set. That's where, if they, if somebody comes to me with a project said, "We're gonna do the Civil War and we're gonna go out and raise for the Civil War." I say, "No, I'm not, not in this, not in this place. You do that someplace else, but not here." So do I have a, do I have a say, the answer is yes, a lot of say. 'Cause I can tell you what that, I can tell you what the jar is gonna fill and I can tell you what sort of things we're gonna put in the jar. And, and so that's a lot. Do I have a specifically, let me tell you about a creative idea, I may have some of those but, that's not what I do. I'm an organizational--the creative part for me is the organizational, development piece, how to take the whole organization and, and move it all in the same direction. Getting people to work together, understanding the direction they're going, it's you know the plans and tactics and all. That's, that's the creative thing for me, and making sure everybody's on the same, same page.
Story_ID: 633629
Speaker 1: Now let's see we got off the chronologically here, but you, but you came, you, you worked at NET [WNET-TV, New York, New York] for ten years and then--
Speaker 2: Ten years.
Speaker 1: And then, and then did you come here, or--
Speaker 2: Then I came here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then I came here as the, I, then I got a call again, this WQED [WQED Multimedia, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] was going through also major crisis. It had literally almost went bankrupt, it imploded. It had a net worth of about eleven thousand dollars; it was a company that was going in all sorts of different directions. And, and I was asked if I wanted to do this, and I said yes for a couple of reasons. One is, it was an opportunity to be the number one person at a place. Two is, I always thought I owed something to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] because I learned, I got my foundation in broadcasting here in Pittsburgh. And three, I realize that if I can do this right and get it done, we can get a national reputation out of this. You know, one day people will be coming in to interview by The HistoryMakers because of what you've done at QED (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so you started here in '94 [1994] right, 1994?
Speaker 2: Ninety-four [1994], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and well what are some of the, the challenges you know here when you, when you showed up, I mean the well the, you said already the net worth was like eleven thousand dollars (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I had a lot of--I had a num- number of challenges when I got here. Start with financial I said the, we're in major debt, we had $13 million in debt, we had eleven thousand dollars net worth. And we had projected surpluses for the next year, which were never attainable. Programmatically we were all over the place, we had programs that we were committed to nationally, that we had no ways to get funded. And they were already in the budget for next year, we were dysfunctional as far as the direction we were gonna take. We had, on, on the operational side, then we had people here who are here, who are not--performed at all. We were basically warehousing people here, where--people here who had not done much of anything for a couple of years. Not, had not raised monies, had not produced any product and, and we also had a, a, a bo- people in the building, some of them who needed to work together, didn't speak to each other. So it's dysfunctional, so the board really reorganized itself, the whole board was retired. And then they reorganized and the first person they hired was me. So that's, that's the kind of picture we paint when we got here, really I, I had thought if I had done more--better due diligence, I probably would not have come here. But I was told that the place had turned itself around, sur- surpluses projected for the next year, and I believed it. I didn't really look into, I didn't really discover it, I was, I was hired in July, gonna start in September. And I was around meeting everybody, doing my pat on the backs and saying hello to everybody. In August I decided to sit down and talk to the, the comptroller, talk to him about the numbers, and as I sat down with him, I realized that we really had a problem. At that moment, I went back home that night, literally cried, because I said I have exposed my family to something that I cannot believe that I have ex- that I've exposed them to. That we, this company may not make it, it was really that bad of a shape, and I say, I woke up the next morning and said you know what? I think about what my father [George L. Miles, Sr.] told me, just get up, figure out another way to get around this mountain, and we did it. And now we're one of the most successful public media companies in the country.
Speaker 1: Well, how did you do it, I mean?
Speaker 2: Well, well I had to give direction. First of all we had to get the strategic direction: where are we gonna go, where are we gonna take this thing? We're no longer gonna be the big national player, and then that's one. We gonna try to produce stuff, then I think about how to retire--
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the debt.
Story_ID: 633630
Speaker 1: What national programs are being produced here--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --when you--
Speaker 2: Well, you had 'Infinite Voyage' ['The Infinite Voyage']; you had 'Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego,' National Geographic [National Geographic Society] started here. You had--'Mister Rogers' ['Mister Rogers' Neighborhood'] was here, many, many (unclear) people, all big national things had started out as--but what happened in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] was a lot of these big corporations had left Pittsburgh, so Pittsburgh didn't have the sort, this station [WQED-TV, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] didn't have the sort of funding as a New York [New York] or Boston [Massachusetts] or D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. So that's, they, but they were still committed to these big projects, so that's, that's a part of the problem.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's, that's, that's what you're dealing with, so what I had to do, I had to first of all, first of all (laughter), had to do was let everybody know there's a new sheriff in town, that we gonna do business differently. And had to go back to my roots of New Jersey and had to shake it up a little bit, I mean--here the first week and literally fired three people, straightaway. Had to let them know that this is no longer gonna be this quiet station, we're gonna change.
Speaker 1: Were they business, I mean management, management type--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.
Speaker 2: Didn't need them, didn't actually didn't need them, they were just here. And so we did that, then we set a direction, we had sit down worked out a plan on where we gonna go. We said we're gonna be the local, we're not gonna be national, we're gonna be local, and then we had to go. Then I had to go out and sell, that's why I brought Mel [HistoryMaker H. Melvin Ming] in, I said, "Mel, you take care of the inside, I'll go take care of the outside." Then I had to go rebuild the creditability, 'cause a lot press had been written about QED [WQED Multimedia, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] and, and how bad it you know had turned and all the other things that had gone on. Management had kept themselves focusing in on their, on their perks as opposed to their, their organization, didn't keep its eye on the marketplace, but just kept itself on its own self. And that was a problem. So what happened was I had to go back and rebuild the creditability, all sorts of negative stories about this place. So I had to go out and meet a lot of people, I was everywhere, everywhere in this community I was there. "Hi, how you doing, I'm George Miles [HistoryMaker George L. Miles, Jr.], I'm here, I'm the new president of WQ, by the way, I'm here, I was here before. I'm the lo- I was a local guy," so let them know that I'm still part of them, so just started building your credit. You gotta give people to like you, you, get people to understand you.
Speaker 1: Was, was the station seen as elitist or snobbish or, or, I, I don't what, what was the--
Speaker 2: All of the above (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) what was the negative, yeah--
Speaker 2: It was lot, I mean it was elitist, it was, it was wasting money, it was, it was not iden- it didn't have the common touch. In fact one of the things I continue to say over and over again that I didn't want this to be your grandfather's publication, public service media, public media company, I wanted this to be a place that belong to the community, the entire community. Not just part of the community on the East End [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], this is a, gonna belong to everybody. And the program that we're gonna be developing was about people in the entire community as opposed to folks who were just part of a certain economic class.
Story_ID: 633631
Speaker 1: I realize that public television stations have to raise money amongst the rich and that sort of thing but what kind of contacts did, did you make in the, in the in our, in our community? Say an African American com- community or the other (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Awesome, everywhere, I made contacts everywhere. We got, you know, we got programs about, you know, I was in the African American community. I was in, I was in everywhere. I was everywhere, so that, you--going back to the projects again, I, I easily made that adjustment back in the African American--I'm very comfortable with going down to the Hill District [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], I'm very comfortable being at Fox Chapel country club [Fox Chapel Golf Club, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], I'm very comfortable, comfortable with my--maybe 'cause I'm comfortable with myself. So people got to like me because of that, you got you know you gotta build a like factor. People in the Af- you know I, you go church on Sunday, I go to a Baptist church on Sunday, black people see you in church, you know they know that you're legit. Or you know I'm not going to some Episcopalian church, a black guy, which I have nothing against, and being something I'm not, I'm a spiritual outgoing person and that, that's where my roots are, so the African Americans, I had no problem there. And so I go to Fox Chapel, I can laugh and be with the rest, be with the best of them. So that's, that's a part of it, so. I had, you know I had to build creditability and, and we slowly happen--and then you get a couple things that happened, luck. One is we had the, I had a two television stations--I had to work towards getting it converted to a commercial station, we did that. 'Doo Wop' ['Doo Wop 50'] ten years ago, little TJ [TJ Lubinsky] came in, hiring TJ, that was huge, then we had another gentleman who's a documentarian we put monies, we invested in him. So he could do stories about the community, we had these cooking marathons, we put monies into that.
Speaker 1: What, what kind of stories about the community were produced?
Speaker 2: Well, well then, then the biggest thing we did was put on the air ten years ago a, a program called 'OnQ Magazine.' Which is on every night, live and it's on live at 7:30, repeated again at 12:00 and then repeated again at 12:30 the next day. Where we do magazine stories about the community, that's our bread and butter program. And that, that, that program now does four hundred, five hundred stories a year about positive things, not positive, but things about going on in the community. Just examining things in the community, that's the centerpiece of everything we're doing. Then we have 'Black Horizons,' which is the longest running African American program in the country. We do that, we do and then we've done a lot of other specials, we, but because of 'OnQ,' it allows us to do other things. We've done programs about a woman in Squirrel Hill [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] go--visiting the family who saved her from the Holocaust, going to visit them. We've done stories 'OnQ' about the new Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra, new director coming in. And so we got every source of that, that's where we get the heart of it, and everything else flows from that. But that's, our strategy was to set that up as a nightly presence, give us a place then everything else will grow around it. And then we've done stories--then we end up doing other programs like not only 'Doo Wop,' we've gone, we've done a major documentary about three years ago called 'The War That Made America.' It's a $14 million project which we, which I, which I spent a lot of time raising monies for. It was about the French and Indian War, which really started right here in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and that, that program was where about a young [President] George Washington who started as a young twenty-two year old lieutenant down the Monongahela Hill and, and watching General Braddock [Edward Braddock] get killed. Where because the French and Indian [Native American], and the French and the English were fighting for the, the, the beginning of the Ohio [Ohio River] where the confluence of the, the Allegheny [Allegheny River] and the Monongahela Hill, they were fighting for that, so they could control the rest of the country. If the French had won that war, we'd be all speaking French today, but the English won. But the English, took such a toll on the English that they you know took a toll financially in English that after the French and Indian War they started taxing the colonies. Then the colonies start to rebel and then we had the Revolutionary War, right, so it all started here. So we always say the war that made America is not the Revolutionary War, but it's really the French and Indian War.
Story_ID: 633632
Speaker 1: We were talk- talking about 'The War That Made America.' And what were some of the logistical challenges to making that, that production (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, that project first of all cost over $14 million to do, logistically getting to raise the money, was, was really the key. Because the foundation could be--they only committed about half of it up front and then we felt we were gonna get a lot of monies from PBS [Public Broadcasting Service], from the government. And that didn't happen and, and from corporation [Corporation for Public Broadcasting], that didn't happen, so we had to go back and hustle and. At one time we were gonna pull the project, but we got it. Logistics, that was the big--to me, was the biggest logistic. But the filming and the project, then I had to get the right people in the job, then I had, had a couple of individuals who started on the project, who I could see were taking the project in a different direction, had to get them out of there, and really move them and put somebody else in who literally saved it, in fact the lady who's my general manager, a woman named Deb Acklin [Deborah Acklin]. She's executive vice president and general manager today because she saved that project. And she not only saved it, but we came in under budget, we came in with good critical acclaim around the country. And we were able to do that project, logistically on her side was--they--we're a small organization [WQED Multimedia, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. We don't, we don't have people sitting around waiting for the next job, project comes in, we go out and hire people, freelance to do jobs. So understand, we're a very lean organization, so when we brought on this project it was like a snake trying to swallow an elephant. And it took all of our resources in the building, accounting and all sorts of personnel to be able to support it number one. And then to go out and hire all these folks. Logistically we were able to get some land, property donated to us by the Mellon Foundation [Richard King Mellon Foundation, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] up the--Ligonier [Pennsylvania]. That's where primarily it was, a lot of it was shot, some of it was shot with the green screen down in our studio. But essentially that's where it was all done.
Speaker 1: Ligonier, right?
Speaker 2: Ligonier yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, how, how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: You gotta ask me (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay that's all right, we'll some, somebody knows how to--
Speaker 2: Ligonier, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: L-I-G-O-N-I-E-R.
Speaker 1: I just wanted you to say it again at least because you said it kind of fast ant--
Speaker 2: Ligonier. And the Laurel--its actually in the Laurel Highlands up in the Laurel Highlands, that's where Ligonier is located but up in that area, that's where a lot of on the, on the R.K. Mellon [Richard King Mellon] property that's where we shot.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, the--okay yeah the Mellon--
Speaker 2: And actors, it was fun, it was a lot of fun, but we had--
Speaker 1: So, so the budget paid for actors and--
Speaker 2: All that.
Speaker 1: --and crew and--
Speaker 2: Oh crew and everything.
Speaker 1: --all that, yeah.
Speaker 2: All of that it was, it was like a docudrama, you know what we did was try to take--Ken Burns' programs you know you get a lot of pictures and then people sitting by bookshelves. What we did was we actually had acting out you know certain scenes, and then we would have the narrator [Graham Greene], I can't think of the narrator's--off the top of my head. But he would literally they would pause; he would walk out through the screen and stand in and tell you what was going on. "Well, today you know we see General Braddock [Edward Braddock] here, and this where they buried General Braddock, and this is the start of the war [French and Indian War]," and blah, blah and on and so forth. It was, it was terrific.
Speaker 1: Reminds me of 'You Are There,' remember the old--
Speaker 2: Exactly right, that's exactly right, that sort of same production value, right you got it, yeah.
Story_ID: 633633
Speaker 1: And you say that this is what--'Black Horizon' [sic.] has been on, now this is something that was on the air I guess when you got here?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, it was, we, what we did was we've, we got rid of the things that we didn't want, that didn't make sense for us. Kept the things like 'Black Horizons,' with a guy name Rick Sebak who does documentaries, and some of the cooking marathons we do with a local community. We kept them, that's where we invested our money, we didn't invest into big national projects, we invested into things that we have and then also put monies into 'OnQ.' And then we put other monies into other specials that we would do along the way. We're down, we did town hall meetings and things like that.
Speaker 1: Yeah 'OnQ' sounds a lot like 'Chicago Tonight' down at WTTW [WTTW-TV, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: It may be, I probably is (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Very similar.
Speaker 2: Yeah probably, we looked at that show early on; I think 'Chicago Tonight' was an example that we would use for that.
Speaker 1: We count bu- you know spans the whole community--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --and brings stories and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --political analysis--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and what's going on in the--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --community.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and broadcast several times a day--
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly what--
Speaker 1: --so people can see it.
Speaker 2: But it's the basis--TTW's got a great reputation for being a strong local community station. There's a guy named Bill, Bill McCarter [William J. McCarter] who's been (unclear), a good friend of mine. And he, he always felt that that's what he was trying to do, he's trying in fact move away from being even identified as PBS [Public Broadcasting Service].
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so 'OnQ Magazine,' 'Black Horizons,' we talked the doo wop. Now, the 'Doo Wop' series as a fundraiser for even other public and--I mean it's got a life beyond this station.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, well that's who it was designed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In fact--
Speaker 2: You gotta understand we built this as a fundraiser for us, then we were so successful, we now, we're able to use that for fundraisers for other stations. Now to show you the impact at a first 'Doo Wop,' the largest fundraiser for PBS up 'til 'Doo Wop 50' was 'Les Miserables.' It raised $15 million in four years; 'Doo Wop 50' raised $22 million in one year, think about it. Fifteen, four years, twenty-two in one year, that's how a big a hit that was, it's huge. And we made a lot of money out of it, we, it helped us financially, it, it just did so much it ra- it also did for us in this community was it showed people we were not different, we're not your public, your, your grandfather's public broadcasting station. In fact I got a call from--the first time it went on the air; this is the, one of my great moments here. My good friend Jac Venza from WNET in New York [WNET-TV, New York, New York], the executive producer of 'Great Performances' called me up and we're talking. No he call- I called him on something else, he said, "What? You call me to gloat about this 'Doo Wop' stuff you have?" Then he said to me, "Where did you get these artists?" I said, "Jac, that's the problem with public broadcasting. You keep having all this elitist programming on and not having programs about other, other, other genre of programming, that's the problem." We brought in more new members to public broadcasting than any other series in the history of public broadcasting. And not the same typical, I mean I love, I love the classical of music. I love it. But you know there's other stuff that we should be doing--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --here.
Speaker 1: I mean I know people, I, I like public television myself, I watch it all the time.
Speaker 2: Love it.
Speaker 1: But I know people that they only watch, they'll watch it for the 'Doo Wop.'
Speaker 2: Exactly right.
Speaker 1: That's what they watch it for (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly right, exactly.
Speaker 1: And it's built--
Speaker 2: What a great, what a great introduction to public broadcasting. That's it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, people see something that's important to them and their past--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that's important to the nation--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --on public tel- television.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah now that, that so every time that's broadcast in say in a Dayton's [Dayton, Ohio] television say, say well you know public T- TV station it, it you all get you know paid for that program right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We get paid; they make money.
Speaker 1: And then they make money--
Speaker 2: We make money. We sell the tapes, you know and but it all started here, WQED [WQED-TV, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] is where all doo wop was revived. It's the re- doo wop revival is right here.
Story_ID: 633634
Speaker 1: I guess the centerpiece for WQED [WQED-TV, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] in a lot of ways, I mean--would seem the most famous show would be the 'Mister Rogers' Neighborhood' show. Now that was produced here, and that that is like grandfather's (laughter), this is the grandfather of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's the grandfather. Yeah, and the, and the last show was taped in 2002, two thousand--2002, 2001, that was last time it was taped. But with, Fred Rogers' show, his message is really not about your grandfather, it's about those four and five year olds. And every year the new four and five year olds come and the, new, new bunch every year new coming through. So it isn't about your grandfather, it's about those four, five, six, seven year old kids that he's getting the message to. And the message is very strong, you know it's, you know it's a real simple message, you are very special. All the sle- message from, from Fred Rogers really comes out of that, so.
Speaker 1: Now as someone who watches public television, I noticed a change in the way 'Mister Rogers' was perceived in some ways. And I wonder if you had something to do with it, but they were specials produced with Fred Rogers going into the projects talking about violence prevention and--
Speaker 2: That I don't know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) dol- I mean there was, those kinds of things were going on. Now did, you, so you didn't know about it?
Speaker 2: No I didn't do that. I mean I didn't but that Fred Rogers' company resides here [Family Communications, Inc.; The Fred Rogers Company, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: His company is still here, he's, he was right down the hall from me, right down the hall from this office. And he's a separate company, so we had no head, no editorial kind of control--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at all in that project at all, but I will tell you this about Fred. Fred's always been about diversity, have you, you, do you know B. Smith?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: B. Smith, Bab- Barbara Smith whose, owns restaurants in New York [New York] and D.C. [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah she, she had a TV show ['B. Smith With Style'], yeah.
Speaker 2: She grew up not too far from here. She grew up about fifty miles outside of here, she could not get a job as a model as a seventeen year old kid, beautiful young woman. The first job she ever got in public--at all as a model was on Fred Rogers' show modeling gowns, modeling wedding gowns. She was here in my office one day, we talked about that. So Fred's always been about being ahead, one of the greatest stories I always tell about Fred is that when I first arrived here, and that's when I knew he was really a very special human being. Was he and I were down at this city council building [Pittsburgh City County Building] in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], receiving a proclamation for Pittsburgh, for WQED. We walked to the room, the city was, it was proclamation day, it's probably about seventy-five young African American kids there, also there to receive a proclamation for something. Fred walked into the room, and all these kids got up, they started running over to Mister Rogers, and that's when I realized he was something. I said here it is, sixty-eight year old white man and connected to these young African American urban kids. That's when I knew he was very special to me, so Fred, his message is really a, a universal message. But then I also realized that Fred is also a universal person.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very, very, and his spirit still runs through this building.
Speaker 1: Now yeah he passed in, was it two--
Speaker 2: Two- 2003.
Speaker 1: Two thousand and three [2003].
Speaker 2: February 2003.
Speaker 1: Okay, now are they, are there plans to, I know the, the show is rerun on most of the public TV stations around the country. Are any pla- well you have say, well you say his company is separate from WQED anyway. So I guess you don't know if they're planning to try to--
Speaker 2: Well, I know they're trying (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) produce new programs on the same theme--
Speaker 2: Yeah there's, there's a lot of conversation right now about airing his programs, is his programs being aired on PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] stations around the country. There's, there's still some conversation about Fred being, going to other things, I'm not involved in those cons- in those, in those conversations. If they, once they decide what they want to do, will we be working with them and the answer is probably is yes.
Story_ID: 633635
Speaker 1: Are there any big future plans that you have or any, any new ideas that we can get before they hit the regular?
Speaker 2: Well, the big thing for us at WQED [WQED Multimedia, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] is really I call, I call sustainability, you know, to get us to a place where this organization can sustain itself for a long time. I don't wanna come back here after I retire and--in my walker walking in and the place imploded. I wanna make sure that I come back here to a place that's really strong. That would be my legacy here, and I'm trying to build that organization so that it will be here for a long time. It will be able to serve the community, it will provide the sort of positive things that this community needs across--and it, and also will not be your grandfather's public service media company.
Story_ID: 633636
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: I've been very fortunate, I had a chance yesterday, going through a bunch of pictures and you know when you start doing that you say wow I've done this, I, I been really blessed. I, and, and all the things that have been you know called--what would've been negative or the wall in front of me, have all turned out to be very positive. I mean the biggest, I mean I go back to 1963, is that--when I couldn't get a job as an accountant, today I sit on the corporate boards of major corporations today. Sit on the audit committees of major corporations today you know, couldn't get a, you couldn't, couldn't be a CPA [certified public accountant], here I am now dictating to corporations, that, making sure that they get diversity within their corporations I do that now. Running my own company [WQED Multimedia, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], you know, now as opposed to, you know, where I couldn't get, you know I was shining shoes at one time and delivering newspapers. And I'm running a major company today, would I do any different? This has been a great journey. I, you know I wouldn't, you know it says in the old gospels, I wouldn't take nothing for my journey, you know it's, and I've been blessed along the way, and good support.
Story_ID: 633637
Speaker 1: If you had a chance or opportunity or inclination even to advise other television, public television stations around the country. I know Detroit [Michigan], for instance, the--I don't know if it's true or not, I'm not saying that it's, if it's true, I don't know. But I've heard that the public TV station [WTVS-TV, Detroit, Michigan] is run by the suburbs, they really don't, is there's no interest in the local community--
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) as such.
Speaker 2: --I, I, that's unfortunate, but I'll tell you what I had been advi- I mean, I have been advising is the country of Bermuda, we were asked to go to Bermuda. I got a call from the premier [HistoryMaker Ewart Brown] last August as a matter of fact to come down and, they were thinking about setting up their own public local station servicing their local community and they want, they get all the other programs from all over the world. But didn't have anything about Bermudians and he had made a commitment to get it up, I said (unclear), I went down, took part of my team down there and we got it setup. The CITV and it's up and running it has been up and running for--September it had been up almost a year. So that's been, that's something I'm very, very proud of, and we you know, we, we talk to other we, we also just received, we received the last couple years the, I call the community service award for the best public television station in the country. And so that, you know not in the country, but the region, so that is also an example. We get a lot of accolades for being very strong, local public service medium [WQED-TV, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania]. We received Emmys [Emmy Award], this year we received about twenty-three Emmy nominations for our entire region. So we're not out there, I'm not out there telling folks what to do but we are setting an example. And people understand that, and people are now starting to talk about serving the community, serving the local. So I think that, that's help.
Story_ID: 633638
Speaker 1: What are sam- some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: My biggest concern is young African American men, that's the biggest concern that I have. I think if we can solve that part of the problem in our communities, you know all the other things it may- maybe its jobs. But it's also a mental thing here, we got to take, you know I think we, young folks talk about taking responsibility all of that. But some way we got to get away from this sense of acting out what the media on this--especially what the commercial media is telling, what you should be like. That's not being a man, that's, that's not taking care of your families. Those are things that concern. That's the thing that's missing. Women, African American women have done a wonderful job all over, from slavery to where we are today, keeping families together, holding and being responsible, working hard in the communities, but our men have, we got to, we got, the young African American men have got to take a step this way. Communities gotta help a little bit, but it's also there be a mindset change about sense of responsibility. And understanding what real manhood is about, not making babies, that's not what it's about. It's a lot more than that, that's not what my father [George L. Miles, Sr.] was about; my father was about trying to do something with his, you know trying to find a job to support his seven kids. That's what he was concerned himself with, not make a whole bunch of babies.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He made a bunch of babies (laughter), but he made sure he supported them.
Story_ID: 633639
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your family. Now, we talked a little bit about your wife [Janet Miles], now you, you have a daughter [Tammy Miles] too, right?
Speaker 2: I have a daughter who is a, she works now, she's working on her Ph.D., she's, she'll be having a doctorate degree in about a year from now. And she's now working as an assistant principal, last year in Pittsburgh Public Schools. She is a--now working for Pittsburgh board of ed [board of education], and I have a granddaughter who's nine, nine years old. And she, both live up in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], she got a divorce six, seven years ago, and came up to Pittsburgh five years ago. And kind of started a new life for herself, and all the, of all the things that I'm most, most proud of is of her. And what she's done with herself and gotten herself to where she is today.
Story_ID: 633640
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything else we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No, you're doing a good job.
Speaker 1: Okay, well the last question is similar to legacy. Sir how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered, I, I would like to be remembered as a person who, who really cared for his community. Cared about people, did all the right things and made a difference, that's--outwardly I would like to be remembered a person who did that. But I also would like to be remembered as a person who had a lot of fun, who grab life, hugged it and lived it and had a wonderful time at it. That's what I, that's, that's who I am and between the two I think that's, that's what it's about for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, well thank you very much.
Speaker 2: My pleasure, my pleasure, my pleasure.
Story_ID: 633641
Speaker 1: This is my wife, Janet [Janet Miles], and me, picture taken--a portrait taken about two years ago.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is at a fundraiser many years ago when I met Senator Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: This is the hundredth anniversary of Harley Davidson [Harley Davidson Motor Company]. I was in the parade, hundredth anniversary parade for Harley Davidson.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me taken in the sixth grade and when I was a business manager for the school newspaper [at Oakwood Avenue School; Oakwood Avenue Community School, Orange, New Jersey].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me I think at Easter, I can't tell you, it was in the '40s [1940s] and I think that's my [maternal] grandmother's [Victoria Caesar] car behind us. And, and I was all dressed up, I think we're going to church.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my wife and my baby daughter [Tammy Miles] and me when we were probably in our mid-twenties.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay got it. Okay.
Speaker 1: That was a--when I did the New York City Marathon in the early '90s [1990s] with the--as a volunteer with the Achilles Track Club [Achilles International]. And I was finishing up with my group.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a program we did in New York [New York] with major black athletes, we had a reception with--Muhammad Ali was there. And the other gentleman is Darwin Davis [HistoryMaker Darwin N. Davis, Sr.], the senior executive at Equitable [Equitable Life Assurance Society of America; AXA Financial].
Speaker 2: Was that the William Miles [Bill Miles] piece on the black athlete ['Black Champions'] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, exactly right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Who's not related to you, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, I take full credit.
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: This is a picture of August Wilson and my vice president of production, Carolyn Wean, reception that we had here in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: This is at a, a reception called the Elsie Awards and we honored Barbara Bush and Fred Rogers. I'm wearing a sweater because we--and my wife should be wearing pearls because we had pearls in, in the--the dress of the night was sweaters and pearls.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my father, George L. Miles, Sr., and my mother, Eula Miles [Eula Caesar Miles], in their later years.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That was at a retreat in Vail [Colorado] many years ago and one of the activities we had to do was ride up the mountains on, on a horse, so. And that was my horse named Harvey.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This a picture of, a pic--went to China in the early '90s [1990s] and in the back is a picture of the, the terracotta warriors [Terracotta Army, Xi'an, China] and, and my colleagues were there. We were visiting China television stations.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: There's a new movie ['The Mummy: Tomb of the Dragon Emperor'] where they come alive and kill people now you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah is (laughter), is that right?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: This is a fundraiser in New York and I'm with--I think this is when we had--was up in--done at the Apollo Theater [New York, New York], as you can see Henry Kravis who's the chairman of my board. Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and I don't know who the other gentleman is. It may--we talk about unity.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This is an event, event we had here in Pittsburgh with 'Speedy Delivery,' Mr. McFeely [David Newell], where we kicked off the sweater drive for the community. We're raising, getting sweaters, folks to donate sweaters for, for you know for folks who--for the winter.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a project we had with Paul McCartney and--many years ago on go- we did on 'Great Performances,' he was performing. We had a reception and I, of course I took a picture with him.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's my wife, Janet, and Fred Rogers and probably about '95 [1995], 1995.
