Story_ID: 116696
Speaker 1: --Racine Tucker Hamilton and I am the interviewer and Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Today's date is Monday, October 18, 2004, and this interview is taking place in Columbia, Maryland.  Now, if you would, for the record, please tell us your full name, including your middle name, and spell it please?
Speaker 2: On my birth certificate my name is Clara Sylvia Cooke and now I am Clara Sylvia Martin, but I never use the Clara.
Speaker 1: And could you spell it please?
Speaker 2: Clara, C-L-A-R-A, Sylvia, S-Y-L-V-I-A, Cooke, C-O-O-K-E, and Martin, there is no hyphen, Martin is M-A-R-T-I-N.
Speaker 1: And would you please tell us the date and location of your birth?
Speaker 2: I was born on May 2nd at six o'clock in the morning in Baltimore [Maryland] at a black hospital that is no longer there but it was Provident Hospital.
Speaker 1: And what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-eight [1938].
Speaker 1: Now the next couple of questions--oh, and your occupation?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: That's difficult because I've had several.  I, I suppose that--you would say I'm, I'm a human resource specialist.
Speaker 1: And a historian, too, probably, wouldn't you say?
Speaker 2: But I don't get paid--
Speaker 1: Or genealogist?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm a genealogist, but that--when you say occupation, I assume you mean for what did I get--what, what career was I in and that--the history and the genealogy are hobbies.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 116697
Speaker 1: The next couple of questions are just some People magazine-ish type questions, just to kind of help us get to know you a little bit better--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and help us get familiar with the process.  So if you could give me short answers--
Speaker 2: Okay, I'll try.
Speaker 1: --that would be great.  Would you please share with us your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Steak.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Autumn.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yellow.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The Greek Isles.
Speaker 1: Your favorite phrase or saying?  Do you have one?
Speaker 2: The elevator to success is not running.  Take the stairs.
Story_ID: 116698
Speaker 1: Let's begin talking about your mother.  Would you please share with us your mother's name and where she was born and where she grew up as a girl?
Speaker 2: Okay.  She's Clara Marie Evans Cook.  She was born in Baltimore [Maryland] on February 5, 1914.  She grew up in Baltimore and she's still in Baltimore.  She's ninety years old.
Speaker 1: And did she ever share any stories with you about what life was like for her as a girl growing up in Baltimore?
Speaker 2: She did, but not to a great extent.  I know that she liked being in high school at [Frederick] Douglass High School in Baltimore.  I know that she liked the variety of being in the inner city.  She liked the theater.  She liked going to work in Baltimore and the busyness of the city, I believe she liked.  She's not--she doesn't cook.  She sews wonderfully.  She loves to sew.  She can make anything out of thread and, and her mother [Clara Copper Evans] taught her to sew.  But her mother was a cook, good cook, but she didn't teach my mother how to cook.  My mother was more into the, the hand crafts and the arts from--with thread rather than with culinary arts.
Speaker 1: Did she ever talk about any of her classmates at Douglass?  Any--because you know there are quite a few famous African--?
Speaker 2: She talked about Avon Long.  She knew Avon Long.  She talked about Cab Calloway being at Douglass High School.  We lived in the same--she lived in the same neighborhood with Thurgood Marshall and when I was growing up we lived across the street from the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and the York Hotel, which were landmarks in Baltimore, especially during the Civil Rights [Movement], and pre-civil rights.  She talked about [HM] Anne Wiggins Brown, who was an actress and was at Douglass High School, I believe, when she was there.  And she talked about Ethel Waters.  My grandmother had been in some vaudevillian production and it--she was a small thing on the--but Ethel Waters was on the program and they talked about that a lot.
Story_ID: 116699
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother [Clara Marie Evans Cook]?
Speaker 2: My mother is a tremendous worker.  She's very persistent about working.  All her life she has been a doer and a doer with very little resources.  She, she's a very resourceful person because she can take simple things and make something out of them.  She--I didn't have a bought dress until I got married.  She made every dress, she made my bras.  She made clothes for other people in the neighborhood.  She would curl hair on weekends to make a--to make things work.  My father [Emanuel Cook] did not have her going out to work.  He wanted her at home with her four children.  And so she was at home but she was still working very, very hard at home.  My father died when I was sixteen.  My brothers [Stephen Cook, Eugene Cook, Benjamin Cook] were eight, ten and twelve, and my mother went out to work at that time, but she still made all the clothes, she made the curtains, she made the chair covers.  She took care of four of her own children and her sister's child without very--in fact, I remember that the first, one of the first jobs she made twenty-six dollars a week in the '50s [1950s].  And--
Speaker 1: What kind of job was it?
Speaker 2: She was running an elevator at a large apartment house on Charles Street in Baltimore.  And there were times when she sent me to college and I'm a first generation college student, when she would walk to work at three o'clock in the afternoon and so she'd have enough money to send me to school, but then she--at eleven o'clock when she got off, she'd take the bus home or the streetcar, but always working.  And a problem now is that she can no longer work and that causes her some psychological issues that she has to deal with because she--we were never taught to, to just sit around or relax.  She always taught us to work and that was the way to get out of the housing project, the way to achieve.  Education was very important to her, too.  She always talked about not being able to go to college and how much she wanted to go to college.
Speaker 1: What did she want to study in college?  Did she-- (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes.  She wants to--she wanted to study dress design, clothing design.  She wanted to be, she--she makes, she can make anything.  When I would see something on the front of Life magazine and I'd say, "Mother, I like this dress," she'd start to drape the materials and she'd make me that dress.  I could call her at lunchtime from school and tell her that I had a date that evening and when I got home, I'd have a new dress for that date and I could tell her exactly how I wanted it.  So I had lots of clothes that she made with umbrella covers to match or hats to match.  She even crocheted my gloves to match my outfits.
Story_ID: 116700
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit now about your father starting--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --with his name and where he was born, where he grew up as a boy?
Speaker 2: His name was Emanuel Levi Cook and he was born on December 27, 1914.  He was raised in Baltimore [Maryland].  Oh, I'm not so sure about that.  I believe he was born in Newport News, Virginia but he came to Baltimore before he was one-year old.  He went to school in Baltimore.  He graduated from [Frederick] Douglass High School in 1933.  He worked as a bellhop at some of the hotels in Baltimore and then I remember one day his coming home being rather sad and my mother [Clara Marie Evans Cook] telling us that he had just lost his job.  But he found another job at a place called Hynson, Westcott & Dunning [Inc.], which was a pharmaceutical company and he worked there in some menial job until he became a chemical technician during World War II [WWII].  He was there when they made some of the first penicillin in the early '40s [1940s]-
Story_ID: 116701
Speaker 1: You were talk--and so, and your father [Emanuel Cook] ended up becoming a chemical technician at a pharmaceutical--
Speaker 2: Yeah, (unclear).
Speaker 1: --company [Hynson, Westcott & Dunning Inc.].
Speaker 2: And during the early part, during World War II [WWII], they made penicillin, they made Mercurochrome [merbromin].  Some of the products that we now take for granted, he would come home with exciting stories about how they had just come up with something, the team that he was working on.  He was not one of the chemists or one of the professionals, but he would get very excited about the products they were producing.  And his job, I believe, was so important that he did not go into World War II.  He received some deferment because of the kind of work he was doing.
Speaker 1: Do you remember when he came home, the story that he told about penicillin?
Speaker 2: I don't remember the story that he told about penicillin, but I do remember he was coming home one day with a microscope and he taught us to use the microscope.  And we would gather around the kitchen table and we would--he would show us things, we would find a drop of water or some bug that we would put on the plate, the glass plate.  And he would tell us how to use the microscope.  He also would draw cartoons for us and, I believe, he was very precise.  During World War II, he would take us to the waterfront and show us the boats that were docked there and would tell us to look at the flags on the ships.  And when we got back home he would give us the atlas and it was a big, big gigantic books with lots of pictures and we would have to find the country to whom that flag belonged, to which that flag belonged and that was sort of a Sunday ritual.  He would take us for walks.  He'd take us to the park and he--a band would be playing.  They would have free bands and orchestras playing in the parks in Baltimore [Maryland] in what we called The Squares.  And we would have to identify the musical instruments.  He would say, "Now, that's a kettle drum and that's an oboe and that's--" and so, by the time I was eight, nine years old, I was supposed to be able to name all of the instruments in the orchestra.  And as I got older I really could appreciate what we thought was just a fun afternoon out, but with him it was a learning experience.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your father?
Speaker 2: Quiet, serious, pensive, artistic.  I think those would--he didn't say very much.  Now, when he did say something, you listened, but he didn't say very much.  I don't remember his raising his voice, a very--my father's family is sort of a quiet, calm family.
Story_ID: 116702
Speaker 1: Do you know how your parents met?
Speaker 2: They [Clara Marie Evans Cook and Emanuel Cooke] were in high school together [at Frederick Douglass High School in Baltimore, Maryland].  My father had tuberculosis.  I believe at one time they were in the same class.  But in the early '30s [1930s], I suppose, tuberculosis was very prevalent and he had tuberculosis and was out of school for a year.  So he graduated a year after my mother.
Story_ID: 116703
Speaker 1: Ms. Cooke Martin, how far back can you trace your ancestry?
Speaker 2: To 1798.
Speaker 1: Tell us little bit about your ancestry, especially, do you know if your people came from free people or slaves or--?
Speaker 2: Let me start with my paternal side.  My paternal side, I believe, were slaves.  I haven't documented the slave family from which they came, but I can document someone who was born about 1798, and says that she was born in Virginia.  They--I believe they were slaves in Virginia.  I'm told that some of them come from some Native American ancestry and, indeed, my grandmother's [Laura Quarles Cook] middle name was Pocahontas and her last name was Quarrels [Quarles] and whenever I see members of the family, they have a look that is not necessarily African.  My mother's [Clara Marie Evans Cook] side of the family comes off of the Lloyd Plantation, which is one of the largest, if not the largest plantation, in the State of Maryland.  And the Lloyds were very well-to-do.  On several occasions, they became, members of the family, became governors of the state of Maryland.  And my mother's family, the Coppers from Talbot County, Maryland, came off of the Lloyd Plantation, sometimes called the Wye Plantation, but not to be confused with the Wye House.  And as I said, the Lloyds go back into England and there's a lot of documentation on the Lloyds.  In fact, I've gone through many of their 30,000 items in the Maryland Historical Society and I know what my mother's ancestors wore, what they had to eat and-'cause I can tell when they--when the Lloyds gave any--got rid of any of their, their possessions, they recorded it in a disposition book.  So when they disposed of five pounds of pork, they wrote it down to whom it got--they gave it to.  And Matthew Copper would get five pounds of pork.  I also know that he got beef only on holidays and at Christmas-time. So her family, her maternal side, came off of the, off the Lloyd Plantation.  But the Dixons, her grandmother was a Dixon.  I believe that they were aligned with the Quakers, but at some time with free blacks.  I can find no--I found some Dixons in the census and I believe that my mother's grandfather, Charles Dixon, was a free black in Caroline County, Maryland.
Story_ID: 116704
Speaker 1: Did your parents or your grandparents ever share any stories with you about the family and do--like are there any legends or that kind of thing in your family history?
Speaker 2: I believe that there are legends, but I did not know them when I was growing up as a child.  My father's [Emanuel Cook] mother [Laura Quarles Cook] was one person who would talk about her mother and her ancestry.  But my mother's [Clara Marie Evans Cook] family was displeased with the Eastern Shore and did not care to talk about it.  But I found some stories about my father's family, not from my father, but because I'd been doing some genealogical research and I found some of his cousins in Virginia, they now live in Blackstone, Virginia and they knew my grandmother's grandmother, who was born in 1830.  She didn't die until 1926.  And so they were with Miranda, and one of the stories they tell me that Miranda told them was that when she was nine years old, she was sold.  She was--they stood her on a big--they turned a big, black pot over and put her on top of the pot, so that she could be tall enough for the buyers who had come to the slave auction to see her.  And she was happy because she thought she was going for a buggy ride.  And when she--what she didn't realize until she went for the buggy ride and was never returned to her mother of just how--that she was being sold.  She didn't understand that.  But she lived to tell her grandchildren and her great-grandchildren about that experience. Another experience they tell me was when they were growing up in, in the household with Miranda, a special relationship that Miranda had with a Mr. Talley.  And I don't know if you want me to go into this now but I--if you don't, just tell me and I'll stop.  Mr. Tal--when I was looking at my grandmother's marriage certificate, 1874--no, my great-grandmother's marriage certificate, 1874, I found that she was married in Mr. Talley's home.  And my grandmother was very fair, but I found pictures of her sisters and brothers, who were not very fair.  And when I asked them for these stories about what happened, I went down one day and I said, "Well, who is Mr. Talley?"  And everyone got quiet.  And then they told me that one of the stories Miranda used to tell was about her relationship with Mr. Talley.  And when Mr. Talley would get drunk or Mr. Talley wouldn't behave, his wife would come and get Miranda.  This is after emancipation and Miranda would go over and calm Mr. Talley down.  We believe that, perhaps, some of Miranda's children were fathered by Mr. Talley.  They told me about being sharecroppers.  They told me how they bought the land one generation out of slavery.  An ancestor owned eighty acres and when I questioned them about how he got the eighty acres, they told me that--one story that I, I like to tell is that I asked them, "Well, how did, how did your father get so much land, 240-some acres one generation out of slavery?"  And they told me that he made his own mill.  He would--one of the children would walk in a circle with the, the mule and they would grind corn meal and mill their own wheat and everything.  And all that they needed for themselves and the ten children they used.  But anything above and beyond that, they would go out on the road and they would sell to other people and that they would let other families in the area use their mill for a fee.  Everything above and beyond what they used was savings and so they couldn't spend that money.  They would save it and then buy another piece of land.  So they had enough wisdom to buy land and they would tell me how they had acquired ten acres here and ten acres there because of their value system.
Speaker 1: What kinds of stories did they tell you about sharecropping?  Do you remember any of those?
Speaker 2: I don't remember that they told me.  Now I may, I may be making a mistake.  I don't really mean that they worked for somebody.  I don't know that they worked for somebody else sharecropping after about 1880.  I believe, though, that they worked on someone else's land before 1880, because they didn't get the land until about 1880.
Story_ID: 116705
Speaker 1: Did they have any stories about blacks in-- passing, like blacks who passed?  Do you remember any stories like that?
Speaker 2: Well I've got a story about blacks passing.  My grandmother [Laura Quarles Cook] was extremely fair and when I was--
Speaker 1: Miranda's daughter?
Speaker 2: No, this is Miranda's granddaughter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Miranda's granddaughter, Laura, was extremely fair and I'm told that Miranda--I said, "What did Miranda look like?" 'cause I'm the heaviest thing in the family.  All my--my father [Emanuel Cook] weighed 128 pounds and everybody's little, thin.  And I said, "Well, what did Miranda look like?" and they said Miranda looked just like you, which made me feel good.  I said, "Oh, well at least I got, got it from someplace."  But when I was growing up, my grandmother would take me to places and she would tell me not to call--I called my grandmother Bubby.  She would say, "Don't call me Bubby.  Don't say anything when we go into these stores."  And I found out that she was going into stores where black folks couldn't buy things and she would act as if I were a child belonging to someone who worked for her.  And she could go in and buy things that, that I could not buy. But there are some other stories about the people in the area and I've, I've been there.  I spend a lot of time in that part of Virginia, in the southside of Virginia, and maybe, twenty-five years ago, the cousins who--these are my grandmother's cousins, now. Not necessarily my--I'm first cousin, twice removed.  But they talked about getting the land and they built brand new ranch homes on this land.  And a friend of mine went with me and he has a doctorate from Columbia [University, New York, New York] and he went to ask my cousin, who has a seventh grade education, how did--what, what's the rate of mortgage on these houses?  And my cousin didn't know what he was talking about or acted like he didn't know what he was talking about.  And so, finally, he proceeds to explain what a mortgage is and how you get a mortgage rate.  And my cousin looked at him and said, "Man, we paid cash for these houses.  We haven't owed the white man anything since the Civil War."  And so they have--I get the impression that the people there at--while we may think of them as being less-than 'cause they're not as educated, they have figured a way to get 240 acres with--and houses on them without paying a mortgage.  And I asked my friend wouldn't he trade his Ph.D. for the right not to pay a mortgage?  My father would never go back, because they were his country cousins.  But I've learned that everything you get you pay for, there's no free lunch.  And what my father got by coming to the big city was the right not to own property unless somebody wanted to, you know, sell it to you.  And he worked hard and didn't have an automobile, but the, the cousins who stayed in the country knew the value of land.  They always had vegetables and things to, good things to eat, fresh food to eat.  So while we could go to the A&P [Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Company] store, we couldn't tell whether the food was fresh or not.  They had their own way of making it and they're just as well off, if not better than the people who came North and came to the city.  One, one--they love to tell stories and one of the stories is that they was--some men were standing on the corner in Blackstone [Virginia] one day and a man who picked them up on the corner to take them off to do--, I supposed that's sharecropping.  This is how sharecropping got in.  They would go off and do day's work.  The men would work on someone else's farm.  So one day, a guy came by in a horse and buggy and asked them if they knew any good men to, to go to work that day.  And one of the cousins said, "All the good men are over there in the cemetery.  You worked them to death."  And so some of them didn't get on the buggy and go off to farm, but he said he didn't go off to farm because he said all the good men, all the hardworking men were dead and he wasn't going off--he used to say that he'd rather die hungry than die tired.  And he would tell me that in--amidst his stories that he would rather die--die.  Said, "Sylvia, I'm gonna to die hungry but I'm never gonna die tired."  So they would tell me some little vignettes like that in their stories.
Story_ID: 116706
Speaker 1: Let's talk now a little bit about your grandparents.  We talked already a little bit about your grandmother but let's--if we can start with your maternal grandparents starting with their names and just what you recall about-- (unclear).
Speaker 2: Okay.  My maternal grandparents were Clara Copper Evans. She married Evans.  And she was born in Talbot County, Maryland and she came to Baltimore [Maryland], I believe, about 1908 or 1909.  And the family, of course, wanted to move to the city for jobs and that kind of thing.  She came to Baltimore because her mother's--the white family that her mother was attached to came to Baltimore to start a shoe manufacturing company.  They were the Dixons and the Bartletts that, I believe, were Quakers.  And when they came up, her mother came and she of course came.  She married my grandfather in about 1909, and he was Harrison Evans, Harrison Martin Evans.  We believe that his father came from Portugal.  My mother tells me that he looked like a wasp and he was as ornery as a wasp.  And that he would tell these, these stories but it's hard to tell the fact from the fiction.  But on one census I found that he was born in Portugal.  On another one it said Puerto Rico.  But he was once again, he--I went to Portugal 'cause his name was Henry and I couldn't believe that anybody from Portugal would be named Henry until I went to Portugal, and as we went down to the waterfront, there was a statue of Henry the Navigator and I said, "Ah, there was a Henry in Portugal."  But Henry doesn't seem like a very exotic name and I imagined Portuguese to be exotic people.  He came into this country--we know he was not born in this country.  He came into this country in about 1884, and he married a person named Mary, and, I believe, her last name was Butler, in Baltimore.  Now, I believe, too, that she had three children before he came.  And when he came, they married and they had another set of children.  Harrison Evans perhaps did not go beyond the seventh grade.  My mother says he did not go beyond the seventh grade, but he was a great story teller and a very romantic individual.  And I mean romantic in the, in the sense of European romanticism.  He always had long fingernails.  He was immaculately dressed.  He always wore--he was dashing.  He wore a tie.  He was light complected with straight black hair, which, in the black community then, meant something.  And he always--during the summer, he wore white shirts and white slacks.  He was never--on both my maternal and my paternal side, how you looked was very important.  They--no matter how poor we ever were, everybody had very nice looking clothes and they would--you had to be matched.  You couldn't wear certain colors and there was always this standard.  And I understand that that standard was two or three generations before I came along.  And so my grandfather had menial jobs.  He worked for dairies, he worked for Western Maryland Dairy and he drove a truck.  I've been told that he drove a truck in World War I.  But my fear is that my grandfather told such elaborate stories that they could not be documented.  As I said, he was a romanticist.  He wrote poetry.  I have a box of poetry, must be twelve inches high, of single pages that he wrote.  I found that he wrote a poem to one lady this year and five years later, he wrote it to another lady and twenty years later, he wrote the same poem to another lady.  And--but he was very flamboyant.  He wore exotic perfumes.  He kept his nails manicured, kept them long.  But on the other side, he was, he was a very--he was poetic and, perhaps too poetic, at the time to support his family like my grandmother expected to be supported.  So she did day's work.  She worked for a family called the Cohns.  They lived in Pikesville [Maryland].  And Mr. Adolph Cohn was the president of the Sun Life Insurance Company, a Baltimore life insurance company.  And they lived in Pikesville with the Hechts and the Hutzlers, who owned some of the big department  stores in Baltimore.  And my grandmother lived-in for some time with them and worked.  And she worked very hard doing domestic work and some of that was because my grandfather did not always have a steady job.  My mother [Clara Marie Evans Cook] tells me that they would move every six weeks because somebody didn't pay the rent in Baltimore and--or my grandmother would lose his job.  But I think that that is a byproduct of the climate in which we lived, where black women could do work and their madams and the people they worked for could give them steak, could give them wonderful clothes and things that their husbands could not buy for them.  And so the husbands were even--they felt demeaned by the fact that their wives could get some other things that they couldn't.  So this is the kind of environment my mother grew up with, a hardworking mother and a father who did the best he could.
Story_ID: 117459
Speaker 1: Okay.  So Ms. Cooke Martin, let's talk a little bit about your paternal grandparents, starting with their names.
Speaker 2: My paternal?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  They are Laura Quarles, Laura Pocahontas Quarles, and John Samuel Cook.  They both originated-well, they were born in, in and around Blackstone, Virginia.  I believe that my grandfather grew up in Blackstone.  I've seen the road that he lived on called the Blacktop Road.  And I thought they called it Blacktop because it had been surfaced but it was called the Blacktop Road even before they had asphalt.  He--his family--I understand the Cooks came in to Virginia by the waterways and whenever I find--when I've traced the family back they were near the waterway.  My grandfather when he came to Baltimore [Maryland] in 1914, 1915, was a stevedore.  He worked at the Baltimore waterfront.  I remember him coming home in this big brown jacket and he had a shovel.  And I was told that that's what he used on the--when he worked down with the boats.  And, evidently, they were loading coal and wood and products down--the waterfront didn't look like it does today.  But my grandfather bought a house.  He was, evidently, very frugal.  He came to Baltimore.  He lived on, I'll think of the name of the street in a minute.  It starts with a P, but it just escaped me.  He lived in East Baltimore and he became a Mason soon after he became--came to Baltimore.  And he was a minister and he went to the First Baptist Church in Baltimore, in East Baltimore.  In about 1923, he bought a house.  He bought a large house, a ten -room house on Stricker Street, 524 Stricker Street and that was right near a big square, as we called it in Baltimore.  It was Edmondson Square which was a square of land about two blocks by two blocks.  And so for an inner-city family in 1923, while they didn't think so, I've learned that it was a big thing.  He married my grandmother, as I said earlier, she was extremely fair.  She had a lot of hair and-- you'll see this picture of her a little bit later, but they raised ten children in this house.  And the house had a third floor with four rooms on the third floor.  On the second floor, there were only three bedrooms but one of them was extremely large.  My grandmother in that bedroom had a double bed, two very large wardrobes when you called them chifforobes.  She had a living-room set that was her first living-room set.  It was a loveseat with two chairs in this room.  She had her vanity and her clothes.  And I used to just love to go into that room and she wouldn't let you sit on her bed.  That was a standard.  You didn't sit on the bed.  She wouldn't let you use her hairbrush or her comb.  She didn't like anybody to use the things on her vanity.
Story_ID: 117460
Speaker 1: But my grandfather [John Cook] kept--I thought that this was a special hideaway.  He would open up the chifforobe doors, the big armoire we call them now, the big doors and he would go in there with his broad back.  I couldn't see around him but he would come out with peppermint pillows, little peppermints in squares.  They looked like little pillows that used to come up on the ends like a pillow but they were candy, peppermint candy.  And they were big, you couldn't put a whole one in your mouth.  You had to bite into it.  And then un--unlike the little Brach's peppermint things we get today, these were big, maybe one and a half inch by one and a half inch.  And so we would always stand behind him and, and wait until he turned around because we knew he'd have a treat for us and it was usually a peppermint.  But he'd come out with suckers and different things that he had bought us. He was a gruff kind of a guy and my cousins and I were talking recently about why he was so gruff.  We think that, perhaps, when he was growing up, he had been mistreated, and we think too-- that many blacks came out of slavery with some of the same behavior patterns that they learned from their masters during slavery; that innately he wasn't a mean person, but he had picked up these behavioral characteristics that led him to seem rough, you know.  And so some of his children, even, you know he--they were, they'd have to stand up to him because he would say you can't go out tonight, you know.  He wasn't--he didn't appear to be kind, but to us grandchildren he was a patsy.  He would--I would stay with him sometimes-well, let me back up.  When my mother [Clara Marie Evans Cook] and father [Emanuel Cook] married, we lived for my first three years with my grandparents.  And I would go--and my grandparents, my paternal grandparents lived across the street from my maternal grandparents [Clara Copper Evans and Harrison Evans].  And so I would go down and Granddad, my father's father, would pour coffee in his saucer and let it cool so that I could sit on his knee and sip some coffee with a spoon.  Just enough to, you know--so I knew I was special because he'd let me drink coffee.  No one else in the world would let me drink coffee.  But then, when I would finish breakfast with my paternal grandparents, I could run across the street to my maternal grandparents and I could sit on Pap-Pap's knee, that's Harrison Evans, but I called him Pap-Pap, and he would, you know, pamper me and take me for walks and take me to the corner store and buy me anything.  So I had a very fortunate childhood. I'm the oldest grandchild.  In this household, there were ten though.  As my uncles married and moved out of the household, there were still uncles there for a while in fact, until World War II or after.  And so they would spoil me.  But the house was very large.  In the living room, you could get a whole living-room set, a piano.  You had two living-room sets, actually.  My grandmother [Laura Quarles Cook] had two sofas and chairs and a fireplace and the piano.  And then the, the way the space between the living room and the dining room was big enough for another loveseat.  And then there was a dining room with the old radio and she would listen to 'Portia Faces Life,', 'As the World Turns,' some of the same soaps I hear on television now.  My grandmother would sit--you had to be very quiet when she was listening to her soap operas.  She was a cook, not by name, but by profession and because she did fix wonderful food.  My grandmother could make rolls that--like no one else could make.  Seemed they would rise overnight and on Sunday you'd have rolls for breakfast.  And when I found her family in Virginia, to regress a little bit, I--they asked me, and this is a story that I should have said a few minutes ago.  But they would ask me, says, "What do you want to eat?"  And I said, "Well, what do you have?"  "Saud, you want a sandwich?"  And I said, "Well, what kind of lunch meat do you have?"  And they said, "Lunch meat?  What do you mean lunch meat?  If you want chicken, we take it off the chicken and if you want ham we take it off the pig.  And if you want beef we're taking it off the cow.  We don't have any artificial meat."  They called lunch meat artificial meat.  And as the cousins in Virginia, my grandmother would have biscuits for breakfast, cornbread for lunch and rolls for dinner.  You didn't have any artificial bread, either, you know, 'cause she would make it all.  So she could make wonderful dishes.
Story_ID: 117461
Speaker 1: Now my mother's [Clara Marie Evans Cook] family is from Maryland, as I said, and she considered my father's [Emanuel Cook] family as being from the South.  And there was a difference in the way they ate.  My father's family would cook cabbage until it was brown or cook greens until they were soft.  My mother's family ate like my grandmother [Clara Copper Evans], who worked for the Jews, and so things weren't cooked the same way.  But I could go to my paternal grandparents' [Laura Quarles Cook and John Cook] house and have some good old, you know, home cooking, some good old greens and some greasy greens, my aunt would call them.  Whereas, my mother would just put a pat of butter on the spinach, my other grandmother would have ham hocks and the greasy greens.  And so I would enjoy being with her.  My maternal [sic, paternal] grandmother was very into her family.  My mother's mother was a work, worker.  My father's mother was a caretaker.  She cared for her children.  She cut her boy's food up on the plates even when they were grown.  She pampered me and cut food up.  She was--I don't know that--she did work but I've never--she didn't work during my lifetime.  And--but she was there doing the washing, the ironing.  I remember wash day.  Wash day was a big occasion.  The house smelled differently.  There was bluing and you'd blue--bluing caused the clothes to be white.  It was something that you'd melt in the water, caused the water to be blue.  But on wash day, she had a ringer washing machine but you would still--she would still pull, have--take out these big silver colored tubs and she would--we had a manual water heater.  It was not in the basement, it was in the kitchen and you'd light it.  It had--it was a gas heater. You would light the gas with a match and the water would get hot and she would pour it into this big tub and that would be the first soaking of the clothes.  And then she'd put some of them in the washing machine, but some of them would still wash in this, this big tub.  And so it was a, it was an all day long process just bluing them, soaking them, washing them, rinsing them and then hanging them on the line and then going out at the end of the day and bringing them in the house.  So the entire kitchen on Mondays would smell like bleach, bluing, lye soap.  And then there was the washboard and you would have to, you know, rub the clothes on the washboard.  You put the lye soap on the washboard and then you'd move the clothes up and down on the wash board.  Sometimes your knuckles--I couldn't do it 'cause I was the only grand--I was the oldest grandchild but the only granddaughter that they had for a while.  And they didn't want my hands getting messed up scrubbing on the board.  But it was still fun to mess in this water and be a part of this process during wash day.
Speaker 2: Would your uncles help your grandmother on wash day?
Speaker 1: No my--in my, on my paternal side, the men were men and the women were women.  My mother--my father never did anything inside the house.  My mother never did anything outside the house for a while.  And my uncles were the same way. They did not--my grandmother had six boys and four girls and the girls might help but the boys never helped in the house to my knowledge.  They went out.  They went to the market, they did the shopping, perhaps, but not any of the housework.  That was for the girls.  They didn't even fix their own plates.  The girls would fix the plates.  My last aunt, last living aunt died a couple of years ago and the one before died in 1996.  And until 1996, she still cut my uncle's food up.  They're in their seventies and the girls still fixed the plates, cut the food up and served the food, and the boys just sit and partake.  I was in Africa in a Maasai village and we asked the men, who were sitting on the fence, "What did the women do?"  The women took care of the children.  We said, "Who built the mud huts?"  The women build the mud huts.  Who feeds the children?  "The women."  Who takes care of the goats?  "The women."  We said, "What did you do?"  They said, "We built the fence around the village" and then they sat on the fence.  And we said, "Oh, just like the guys on the corner these days."  Just like my uncles, they were sitting there waiting for the women to--they bought the food and they brought it in the house and then they sat and waited for my aunts to serve them.  So it occurred to me that perhaps all of the tales that we tell about the black male, especially in the heart of the city, has not changed for a few thousand years.  It's just like it was in the Maasai village in Kenya.
Story_ID: 117462
Speaker 1: Ms. Cooke Martin, let me ask you, what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: You know I know I remember when I was two years old.  I may remember even before I was two years old because I drew--I moved from my grandmother's [Laura Quarles Cook] when I was three.  But I can tell you exactly where my crib was on the third floor of my grandmother's house.  I can draw and I did for my aunt in about 1995, and I told her where all the furniture was in the house before I moved at the age of three.  I remember--I know that I know when I was two because my grandmother gave me two dresses and I know exactly what they look like.  One was pink flowers and one was blue flowers and they had little puff sleeves.  But I think that I can remember even back farther than that second birthday because I know where my crib was and I know where the lamps and the telephones and things were in the house.
Story_ID: 117463
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your growing up.  Can you kind of give us an idea of what holidays were like in your house?  Were they very special occasions?  What were they like in your house growing up as a small girl?
Speaker 2: Holidays were special occasions and I mentioned earlier that my maternal grandmother [Clara Copper Evans] was a worker, but my paternal grandmother [Laura Quarles Cook] was very family-oriented.  And usually we were at my father's [Emanuel Levi Cook] mother's--my father's family, with my father's family for holidays.  Now there were ten children in the family and my father was the first one to have children.  He had four children, but we were always at my paternal grandmother's house and it was a big house, as I mentioned earlier.  And so it could--we could always be there. After World War II, when the sons came back and there were--there was even a ping pong--the living room was big enough with all the furniture to put a ping pong table in the living room.  So there would be uncles and cousins.  And my father's sisters could cook so there was always freshly baked bread.  There were always Christmas presents.  And then ten aunts and uncles and--well nine, one died when I was about four years old but just a house full of people.  And that tradition carried on until the 1990s because when my grandmother died, my Aunt Elizabeth took over that role and every Sunday in the '80s [1980s] and the '90s [1990s], there would be people from church, there would be twenty, thirty people for dinner on Sunday, so holidays and Sundays were big occasions.  My grandfather [John Cook] was a minister and his church was right across the street.  So Sunday afternoons at my grandmother's all the church people would be coming and so the house was open on holidays and Sundays, just lots of family, games, discussion, food.  You know, it never occurred to me that we were poor because it was always food.  My aunt says she can remember having nothing but the chick--the backs of the chickens after we all left.  But my grandmother made sure that company had and that--just a big family relationship.  And I still value family because of those experiences at my paternal grandparents' homes.  My father also would walk us to his mother and father's house every--if he didn't walk us to the inner harbor, he walked us somewhere on Sunday afternoon which was his way of passing down to another generation this value of family.  And he would walk us out Dolphin Street in Baltimore [Maryland] and I'm thinking that we would go ten, at least ten blocks out, Dolphin Street, Harlem Avenue and through Edmondson Square to my grandmother's house for these festive occasions.  In-yeah, we would all--we would just about walk.  Now when we got to be four of us and perhaps my mother was expecting another child that couldn't walk, they would take the number twenty-one trolley and get off and walk about two or three blocks to my grandmother's house.
Story_ID: 117464
Speaker 1: Could you give us your siblings' names and their birth order--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --including yourself?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest, that's May 2, 1938.  My brother Steve is next and he was born December 2, 1942.  And then I--and I'm hoping that I get these right.  I've got the family history, the public--
Speaker 1: No, that's fine.  If you can just give us their names and their birth order--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --you don't have to give us the birthday.
Speaker 2: Well then there's Eugene.  Eugene was born Dec--on April 27.  He is two years younger than Steve and then there's Benjamin who was born on January 13.  And he's about a year and a half to two years younger than Eugene.  So there's Steven Levi, Eugene Noland and Benjamin Martin Cook, my three brothers.  Now when I was-well, my mother [Clara Marie Evans Cook] raised another child, her sister's child who is Brenda and I don't want to leave Brenda out.  Brenda Priscilla Smith lived with us from the time she was six until she married.
Story_ID: 117465
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you tell us the name of the street that you grew up on and kind of describe your community for us?
Speaker 2: I lived at 524 Stricker Street which was my grandmother's house, big ten-room house, three stories in the--off of Edmondson Avenue in Baltimore [Maryland].  And when I was three years old I moved to Mc, to the McCulloh Projects.  The McCulloh Homes, it was called, was a brand new project.  It was built at a--in about 1941, it opened and we were the first, one of the first families to live there.  I just did an article for a historical journal on what life was like in the projects in the '40s [1940s] so I know that people moved in not with moving vans but with horse and cart, they moved their furniture in.  It was a two-bedroom apartment at 418 Manse Court and we were very happy because the floors in the projects were cement floors.  There were no wooden floors for rats to gnaw through so you didn't have mice, you didn't have rats, unlike some other places in the surrounding neighborhood.  You had central heat.  We had big picture glass windows rather than the windows with sashes.  And my mother was very grateful for that kind of living without the rundown old houses that people lived in, in those days.  While it was an apartment, each person had their own front door and there was a down--you'd go into one front door and there would be a downstairs first floor apartment.  We went upstairs to the second and third floor of the building and we had a two-bedroom apartment there.  So I had my own room until my brother came along.  We had central heat.  We had an ice box and I understand young people don't know what an ice box is, but the ice man would come twice a week and my mother would hang in the window a card.  And if I remember it was a green, dark green card with white numbers and it would five or ten or twenty and that told the ice man how much ice to deliver.  And they would come with a big pick that would hold this big block of ice and they would deliver the ice according to the side of the card that she would have visible and he would bring the ice in.  I was a little too young to empty the pan but ice would melt and go down in a pan under the ice box and you'd have to take it out every night and empty it and put the pan back.  And if you didn't the ice would melt and you'd come down in the morning, there'd be water all over the floor.  In the McCulloh Homes, I felt quite fortunate because the York Hotel [Baltimore, Maryland], which was the only hotel for--big hotel for blacks, there were some other hotels in something like a boarding house.  Well, this was a big hotel, had a ballroom called the Blue Room and it was the only hotel, as I said, for blacks.  So when the Baltimore Elite Giants, the baseball teams, when Jackie Robinson, came to town, when Little Richard [Penniman] came to town, when Sugar Chile Robinson, when Esther Phillips came they all stayed, Dinah Washington, they stayed at the York Hotel.
Story_ID: 117466
Speaker 1: Did you ever get a chance to see them?
Speaker 2: I saw them coming and going but not--but we would go--I lived a few blocks from the Royal Theater on Pennsylvania Avenue [Baltimore, Maryland].  So the people that I would go see at the Royal on stage, I could come home and view them going and coming out of my bedroom window.  When my mother [Clara Marie Evans Cook] would punish me, and my mother could punish you, she only remembered holidays.  If you did something wrong in March, she'd say stay in until Easter.  And you would do something two weeks later, she would say you're punished until the Fourth of July.  And then in June, you do something, you'd be punished until Labor Day.  And it would go on, but I didn't mind.  I learned to read and I could excel in reading cause I got punished, I could--but I would go to my room and lean on my window sill and watch the celebrities come and go out of the--York Hotel in luscious gowns and I would say, "Oh I'm going to have that when I grow up."  You'd see limousines roll up because that's the place where black people went.  Now, on the other side of the--the York Hotel took up half a block.  On the other side, the other half of the block was a beauty shop and the NACCP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Baltimore Headquarters. Of course, there was Walter [White]--, Thurgood Marshall going in and out.  Around--
Speaker 1: Did you know who they were?
Speaker 2: I did not know who they were.  I knew they were the lawyers who were working but around the corner--I lived in Manse Court.  In Watty Court, there was Donald Murray and his family and Donald Murray was the first black to graduate from the University of Maryland Law School [Baltimore, Maryland].  And they--there was a big case with Thurgood Marshall getting him, Donald Murray, into the law school.  Two doors from me, Donald's wife--Donald Murray's wife was named Rosa and across the street from me in the projects, Rosa Walker Murray's mother and father lived.  And two doors from me, her sister, Lorraine, lived and I would baby sit with the nieces and nephews.  So there was this before the, the national Civil Rights Movement, I was growing up in a neighborhood with Thurgood Marshall and Walter White and Donald Murray and these issues of--concerning people that I was around.  I lived not very far from Sharp Street [Memorial United] Methodist Church which was the first Methodist Church for blacks in this country.  And there was a lot of active, community actively participate--participants in the neighborhood.  So when civil rights came along in the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s], it was rather routine for our neighborhood.  There was Douglas Memorial Church [formerly, the Madison Avenue Methodist Episcopal Church, Baltimore, Maryland] was, which was highly active in the community and Union Baptist Church where Harvey Johnson had once been a preacher and just a lot of activity in that neighborhood in Baltimore.  Emerson Julian was in the neighborhood and he was related to Percy Julian, the famous chemist and so these were household names.  The Walkers, I believe, were somewhat related to Leslie Uggams and when Leslie was playing at the Royal she'd go over to the Walkers.  And so I felt quite fortunate growing up in a housing project in this neighborhood--
Story_ID: 117467
Speaker 1: But did you appreciate it then or was it later in life (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I, I, no, I appreciated it then.  I told you, my father [Emanuel Cook] took us for walks every Sunday.  I could walk up Utah Place and see the big brownstones and I would just marvel at them.  The first monument of Francis Scott Key sits on Utah and Lanvale Street and it's a woman, I guess she's liberty or something in a boat.  And it's gold-gilded and I would walk by and just be in awe when I was a child at the big brownstones and I would just say I'm going to get a house like that.  I'm going to--and then we would go to the waterfront and we'd look at people coming and going in their yachts and their boats, as well as the rats coming from the banana boats and the watermelon boats.  But I felt that I was rich, indeed.  Another thing that caused me to feel very fortunate was the Enoch Pratt Library. When I was four years old my mother [Clara Marie Evans Cook] took me down, I knew how to write my name, and I got a library card.  And I could walk from the McCulloh Homes to the Enoch Pratt Library.  I, I thought I mean going to the Enoch Pratt Library was like going to heaven and I could walk there even as a child, six, seven years old, I went to that library.  And I got to be so well known at the library that they let me go upstairs.  You couldn't go upstairs until you were fourteen.  You went to the children's department.  But when you were fourteen, you could go to the adult department.  When I was about ten, they let me go to the adult department.  And one summer, because I did not have--know the relatives in Virginia, because I could not afford to take summer vacations, I would go to the library.  And one summer, I decided that I was going to France.  So I went to the library and I read everything that I could on France.  They had a slide, they had slides and you could take the slides out at the library and use them.  You couldn't borrow them but you could use them there at the library and I would look at Napoleon [Bonaparte], the place where Napoleon was buried and I would look at the Eiffel Tower and I would look at all the landmarks in Paris.  And when I went back to my elementary school I remembered standing up and telling people that I had been to Paris this summer.  And I'm thankful that my teacher let me talk and didn't tell everybody that I was a liar because she must have known that I did not go to Paris.
Speaker 1: You sounded like you did-- (unclear).
Speaker 2: This poor kid from the housing--but I had pictures, I had copies of things, I had a report and she let me go on and on.  But that's how valuable being in that neighborhood was.  I remember going to the Walter's Art Gallery and you went through this wonderful stone--marble building with granite and all this.  And when you went inside there was an Egyptian mummy and I knew in the fourth grade that I was going to Egypt because I, I was a, I've always been a dreamer and I lived in that inner-city environment that promoted my dreaming.  But Walters Art Gallery, the Baltimore Museum of Art--close to the downtown, close to the [Baltimore] City Hall is the Peale Museum [Municipal Museum of the City of Baltimore], the Sharp Street United Methodist Church, Union Baptist, the parades would come out Dolphin Street.  Every Sunday afternoon, as soon as my mother would put dinner on the table there would be the Sampson Brooks Lodge or the Elks Lodge and parades coming down the street.
Story_ID: 116960
Speaker 1: Tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up and remind you of your childhood.
Speaker 2: Sights, the Arab, Arabers [sic, Arabs], the people who came through the neighborhood selling vegetables, fish on Fridays with their horse-drawn carts, that was a sight and a smell.  It depends on what they were selling.  If they had oranges and bananas it was a good smell.  If they had fish, then you knew it was Friday and they were selling fresh fish.  And they were also interesting sounds because the Arabers would hawk, they would call out their wares.  They would say, and you couldn't understand them at first.  It sounded like another language.  But they might say fresh fruit, but they would say it in a way that only the people who lived there knew what they were talking about.  It didn't sound like today saying fresh fruit.  But they had special--they would say watermelon, red to the rhino, you know and they would actually hawk their wares.  And that, that had both sound, smell and sight because they would have their horses decorated with bells, so you could hear them coming through.  And another sight was-were the parades.  There were--and sounds too because we would be beginning Sunday dinner and all of a sudden you could hear the drums in the background.  And my mother[Clara Marie Evans Cook] would say, "Oh, God," because we'd all jump up from the table, run down the steps and out to see the Elks, the American Legions, Sampson Brook Lodges that would parade.  And I would want to--and then we'd come back and we would pretend that we were drum majors or majorettes prancing up the street 'cause the music was going two or three blocks away by then.  Smells, I used to go to Lexington Market and Lafayette Market, which was up off of Pennsylvania Avenue and these, when I was a child, were canvas tents where they sold--well Lexington Market is still there and they're still selling sausage and ground beef and string beans and all of the fresh vegetables and everything.  But when I was young, it was canvas and so it--the smells were not as contained and my father [Emanuel Levi Cook] would take us there and we would buy the material, the food that we needed for the week.  Now Daddy would go on Saturdays and he always did the shopping and I learned that that was a family tradition that did not begin with my father, but my grandfather [John Samuel Cook] would go to do the family shopping.  Now, my grandfather would go late in the day and when I asked my aunts, "Why would he go so late in the day?" I found that it was because the food was cheaper later on Saturday.  They did not have refrigeration and freezers as they do today.  So--and Sunday, everything was closed.  The supermarkets were not open on Sunday and so you couldn't keep produce from Saturday till Monday or Tuesday, everybody went to get it on Saturday.  And if you went late in the day you could get real bargains because the sales people would sell it to you cheaper so they wouldn't have to keep it or it wouldn't have to spoil until Monday.  And so my father picked up on that tradition.  He would go to the A&P [Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Company] on Friday evenings and buy things like soap powder and soap products and things that wouldn't--were not necessarily fresh.  But then on Saturdays, he would go to Lexington Market and the sights and the smells and-'cause everybody would be there from the very well-to-do, to the people that you couldn't get near and you would buy.  Well, the colors, I can just see the, the vividness of the tomatoes and the grapes and the--even the browns of the potatoes and the different hues, I would find artistic and attractive.
Story_ID: 116961
Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of your elementary school that you attended?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I remember--I not only remember the name, I know every teacher.
Speaker 1: So tell us (unclear).
Speaker 2: It was the Henry Highland Garnet Elementary School Number 103 [Baltimore, Maryland]--
Speaker 1: Who were some of your teachers there?
Speaker 2: --on Division Street between Lanvale and Lafayette.  In kindergarten, I had Edith Clark [ph.].  In the first grade, it was Mrs. Newsome [ph.].  The second grade, oh, I said I knew everyone.  I can just see her, Ms. Kinney [ph.].  I know that my fourth grade-- and I know I'm skipping the third grade.  I'll get back to that.  The fourth grade was Earl Stanley Britt [ph.].  Fifth grade was Ms. Bevins, Mary Bevins[ph.]).  Sixth grade was Ms. Crudup [ph.].  And I missed the third grade.  Newsome, Kinney, the third grade teacher's name started with a W.  Forgive me but I--
Speaker 1: That's okay.
Speaker 2: --you know but--
Speaker 1: When it, if it comes to you-- (unclear).
Speaker 2: But I was there from the kindergarten through the sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Did any of your teachers there in elementary school have a particular influence on you?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And I had one, I mentioned Ms.--I can just see her.  Reba Brooks [ph.], I didn't mention Ms. Brooks.  Ms. Brooks had a, an influence on me because Ms. Brooks was very pretty and very--she wore wonderful clothes and she--I knew when I saw Ms. Brooks that I had to look right.  Now, Ms. Crudup had an influence on me because she allowed me to make her young daughter a dress and I was not yet--I don't--I was either, just becoming ten or ten years old when I made my first dress for her little girl.  And it was a little sundress with a pina--with a jacket.  And she let--it was a green, green print.  She let me make it for her daughter and her daughter wore it and that had a great deal to do with my self-esteem.  I felt that I could do something and be somebody if my teacher allowed her child to wear a dress that I made.  Mr. Britt had an influence on me because he was the one male teacher in the school.  But because he also taught social studies and I developed a desire to travel during the time that I was with him.  And I've been on every continent except Antarctica as a result of Earl Stanley Britt.  So I would say that once again, I loved being educated.  I--my mother [Clara Marie Evans Cook] always taught us that if we wanted to get out of the housing project and get a good job, we had to do very well in school.  And I did--
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you in elementary school?
Speaker 2: I was an excellent student and my teachers appreciated it to the point where they told me.  I don't believe I ever got--we got grades that were good, very good and excellent.  And I don't think I ever got anything less than a very good all through element--I still have my elementary school report cards.  And I tell my grandchildren now that, you know, you're not going to let the family down by getting anything less--you got to try your very, very best.  If my teacher told me to do a report, I did two reports.  If she said read a book, I read three books, whether I had to--it was not--I didn't just do what I had to do, I did what I loved to do.
Story_ID: 116962
Speaker 1: And during the elementary school years, what type of child were you?
Speaker 2: I've all--I've never been a playful person.  I don't know how to play.  I'm hoping that I learn maybe in the next ten years between sixty-five and seventy-five.  But as a child I always valued reading and school above playing.
Speaker 1: So you were a very serious, very obedient--?
Speaker 2: Very serious.  In fact, I was very serious, very obedient and most people thought I was older than I really was.  If my mother [Clara Marie Evans Cook] saw me doing nothing, she said, "Don't you have something to do?"  And I knew that I wouldn't have to work if I had a book in my hand.  So I always had a book in my hand.  I did play with paper dolls.  I played jacks but they were not things--I don't like to perspire and I don't remember perspiring as a child.  My mother was the type of person that you went out to play in the morning.  You could get dirty in the morning, but about lunch time, you came in, you had your lunch, you took a nap before you--before school age and even during the summer and then you--about three o'clock in the afternoon she washed you and dressed you.  And I was the only girl, so I wore little organdy dresses and after three o'clock or so, especially after dinner, you did not romp and run.  You sat on the steps and you played jacks.  You talked to your friends.  You play "Simon says," maybe, but you did not perspire after three o'clock in the afternoon.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite paper doll?
Speaker 2: Usually my favorite paper dolls were the ones I made for myself.  I could draw a little and I could draw women so I, I wanted to be a--my mother wanted to be a fashion designer, she made clothes and I had a little bit of that.  So I would design clothes for my paper dolls and so my favorite paper dolls were the ones that I drew and I designed clothes for.
Story_ID: 116963
Speaker 1: And during the elementary school years, during that age, term, that age frame, what were some of your dreams and aspirations?
Speaker 2: That I would see the world.  Some of my aspirations were that I would go to college.  I--during elementary school I don't--I knew that I wanted to see something outside of Baltimore [Maryland].  I had never been outside of Baltimore.  My father did not have a car, so I wanted to go.  I wanted to--I remember that very vividly in elementary school.  The other thing that I dreamed of was getting dressed, because my mother [Clara Marie Evans Cook] sewed.  If my mother made someone a dress, she had a little piece of material left over, she made me a skirt or a blouse.  And the more I got, the happier I was.
Speaker 1: So were you pretty fashionable?
Speaker 2: I think that I was.  I--when I got beyond elementary school, in junior high school, I would design clothes, and my mother would make them for me.
Story_ID: 116964
Speaker 1: What was the name of your junior high school?
Speaker 2: It was Booker T. Washington Junior High [Baltimore, Maryland].  I guess every junior high is named after Booker T. Washington or Frederick Douglass.  And it was on McCulloh Street.  It is still there.  It is still a middle school.  It was an old building.  It had once been a high school for white girls, Western High School, I believe, and it was about two blocks, I had to walk two blocks from the projects to get there.  Recently, I became the president of a national organization [The Pierians, Inc.] that was founded by my junior high school principal and assistant principal, Annette Colbert Johnson.  And she was a descendant of Henry Highland Garnet who, for whom my elementary school was named.
Speaker 1: What were some of your favorite subjects in junior high school?
Speaker 2: In junior high, I can tell you that one of my, one subject that was not my favorite was mathematics.  My homeroom teacher was my math teacher, Enolia McMillan, who became national president of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  And I told her that she was not very successful in getting me to like math.  My favorite subjects were English--my favorite teachers were my English teachers.  In junior high my favorite subject was English.
Speaker 1: And who were some of your friends in junior high school?
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness.  I remember them well.  They was--in the junior high school, some of my friends were Ellen Carter, Walter Shervington, whose father was a doctor, who lived right up the street in the Carver Apartments, Mary Johnson, who lived on Mosher Street--Mary Otis Johnson, because I had two Mary Johnsons.  There was a student who lived around the corner from me went to the school, but was not in my class named Marietta Northern.  There was Paula Brown and Irene Stanley.
Story_ID: 116965
Speaker 1: Who was influencing you during the junior high school years?  Who were you most influenced by?
Speaker 2: I was not influenced by the people that I just named who were close to me.  I was perhaps influenced by the people that were not very close to me and let me explain that.  In elementary school and junior high school, I believe that Baltimore [Maryland] was a very stratified society.  Black Baltimore was stratified.  And there were the students who were doctors' daughters and sons and they were light and had long hair and they were, of course, the elites.  My mother [Clara Marie Evans Cook] sent me to a school where most of the kids who lived in the projects did not go.  They went to School 122, my mother said, though, School 103 was closer by maybe a half a block, but that was the school where the doctors and the lawyers sent their children even out of their districts and their neighborhoods.  And so that's the school she wanted me to go to.
Speaker 1: The one where the doctors and lawyers would send (unclear)?
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--School 103, Henry Highland Garnet [Elementary School], and so I became influenced by the haves because I perceived myself as a have not.
Speaker 1: Did you ever feel out of place?
Speaker 2: Yes, but my mother was very instrumental in making sure that I felt it was my place.  My mother was always at school.  She washed the oil cloths and the paste jars when I was in elementary school.  She participated actively in the PTA [Parent Teacher Association] and the PTA used to put on productions of children's stories like the Three Bears, Little Red Riding Hood.  And the parents would play, would be the actors and the actresses and my mother was always there playing a role.  When she wasn't playing that role she was helping the teachers by washing oil cloth.  You probably don't even know what oil cloth is.  Oil cloth was before plastics and it was a certain kind of a cloth that was made, I suppose, with some type of oils or like linoleum but it was softer and had a backing.  Tablecloths used to be made out of this material called oil cloth 'cause you could wipe it off.  It was not cotton cloth.  It was some synthetic cloth that could be wiped and washed and used again.  And children would lay it on their desk and do their cutouts and their pasting on it 'cause it wouldn't mess up the desk.  Well, Mama was always at school washing blackboards, washing oil cloth, washing your paste jars or the inkwells and cleaning up and helping the teachers, so that no one would dare disturb her children's learning process.  And so I was always--and because I had good grades, the doctors' children and the lawyers' children would always invite me to their parties and their homes, and so, I could get to see things outside of the housing project.
Speaker 1: Was it exciting for you or was it a little bittersweet because you--?
Speaker 2: It was bittersweet.  It was somewhat intimidating but I believe that it drove me to want a better life.  I did not have any idea how I would ever get to college.  College was not a light at the end of the tunnel.  I did not--when I was in junior high school, when I got to the ninth grade and it was time to choose a curriculum, my mother said, "Thou shall be a commercial student, because thou shall not wash floors."
Speaker 1: What was a--what did she mean by a commercial student?
Speaker 2: A commercial student was a student--you had the academic curriculum, you had the technical curriculum, and you had a commercial curriculum where you learned typing, shorthand and business practices.  And she encouraged me and almost insisted that I be in that curriculum so that I would not have to do--I'd have, I'd have a white-collar job.
Speaker 1: So why not the academic curriculum?  Why not that track?
Speaker 2: Because the, because academic, the academic curriculum prepared you for college and she had no thought or no idea as to where the money was coming from to go to college. So during--in junior high school, I began this commercial training and this office training--
Story_ID: 116966
Speaker 1: And what were you thinking you wanted to be when you grew up when you were in junior high school?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I wanted--well I wanted to be a journalist.  I loved English, I loved reading, I loved writing.  I wanted to be a newspaper reporter.  I didn't--we didn't have television.  It wasn't in every home just then in the '40s [1940s] and the early '50s [1950s].  And so I wanted to be a journalist.  I wanted to write.  I knew I could do it, I knew I could do it well.
Speaker 1: Did you read The Afro?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I dreamed that one day I'd write for The Afro and in my sixth grade class one of the daughters of one of the Murphys [John H. and Carl Murphy], who owned The Afro, was in my sixth grade class, Marcia German and I you know--yeah, that was a dream.  But a dream that was at the end of the rainbow, the far end.
Story_ID: 116967
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about high school.  What was the name of the high school (unclear)?
Speaker 2: The high school was Frederick Douglass High School [Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like at Douglass?
Speaker 2: Well, Frederick Douglass High School is, I have to say this, it's the second oldest high school for blacks in the country.  And my experiences in high school, well, I enter high school as a commercial student and the--your classes in high school were numbered from one to thirteen.  So I was in--and they were numbered because academics were num--were 12--tenth Grade 1, 10A1, 10A2 and by the time you got to 10B or 10A12 and 13, you were down to the commercial students and the technical, so you were at the bottom of the barrel.  But I knew all these people who were in academics because I had gone to elementary school with them and knew them in junior high school, the doctors' sons and daughters and the teachers' sons and daughters.
Speaker 1: They were all in the academic track?
Speaker 2: They were in the academics but I could say, "Well, I'm going to dinner today.  I'm going to the lunch"--I'd go sit with them in the cafeteria and I went to the football-Douglass High School had a football team called the Douglass Ducks.  That was our mascot, the Ducks and I loved football all through high school.  I, when I was in the twelfth grade and had to write a research paper on some phase of American life, my research paper was on American football.  I love football until this day.  I have season tickets to the [Baltimore] Ravens.  I had dirt that Johnny Unitas stepped on, on the goal line with the [Indianapolis] Colts.  But in high school, also, an aside from football, I liked becoming a part of organizations and I think that this is where my love of organizations began, the student council, writing for the newspaper, belonging to the honor society.  I loved working in organizations and with groups and that love began in high school and exists until the present time.
Speaker 1: So in high school at some point did you switch to the academic track?
Speaker 2: No.  I graduated as a commercial student.
Story_ID: 116968
Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about when you were in high school what were some of your thoughts about college?
Speaker 2: I knew that I wanted to know but I was--I knew also that the chances of my going to college were not very high.  I did not--I want--in the twelfth grade I wanted to go to college.  I applied to the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] in the twelfth grade but I did not know that I was going until June 23, 1955, I believe it was a Thursday, and I was on the stage at graduation.  I had gotten a scholarship from Iota Philander Sorority, the Kappa Chapter, as being the commercial student with the highest average.  But it was a few hundred dollars and would not get me into the University of Maryland.  And remember, this is one year or less--about one year after Brown v. The Board [Brown v. Board of Education, 1954].  After all of the scholarships were given that night to all of the graduates, the principal, Ralph Wreckland, [ph.] came to the microphone and said that he had just gotten word that one additional student would get a four-year legislative scholarship to the University of Maryland and he announced my name and my mother [Clara Marie Evans Cook] was sitting very close to the back of the auditorium at what was then the Polytechnic High School on North Avenue.  It's now the Department of Education.  And my mother was sitting in the auditorium in the back on, on my right hand side.  My mother is only 4'11" and she jumped so high I thought she was going through the ceiling.  And Mr. Wreckland announced that I would get Marvin Mandel, who was in the state legislature and would go on to become the governor, I would get his legislative scholarship.  What happened was that Marvin Mandel was Jewish and was the legislator for my district.  But Truly Hatchett was black and the legislator from another district and they switched students for their funds.  And that--it was almost--graduation was almost over when I knew that I was going to Maryland.  I was one of the first blacks to live in College Park on the campus, not to go to the university, but to live in a dormitory on the campus.
Story_ID: 116969
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from high school? (Simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-five [1955].  In September of 1955, there were six blacks on the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland] campus living there and I was one of those six.
Speaker 1: What was your first day like at the University of Maryland?  And what was it like meeting--
Speaker 2: Scared--
Speaker 1: --your roommate and--?
Speaker 2: Well, my roommate came from Catonsville [Maryland], black lady named Wallis Johnson.  Wallis after Wallis Warfield Simpson, the Duchess of Windsor.  And Wallis and I were roommates.  I had one other person from my high school, Elaine Johnson, who was in commercials with me also.  She was there and then some others--two--three others.  But we were all from the Baltimore [Maryland] area.  I don't remember my first day.  I do remember one of my first classes though and I believe this was the first Wednesday and I walked into government and politics and my professor said, "We lynch negroes in Texas where I come from."  And my response was, "Well, Dr. Harrison, you're in Rome and you might want to do as the Romans do."
Speaker 1: Wasn't that scary though, to have your professor say that to you?
Speaker 2: It was very, it was very scary, then.  But this was before--it was extremely scary.  I felt it was--once again it was bittersweet.  Wonderful because I was here, I mean, I had gotten out of Baltimore.  This is the first night that I spent outside of Baltimore City. And I go in down [Maryland] Route--what is now? 294 [sic, 295], the Baltimore-Washington Parkway, and there was grass.  Now, this little kid from a housing project who didn't have but a little teeny plot on the front steps outside the house, it was now go--it--all this grass, all these big buildings, all this--central air conditioning.  And of course I had central heat by that time, but not any central air conditioning.  But I was scared.  Not scared about whether or not I could make the grades, but scared about having a support system.  My mother [Clara Marie Evans Cook] and father [Emanuel Levi Cook] still--my father died when I was in twelfth grade.  My father died in September, just as I was entering the twelfth grade.  And my homeroom teacher became my surrogate dad and I had a wonderful opportunity to talk with him a few years ago.  And I don't think until that time he realized what he meant to me, but I would never have gotten through twelfth grade and to college had it not been for W. DuBois Johnson [ph.], who the last time I spoke with him was living in northern Virginia.  But he was my homeroom teacher.
Speaker 1: I was kind of scared of--to give you an example, I could not go down on [U.S.] Route 1  and go into some of the stores by myself.  But my roommate and I and some of the, and the other black women would go together.
Speaker 2: Why couldn't you go by yourself?
Speaker 1: Because people would holler at you.  Black people in College Park [Maryland] did not come out of their own neighborhood into the mainstream of [U.S.] Route 1 that ran through College Park.  And you couldn't go into a restaurant.  We didn't have public accommodations.  I remember there was a--it was like a Howard Johnsons but it wasn't called Howard Johnsons, it was a, sort of a--we couldn't go in a restaurant.  I mean that was it.  You could not go into a public place to eat on Route 1.  And then on campus, people weren't used to seeing blacks.  The dean of women called me in one day and she says, "Sylvia, I want you to come in and I want to talk to you."  And I went in and I sat in front of Adele Stamp and the student union is named after her much to my regrets and she said, "Your mother is an elevator operator?" and I said, "Yes."  And she said, "What are you doing here?"  And I said, "Well Mrs. Stamp, I'm on a legislative scholarship, Marvin Mandel let me come."
Story_ID: 116726
Speaker 1: You were talking about the dining hall, the process at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland].
Speaker 2: The first week when we would go through the line and pick up our tray of food, as we came by the cashier with our I.D. [identification] card and everything to go to our table, someone would come along and smack your tray up like, (gestures with hand hitting upwards) you know, and that would 'cause your food to go all over you or the floor or both.  And my--and those six of us would have to get used to that because we'd have to go back through the line and get some more.  But, also, one day we found that the men who--you had to take your tray over, your empty tray over and give it to--go through this conveyor line to put your dirty dishes in place.  And the men who worked behind there were usually black men and sometimes they would make remarks to the women.  And sometimes they would--
Speaker 1: Derogatory remarks?
Speaker 2: Well, or they'd say, "Hi baby, how are you" or something.  "We're glad you're here", even was a derogatory remark because we were supposed to just go through and put your glasses here and your plates there and your knives and forks here and get--and they were supposed to clean up the dishes.  But they would say things as if they were on the street and--to the black women.  They wouldn't say it to the white women, but to the few black women who were there.  So one day, I reported them and told the dean of women that I was extremely uncomfortable and that these black men were harassing us and, of course, we didn't have sexual harassment at that time.  And when I went--she gave me an audience and I went to the meeting with her.  And when I got there she said, "Well Sylvia, they're your kind." And that didn't--that only added fuel to the fire because I--there was no--what I'm saying is you asked me how did I feel?  There were--we felt as if there was no place to go.  You could not--we were not--oh, I mean, I'm seventeen years old.  I'm in this strange environment.  I don't know anything--I don't know a lawyer.  I can't--it's not today, where everybody understands civil rights and appeal rights.  I'm just a kid.  And, you know, I grew up in an environment where I had no rights.  Even at home, I had no rights 'cause your mother would tell you in a minute you know.  You don't have a social security card yet.  You don't have any rights.  So times were very, very different in terms of children's rights, your civil rights, your personal attitude.  The only--the thing that I felt I had going for me was that I was there with a scholarship from the state legislature and this was a state institution.  So I used that as leverage.  If you don't treat me right the state of Maryland will know about it because I'll call Mr. [Marvin] Mandel.
Story_ID: 116727
Speaker 1: The--my second year at the university [University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland], I met my husband [Donald Martin], my children's father.  He came as a--he came out of the [U.S.] Air Force and came to the school during the second year.  And before I entered my third year, we got married.  My third year, I commuted from Baltimore [Maryland] to College Park [Maryland] on a Greyhound bus and I was expecting my first child.  And I remember that in 1957, in February, there was a tremendous snowstorm.  It took me from four o'clock in the afternoon till six o'clock the next morning to get home.  And I walked from the Greyhound bus station to Fulton Avenue where I lived.  And anyway, my doctor said, "You know, you probably shouldn't do this too many times or you won't have a good childbirth."  So I stopped school.  To make a long story short, it took me seventeen years to get my degree from College Park.  When my children--I had two children in, from--one in '57 [1957], one, no, one in '58 [1958] and one in '59 [1959] and I did not get my degree from College Park until 1972.  But I was determined that I was going to get it from the University of Maryland, that I was not going to let those first experiences endanger or in any way impede my getting a degree from the University of Maryland.  So I got that degree in 1972--
Speaker 2: What was your degree in?
Speaker 1: In economics.  And we were talking about subjects and what I liked in junior high school.  But in high school I--being a commercial student, we took business subjects and I took economics and decided that I wanted to be--wanted to major in economics.  My teacher had a great influence and I understood, I felt that blacks did not really understand the political system in this country or the economic system in this country.  And we didn't know anything about monetary policy or--we were so busy taking care of those needs at the bottom of Maslow's Hierarchy [of Needs] that we never understood what fiscal policy and all this stuff, what impact it had on our making a living, and so, I went to college to major in economics.  And then, I thought well I'll never get a job as an economist so I minored in sociology, just in case I needed to become a social worker.  But in the interim, I went to work for the Social Security Administration in 1963.
Story_ID: 116728
Speaker 1: What did you do at the Social Security Administration?
Speaker 2: I started as a file clerk, GS-2 [General Schedule], and at that time you didn't get a promotion to a GS-3 until God or your supervisor smiled upon you.  And usually God did it before your supervisor.  And--but I was--I worked hard.  Once again I'm accustomed to working.  I'm accustomed to reading and doing things.  And while I was a file clerk, I investigated where all the folders were going that I was pulling and filing.  And they would go upstairs somewhere and if I had a break or a lunch period, I would go upstairs and I would ask people in evaluation and authorization what are you doing, and they would tell me.  And I'd go over here, what are you doing, and they'd tell me.  So I learned a lot about how to process disability folders and disability materials at the Social Security Administration and I got a promotion.  And then they were planning for Medicare and I kept reading about what was happening in Washington [D.C.] with Medicare and how the Social Security Administration was going to have a new Bureau of Health Insurance.  And by the time Medicare was, the bill was passed in 1965, '66 [1966], I was a GS-4.  And some of the older men who worked with me told me I should go off and take the Federal Service Entrance Exam and that there were lots of complaints during the '60s [1960s] and the Civil Rights Movement about this, these federal exams being culturally biased.  Well, I took it and I passed.  And while it was culturally biased, remember my daddy [Emanuel Cook] is taking me to the Walters Art Gallery [Baltimore, Maryland], and to the waterfront, and to the Baltimore Museum of Art, and I found that I was not culturally deprived because of these, some early childhood experiences.  I knew about Francis Scott Key and the mummies in the museum and who wrote what operas and what symphonies because I'd been at these concerts in the park and I passed.  But the Civil Service Commission said I did not have a college degree and that they were not going to put me on the register.  So I wrote to them and I explained all that I had done in these years with my PTA [Parent Teacher Association], with raising my children and with my community activities, and asked them to evaluate my volunteer experience and consider it professional experience, which would qualify me in lieu of a college degree, and they did.  They put me on the register and I became a GS-5 Health Insurance Analyst when Medicare started.
Story_ID: 116729
Speaker 1: So what year was that?
Speaker 2: 1966.  Now, a health insurance analyst in the Medicare program [at the Social Security Administration], you were a health insurance intern.  And you rotated through every division in the Bureau of Health Insurance and you went to at least one of the ten regional offices to get an in-depth understanding of the work in the regions.  And so in December of 1966, I took my first plane ride to San Francisco [California] which was the region to which I was assigned as a health insurance intern.  And I learned everything I could about Medicare and I applied myself.  At the end of that year, you could take a permanent assignment in one of the divisions and I took my permanent assignment in the division of management as--and that's where I worked.  I worked in the personnel office.  Well, before I got into this professional job, I had worked very hard in the files and they called me and asked me to work on a special project to get rid of a backlog and I had--my file unit was in the basement with the aerate--with the rations and stuff that you take should the United--should something happen to a government building.  And I went upstairs and I met with the head of the unit and they told me that I could get this detail to a sit-down job because they wanted to get rid of a big backlog.  And I said, "Well I'll come if you will send another co-worker, if you will bring her with me."  And when I got from the first floor back to the basement, the person that I had recommended had been called and told that she had a detail, also.  So I realized that it's not how much work you do necessarily, but it's also who you know.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: And who, who's moving your name through the system.  So when I get to Medicare I, I learn a lot about Medicare but I also realize that it's who I know and I had an opportunity to meet some very influential people.  I was a health insurance intern.  I could meet the head of Medicare.  I could meet the head of the Hospital Association and I met the head of Blue Cross Blue Shield.  And I was going to all the cocktail--I was the only--there were two blacks in this program.  There were ten of us and two of us were black and so I was the black female.  I got to be, to work with presidential conferences.  I worked with a--during the [President] Lyndon Baines Johnson administration I was staff person for a presidential conference on the cost of medical insurance, got me in touch with a lot of people.  And I guess was a--no, I know I was a good worker.  I got excellent evaluations and I tried very hard to study a lot of things that related to Medicare.  And I became a management intern with the Social Security Administration, which got me to the point where I could work on another--management interns rotate through management.  And you are sort of earmarked for a job in management or high-level or mid- level management job.  I got to be a management intern and during that time I got to work on another presidential conference 'cause you take assignments for a two-year period.
Story_ID: 116730
Speaker 1: And to work in Washington-(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Let me ask you this Ms. Martin, were you active at all in the Civil Rights Movement during the '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 1: No.  Let me put it this way, I--yes.  Yes and no.  I wasn't as active as, I believe, as instrumental as marching to Sel--through Selma [Selma to Montgomery March, 1965], but I did participate with the Poor People's Campaign.  When the Poor People's Campaign came south to Washington [D.C.] and you may recall or you may have read that they had donkeys and the poor people came marching into Washington.  When they came through Baltimore [Maryland] I helped feed them and make--set up cots for them at a church in Baltimore on Carrolton Avenue.  I did those kinds of things.  I attended meetings and participated in civic organizations and church organizations but I didn't get to go South and I didn't sit in at lunch counters and that kind of thing.
Speaker 2: Do you remember what the city was like though during the civil rights movement, the city of Baltimore?  What was the climate like in the city?  Do you recall?
Speaker 1: The climate in the city was, I think that in some parts of the city it was rather--it was not like what I read about in the South.  I think that Baltimoreans were somewhat, I don't want to say apathetic but they weren't--but Black Marylandians were not as involved until they started burning Cambridge [Maryland] [1967] and we started getting excited, perhaps, maybe in '68 [1968].  I think that until the death of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], I think that that was a turning point for black Baltimore.  That's when Baltimoreans became really upset and started burning and tearing things down.
Speaker 2: You remember the riots?
Speaker 1: Do--I, I was in Washington the day Martin Luther King was killed and a friend of mine called me--once again I'm--at that time I was a management intern.  I had an assignment in Washington.  I was in Washington that day and he said, "How are you getting"-- he called me and said, "How are you getting home?"  And I said, "I'm going to drive or take the shuttle back and drive home."  He said, "Call your family and tell them to stay indoors."  I called my husband [Donald Martin] and I said, "Put the children in the house, do not go out."  My husband was livid because I said, "I may not be home tonight" and he didn't like that at all.  I went to a motel in northern Virginia and stayed because my mother's [Clara Marie Evans Cooke] neighborhood and my neighborhood were being burned.  My clothes were in a cleaners that I could never get out, could never find on Edmondson Avenue because that was the--they had broken into the cleaners and, and torn up a lot of things.  My mother lives in Baltimore [Maryland] in the Walbrook Junction area and North Avenue, they tore to pieces.  But I think that was a turning point for getting people active, Baltimoreans active, in the Civil Rights Movement.  It was one thing to go to the white high schools or the white schools or to deal with busing, but it was another thing to see your neighborhood torn apart.  And so, before, I think it was the ministers and the social workers and the people who could make some change or facilitate change.  But after King, with King's assassination, the common folk became--rallied to the cause.
Story_ID: 116731
Speaker 1: And so you continued as a management intern [at the Social Security Administration] until 1970.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: What did you do after 1970?  Were you still moving up the ranks?
Speaker 2: I was still moving up the ranks.  I think I had moved as quickly as you could according to the law.  There was a law called the Whitten Amendment to the civil--to some personnel laws and I had gone something like eight grades in four years.  I had gone from a GS-4 [General Schedule] to--
Speaker 1: Eight grades in four years?
Speaker 2: In four years.  I had gone from a GS-4 in 19, in 1966 to a GS-13 by 1970, I believe.
Speaker 1: Wow, that, that's a little unusual.
Speaker 2: That, that's a little unusual.  But I was blessed and I do believe that I worked extremely hard.  I was going to school at night.  I was working eight hours a day, going to college in the evening to finish my bachelor's degree.  I was married with two children.  I would come home at five o'clock, put dinner on the table for my children, be at school, leave for school at six because I had a husband [Donald Martin] who did not allow me to use the car when he wanted to use the car.  I had to get on the bus and be in class at seven, come home at ten, look at the children's homework, get them ready--get their clothes and things ready.  He would take care of his children and they would be in bed when I would come home.  But I checked their homework, you know, get things together for the next day--
Speaker 1: Do your own homework.
Speaker 2: Do my home--well what I did was I had to be up, I set up--I think that I'm good at organizing things.  I set up a really strict schedule.  I would make up my menu and post it on the refrigerator every weekend.  And if he didn't want something, my husband didn't want something to eat, if he didn't want hamburgers on Tuesday, he'd have to tell me 'cause I'd fix it so that on the days that I went to school there was something already prepared.  On Saturday, I coked two meals, one for Monday and one for Tuesday.  On Sunday, I cooked two meals, one for Sunday and one for Wednesday.  So by Thursday, they could have hamburgers or hot dogs or something left over from Monday.  So I had to be extremely organized and I had to come in--and then, what I did, also, on the weekend, was I put my children's clothes in their drawer, drawers by day.  It would be--under shirt, panties or socks for Monday, for Tuesday, for Wednesday rather than all of your socks in one drawer, it was set up by the days of the week.  Your clothes would be hung in your closet by the days of the week.  The menu would be posted on the refrigerator by each day.  So I had to have that kind of organizational structure.  The marriage ended in divorce a couple of years later, but I got the degree and moved on, too.  So, that's the way it was in the, in--from 1970 until I got the degree in '72 [1972].  And by the time I got the degree, I was a GS-13.  I said a, from a--I went from a four to a twelve [GS-4 to GS-12], in 1970.
Speaker 1: It's still unusual.
Speaker 2: Well, in 1972, I was a GS-13 in the federal segment and I had, by that time, gotten Social Security's highest award which was the Commissioner's Citation.  Now the Commissioner Citation is worth five or ten points.  It was worth five or ten points in the selection process.  And a master's degree was only worth about two points.  So I could move in that organization.  I'm extremely grateful to the Social Security Administration.  And Social Security, I believe it's not like any other federal agency in that Social Security looks at its recipients as beneficiaries, which is different from being a recipient.  A beneficiary means that you're not given anything but you've earned it and a recipient is a person whose given something.  So unlike the regular welfare system, social security looked at--and its' employees were trained to treat the beneficiaries as beneficiaries and not recipients.  And so I think that set a certain mindset for how you treat people.
Story_ID: 116732
Speaker 1: But remember that I said that when I went up to get a detail, I got somebody to come with me, I set my goal then to be a personnelist, to help other black people, especially, who worked hard to move.  And I set about--I was in personnel.  I took my final position as a management intern in personnel and while I was a management intern, I knew that I wanted to design programs to move lower-grade employees up and that's what I spent the rest of my life doing.  I designed upward mobility programs during the civil rights era and the affirmative action era.  I designed career development programs at all grade levels from work study at the very bottom to executive development programs at the top.  But most important to me was the development of programs for--to move clerical and menial work employees into technical and professional jobs.  I would do it at home at night.  I would design the program, look over performance appraisals and all this stuff.  I would bring my children into the office on Sunday afternoon, put a little portable black and white TV there and sit them down with their toys while I worked.  And that became my life and a lifestyle.  And I believe that it's been quite beneficial.
Story_ID: 116733
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this, Ms. Martin.  In 1972, when you finally got your bachelor's degree after starting in 1955, what was that like for you?
Speaker 2: The first thing I thought of was revengeful.  I had a hundred announcements printed up, just so I could send my former husband [Donald Martin], by that time, an announcement.  And that announcement said that Donald and Marcia Martin proudly announce that their mother, Sylvia Cooke Martin, after seventeen years of Taurean stubbornness, had received a bachelor's degree from the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland].  It was green ink on white paper so you couldn't get it mixed up with anything else.  And I had to have a hundred, that was the minimum the printer would print, so I could send Donald Martin one.  But I sent a few other people some too.  So that was number one.  I thought that was a major accomplishment, I'm first generation to get--nobody in my family, in my direct family, on my mother's [Clara Marie Evans Cook] side had ever gotten a college degree.
Story_ID: 116734
Speaker 1: But then I was hungry for even more and I felt--I think it did a lot for my self-esteem.  Here's this poor little kid with short hair and, you know, at that time--we used to jump rope when I was a child.  And we'd say if you're white, you know, if you're--if you're white you're all right.  If you're yellow, you're mellow.  If you're black, stay back.  And that--so it became a way of life for this poor little black kid in the projects to think that she wasn't supposed to do anything anyway.  And it occurred to me in 1972, that there may be something for me to do.  In 1974--oh in 1972, I was living here in Columbia [Maryland].  And in 1973, I decided I could buy a house.  My brother who didn't--hadn't graduated from high school bought a house in Columbia.  He was in the [U.S.] Air Force and I said, "I'm going to buy a house."  So in 19--'73 [1973], I started looking at houses and I put my down payment down on this house.  I didn't have the slightest idea how I was going to pay for it or how I was going to even get it because I didn't have enough money for settlement.  But it was strange and I got this brand-new house in Columbia and I moved in, in 1974.  A week after I moved in, I was chosen for an--I, I'd been a health insurance intern, a management intern and in 1974, there was a program called the Education for Public Management Program which sent eighty-some government employees off to graduate school, and I was one of those eighty.  They picked about seven or eight from Social Security.  I went to the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] and I made a 4.0 [grade point average].
Speaker 2: Did you actually go to Charlottesville [Virginia]?
Speaker 1: I went to Charlottesville.  I lived in Charlottesville for a year.  What I didn't know when I went that graduate students only took six, nine credits a semester so I went down to Charlottesville and registered for eighteen credits of graduate credits my first semester.  I learned the first semester that you don't take eighteen credits of graduate course.  So the second semester, I only registered for nine, I think.  But I had twenty-six credits of graduates study in ten months and I had a straight A average.  And I said, "Hey, you're not so bad for a project child."  And I said, "I've got to get this master's degree.  If I can do this in Charlottesville"--my mother [Clara Marie Evans Cooke] was staying here with the children and she would call me upset, "Your children don't have any milk."  So I would jump in my car after class, drive two and a half hours up here, go to the high store, get them some milk, get up at five the next morning and drive back to class, and I made a 4.0 out of--with twenty-six credits.  So I went off and registered for University of Maryland for a graduate program in policy science with a political science focus because at Charlottesville it was public administration, and got the degree at UMBC [University of Maryland, Baltimore County, Baltimore, Maryland] in policy science.  And--
Story_ID: 116735
Speaker 1: Let's talk about the Library of Congress in 1978.  How did that opportunity come about?
Speaker 2: Once again, I had difficulty with self-esteem and I never filed for a job myself.  When I got the management intern position it was 'cause a friend of mine who lived in my neighborhood actually sent my application in for the management intern and he was head of personnel at the time.  And they called me on Monday morning and said, ""Sylvia, you, you've filed for this position but you didn't sign your application.  Come on over and sign it."  And when I got over there, I found out that Ian had sent it in for me.  Well, in this case I--in the interim I became president of a national organization called the Conference of Minority Public Administrators.  I met some people in Charlottesville [Virginia] that were--it's a part of the American Society for Public Administration.  And I was chairman and the--I had a person assigned to that professional society, organization who was in Washington [D.C.] and he called me and said, "There's a job vacancy at the Library of Congress."  He was thinking that I could do something outside of social security.  Anyway, to make a long story short, I applied for two jobs in Washington, one as head of the Horace Mann Center of Department of Education and the other, the Library of Congress and I got an offer for both jobs.  But I had worked for fifteen years on the executive side.  I said, "Let me move over now and work for the legislative side," so I took the one at the Library of Congress which was probably a mistake.  But--
Speaker 1: You think so?  Why?
Speaker 2: Because I think I could have gotten a lot more money and a lot more--moved a lot faster in education being on the executive side than I could--the Library, I believe, is the last bastion of the plantation society.  The Library of Congress had grievances in the courts before I got there in 1978, and I left in 1993 and they were still in the courts.  And the--
Speaker 1: The grievances were there on all levels or were they mainly like the lower grade (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, the Library of Congress is an old institution and it is--the reason I said it's the last bastion of the plantation society because I learned that the older institutions, the heavier the weight that it carriers.  The Library of Congress was even designed before there was a congress, when the people were meeting in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to form the nation.  So the Library was designed especially for the [U.S.] Congress, not for the people of the United States.  But anyway, there were people at the Library of Congress with master's degrees who were GS-6 [General Schedule] clerical employees.
Speaker 1: African American?
Speaker 2: African Americans.  There were African Americans at the Library of Congress with Ph.D.s but didn't have professional jobs.  And when they hired me, this was one of the few people who had a management position at the Library of Congress.  They have sent, especially black women, I mean, to tears.  Ruth Ann Stewart's brother was president of Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and she had--I mean these people came with degrees miles long.  There's never been a female Librarian of Congress.  Males!  And how many men are librarians?  But only one who is--it's a very political environment.  The Library of Congress is appointed by the Congress and--by the president, confirmed by the Congress.  Anyway, very conservative organization and so I think that if I'd stayed with health and human services, which was Health Education and Welfare [HEW], I might have moved more.  But I think that--I've just done some reading with The Purpose Driven Life and I believe that God had a mission for me that--and I wasn't in control.  There were employees and people at the Library of Congress for whom I could--whose cause I could promote.  And the Library had never had merit selection when I went there.  It had never had affirmative action programs that would promote people.  I have a lot of surrogate children there who are now in well-paying jobs because I could encourage them to get a master's degree and promote their cause.  I designed the first upward mobility program for the Library of Congress that moved fifteen, twenty people into professional jobs who could take care of their families and were now doing rather--very well making six digits.  So I think that that's what God meant for me to do in terms of being in personnel and moving people.
Story_ID: 117468
Speaker 1: So at the Library of Congress, Ms. Martin, did you have an opportunity to look at the slave narrative project and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: One of the wonderful things about working at the Library of Congress is getting into the collections.  I didn't have as much time as I'd like to get into collections, but I did learn an awful lot about the slave narratives.  I've gone to the manuscript division where some of the--where I first discovered the narratives and gone through not only the slave narratives but some other materials.  As my personal affirmative action program, 'cause I believe that's not something for the government to give you, that's for every black American to set up a way where they can have their own affirmative action and pull somebody along.  I would give tours.  I set up Afrocentric tours at the Library of Congress.  Well I--
Speaker 1: Is it still in place today?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I just did it on my own.  If--I tried to do at least two or three groups a year and if you called me--the Tuskegee Alumni Association came over, the DuBois Circle in Washington came over and I would--I was training to be a tour guide and I would take them through.  But getting back to slave narratives, the largest manuscript collection, ethnic manuscript collection of materials at the Library of Congress is African American materials.  We had--I keep thinking I'm still there.  But there are Frederick Douglass' papers, Booker T. Washington's papers, Nannie Helen Burroughs's papers, Mary Church Terrell's papers.  I went through all 13,000 items of Mary Church Terrell's papers.  I went through some of Nannie Helen Burroughs' papers.  I went through Mary McLeod Bethune's papers in the manuscript division and developed what I thought was necessary and that is to get African Americans to reposit their materials in some archive.  And I would go out to organizations, groups, photographers, historians and say, "What are you doing with your papers?"--teachers, professors.  And invariably, blacks I felt, do not feel that their papers were worth anything to anybody until I would explain to them that some Hungarian or Lithuanians papers, on paper one degree better than toilet tissue, was in the Library of Congress.  And I still try to get people to understand, I try to get chil--students to go.  I give tours and take them through and show them how to do research at the Library of Congress.  Does that answer your question?--
Story_ID: 117469
Speaker 1: Well let me ask you, were you--did you learn a lot of things you didn't know, like, when you read some of these papers and when you were listening to the slave narratives?
Speaker 2: Oh certainly, certainly.  For instance, one of the things I learned was research. Just what is research?  I think that many of us come out of college thinking research is ten footnotes, read ten books, do ten footnotes.  I did not understand that there were different types of research. I did not--I had done research with the federal government where you don't take credit for your research because it belongs to the government.  But in the Library of Congress, there was a congressional research service that you know, where research was intellectual property, learned about copyright, learned just-there are twenty-three reading rooms in the Library.  I thought all libraries when I went there to work were lending.  I thought they were like Enoch Pratt [Library, Baltimore, Maryland].  I did not know that you had research libraries that were closed to some people and only open to other people, you know.  I, I was just amazed at the collection.  So there I am.  One night, I got lost under the main building.  They used to have some books and stuff down there but they, they've moved them out, I believe.  But they got these gigantic arches that hold up the main building, and support the dome and the main meeting room, and I got lost down there one night.  It was dark and I heard someone in a deep voice reciting (unclear) and I realized there were some guys on the other side of the, the stone beams who had a radio over there, they were playing some stuff.  But anyway, I stayed so long I got--I was down there and it was closed so--
Story_ID: 117470
Speaker 1: Did this begin your interest in genealogy?
Speaker 2: No, my interest in genealogy happened about a year before I went to the Library of Congress and I was in Red Square in Moscow [Russia] when I thought about genealogy.  In Moscow, I met a woman--there were only two, two or three black--there were three blacks on the trip and the other two blacks were with me at Red Square and they came from the Eastern Shore of Maryland and I told them that my mother's family came from the Eastern Shore, but that the only person I remembered, the only name I remembered was the name Martha Copper.  And the woman looked at me and she said, "My best friend's name is Martha Copper."  When she got back to the States--or when I got back to the States, I discovered that my baby brother [Benjamin Martin Cook] had died while I was in Russia and when I went to his funeral I realized the only time my family got together was at the funeral.  So I set up family reunions.  Well a couple of months later I went to--this woman named Martha Copper invited me to the Eastern Shore to her family's reunion and she looked just like my grandmother.  To make a long story short, I started the genealogy then, because I was interested in family, my brother was gone, I wanted to hold a family, my other cousins together. And I found out ten years later that this woman that I had met was my grandmother's [Clara Copper Evans] first cousin.  But I started because of this experience and my brother's death and all that, not the Library.  But the Library was instrumental in moving me along.  One of my best friends was the African American specialist in local history and genealogy in that reading room at the Library.  And then she got me to join the African American Historical and Genealogical Society.  I became president of this national organization that was started by Jimmy Walker, who was the archivist who helped Alex Haley.  And out--the Library of Congress carries a tremendous title with it, so when you say that you are the Staff Development Officer for the Library of the Congress, people open doors that couldn't be open to you.  And so I met Alex Haley, I met [HM] John Hope Franklin.  I got entrees to the--as president of the historical society, but also as a member of the Library of Congress staff people would invite me to speak on career development in libraries.  So I got to go to the Society of American Archivists National Conventions and Library, the ALAs [American Library Association] National Conventions and meet people and talk to people as a result.  I got to meet librarians and archivists from India, South Africa.  And then as I traveled I would try to go to the national libraries in the countries that I was visiting for fun.  Go to South Africa, go to Cape Town to the national library, go to Greece or Austria, go to the national library.  And then you find out what other ethnic groups are doing in terms of their archives and their collection of materials and you come back and rally African Americans to start thinking about themselves differently.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I think one of the outcomes of slavery is that we didn't think we--we don't think we're worthwhile.  We don't know that anybody wants--until recently now everybody wants a piece of the African American pie.
Story_ID: 117471
Speaker 1: And do you think that that's why so many of our stories are lost because people just wanted to forget about that?
Speaker 2: People--my mother [Clara Marie Evans Cook] and father [Emanuel Cook]--my grandmothers [Clara Copper Evans and Laura Quarles Cook] would never talk about themselves.  They didn't think anybody wanted to know.  And now we have tremendous stories coming out of, you know, in terms--but we haven't been--well as I said one of the byproducts of slavery is to lower our self-esteem and let--and to think that we don't--and I, invariably, ask people questions.  Do you know who Robert Smalls is?  No.  And one of the things I do is I said, "Do you know who Booker T. Washington is?"  They say yes.  You know who Robert Smalls--do you know who George Washington Williams is?  Yes.  Do you know who Fred--no.  Do you know who Frederick Douglass is?  I said, "Well why don't you know?"  And they--I said, Because you're not in charge of your history."  So it's who's in charge of your history that makes it what it is.  I think that during the [President Richard] Nixon issues someone asked Richard Nixon how would history remember him and Alderman [Harry Robbins] Haldeman or somebody said, "Well, they're going to remember us rather well because we're going to write it.  We're going to write history so people will-we'll tell our own story."  And that's what I think is needed in the African American community, we need to tell our own story.  And so I've been out encouraging people to tell their own story and then doing the research to bring the story out.  But getting back to, Robert Smalls is one of my favorite people in all of African American history.  And I've got, I've got a collection here of materials.  I collect signed first editions and I've got George Washington Williams.  People say, "Well," nobody told me about my history. Well, did they have to tell you?  George Washington Williams wrote three books of African American History before 1900!  It took John Hope Franklin forty years to research George Washington Williams and put a book out.  So it was there, it just took forty years, but go do it, you know.  Anyway--
Story_ID: 117472
Speaker 1: All right.  Let's talk a little bit about when you left the Library of Congress in 1993, you then went to work for the University of Maryland, Baltimore County [UMBC, Baltimore, Maryland] with the McNair Scholars Program.  Tell us a little bit about what the McNair Scholars Program is.
Speaker 2: The McNair Scholars Program is named after is named after Ronald McNair, the astronaut that was lost in space, the African American astronaut.  And it is designed to take first-generation college students and prepare them for doctoral programs and doctoral degrees.
Speaker 1: In science and math?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's Meyerhoff [Scholars Program] in science and math.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: McNair is across the disciplines.  It's in more than a hundred universities in the country now.  It is a--you get a grant from the Department of Education.  The universities get a grant.  There were four schools in Maryland; Bowie [State University, Bowie, Maryland], Coppin [State University, Baltimore, Maryland], College Park [University of Maryland, College Park] and University of Maryland, Baltimore County.  I think that Bowie lost their con--their grant.  But you--what I did was, I counseled with them, I set up research, a course in, to teach them how to write a research proposal and then we put them through a research experience during the summer.  And then we planned conferences where they could present the findings of their research so that when they went in to graduate school they would know what research was, and how to do it, and how to set a hypothesis, and theorize, and to prove or disprove their theories, and then to help them find the funding for graduate school.  We have, we were granted a space for twenty-six people a year, but I'm kind of greedy.  I would take as many as--sometimes I had fifty-some in the program.  But I'm, I think it was very successful.  Cynthia Hill was my, was the director and I was the coordinator during the daily activities in the program.  Cynthia would write the grants and get them in and I would have the day-to-day relationships with the students.  I have one student now who is doing her post-doctorial work at the University of Cape Town [Cape Town, South Africa].  She's a Ph.D. in mechanical engineering from--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: --Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland].  I have another student who is my child.  Sherry is--wanted to be a doctor.  Her mother was--on chemical substances and abused chemical substances and she--her father had gone off and left the family and sometimes she didn't have food.  But she is now doing her residency with an MD [medical doctor] at Lehigh [Valley] Hospital in Allentown, Pennsylvania.  They're all over the country.  They've gotten master's [degrees] and Ph.D.s all over the world, probably.  One of them just graduated from California Tech [California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California] and he's now teaching math and science at Columbia [University, New York, New York].  They're just, they're doing marvelous work and it's just a good feeling to have all these surrogate children who come home.  And one of them, I told her I was broke and I was kind of down during my birthday and mother's day and she sent me a check for my birthday and flowers for Mother's Day and I said, "What could be better than this?"  But once again, I said that I believe that the purpose of my life has been to help people because I did--I designed all these programs in social security and then at the Library of Congress, supporting, and picketing, and marching, carrying the banner.  I actually marched around the Library of Congress for civil rights.  It didn't end in the '60s [1960s].  In the '90s [1990s] we were marching around the Library of Congress to get certain kinds of programs for employees at the Library.
Story_ID: 117473
Speaker 1: And I have just children at the Library who support me even 'til this day.  And then at UMBC [University of Maryland, Baltimore County, Baltimore, Maryland], just wonderful experiences with people and--that are doing very, very well. Once they understood the political environment, the system, once again, I believe that we are not, we, African Americans, are not very political.  I don't believe we understand, not the world of organized politics, but the politics of life--everything we do is political.  And getting them to understand that this is how you write your resume and this is what you do and this is--you see, in the African American community, and this is probably true when I was a child, we have a tendency to put negative labels on things that other people do.  For instance, if you're in a black community and you support your neighbors, they call it--we call it brown-nosing.  But if you're in the other community, we call it the old boys' network.  It's the same process.  We just look at it a little negatively.  But it's okay. If I ask a little Jewish boy, "Do you have a license?" he says, "Yes."  And I ask a black boy, "Do you have a license?" he says, "No."  Well, one of them has a driver's license and the other one has a driver's license, but one says yes and one says no, 'cause this one is thinking, "Do I have a license to practice medicine or a license to fly to the moon?"  And this one is taking me at my very question, "Do you have a license?"  And so, what I try to do, especially with young people, and I believe that it's my purpose in life, is to get them to understand the environment in which they have to operate and all the politics and all the understandings that it takes to be successful in that environment.
Story_ID: 117474
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about the Ellicott City School [Ellicott City, Maryland]--the Ellicott City Colored School restoration project.  First of all, tell us what the Ellicott City Colored School was or is?
Speaker 2: The Ellicott City Colored School is the first school built with county money for blacks in Howard County.
Speaker 1: And Ellicott City is a city in Howard County?
Speaker 2: Right.  Ellicott City was a city.  I don't believe there is a city in How--it is now an incorporated city in Howard County, but Ellicott City is a, was a large community, a large part of the Howard County community.  There were five or six districts in 1880.  There were electoral districts and the state law said that every county had to have a school for blacks, accessible to blacks in every electoral district.  And the first one was in District 2 in Ellicott City.  There were others that came along a little after.  There were other schools for blacks, but they weren't built and run with county funds.  They were in churches, that kind of thing.  In 1989, a friend of mine was, a genealogist, was looking for cemeteries in Howard County, black cemeteries.  And as she was looking for one, she came across this old, dilapidated building and she started doing research on it and found that it was the Ellicott City College School at one time.  The school was opened for blacks from 1880 to 1953.  In '53 [1953], the school never had heat, central heat, and it never had electricity, and it never had running water.  And when the students left in 1953, that was the first time they got heat and running water in the new building that they moved to.  It was used in the interim as a church and, then, it just sat there and dilapidated and there were vines and trees and everything growing up out of the middle of it.  She set about as a grassroots effort to raise money and when she started they told her it was going to take $400,000 to restore this school.  By the time it was finished in the year 2002, it took $1.4 million.
Speaker 1: The restoration?
Speaker 2: The restoration.  It was a $1.4 million restoration project on a one- room school.  She got sick.  She had a stroke in about 1995 or so, 1996 or so.  And now she has Alzheimer's [disease] and I promised her right after her stroke that I would help her get her building to a state of operation.  And then, when she got sick, and she decided to move to Mississippi, and then she came back with Alzheimer's, I'm there working on the project.
Speaker 1: So what's the goal, to, for it, to have it declared like as a national landmark or--
Speaker 2: It is, it has been--
Speaker 1: --historic landmark?
Speaker 2: --declared a historic landmark, but that meant there were some disadvantages to that because that meant we couldn't change anything on the outside.  We had to leave the school as it was in 1880, without asphalt, without parking lots, without certain kinds of things around it.  But what is it used for?  It is now a living history museum and genealogical resource center.  I mean, that's where we're moving.  We have programs there, periodically.  We have a seminar series called the Decatur Dorsey Series.
Speaker 1: And what's that?
Speaker 2: Decatur Dorsey was a Howard County-an who received the Congressional Medal of Honor during the Civil War.  He is the only person--there were six Marylanders, but he is the only person from Howard County to get that award.  And we named the seminar series after him so no one would forget him.  People keep, have to ask me, "Who is Decatur Dorsey?" and I have to tell them.  We have, we just had American, African American Heritage Day where we featured the Buffalo--we had exhibits, the Buffalo Soldiers.  We had the USCT [United States Colored Troops] re-enactors there.  We had one woman who had an exhibit on women in tennis before the Williams sisters [Venus and Serena Williams].  We had another one who had a display on black inventors.  Inside, we had a woman from Baltimore [Maryland] who is Ms. Senior Maryland and will be going to Las--to Nevada to compete from National Ms. Senior Maryland, Verna Day Jones, who portrayed Harriet Tubman.  She's an actress.  She did a re-enactment of Harriet Tubman.  We had people in period costumes there, so a big African American Heritage festival with speakers and exhibits and music.  There's a young jazz group that played outside all day.  We have, we sponsor African American history 365 days a year.
Story_ID: 117475
Speaker 1: And do you, have you found that people are using the genealogy resources there?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Why do you think that is?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, we haven't really completed setting it up.  We--the school, the building was finished two years ago, but after the building was finished, it took a year to finish the, to do the site restoration because they had to shore up a wall, a hill, and we had to get the [U.S. Army Corps] of Engineers to put a wall there, so the building and the school would not go down into a river that comes through Ellicott City [Maryland].  So there were things to do at the site.  So we actually started a year ago.  But the genealogical resource center required that we have a, some good computers, some heavy duty computers 'cause it will not be a resource center with material resources but with digitized resources, so that we can help you strategize.  We will have information on computer for you and that--we had to find grants and money and raise something to do this with.  We just got a computer from IBM.  One of our board members is an IBM manager who has worked on that.  In terms of living history, we've moved further with that than we have with the genealogy.  We have a trunk that's a hand carved, an antique piece, that's called Grandma's Trunk.  When young people come in, we give them a simulated day of school as it was in a particular era, maybe in the 1930s, 1940s.  They learn what an ink well is.  They learn how to write with an ink pen and a fountain pen.  They can--and then, in the afternoon after lunch, where they--and during lunchtime and recess, they jump rope, play shoot marbles, play hopscotch like we did in the '40s [1940s], and then they can go to Grandma's Trunk, where they can find a kerosene lamp, a pie plate, a washboard, lye soap, some--cameras that are no longer--one young man picked up a box camera and tried to put it up to his eye, when you look down in it--I couldn't get him to under--I think this will tie it up.  What are we there for? I had a group of middle school children there and I said, "Let's go to Grandma's Trunk."  And this little boy named Domonique [ph.] looked at me, he said, "Ms. Sylvia, you said trunk?" and I said, "Yes, we're going to look in Grandma's Trunk."  He said, "Ms. Sylvia, you can't get a trunk in here."  I said, "Why, Domonique?"  He said, "A trunk won't come through that door."  I said, "Why?"  He said, "Trunks are in cars and elephants and you can't get them through that door."  So I had to explain to him that a trunk was something that you once used when you didn't have a closet, that you once took your clothes away to school in.  He said, "Oh, like a foot locker."  I said, "Yeah."  Well I, you know, I said, "Well, do, are we really needed?"  Yes, we're really needed.  They don't know what--young people don't know what rationing stamps are, so we have some there.  We tell them about World War II [WWII] rationing stamps.  We tell them about blacks in the military.  We look at black inventors, so we have these kind of seminars, these kind of programs.  We have workshops for young, for youngsters, writing implements.  Just what did you write with before you had a ballpoint pen?  They don't know.  So we do some of those kinds of things at the school.
Story_ID: 117476
Speaker 1: Why do you think history is important?
Speaker 2: I believe that history is important because if you are going to go somewhere if you go to AAA [American Automobile Association] to get a map or go to MapQuest to get, you got to first, when you go to MapQuest, put in where you are.  And if you don't know where you are, if you don't know who you are or where you are, you can't plot your way to where you want to go, even on MapQuest. And so I try, I believe history is important because it tells people, helps people to under--and see some people think you know, can know where you are now without knowing where you, where, how you got there.  I don't believe that.  I believe that if I want to plot well where I want to go, I need to know on whose shoulders I stand.  I need to know how I got to be where I am today so that I can plot adequately to the future and that's why history is important.
Story_ID: 117477
Speaker 1: And Ms. Martin when you look back at your life, what stands out the most to you and why?
Speaker 2: What stands out the most to me is the value, what values that my mother [Clara Marie Evans Cook] and my father [Emanuel Levi Cook] taught me.  The fact that my father took me for walks, introduced me to cultural aspects, taught me how to dress, it bothers me now when young people sit in front of the boob tube [television] or the computer without having that cultural enrichment that comes from parents, from grandparents, from, not just from schools.  Well, I think we have--sometimes we put too much on the schoolteacher.  I believe that it comes from family.  And when I look back on my life, I think that the cultural values that came about because--and we didn't have money to do it.  My father never owned a car.   He died without owning an automobile.  But he walked us, he talked to us, he took us places.  That kind of thing lasts for more than one lifetime.  You pass it down from generation to generation and that's what I believe has been really the foundation from which I jump.
Story_ID: 117478
Speaker 1: And how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to--to sum it all up, I'd like to say that I helped somebody.  I feel that--people tell me now that I've helped somebody and I think that that's what makes life worth living.
Story_ID: 117479
Speaker 1: And what do you believe your legacy will be?
Speaker 2: I--my honest answer is that I don't really know.  What I'd like my legacy to be is that I put a value on, and maybe this is not the right word, but I put a value on cultural aspects of life and intellect.  And I believe that if you dare to dream, I believe that if you dream and you've got a foundation of the abilities to do some things like reading and intellectual things and you understand culture, then you can dream and jump as far as you can dream.
Story_ID: 117480
Speaker 1: Any regrets other than taking the job at the Library of Congress?
Speaker 2: I don't regret taking the job at the Library of--every coin can be turned--this is my, one of my mottos, every coin can be turned over.  If you got a tail here, you can turn it over to heads.  And what I try to do is take the tails and turn them over to heads or the heads and turn them over to tails.  So my career at the Library of Congress was not a regret.  I learned a heck of a lot and I would not have the friends and the people around me if I had not been there.  I would not know what I know about research if I had not been there, about collections, about archives if I had not been in the Library.  So I don't have any--do I have any regrets?  I regret--I tell people that God knows what I need when I don't know myself.  There was a time when I regretted having children but I don't now that I'm getting older.  I'm so happy that I got some kids that come by every once in a while, that's why they have a door key.
Speaker 1: To check on you, huh?
Speaker 2: But I don't--do I--what do I regret?  I regret that I had not studied history earlier.  When I was at the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia], I did not have to take but nine credits.  And just think of the wealth of materials that are there.  Thomas Jefferson's materials are just awesome.  And I did not know the value of history sooner, but it came to me when I was on the other side of forty.  When I was sitting at home with my children, why wasn't I reading something, you know?  I was reading something, Time magazine, but why wasn't I reading something about history and blacks in Maryland or something.  Anyway, the history could have come a lot earlier.
Speaker 1: And--
Story_ID: 117481
Speaker 1: Why do you say sometimes you regret having children?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't like children.  I shouldn't have--(laughter).  Now people who may look at this a hundred years from now, that lady is crazy.  But I really--children don't turn me on.  It never occurred to me that I was going to--I never made--tried very hard to be--my children are good.  My son [Donald Eugene Kemp Martin] is a Ph.D. at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] in math.  My daughter [Marcia Lauren Martin] is doing wonderfully.  My grandchildren are absolutely marvelous.  I'm glad that I have them, but I never had a goal, it was never my goal to be a mother.  It was never my goal to have children.  I think I would have had a wonderful, productive life without children.
Speaker 1: What kind of mother do you think you are?
Speaker 2: My children tell me I'm a wonderful mother and I think that's more important than what I think I am.  I know I made some mistakes.  I think I did the best that I could do at the time but not--but I think that I--I think that they are the--the proof of the pudding is in the eating.  And so I, I have two wonderful children.  They did very well in school, they did very--I don't have to take care of my grandchildren.  I don't have a grandchild that's on drugs or substance abuse.  My grandchildren say please, thank you.  My three year old grandson prays before we take the car out of the driveway.  I think that's wonderful.  My children are good parents and I think that they think I was a good parent.  So it's worked out--I think that one of the things we have to be very careful about with children is that we sometimes are not honest with them.  I told my--when I left their daddy [Donald Winfrey Kemp Martin], I took nothing.  I had no alimony, no child support.  I only took the two children.  I left him with the furniture and the children did not even have a television 'cause I left, I just picked up the two children and left.  And I was upset one day and so upset I said, you know, "I don't know what I'm going to do, I don't know how I'm going to do it."  And my children said, my son came over to me and put his arms around me and said, "Mommy, we'll help you."
Speaker 1: Great.  Thank you very much, Ms. Martin.  Thank you.
Story_ID: 116750
Speaker 1: (AUDIO TECHNICAL ISSUES)
Speaker 2: That's wrong.  He's my paternal great grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is Henry Benjamin Evans and I think this is about 1900.
Speaker 2: And who is he?
Speaker 1: He's my mother's grandfather, my maternal great grandfather.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh goodness, this is Clara Marie Evans Cook and Helen Louise Richardson, 1950.
Speaker 1: So your mother and your aunt?
Speaker 2: My mother and her sister Helen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is Catherine Claiborne [ph.] Cook, my father's brother, my uncle, 1945.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is Nathaniel John Cook and his wife Mary Brown Cook, about 1940.  They are my father's brother and his wife.
Speaker 1: Very good.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Mary Evans and Benjamin Evans, my mother's sister and brother about 1944.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is Mattie Evans and this was probably about between 19--circa 1925.  I don't really remember.
Speaker 1: And who is Mattie Evans?
Speaker 2: That's my mother's sister, her older sister.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh.  This is Sylvia Clara Cook, December 1938.  This is Clara Copper Evans, my grandmother, my mother's mother and this is about 1950.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh my goodness, this is--
Speaker 2: (BRIEF INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: This is Harrison Martin Evans and Sylvia Clara Cook about 1941.
Speaker 2: And who, whose Harrison?
Speaker 1: This is my grandfather and Sylvia, me.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't know you went back that far.  This is Cal [ph.] Dixon and I believe this is a World War I picture so that would be about 1917, 1918.
Speaker 1: Okay, and who is he?
Speaker 2: He is my mother's cousin.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is Sylvia Clara Cooke Martin about 19--I'm sorry, 2003.
Speaker 1: Okay, next?  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Oh I'm sorry, that's Donald Winfrey Kemp Martin and Sylvia, my children's father.  That's 1965.  And that's Sylvia in about 1963.
Speaker 1: Very good. Anytime you're ready.
Speaker 2: 1958, Sylvia.
Speaker 1: Okay, enough said.
Speaker 2: Is this your wedding photograph?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Do you not want to do that or--?
Speaker 1: It don't make any difference.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's Donald Winfrey Kemp Martin and Sylvia Cooke, September 1957.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: Oh!  Oh wow, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: From the left that's Sylvia and then Sonya Reynolds, Rachel Riley, Brenda Priscilla Smith on the back row and Sandra Reynolds, September 1957.
Speaker 1: Very good.
Speaker 2: Oh my god.  That's Sylvia, 19--
Speaker 1: Sixty-Four.
Speaker 2: Oh okay, '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Great.  Okay.
Speaker 2: That is Sylvia, 1954.  I think that's my 16th, I know that's my 16th birth--
Speaker 1: On the right, go ahead.
Speaker 2: That's Sylvia in 1968.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was an old Polaroid.  It's--
Speaker 1: This is Sylvia, 1967.  I think the other one's about the same.  What's the date on (unclear)?
Speaker 2: You think it's about the same?  It doesn't have a date.
Speaker 1: I think it's about the same.
Speaker 2: If you think it's about the same--
Speaker 1: No, I got a wig on, on one and that was before with Medi--
Speaker 2: That was a different time--
Speaker 1: Oh no, well Shirley Chisholm is good though.
Speaker 2: Yeah, what did you (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Oh, she's my (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is Sylvia with Shirley Chisholm, 1990.  One of the great things about being at the Library was that you got to be with all these people.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, I can imagine.
Speaker 2: Sylvia with Walter Fauntroy--
Speaker 1: What was (unclear)?
Speaker 2: --about 1988.  It was congressional black caucus time.  This is Sylvia with--starting from the left, I'm sorry, I--
Speaker 1: That's okay.
Speaker 2: Her last name is Williams.  What's her first name?  Mrs. Williams, Aileen Farmer Hayes, Maxine Waters, Sylvia and--oh, she's going to kill me.  I don't--I've forgotten.
Speaker 1: That's okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: About what year was it taken?
Speaker 2: This was about 1990.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I, I can call you and give you her name if that helps.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Starting at the top.
Speaker 1: This is Sylvia with [HM] John Hope Franklin, 1989.
Speaker 2: Okay, and lower right?
Speaker 1: Sylvia with Dr. [HM Josef] Ben-Jochannan, 9--2003.
Speaker 2: Got it.
Speaker 1: This is-is it the camera or is it you that makes these pictures look so good?
Speaker 2: It's the camera.
Speaker 1: This is, standing this is Sylvia and Clara Marie Evans Cook, my mother.
Speaker 2: Okay, about what year?
Speaker 1: Oh, that's year 2000.  You know what you don't have?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: --1977.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's your daughter?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my daughter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is Donald Eugene Kemp Martin, 1975.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's your son.
Speaker 1: My son.  My father, Emanuel Levi Cook, approximately 1935,   I don't know, let me see, 14--might have been 9, probably was 1940.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: My father was 1940.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's fine.  We got it on there.
Speaker 1: This is Antoinette Ware Martin and Donald Eugene Martin, 1995.
Speaker 2: And your son and daughter in law?
Speaker 1: My son and daughter in law.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is Marcia Lauren Martin and Glen Fenderson, 2001.
Speaker 2: And who is this?
Speaker 1: This is my daughter and her husband.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Probably her former husband by now.  Just went to divorce.
Speaker 2: Okay, I think that was--
Speaker 1: Keep going, there's one or two more.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is Clara Marie Evans Cook, 1934.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And who is that?
Speaker 1: My mother.  That's the one you had to hold--
Speaker 2: That's the one that I got.
Speaker 1: Okay, so we don't have to do that one.
Speaker 2: So I think if we got up to there we did it.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did you remember this one?
Speaker 2: Let's go ahead and just do it real quick.
Speaker 1: This is Laura Pocahontas Quarles and John Samuel Cooke, 1945.
Speaker 2: And who are they?
Speaker 1: They're my paternal grandparents.
Speaker 2: Okay, great.
Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is Laura Pocahontas Quarles, my grand--Cook, my grandmother in 1944.
Speaker 1: Great.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now the ones in the book, I mean I think we have--
Speaker 1: (BRIEF PAUSE)
Speaker 2: This is Danielle Nicole Martin, 2004.
Speaker 1: And who is she?
Speaker 2: She's my granddaughter.
Speaker 1: No, I just need you to say it on tape.
Speaker 2: Okay I understand.  Okay.  That's--This is Donald Benjamin Kemp Martin and this picture was taken in 2000.
Speaker 1: This is your grandson?
Speaker 2: My grandson, my first grandson.  And this is Jonathan Antonio Martin, 2003.
Speaker 1: Your grandson?
Speaker 2: My grandson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
