Story_ID: 10499
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for the--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Larry who?
Speaker 1: Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer, the camera man here is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: My name is Samuel "S-A-M-U-E-L"  Samuel Proctor "P-R-O-C-T-O-R" Massie "M-A-S-S-I-E".
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) The third of this month.  In fact it's about two days from right now.
Speaker 1: July.
Speaker 2: July.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 1919.
Speaker 2: Sure 1919. You know that don't you?
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Teacher at the [United States] Naval Academy [Annapolis, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Okay.  You're a chemist. Right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm a chemistry professor.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the fifth or the fourth--what is today? It's not very far.  I forget what day--
Speaker 1: This is June--July ninteenth.
Speaker 2: July ninteenth.
Speaker 1: It may be July ninteenth.
Speaker 2: July 19, 2003.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think so.  That's right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 1: In what? Where are we what where?
Speaker 2: Where are we at the present time?
Speaker 1: We're at the--where are we--I don't know where--
Speaker 2: We're in Laurel, Maryland where you've lived for the last thirty years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  At Fairfield Inn.  I think that's the (unclear).
Speaker 2: You mean Laurel?
Speaker 1: Observing is--what is your full name Trey?
Speaker 2: Samuel Proctor Massie the third.
Speaker 1: (laughs) Right.
Speaker 2: Tray.
Speaker 1: Samuel Proctor Massie III, Trey is--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) See he was born after me.  He's my first child.  And he--I didn't wanna call him Samuel.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah. And your wife is Gloria Massie.
Speaker 2: And so I give him that name--six.  My wife is Gloria Massie.
Speaker 1: (unclear).  Yes.  She's here as well.
Story_ID: 10500
Speaker 1: Sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food? Watermelon and chicken, I guess and milk.  Just food in general.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, sir do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: College?
Speaker 1: Color. Color
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know if I have a favorite color--I like blue color like I got on here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Dark colors you mean?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess so.
Speaker 1: Navy blue?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I'd say that since I'm with the Navy. And we have the blue color.  I guess Navy, 'cause that's my color--since I worked for the [United States] Naval Academy [Annapolis, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't have any special.  'Cause I worked in the summer and winter.  I worked teaching in the summer and winter I teach kids.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite place to go on vacation? A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No, I don't have that money.  I'd like to go, but I don't have the favorite many--I'd like to--if I had enough money I could have a lot of favorites.
Speaker 1: (laughs) Okay.
Speaker 2: Dad's a workaholic.  He's--
Speaker 1: That make sense.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite saying?
Speaker 1: Saying, yeah.
Speaker 2: (pause) I don't know whether I got one or not.  I have to think about it.
Speaker 1: How about, "Do the best you can with what you have. "
Speaker 2: I have to think about it.  I can't think of--
Speaker 1: How about "Do the best you can with what you have. "
Speaker 2: That might be a--that's what I might tell my students.  "Do the best you can with what you have."
Story_ID: 10501
Speaker 1: Give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My [grand]mother's full name is Josephine Jacko.  About my father.
Speaker 1: His mother's name was Earlee Taylor Massie.
Speaker 2: Earlee Taylor, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now about when was she born?
Speaker 2: [Grand]Mother [Josephine Jacko] was born in Texas--in Texas in a slave track. She was born ---when they declared emancipation. When President [Abraham Lincoln] declared (sic) emancipation.  He had to--The  kids--then the president declared emancipation for all the blacks.
Speaker 1: I guess what Dad is trying to say is that his mother's name was Earlee. She was probably born at the turn of the century.
Speaker 2: And she was--
Speaker 1: And his grandmother's name was Josephine.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And Josephine was very similar to his mother.  Because in those days, the grandmother helped raise the children and lived in the home.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) That's right.
Speaker 1: And so--like he took Josephine similar to his mom.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And she was the one who was born on the road to Texas.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And that was the road that allowed black slaves--well allowed slave owners--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) To go from Texas to--
Speaker 1: (unclear) to avoid the Emancipation Proclamation.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) From Arkansas to Texas.
Speaker 1: Because Texas was not a rebellious state.
Speaker 2: And Josephine was born on the road to Texas.
Speaker 1: Now this is important.  Because people don't often realize that the Emancipation Proclamation didn't free all black people.  it only freed the slaves of those who were rebelling against the United States government.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Well now, there were a few--there were a few--there were nice slavers who freed the slaves.
Speaker 1: Well yeah.  But by law the Emancipation Proclamation didn't free anybody who wasn't already--that was an important point.  So your--
Speaker 2: Well some of the slavers gave the slaves freedom.
Speaker 1: Okay. So tell us about--are there any other stories about your mother's family you wanna tell us?
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: About the--
Speaker 2: My--let's see.  My grandmother was born in Arkansas in a slave--as a slave going from Arkansas--going from Arkansas to Texas.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And that was how  she knew when she how old she was.  She knew she was born a slave to Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she was born in 1863, I guess, with the Emancipation Proclamation was signed.
Speaker 2: Around that time, yeah.
Speaker 1: I see.  Okay. Alright.  Were there any other stories from her side of the family you can tell us? Or that you remember?
Speaker 2: How about William B. Jacko?
Speaker 1: That's my old--William B.--that's my grandfather.  He was--that was his name.  'Cause that was my grandfather's name was William B. Massie [Jacko].  And he was enslaved.  He was a slave.  And he had a nice--he was a teacher.  He had a nice teacher who was kind enough to kind of release him a little bit. He didn't make him a slave.
Speaker 2: But Dad, William B. Jacko served--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: The Arkansas legislature under Reconstruction.  And that was your grandfather.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He was from Pine Bluff [Arkansas].
Speaker 1: That's right, he was.
Speaker 2: And he was Earlee Taylor Massie's father.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Boy you got a good memory.  You remember more of  that--more of that than I do.
Story_ID: 10502
Speaker 1: Tell us about your mother [Earlee Taylor Massie].  What was she like and what did she do?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother was a teacher.  And she was first--the first interesting thing about my mother she--world war--when they had emancipation declared, then they didn't have schools for blacks.  And so my--and mother couldn't get a job anywhere--she couldn't work with her dad--with my dad. [Married couples were not allowed to teach in the same school district in North Little Rock.] And so she had to go and be--and go into--they didn't have any schools for Negroes.  So that they gave--that they gave her a job teaching [in a rural school in Keo, Arkansas].  Because slavery didn't have no emancipation.  But she married Dad.  And because she was married to him--because he had a nice slaver, he let mother become his--I mean, that's right, so she was--
Speaker 1: Right.  So she could--she was a country teacher.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Mother--mother--and that's what made (unclear). I taught--to take care of me.  I was just five years old when grandmother [Mother] started teaching [at Keo].  And since I was an only child, I was the only child who had--I had to go to--I had to go with mother .  I was the only place to be in there with mother.  So mother took me to--to her.  And so that's why she would go to school.  'Cause that's the only place she could--she had to go with my grandmother.
Speaker 1: They used to ride on a buckboard out in the country--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That Monday to--to--so your mother could teach school.  Grandma Earlee could teach school.
Speaker 2: Well--well she had to.  You know.  That was the only way they taught the black kids around there. See and they didn't believe--.
Speaker 1: She taught in the proverbial one room schoolhouse.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: Taught many black students.
Speaker 2: All black students.  That's why--that's how I got my education.  She had to take me to school in order to--she had to take me 'cause she couldn't leave me home with--nobody to leave me home with.  So the only thing she could do--and she couldn't have nobody take care of me.  And so that's why she took me to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) And that's where I learned.  Because the only place she could have me was there.  And so I was in school all day.  And therefore, I spent my whole school [day] going  to--from school--from grade to grade. [As a pre-schooler, Massie accompanied his mother to her job teaching country school, which had eight grades in one room with the children seated by grade level;  he followed her around to the different 'classes' and listened to the lessons.]That's how I got my start.  That's how I got my education in school.  I had to go to school all day with Grandma [Mother].
Speaker 1: And you went from class--from class to class? Didn't you when--?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, from first to eighth. .  Yeah.  That's right.
Speaker 1: Now from what we've read about you, you're a pretty smart man.  And you were a pretty smart kid too.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah.  Well I was lucky, yes sir.
Speaker 1: You're very bright and--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, well I've been very lucky.  I had all smart kids.
Speaker 1: And some have said that you're near genius in your intelligence and all that.
Speaker 2: I was fair.  I had a good education.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And you--well you were way ahead of the others students in the class from what we heard--we have read.  Right? So you learn how to read real early and--
Speaker 2: Well my grandfather was a teacher.  And he showed--he taught my grandmother something too. And one reason my mother got a good school, Grandpa [William B. Jacko], was determined that his kids would get--I told you he was in--he was in the [Arkansas] legislature.  And they had to go to school.
Speaker 1: One of the great stories about him is that he had all daughters.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And he told his daughters which is what Grandma Earlee said, always said, "I want you as educated as any husband you marry."
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 1: So they all had professions.
Speaker 2: And they all got school at the--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Good grades.
Speaker 2: They got education in school.  The--
Speaker 1: You ever heard of Philander Smith [College, Little Rock, Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Philander Smith school.  Yeah.  Right?
Speaker 1: That's in Little Rock [Arkansas].
Speaker 2: That's where--that's where my mother [Earlee Taylor Massie] got her education.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where she met my dad [Samuel P. Massie, Sr.].
Story_ID: 10503
Speaker 1: See my father [Samuel P. Massie, Sr.] was born in Ohio.  And he was in--yeah, yeah--Ohio.
Speaker 2: Now he was raised in Ohio.  Right?
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: He was born in--He was born in Winchester, Kentucky though.  Right?  Was that it?
Speaker 1: My father was born in Winchester--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Right.  In Winchester, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And he was raised in Xenia, Ohio.
Speaker 1: That's right, yes.  That's where he went to school.
Speaker 2: Now tell us about him.  Now he--he--I've heard that he worked with the [Wilbur and Orville] Wright brothers.
Speaker 1: He did.  Yes.  He discovered--e went to school [Central High School, Dayton, Ohio] with Wilbur Wright.
Speaker 2: Wilbur Wright.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He--that was one of the things he did.  He helped--he worked with them--with that Wright brothers.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And he used to tell stories.  I remember that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  What kind of stories would he tell about the Wright brothers?
Speaker 1: Things about the Wright brothers and how, you know, what they were like.  You know, just a little bit about them.
Speaker 2: Do you remember any of the stories?
Speaker 1: Oh no, see, I can't remember--I was about a year or two years when--at that time.
Speaker 2: Did he work on the bicycles in the Wright brothers cycle shop [Wright Cycle Company]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he worked in a--he worked some on--some of the jobs there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He actually worked in the bicycle shop.  Right?
Speaker 2: I think he did.  I think he did.
Speaker 1: And did he know Paul Laurence Dunbar?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he knew Paul.  He used to tell us about him.  Paul Laurence Dunbar.  He used to tell us about him.  Paul Laurence Dunbar.  He used to tell us about Laurence Dunbar.
Speaker 1: Did your father go to high school in Dayton [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he finished high school in Dayton.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That must have been Central High School [Dayton, Ohio] I guess.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  All right.  That's interesting.  Yeah.  So why did your father leave Dayton to come to Arkansas? Did he tell you why he came to Arkansas?
Speaker 2: Well he first had to try to get himself a job to work.  And the black school called Shorter College [North Little Rock, Arkansas]--and that's where Grandpa--that's where my father got most of his education.  But then he had to leave and find a job.  But there were only jobs for white-for blacks he had to go to the colored school.
Speaker 1: And Dad?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Before that, he attended Howard University [Washingon, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know he did--he went to--.
Speaker 1: He went to divinity school.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In addition, he was a charter Phi Beta Sigma fraternity member.
Speaker 1: Yeah, for a little while.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  And so he went to--going to Shorter brought him to--
Speaker 1: Arkansas.
Speaker 2: To Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Well yeah, Shorter brought him to Arkansas.
Speaker 2: To Arkansas.  Okay.  All right.  Well, so your mother [Earlee Taylor Massie] and father met in college--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) At Shorter.
Speaker 2: In Shorter.
Speaker 1: At Shorter College.  Right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See, my grandfather [William B. Jacko] wanted mother to go to Philander Smith [College, Little Rock, Arkansas].  And she went to school there.  And--but to get--the only job--she got a job working at Shorter.  And so that's where she went to school.
Speaker 1: All right. Now so your father became an AME [African Methodist Episcopal] minister.  Right?
Speaker 2: That's right.  And he became a minister.  And he built the first church [Bethel A.M.E. Church]--the church I was baptized in when I came to Little Rock [Arkansas].  I was--I think I was the first child to be Baptist to be in school.  Go to school there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you--are there any other stories about your father you want to tell us? That you haven't told us? Anything that you remember about him that you wanna tell us?
Speaker 2: Well he was a teacher. And he was a young, jack-leg preacher.  We called people jack-leg are people who don't have a legitimate job. But he taught there at Shorter College.  Shorter College is where he taught the early part of my life.  The early part of my life I knew about Shorter College.
Speaker 1: So he was a teacher at Shorter College--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in those times too, as well.  But he was a preacher.  Sort of a part-time preacher.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, that's right he was a preacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  'Cause my grandmother [Josephine Jacko] wanted him to work somewhere else and make a little money.
Speaker 1: 'Cause he wasn't making no money.
Speaker 2: And he taught--'cause he taught science at [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School in Little Rock [Arkansas].
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) at Dunbar.  And he was science teacher.  He was my first science teacher, was my grandfather
Story_ID: 10504
Speaker 1: Well I want you to think back about growing up.  And tell us--can you tell us about some of the sights and sounds and smells and growing up?
Speaker 2: What do you mean?
Speaker 1: Well, sights, and sounds and smells.  The kind of things that you saw.  And the kind of things that you heard--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: And the kind of thing that you could smell when you were a little kid.
Speaker 2: I don't remember too much smelling. 'Cause with--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) What about food or--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I don't know. There's a lot of things to smell.  But--
Speaker 2: Why don't you talk about the street, Dad that you were on and the pavement versus the others street that was unpaved.
Speaker 1: The major street I knew was named--was Linton.  She was going--if you were going--if you go to Little Rock [Arkansas] right now and you were to drive, to Little Rock right now, you would find a main street.  The main street there is Little Rock.  There--
Speaker 2: Is Lent you mean?
Speaker 1: Was that the street Lent or something?
Speaker 2: No, it short.  Did--what did I say it was?  The street we grew up on?
Speaker 1: You said it was Lent before.
Speaker 2: I guess so.  Yeah, I gave the name of the street.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where we grew up on.
Speaker 1: Now what was it like? What was that street like?
Speaker 2: I remember when they paved the first street.  Boy, I can't say--I'd better try to do get one of these days and write that if I can get around to it.
Speaker 1: You used to talk about how the being on a paved street boosted your self respect and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And those among others.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Now that was when I was--
Speaker 1: And it was very different from an unpaved street.
Speaker 2: Boy, you remember a lot of things I told you.  God.  You remember a lot.  Negroes lived on a street called Linton, "L-I-N-T-O-N".
Speaker 1: Linton I guess? Is that it? "L-I-N-T-O-N"?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Linton Street.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that was the main street.
Speaker 1: Well what did you like to do when you were a little boy?
Speaker 2: Well there really wasn't much to do.  I don't know a whole lot I like to do.  But on the farmland, 'cause that's where the farms were and that's where--that's a little job if you were a black boy.  You had to work around the farm. (Unclear) about that.  I worked with farm hands.  That's all I remember.
Speaker 1: You worked at Horton's.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well Horton was a grocery store.  Yeah, I worked at Horton.  And I was--that's where I first learned how to work at a grocery store and  to be in charge of everything.
Speaker 1: Cut meat.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I learned to be a butcher. I was honest.  And the man, Mr. Horton was his name.  The man that--he would hire my mother [Earlee Taylor Massie].  And I remember--I will always remember that store.  Because they let him--his father would let me get the groceries for working there.  And I think I would get two--and I think we'd get two dollars and something a week.  Something like that.  It wasn't much.  But he liked me 'cause I was honest.  And I remember when they--in the early days that was on Nineteenth [Street] the Negroes worked at the Shaw place.  A store.  And Mr. Horton was the chief man who sold food.  'Cause he would go there every Saturday and get the food.  And he would--and he liked me because I was honest.
Story_ID: 10505
Speaker 1: Can you tell us the name of the grade school you went to?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The name--the grade was called Hickory Street [School, Little Rock, Arkansas].
Speaker 1: Hickory Street? Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That was the only street on the street.  See that was a major--on a major street. That was a major street.  Hickory Street.
Speaker 1: Was Hickory Street high school and grammar school?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) It was eighth and ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Eighth and ninth.  Okay.  And did you--did you go to [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School--?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 1: In--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I went to Dunbar High School in Little Rock.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now when you were in high school did you--did you participate in sports and all that kind of thing?  Or did you--?
Speaker 2: No, sir.  I wasn't that big.  See I was only eight or nine.
Speaker 1: Okay, When you were in high school?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) See my brother died when I was nine.
Speaker 1: OK.  So you were like a little kid in high school.  Right?
Speaker 2: Well I was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Dad's high school graduation picture has everyone else in long pants and dresses and he's in knickers.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  Well, how did you--did it make you feel funny being the youngest kid in high school? The youngest student?
Speaker 1: I don't know--I think it made me--I don't know how it made me feel.  But I guess it's why I didn't make much difference about it.
Speaker 2: Were you--well were your parents proud of you?
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Oh yeah, they were proud of me.  'Cause I was smart. I was liked--all the other kids thought I was smart.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you--did you run for class office or anything like that when you were in school?
Speaker 1: Now in junior high [sic, at Dunbar Junior College] had I got to be president of the student body. I guess so.  A man named (unclear) Jones was named after the junior--in high school. If any of you want to find out where my birth place is.  If you go to Little Rock, you get on Jones Street.  And ask for where Jones High School is.  That's my birth street.  Six--I was born right there on Jones Street.
Speaker 2: You see two large walnut trees and those were in his backyard.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  We had more than that.  We had eight--what do you call it? He had a lot of--what kind of sweet nut grows?
Speaker 2: Walnuts or pecans?
Speaker 1: Yeah, pecans.  My back line was full of peaches and those trees.  That's all I remember.
Speaker 2: OK.  Well did you have chemistry in high school?
Speaker 1: No, I don't think we ever had chemistry.  I think we might have had science.  But I don't think I had any science.  Because remember I was only seven.  And they--I didn't get to high school 'til I was in senior high. I went to school there.
Speaker 2: Well did you have science in senior high school?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we had a little bit of science.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Did you like it a lot? Or did you--?
Speaker 1: I guess it was interesting--I like--I like mathematics and like that.  I guess I liked it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: I wasn't very good--I was never very, very good with my hands.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So now you graduated from Dunbar when you were thirteen years old?
Speaker 1: Yeah, when I was thirteen.  That's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Okay.  Can you tell us about graduation? What was that like?
Speaker 1: I can't--just--I can't really remember--Grandma was--.  I think I gave the high school speech.  'Cause that--but I don't remember.  I don't remember much of high school.
Speaker 2: But you gave a speech?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I gave the graduation from high school commencement speech I think.
Story_ID: 10506
Speaker 1: So--but when you were on the verge of graduation, did you know you were going to college?
Speaker 2: Me and my father--see my father [Samuel B. Massie, Sr.] taught in the junior high.  And he could take me to high school free. Fifteen dollars a month tuition.  That's how I got to go to creditory school with Grandpa [William B. Jacko].  They let him go there.  So I went to school there in Little Rock [Arkansas]. And I don't remember much.
Speaker 1: But I believe you had--when Dad graduated he was twelve or--around age twelve [sic, age thirteen at high school graduation].
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I was sixteen.
Speaker 1: Unfortunately that was in the [Great] Depression.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, I think was I--wasn't I sixteen?  I think I was sixteen.
Speaker 1: During the Depression.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was sixteen.  I don't think I was thirteen.
Speaker 1: You were sixteen when you started college, I believe.
Speaker 2: Oh maybe so.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you had to wait two years--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Well that might be it.
Speaker 1: Because of the Depression--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you're right.
Speaker 1: You couldn't afford to go to college.
Speaker 2: You're right, you're right.  See he remembers a lot of my stuff too.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so then he waited two years.
Speaker 1: What happened? He just worked or something? What did he do?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he worked at Horton's [grocery store] and a few other odd jobs.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then he went to University of Arkansas-Pine Bluff [Pine Bluff, Arkansas] which at that time was Arkansas AM&N [Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College].
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: All right.  Agricultural, mechanical and what's the "N"?
Speaker 1: Normal.
Speaker 2: Normal.
Speaker 1: Normal, for teaching.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  When you recognize that there were only three things Negroes were supposed to do.  Education, agricultural, teaching--AM&N.  That's us.  AM&N.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Teaching was mechanical (unclear). Teaching was called mechanical.
Speaker 1: Normal.
Speaker 2: Normal--normal was--
Speaker 1: Engineering was mechanical.
Speaker 2: Yeah, AM&N, Agricultural, Mechanical, and Normal.
Story_ID: 10507
Speaker 1: Tell us about the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff [Pine Bluff, Arkansas].  How did you like that? Now you're sixteen years old when you started.  Right?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: Yeah--when you started at the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff.
Speaker 2: Well I was about five or six years old.  It was the only school.  And I guess I went--I  didn't have no money.  I think it was fifteen dollars a year or something.  And I went there.  But the university president always--I always will remember--the university president would not give me a degree.
Speaker 1: Oh you're talking about the University of Arkansas [Fayetteville, Arkansas].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You're talking about--I'm talking about the University of Arkansas Pine Bluff where you went to college.  When you started.
Speaker 2: --Went to college.
Speaker 1: When you started college.  I was asking you how did you like school when you started, and what was it like?
Speaker 2: Oh I've--no, that was a black school.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: That is the black school.  That's what I'm talking about.
Speaker 1: University of Arkansas [at Pine Bluff] is a black school.
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: I didn't have no money.  Tuition was ten dollars a year.  Something like that.  I was smart.  I won a prize fifteen dollars and they gave me a year's worth of school there.  And so--
Speaker 2: Who were some of your teachers there?
Speaker 1: If I could remember the names.  I have to think it over.  (pause) Listen, would you do me a favor? When you--let me think.  See if I can think of some of them.  I'll try to see if I can remember.
Speaker 2: If you can't remember now that's all right.  I'm just asking.
Speaker 1: I'm just trying to think.
Speaker 2: That's okay.
Speaker 1: I had a history teacher, a Lincoln teacher, math.  I had my first job at teaching with the math teacher.  History teacher, Latin teacher, I don't remember.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But--.
Speaker 2: But you did--did you have chemistry there at--?
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Oh yeah I went to--that's how I got where I am.  I had teachers--I took chemistry there. And he told me about teaching at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee].  That he want me to go to graduate school and get a master's degree.  So he could go on further.  So I did.
Speaker 2: Now when did you--you joined a fraternity, right? When you were--?
Speaker 1: I couldn't join the fraternity until about 1940.  Because Arkansas didn't have any money.  And the president said, "Those colored kids were too young to go to school."  So we didn't have--I didn't go that time.
Speaker 2: Okay. Well do you have any memories of college and University of Arkansas AM&N [Agricultural, Mechanical, and Normal College, now called University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff]? The black school?
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Oh no, no.
Speaker 2: The black school.
Speaker 1: You have any memories about the black college you went to that you can tell us? You know?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  There--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) any good stories?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I could tell--because I became the national president of the black--in fact, you were the one kept me from going to the party?  We had our meeting down there.  Remember that thing you kept me from going to. To that party two weeks. I'll have to get that--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well--.
Speaker 2: And my dad belong to a fraternity called Sigma [Pi Phi]. And he was the first black to be named. Remember?
Speaker 1: He was a charter Sigma [Pi Phi] at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  He was a charter Sigma at Howard University.
Speaker 2: Yeah, charter.  Charter Sigma.  Did I tell you that? Well, you remember everything I told you.  I'm glad that you got a good memory.
Speaker 1: When did you become a Kappa [Alpha Psi]?
Speaker 2: Around 19--early in my career.  Because the president of [University of] Arkansas [at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas] wouldn't--said Negroes couldn't afford it.. He didn't have no money.
Speaker 1: In Nashville [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: In Nashville, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: At the Fisk [University] chapter.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's when he joined the--okay. That's when you joined the Kappas.  And--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Yeah.  and I didn't become anything until later when I went to Arkansas to go to school.  My father was a Sigma [Pi Phi] member of a organization--and so he's the--and in Washington [D.C.], and so he's--one of my good friends--I gotta go--go there and see (unclear).  'Cause he had one of my mother [Earlee Taylor Massie] and father's [Samuel P. Massie, Sr.] cemetery there.  Where they were buried.  He was a charter member of it.  And we would sing for me.  I gotta go around and look for that.
Story_ID: 10508
Speaker 1: After you graduated from University of Arkansas AM&N [now University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff], you went to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee].  Right? To get a graduate degree?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I graduated from Fisk.  Then I went to--I graduated from there.  And got to get a degree. And then I went to Fisk to go to school.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That's in Nashville.
Speaker 1: Right.  Now--
Speaker 2: And then--
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers there that you remember?
Speaker 2: Where? At where?
Speaker 1: Fisk.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Some of the great black teachers of that generation were from Fisk.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they helped me be where I was. That's where I--went to get my first degree
Speaker 1: Who were some of your teachers?
Speaker 2: You have to give me time to--my memory is not as bright as it ought to be.  It'll come to me, but he--but that's where I got my first degree.
Speaker 1: That's [Fisk University] where you got your master's degree.  Right?
Speaker 2: Yeah I got my first one.  He taught me a saying.  He taught me one of my famous saying about--they used to send us to school and we had at chalk and chalk.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Mordecai [Johnson]
Speaker 2: That was his famous expression.
Speaker 1: Who is that?
Speaker 2: Not Mordecai Johnson.
Speaker 1: Mordecai Johnson.  He went to Fisk.
Speaker 2: Oh he--did you--he was a teacher of yours?
Speaker 1: Well I knew him.  I didn't go to him 'cause--But I knew him. Once though, I was going to live with him.
Speaker 2: As president.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  President was Charles S. Johnson wasn't it? I mean when you were there?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Charles Spurgeon Johnson?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Charles--(unclear) Charles E. I thought it was.
Speaker 1: Charles S. Johnson.
Speaker 2: Charles S. Johnson.
Speaker 1: Oh Mr. [St. Elmo] Brady.  Dr. Brady was your professor.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  And he was my commencement speaker when I graduated.
Speaker 1: Dr. Brady was one of your mentors.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) He gave my commence--he gave my [commencement] address.  I promised his daughter one day, if I ever get around to it, to write his biography. 'Cause nobody wrote his biography.  That was a disgrace that they didn't do it.  'Cause he was one of the greatest of all Negroes. But I don't know.
Speaker 1: His name was what? What again?
Speaker 2: Charles Spurgeon Johnson.
Speaker 1: (unclear) Dr. Brady.
Speaker 2: Not Charles Spurgeon Johnson.
Speaker 1: Dr. Brady.  What's Dr. Brady's full name?
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: Dr. [St. Elmo] Brady your chemistry professor.
Speaker 2: No, Brady didn't--no he didn't teach--Brady was a chemist.  But he didn't teach me chemistry.
Speaker 1: Dr. Brady did teach you chemistry.  Mom--
Speaker 2: Ha?
Speaker 1: Dr. Brady.  You wrote a--you wrote a biography about him.
Speaker 2: No, Brady didn't do that.  The other guy--what's his name? What's his name, Gloria? 'Cause that's how I met you. That's how I met you.
Speaker 1: Dr. Brady was a professor.
Speaker 2: He was--he let me court you [Gloria Massie] in his room.
Speaker 1: The Chemistry Department at Fisk.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously)  Dr. Brady was the professor at the Chemistry Department at Fisk that allowed you to court with Mom.
Speaker 1: In her room.
Speaker 2: Right. Dr. Brady.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And he was the one who allowed me to court you. Because he said, "I ain't worried about nothing."
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) In his room.
Speaker 1: In his room.
Speaker 2: In Dr. Brady's room.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  'Cause he said, "He ain't--she ain't--he ain't gonna do nothing." And incidentally you might be interested in this for a historical thing. One of my--one of my best friends let me court in his room.  I had a--his son--I mean his daughter is now an outstanding secretary of state in our federal government.
Story_ID: 10509
Speaker 1: So it was a Professor [Henry] Gilman that you were--who was your professor at Iowa State [University, Ames, Iowa].
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, he was the greatest professor.  He was the one that saved me.  The draft board man told me I couldn't go to graduate school.  I had too much black education for a nigger.
Speaker 1: That's what he told you?
Speaker 2: Mmhmm. See my father [Samuel B. Massie, Sr.] died and it was just about this time of year.  I always will remember.  But he died.  And he didn't have any money.  He had asthma, and he died.  And I--in those--I'll back up a little bit.  When I went to school, in Arkansas, I got sick. And I wanted to get exempted to go to my high school graduation. [sic, to get his doctorate]  My father was--and he said, "Remember you can't go." I said, "Well I do.  I wanna go and get my master's degree." He said, "You got too much education for a black nigger.  You're a black man."
Speaker 1: That's for your doctorate degree at Iowa State.
Speaker 2: For--to get my black--yeah. I was at Iowa State--I was at Iowa State.  Yeah, that's right, doctorate.  And the man who was the head then he gave me an exemption. 'Cause he--that's when he put me on the senior--he said, "What's the thing--?"  What's--the war [World War II], what was that?
Speaker 1: The Manhattan Project.
Speaker 2: The Manhattan Project.  And so he sent a notice down to my board to exempt me.  But they said, I couldn't go.  'Cause that's too much education for a nigger.  They didn't tell me that.  But he wouldn't--but he wouldn't excuse me.  So I wrote Dr. Gilman, Henry Gilman, one of the great chemists and asked that I be exempted.  And the man said, "He didn't have it." He said, "He lost it." The man in Arkansas wouldn't send the exemption from Arkansas.  So I could be exempted.  And work on the Army.  And let me stay there and go to school.  And he said, "No, you can't do that because you're black.  You got too much education for a nigger.  You belong in the Army." And every time I tried to get something, he always told me that you can't get education.  You got too much education for a nigger.  You belong in the Army.  And yet--he has yet become my friend. And years later, he gave my commencement speech.  When I became president in Carolina [North Carolina College, Durham, North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Dr. Gilman.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Dr. Gilman.  Dr. Gilman  gave my graduation speech.
Speaker 1: Dr. Gilman used to make you work hard because he threatened to put you back in the Army.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah. Oh yeah.  He said that.  He always said you have to work too hard.  He said, "I had to work too hard."  So you can't go.
Speaker 1: What were your conditions like when you lived in--at Iowa State?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What were your conditions like when you lived in Iowa State?
Speaker 2: Well now when I--this is another story you might like.  When I went to Iowa State I couldn't live--I couldn't live at Iowa State.  So I couldn't get a permit to go in the dining hall.  So the only place I could live was with the blacks.  And so when I went to Arkansas--when I got--dormitory wouldn't let me live there.
Speaker 1: Mom said there were only two black families in Ames at the time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were only two black families.  And if you would have--Iowa State wouldn't let me go to school. He said, "I want you to lived in a place called the--"
Speaker 1: YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association].
Speaker 2: YMCA.  And he said, "You're black. And we can't let you live there.  Wouldn't be our--it would be good for you."
Speaker 1: Wasn't it, it wouldn't be the Christian thing to do?
Speaker 2: It wouldn't be the Christian thing.  Boy, I have to give you credit.  You remember all of this stuff I told you.  You remember much more than I do.  That's why-- and he said, "You got too much education to go to Iowa State.  That'll be too much education for a nigger."
Speaker 1: And then you lived in the basement of the hall.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And that night it rained all over the basement.
Speaker 1: Now is that when you shared a room with Henry DeCosta?
Speaker 2: Henry DeCosta?
Speaker 1: Where were you roommates with Mr. DeCosta?
Speaker 2: I guess I did.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: When he went to Iowa State.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.  At Iowa State they were roommates.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess so.  Yeah.  That was his name I think.
Speaker 2: And he is a--and he is a very wealthy architect in Charleston [South Carolina] now.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He said that in California.
Speaker 2: His father was an architect also.
Speaker 1: He's an architect now.
Speaker 2: They renovated Catfish Row in Charleston [South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  They made a great place.  That's right.  That was my brother.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) And for many years he was listed in 'Black Enterprise' top 100 companies, H. A. DeCosta Construction [sic, H. A. DeCosta Company].
Speaker 1: So that's who you shared a--shared a place with?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so you had to live in the--did you--you lived in the basement of the--?
Speaker 2: I had to live in the basement. And the irony of that a white man got a place for me.  And the only place I could get a place to live at was a Jewish place.  I'm Christian now.  But they can't let me live in a Christian house.
Speaker 1: In a Y?
Speaker 2: The man say--when I wrote she almost couldn't believe--they all got--she almost couldn't believe it.  'Cause I wrote that story and told them that.  They wouldn't let me live in a black Christian place.  And so I lived there for a while.
Speaker 1: He's referring to the article in the 'Faces' magazine for Iowa State University.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You saw that?.
Speaker 1: About four years ago
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 10510
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about the Manhattan Project? Now what was the Manhattan--?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Well the Manhattan--the Manhattan is essentially a place where we were trying to make it so that the sodium--let's see what it is--they needed to get gas.  To formulate to make gas.
Speaker 1: Make the atomic bomb.
Speaker 2: Make the atomic bomb.
Speaker 1: So you worked in several labs in Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee, sic, Massie worked on the Manhattan Project while at Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa].
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.  And that's how I got my--that's where I got my break.
Speaker 1: Let him know the danger of what your experiments were.  The volatility of some of the things you were working with.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  He knew it was dangerous.  It was dangerous.
Speaker 1: But what happened as a result to your chemistry partner next to you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, was it dangerous?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  We were trying to make explosives.  And one of my good white friends wanted to make an explosive using this material.  But and so he was going to--he having a hard time making the explosive.  And--but he wanted to seal it so he it could seal it. But he had to open it.  And what he didn't know--none of us knew it--that this was an explosive gas.  So if you hit it with a (unclear), it would blow up.  I was lucky.  Okay.  I didn't die.  'Cause I was at the same place when he opened that window.  And I would have been blown to death if it hadn't been for God.  'Cause I should have been blown up that day.
Speaker 2: What happened to him?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: What happened to him?
Speaker 1: He was blown to death.
Speaker 2: In the lab right next to yours.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I should have been on it, but I wasn't there.  I was down the street. God took care of me.
Speaker 1: Now you all were working with--I read that you were working with liquid uranium. Is that correct?
Speaker 2: Well it was--yeah.  I forget the name of it now.  It'll come back to me.  Now anything liquid gas will explode.  And he was using a thing to open this thing, we were trying to seal it, and then he hit it against his chest explosive.  He was from Minnesota.  I can't even think of his name now.  But he died, so I should be dead.
Speaker 1: You were lucky.
Speaker 2: Oh I know I say that.  I owe God a lot.  'Cause I should be dead.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you taught at--well is there anything else about the Manhattan Project you wanna tell us?
Speaker 2: Well I spent--they had--they set up the Manhattan Project.  I can't think of the name of the place.  It begins with a C. Where is the name of the place?  The name of where they have this is on 12th Street.  I can't think of the name.  I'll have to get it for you.  They set up a thing there where you could--where you could go to it. They have it--they put my mother and my picture in the thing. But I'll come to it one day.  The next time I get to Chicago [Illinois].  I forget his name.
Speaker 1: Oh it's on--in Chicago? Where you were--you were working in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 10511
Speaker 1: But Dad, also during grad school did--is that when you had the opportunity to work at Eastman Kodak [Company]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was.
Speaker 1: Rochester, New York?
Speaker 2: I worked in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: No, Rochester, New York.  Weren't you one of the first black employees? One of the first five that were hired by Eastman Kodak?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) You worked there in the summer.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You were in grad school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I believe one of the first other five was an Olympic athlete [James E. Lu Valle]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was.  That's right.  The first Negro to run fast was a black man.
Speaker 1: He worked for Kodak.
Speaker 2: He worked for Kodak.
Speaker 1: Was that Jesse Owens? Or--?
Speaker 2: (unclear).
Speaker 1: No.  That's not--That wasn't his named--I have to look it up.  But he was the first Negro to run--.
Speaker 2: But Dad was one of the first five to ever work for--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 2: Eastman Kodak in Rochester.  And he worked there for two summers.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right.  Boy, I've gotta give you credit.  You got a wonderful memory.  I can't see how in the world you remember all of that stuff I told you.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So now that was after the Manhattan Project you worked for Eastman Kodak?  Or was that before?
Speaker 1: Well no, what happened I worked with Eastman Kodak.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) That would have been before.  'Cause that was in the '30s [1930s].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I worked for Eastman Kodak.  And then later I--then later I--They appointed me to come in--to a committee.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so they liked me and had me be the secretary for the club.  And so as a result, I got my picture not in Manhattan, right in Chicago.
Story_ID: 10512
Speaker 1: What was the result of the Manhattan Project?
Speaker 2: Well that was the result of the (unclear).  See, one of the major problems of the war [World War II] was they would have--they need some way to get explosives.  And so they found that this would be explosives.  But the--it's a funny thing.  Nature does--did a funny thing.  The only gas that would explode was--begins with an N.  I don't know what it is.  It begins with an N.
Speaker 1: Nitrogen gas?
Speaker 2: It might be nitrogen. But I don't know.  That was the day I was at a Manhattan Project.  And so that was the problem.  We were trying to make this gas.  So we could explode it. But what we did not know that you couldn't--you couldn't explode the thing.  Couldn't explode it the way it did.  This boy tried and made some of it and had I guess it was a matter--
Speaker 1: Was that nitroglycerine?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so when he tried to open it blew up.  Just blew up the whole thing.  I will one day and you get me when I get home and try to get our memory back. I'll try pulling out a lot more. And so that helped me out.  Because they made me a man.  That's how I got my reputation with them.
Speaker 1: And after that you went to the faculty at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee].  Right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to Fisk.  That's right.  I was on the faculty at Fisk.  It's there now.  If I ever--if some time if we ever go to Chicago [Illinois] I'll find that place.  I gotta find it.
Story_ID: 10513
Speaker 1: Now you taught at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and then at Langston University [Langston, Oklahoma].  You were head of the chemistry department at Langston.  Right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In Oklahoma.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: All right.  And then you became head of the Chemistry Department at Fisk again.  Right?
Speaker 2: No, my next job--
Speaker 1: (unclear).
Speaker 2: My next job after I left Fisk was to become a--my job at--what's the thing now at the--?
Speaker 1: National Science Foundation [Arlington, Virginia] came after Fisk.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Is that the name of it?
Speaker 1: National Science Foundation.
Speaker 2: National Science Foundation.
Speaker 1: The man who was head of the science said that it was a national science.
Speaker 2: Dad, after you left Fisk the first time and married Mom [Gloria Massie], then you went to Langston [University] as the head of the Chemistry Department, the Chairman.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 2: Then you returned to Fisk as the Chairman of the Department at Fisk. And that's--
Speaker 1: Then went the National Science Foundation after that.
Speaker 2: Well you're not talking about--
Speaker 1: After that, in (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well just keep that together.  And one day when I have my mind.
Speaker 1: All that stuff is written, pretty much.  But I think I'd like to hear more about your thoughts and ideas and your feelings about certain things that did happen.  So maybe--can you tell us now--what can you tell us about any stories from your time with the National Science Foundation that you remember?
Speaker 2: Well I was the first Negro to be--to become a member of the National Science Foundation and to give away money.  I remember the day.  I was--I had been the first.  They wouldn't give a black much money.  And they made me head of the--four people's money. But at the same time when, that happened, I got a letter from--the man who--wanted money--to give money away to schools.  And I took that job.  'Cause it was a chance they let a black guy a $158 or $159 to black schools.  And 'cause I was there I had to give up that other job.
Story_ID: 10514
Speaker 1: The March on Washington [1963] when you heard [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] speak with Herbie [Herbert Massie] and Jimmy [James Massie].
Speaker 2: That was very important.
Speaker 1: Right.  That was very important.
Speaker 2: So that was good.  You didn't lose any money on that deal.
Speaker 1: Oh on Martin Luther King Jr.?
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: Oh no.
Speaker 2: And what was one of the exciting things about Martin Luther King at Durham [North Carolina]? At North Carolina College [now North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina]? On the eve of when he was to receive the Nobel [Peace] Prize [1964].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That's right.  And I gave it to him.
Speaker 2: Good.
Speaker 1: And where did he speak just before he received the Nobel Prize?
Speaker 2: And we were the last--my speech was the last speech he gave anywhere was my speech at my place.
Speaker 1: You're right.  He spoke in North Carolina College.
Speaker 2: I was president.
Speaker 1: Just before he [Martin Luther King, Jr.] went to receive the prize?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And he came and stayed.  And he was at our house for quite a few hours.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In fact, I've got that picture. If you remind me sometime, I'll try to find it.  But I got the picture of Martin Luther King and my wife [Gloria Massie] and we're all standing--the singer what's her name.  It'll come to me.  And he spent the night there.
Speaker 1: Miriam Makeba?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: The African singer who stayed with us.
Speaker 2: Miriam Makeba I guess.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Miriam Makeba.
Speaker 2: I don't remember her.
Speaker 1: Miriam Makeba.
Speaker 2: But she might have stayed with us that night.  I can't say.  But I don't remember in my mind. That might be the night she stayed with us.  But I couldn't swear it.
Speaker 1: Jesse Hughes' sister.
Speaker 2: Jesse Hughes' sister.  I remember John [H.] Johnson came by.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Martin Luther King's sister was the one that was singing.  And stayed with us that night.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) And Johnny Johnson stopped by.
Speaker 1: And Johnny Johnson.
Story_ID: 10515
Speaker 1: John [H.] Johnson came to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee].  I invited him to--I gave the first speech he ever gave was that one.  He agreed to come, and give a lecture for me.  Now years later--what's the lady's name from the National Science Foundation? Can you think of her name?  You must know who she is.  It will come to me.  She liked me very much.  And she wanted me at her house for a meeting.  And she said, "I was an outstanding person of all."  And then she had written a very nice speech about how great I was.  And I should have gone ahead and had--now this is where I made my mistake.  If I had Charles Johnson, as I should have, if I made Charles--if I had let Charles [Spurgeon] Johnson write my biography--But I thought--but I decided it would be better to have the National Science Foundation write it.  And they never get through with it.  If I had let her--let Charles S. Johnson write that biography, he would have--I would have gotten $50 million.
Speaker 2: Dad, let's focus back on--in Durham [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: In Durham, North Carolina College [now North Carolina Central University].
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: We were talking about North Carolina College.  And you remember--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) No, we were talking about Dr. [Martin Luther] King and the speech and all at North Carolina Central. But--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) See I was the first person that ever invited Charles S. Johnson to  speak there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So Charles S. Johnson spoke there too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he spoke.  He spoke there.  And he would've spoke there--I gave him his first honorary degree. I got him to be my speaker.  He spoke for me. But if I had gone ahead and when this lady--I mention your name--If I call her name you would know who I'm talking about.  But if I had--and giving her the invitation to write my biography.  I'm sure he would have done it.  Because I was so outstanding.  He probably would have written it.  And we probably would have gotten fifty, sixty thousand dollars.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Because my reputation for Negroes at that time was so high.  He probably could have written a book for fifty thousand dollars for me.  But I didn't do it.  And so I didn't get any of it.
Story_ID: 10516
Speaker 1: So you were president [of North Carolina College, now North Carolina Central University, Durham, North Carolina] from '63 [1963] to '66 [1966]. Right? And then you taught at the U.S. Naval Academy in Annapolis [Maryland].  Right? You taught chemistry at the United States Naval Academy.  Right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, later.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So tell us about that.  What happened? What was that like? Were you the first black person to teach there?
Speaker 2: I was the first black person to become president and also to teach there.  And get a doctorate.  I had a doctorate.  I was the first one he made president.  And I also was the first one to teach.
Speaker 1: Dad, you were the first black professor at any of the military academies.
Speaker 2: Well that was at a military.
Speaker 1: But you weren't the president though.  You were there--you were a--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No, I  was Dean--I was the head--what do you call 'em?
Speaker 1: You were chairman of the chemistry department eventually.
Story_ID: 10517
Speaker 1: Let's talk about the time you were at the [U.S. Naval] Academy [Annapolis, Maryland] when you taught there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Didn't you established the black history department at the Naval Academy?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But he worked--he worked with the black plebes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I got a note there, I can show you somewhere how they felt
Speaker 1: (unclear).
Speaker 2: You worked--you worked hard in the black community also in Annapolis [Maryland].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You helped to establish--reestablish the Kappa Alpha Psi fraternity group there in Annapolis.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: To ten members.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And that's about the time that you started working with them.  And you earned the Laurel Wreath.  Which is the highest honor you can receive in the Kappa Alpha Psi fraternity.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I'm national president [in Sigma Pi Phi].  I am now.  I've gotta get some money to pay them back. So I can come up with finance--I just don't have enough money to pay my dues right now. To pay my dues back up.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now you were national president of the Boule [club] at one time too?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I know you received like--like hundreds of honors, you know, in reading the material about you.
Speaker 1: I've gotten some.
Story_ID: 10518
Speaker 1: There's a little white school in Columbus--in--down in North Carolina.  Where they wanna name a white school after me.
Speaker 2: Dad. Prince George's County [Maryland] is honoring you with an elementary school and a community center--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yeah I know.
Speaker 2: --That's opening in August.
Speaker 1: But they haven't done it.  They haven't done anything about that.
Speaker 2: They've already put the name on the school [Samuel P. Massie Elementary School and Community Center, Forestville, Maryland].
Speaker 1: I've never seen it.  I hope I get it.
Story_ID: 10519
Speaker 1: You were the first black to receive an honorary doctorate from the University of Arkansas [Fayetteville, Arkansas].  They gave that to you in the '70s [1970s].  And you reminded them that you could not receive a regular degree from them because you were black at the time.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Couldn't go to school there.  Right.
Speaker 2: And so I went there and spoke. You might appreciate this.  Now this is one of the nicest things.  When I--they invited me because they said they had not invited me when they should have.  And so I said, "Today you have given me a lot--" when they introduced me, they gave me some of the greatest honors you could've given me.  "And the greatest honors you gave me this--the greatest honor I got was the one when Gloria [Massie] said yes."  That's the greatest honor I've ever gotten. She's around here asleep someplace. You know what I'm talking about don't you? My wife.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know.
Speaker 2: I said, "I should have given it--that's the greatest honor I've ever had.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: And Dad, there were multiple chairs for engineering departments at predominantly historically black schools named in your honor.
Speaker 2: Well I know.  But they haven't done what they should've done.  And I was too busy to--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Dad, that was a tremendous honor.
Speaker 2: I know they gave fourteen million [dollars].
Speaker 1: There are several chairs.
Speaker 2: Gave 'em fourteen million.
Speaker 1: Right. Fourteen million in your Honor.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: That's highly respected.
Speaker 2: But I didn't use it right somehow.
Speaker 1: Dad, and they also as I said, they're naming Prince George's [County] Elementary School after you.  And all the work--and it's going to be the largest state of the art campus of any Prince George's school.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I hope so.
Speaker 1: And Samuel P. Massie Elementary School and Community Center.
Speaker 2: I hope so.
Speaker 1: Located in Forestville, Maryland.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I know
Speaker 1: And it will open in September of this year [2003].
Speaker 2: I hope so.  Keep up with that.  Will you please?
Speaker 1: It will Dad.  We have seen it.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: We have seen it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know you drove me out there.
Speaker 1: Right.  And you saw it with your name on it.
Speaker 2: I know I did.  But I gotta get it finished so we could get the school open.
Speaker 1: They're opening the school.
Speaker 2: Well when they do that I'll believe it.
Speaker 1: And they've done a video of you in your honor.
Story_ID: 10520
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered really as a man who tried to live well. A man who tried to be good to people that he knew and lived with. As a man who tried to be a good teacher.  A man that was kind.  I don't know.  That's what I'd like to be really remembered.  But I got so much I've got to think about.  I don't know where I am.
Speaker 1: As a man who went to his Episcopal Church practically every Sunday--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: For the last fifty years.
Story_ID: 10521
Speaker 1: Have you remembered to talk to them about your presentation that you got in the Smithsonian [Institution, Washington, D.C.]? About blacks in science.  There's a running exhibit that shows him talking and encouraging blacks to be in science at the [National] Air and Space Museum in [Washington] D.C.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And the thing that made me mad the black schools didn't pick up on that.  I know that that food thing--pay a thousand dollars to write those things.  And the black kids never did say much about that.
Speaker 1: And Dad, have you spoken to them about your picture at the American Chemical Society [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Where?
Speaker 1: Didn't--wasn't your picture unveiled? An oil picture of you at the American Chemical Society?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was named one of the top twenty-five chemistry in the whole nation.
Speaker 1: And then also, in the last century, weren't you nominated as one of the top hundred chemistry--scientist--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In the nation. Of the world actually, along with names like (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) But in the United States they--the food people gave that.
Speaker 1: And you're the only living African American on this list.
Speaker 2: Yeah, just two of us.
Speaker 1: And the other one is George Washington Carver.
Speaker 2: George Washington Carver is on that.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) He's no longer with us.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Story_ID: 10522
Speaker 1: Are black colleges still important?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, they're important.  They just need to do more.  I know they are.  But I just haven't had time to do it myself, I don't know what the matter with me.  They're important.  They just need somebody.
Story_ID: 10523
Speaker 1: You wanna talk about the community college system, at this point.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You were Chairman of the Maryland [State Board of] Community Colleges.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) For twenty-nine years--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was chairman of all the State Community Colleges.
Story_ID: 10524
Speaker 1: Dr. Massie, I wanna ask just one question for my own curiosity.  When you worked at [Eastman] Kodak [Company], what were you doing there? What was your job during your work at Kodak?
Speaker 2: Why, my first job at Kodak was making chemicals.  I made chemicals.
Speaker 1: Was that a research position?
Speaker 2: Yeah research.  They hadn't had any blacks do that and I got it.
Speaker 1: What did you like better, research or teaching?
Speaker 2: Well I liked to do research and teaching.  Because I made money.  I didn't have much money.
Story_ID: 10525
Speaker 1: I can't see who that is.
Speaker 2: That's you [Samuel Massie] as a baby with--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) That looks like me and mother and dad.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Trei, could you carefully make your weigh over beside his chair.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, you can probably describe them.
Speaker 1: So that when you interject we'll pick up your voice more clearly.
Speaker 2: This is about 1921.
Speaker 1: That's when it was.
Speaker 2: 1921 or '22 [1922].
Speaker 1: It would be '21 [1921].  That's when I was born.
Speaker 2: Okay.  that's a picture of Earlee [Taylor] Massie--
Speaker 1: Yeah. Samuel--
Speaker 2: Samuel Proctor Massie, Sr.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And Dad--and it was probably taken in North Little Rock [Arkansas], which at the time was probably called Argenta [Arkansas].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Argenta was known because it had a silver mine there.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And now it's known as North Little Rock.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: [Samuel Massie (center) as a Child with his Father, Samuel P. Massie, Sr. (left), and Mother, Earlee Taylor Massie (right), North Little Rock, Arkansas, ca. 1921. From the collection of Samuel Massie].
Story_ID: 10526
Speaker 1: That's a picture of mom [Gloria Massie] and dad probably taken about five years ago.  At an event.
Speaker 2: [Samuel Massie with His Wife, Gloria Massie, ca. 1998. From the collection of Samuel Massie].
Story_ID: 10527
Speaker 1: Another picture of them taken around the same time more formal.
Speaker 2: Just be careful, Trey--Trey?
Speaker 1: One of the great things about their marriage is that they complemented each other.  Because Mom [Gloria Massie] was always--like to go on the go.  And Dad was a little bookworm.  But she taught him how to come out of his shell.  And they blossomed together.
Speaker 2: Yeah we did that.
Speaker 1: [Samuel Massie with His Wife, Gloria Massie, at a Formal Event, ca. 1998. From the collection of Samuel Massie].
Story_ID: 10528
Speaker 1: This is a picture taken of my grandmother Earlee [Taylor Massie], who you saw in the earlier picture, but quite a few years later with Dad and his brother, Jack Massie, who's named William Jacko Massie after William B. Jacko, who served in the [Arkansas] legislature under Reconstruction, who was her father.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Your dad is the one on the right?
Speaker 2: My dad is on the right.
Speaker 1: Where?
Speaker 2: And my uncle [Jack Massie] is the one on the left.
Speaker 1: [Samuel Massie (right) with His Mother, Earlee Taylor Massie (center), and His Brother, William Jacko 'Jack' Massie (left), not dated, from the collection of Samuel Massie].
Story_ID: 10529
Speaker 1: That shows dad as a professor at the [U.S.] Naval Academy [Annapolis, Maryland] doing what he loved best, working on experiments in the lab.
Speaker 2: What time is it getting to be?
Speaker 1: [Samuel Massie in his Chemistry Lab at the U.S. Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland, not dated, from the collection of Samuel Massie].
Story_ID: 10530
Speaker 1: And here's a picture, taken of Mom [Gloria Massie] and Dad at the [U.S.] Naval Academy [Annapolis, Maryland].
Speaker 2: Let me see that.
Speaker 1: If you look in the back, you can see the dome of the Naval Academy chapel.
Speaker 2: Let me see.
Speaker 1: And if you notice, there's a cannon in the foreground right behind Mom.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Let me see that. Let me see that.
Speaker 1: You can hand him the photo now.
Speaker 2: Here you go, sir.
Speaker 1: And that was taken right outside of the lab in the classrooms that Dad taught at for many years.
Speaker 2: [Samuel Massie with his Wife, Gloria Massie, at the U.S. Naval Academy, Annapolis, Maryland, ca. 1990s. From the collection of Samuel Massie].
Story_ID: 10531
Speaker 1: James Massie on the left, and Herbert Massie in the middle and Samuel ['Trei' P.] Massie [III] on the right.  Now we all have the same middle name which is Proctor.  And that's a surname that comes from our family in Kentucky.
Speaker 2: [Samuel Massie's Three Sons (from L to R), James Massie, Herbert Massie, and Samuel 'Trei' P. Massie III, ca. 1963. From the collection of Samuel Massie].
Story_ID: 10532
Speaker 1: Tell us about this one.  When was this photo taken, Dr. Massie?
Speaker 2: I will--.
Speaker 1: When did they take this photo?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Probably took it about ten years ago, Dad.
Speaker 2: I don't know, son.
Speaker 1: It's a very nice picture of you.
Speaker 2: [Samuel Massie in a Portrait, ca. 1993. From the collection of Samuel Massie].
