Story_ID: 630688
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Neculai Burghelea.  Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Melba Moore, M-O-O- oops, excuse me.  M-E-L-B-A.  That's my first name.  Moore, M-O-O-R-E.
Speaker 1: All right.  And now, can you now--this is not your birth name, right?
Speaker 2: Actually--you want my birth--you want the truth?  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Beatrice Melba Moore.  Oh, Beatrice, B-E-A-T-R-I-C-E, Melba, M-E-L-B-A, Moore, M-O-O-R-E.  How did you know that wasn't my birth name?
Speaker 1: Well, they sent me some--
Speaker 2: You did your research (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, was your last--original last name Moore instead of (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it wasn't.  Oh, we're going to tell all the truth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: All right.  No.  My name was Smith.  My mother's name was Gertrude Melba Smith [Gertrude Smith; Bonnie Davis], and her name got too hard (unclear).  She married a wonderful man by the name of Clement Moorman [Clement Leroy Moorman].  And so, I took his name and shortened it from Moorman to Moore when I thought I was going to be a star.  I thought Moorman was too long for the marquee (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I figured that might have been it, but--okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, a real historian.  Okay, Larry (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thank you.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Well, now, I won't tell you my date, but I'll tell you the place; New York City, Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York].  You can research that.  I know you can find out what--when I was born.
Speaker 1: What is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Let's see, singer, actress, actress, singer, I'm not a dancer (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is February 2nd, 2008 [sic. February 4, 2008].
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at Times Square, New York City; Manhattan, New York.  New York State, the borough of Manhattan.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you know, before we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ooh.  Now, they're going to have to lock me up for being insane (laughter).  At least I know where I'm at.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, go ahead.
Story_ID: 630689
Speaker 1: Before we get into depth, there are five lightweight questions that management compels me to ask of everyone, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food?  I'm colored, ain't I?  Fried chicken.  No (laughter).  A favorite food?  I used to have favorite foods.  Now, I won't make it a long story, but since I'm a singer and an actress, and that's kind of an athlete, you can't always eat your favorite foods.  It doesn't really behoove you to have favorite foods.  So now I eat things that are good for me and the best tasting things I can probably eat are, you know, tilapia (laughter) breast of chicken, sliced turkey; very boring things but they like me so I like them.  I don't have favorite foods anymore.
Speaker 1: You have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: A favorite what?
Speaker 1: Color.
Speaker 2: Color?  I think it's red.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.  I like pastels a lot, but I think red is my color.  Not every red, but there's a certain red that, when I wear it, I can see people's response.  It just perks--it's a certain aura, energy, liveliness, and goodness that it brings out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: No.  I love every single season.  I guess that's why I like the East Coast, because you have the different seasons, and I could go on, and on, and on.  But if I'm good and healthy, I love the cold, and you know, you're dressed warm and you can breathe hard.  I like to go out and see the breath.  It's so crispy.  But I mean, the spring, you know, of course, everybody loves the spring when everything is just perfect, and the temperature.  Everything's starting to blossom.  You feel yourself starting to just renew.  And then I love the summer especially because it's not such a difficult, quick transition which just goes from absolute cold to absolute hot, and your body has a chance to adjust.  I love the warmth where, you know, you can--you don't have to wear anything on your arms and you can sweat and purify, and I don't know.  I just love--I love all the seasons.  (Laughter) I love all the seasons.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The reason why it's difficult for me to answer that, I've have my nose to the grindstone for the last twelve years or so.  I've had to learn business.  That's like telling somebody who's a judge, "Okay.  Now get up and sing."  You really have to focus.  And I go to some wonderful places but I'm so focused on my work.  I can't answer you that.  I hope that now that things are kind of leveling off, when I go to workplaces I won't be so busy learning the script or doing something that I've never done before that I'm so scared to death I can't pay attention to where I am and choose some places that, maybe I'd like to buy a second or third home or I'd like to go when I'm on vacation.  I haven't really been that much out of the country.  I'll go back for the first time this spring to France.  I haven't been there, in over twenty years.  I haven't done European tours.  I'm kind of--I guess I'm God's diva (laughter).  He's saving me for something special.  All of these things are going to happen now, so I'll get a chance to see some of the wonderful places around the world that people talk about in terms of vacationing, making your homes, when they--especially in the entertainment industry, if you're very successful, this is just par for the course.  I mean, travel is part of--it's like a busman's holiday.  But I look forward to that soon now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last question is--
Speaker 2: I haven't answered anything you've asked correctly (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes, you have.  The last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Probably, praise the Lord, y'all, probably these days.  It seems to be good, and I like to make sure I suck up to the boss so He'll keep on being--being good.  It's just a reminder, and it's now that I'm, like, one of these super religious--especially as I go back into the mainstream of entertainment and commerce.  You don't want to always be smacking that in people's faces.  It seems like you trying to judge them or push them in a certain way.  But I really like that phrase because it reminds me of why everything is so good and why I'm going to have it all over again, and why I'm going to have a fresh start of--and a new, a new life.
Story_ID: 630690
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your ancestors.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll start with your mother's.  Can you tell us what do you know about your mother's ancestors?  How far back can you trace that side of the family?
Speaker 2: Not very far because I'm one of those, unfortunately--maybe not typical, but a large portion of whose families was very broken and disintegrated.  And--even the marriages were not solid.  We're part of that decimation that happened because of slavery or where our values, our families were broken.  So my mother is one of the types of a typical, beautiful young woman born in Pipe Shop, Alabama, which is a suburb, I think, of Birmingham, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Pipe Shop?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Only people from there know that.
Speaker 1: P-I-P-I?
Speaker 2: P-I-P-E, like pipe shop--
Speaker 1: Pipe Shop (unclear).
Speaker 2: --where they used to make pipes for the world.
Speaker 1: That's Alabama.
Speaker 2: Alabama.
Speaker 1: Is that near Bessemer [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Bessemer, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Can you give us your mother's full and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Her name was Gertrude Melba Smith [Gertrude Smith; Bonnie Davis].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is--
Speaker 2: And her mother, as much as I know about her, my grandmother was named Yvonne [ph.].  Now, I don't know who my grandfather was.  I know I had some uncles.  I had three uncles; Leonard Smith [ph.], Earl Smith [ph.], and Don Johnson [ph.].  So they had different names but they lived in the South, so they visited sometimes.  So I don't really know their background.  My mother, I know she finished high school, was going to go to college, and she was a singer.  She was a professional singer.  And I know that my natural father is Teddy Hill and he was a very famous jazz musician.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I don't want to get to your father's side yet.
Speaker 2: You don't want to get--well, I was just--
Speaker 1: But your mother--
Speaker 2: --I just want to tell you--
Speaker 1: --now, she was raised, from what I read, she was raised in New Orleans [Louisiana]; or was she raised in--?
Speaker 2: She was--well, I believe I heard her say something about living in New Orleans.  I never--I don't--I--let me see.  What can I say?  My grandmother had strokes so she never spoke.  I was around her but--so I didn't really get my history, you know, like grandparents give you.  And my mother was a singer but she was gone all the time.  So I get bits and pieces here.  And I remember her saying that they lived in New Orleans, and she had a Creole background as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you don't know--was your mother raised in Pipe Shop or New Orleans; do you know?
Speaker 2: I believe she was raised in Pipe Shop.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't think--I don't know--
Speaker 1: And then they lived in New Orleans?
Speaker 2: --how much time she spent.  Probably before I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think my grandmother was probably--lived there and then they probably moved to Bessemer or Pipe Shop, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I'm guessing.  I don't really have--one of these days when I get the time though, when I get my nose up from the grindstone, I know that there are people who--relatives who are still living in Birmingham; Bessemer; and Pipe Shop, Alabama, who do know my history.  And they'll tell me what it is, at least some of it anyway.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Well, you're right.  It's like, like a lot of people.  There're so many branches that could, you know--
Speaker 2: Yes.  I know--you know, there's part Cherokee Indian [Native American], and most of us have that, and some Irish, and some Italian.  You can tell--I have pictures, of course, still of my mother and my grandmother, they have straight hair; my grandmother's very fair with freckles.  So you know that there's a Caucasian in the family. Just since it's so broken I don't know what it is.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 2: I just blame everybody.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 630691
Speaker 1: Are there any stories from that side of the family about--
Speaker 2: That's what I'm saying.  The stories that your grandmother would have told you.  My [maternal] grandmother was stricken, so I don't really have those stories (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Some of them, you know, I--my mother [Gertrude Smith; Bonnie Davis] did tell me, but I would have to really sit down and try to dig them out because my mother's passed away now over thirty years.  So I have more of my stepfather's history than I do of hers which--but it's not all gone.  You know, once you get--when I have time to sit down and ponder and go back and remember some of those things, even ask my stepfather [Clement Leroy Moorman], who was married to my mother for quite a long time before she passed away, can tell me some of the stories but I don't have them at hand.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you know much about your mother's young life growing up in Pipe Shop [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: I just know that she was a good Catholic.  And, I guess maybe some of the reasons I--how can I say?  I feel that there's a spirit passed to me from her, and I don't know what my grandmother did, but my mother wouldn't have known to be a good anything if her mother hadn't made--given that to her.  And I've known that New Orleans [Louisiana] particularly is very strong in Catholicism, and that particular Christianity part of the--of religion.  I know that she was a good athlete.  She could run very well, I remember that much.  And she valued education, and she wanted to go to college, but they--I think she was, you know, was concerned about taking care of the family financially.  I don't think the boys were too reliable.  I'm guessing that, judging by they were scattered and when they came in and out, the memories I do have of them.  One of them was in a gang, and you know, and I don't remember any men being--and I don't remember my grand- my grandfather, I know, in my mother's life.  But she married my stepfather.  It's the first time I had a steady role model for a man in the family.  So I can imagine it was her burden really to take care of my mother--I mean my grandmother.   And I don't know how her health was earlier days, but from the time that I was born she was sick and needed care.  And my mother was just out of her teens then.  So she had to be concerned with being the breadwinner.
Story_ID: 630692
Speaker 1: Just go back a little bit to the Creole side.  Did they have any stories about, about the Creole community in New Orleans [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: I just remember my mother [Gertrude Smith; Bonnie Davis] saying that she was Creole and she could cook very good New Orleans style food, and that was the primary thing I remember.  She was a beautiful singer and very passionate about that, and explaining to us--oh, one of the things that kind of sticks out, but I think most of them are from the Creole side, was her teaching us how to have manners and how to have some kind of class, you know.  And part of that was: don't be too Negroid.  That means, you know, "Straighten your hair." And, "Try to be white."  Well, that's the era, too, and it's also reflecting the racism we have within our race of the fairer you were, the better you were; and if you had straight hair, you had good hair.  Mama had good hair.  My hair was nappy, so (laughter) I had to try to be white--well, not white, but you know, "Straighten your hair, act nice," you know, "Don't talk colored," you know, "Don't talk that Ebonics," what we call Ebonics now.  Speak the King's English.  Have some class about you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not that I couldn't have come from the Bessemer [Alabama] side, but I have a few who came from the Creole side.
Speaker 1: So would I be right in saying your mother, like--your mother's mother was--they moved from New Orleans to Pipe Shop [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: I'm guessing that like I said I don't have all the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that so, their origin it's down there really, in New Orleans, and then they moved to Pipe Shop--
Speaker 2: Like I say, I don't have--
Speaker 1: --really later on?
Speaker 2: I think so.  And I think I feel so much strength from Alabama because that's where they spent most of their lives and times.  And if I were to try to trace--go back to New Orleans, I don't know what I would find.  Maybe I would find roots of my grandfather.  But I definitely would find roots possibly of my grandfather; I know of my grandmother and my mother and my uncles when they were in Alabama.  That much I know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they're Alabama basically, I mean, your mother--
Speaker 2: I think that's where they settled.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They may have come from New Orleans but I think they settled in Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Of course, again, I'm guessing.
Story_ID: 630693
Speaker 1: Now, your mother is a per- performer, too.  She's a singer--she was a singer, and do you know how her career got started, and can you tell us something about what she did?
Speaker 2: I don't know from the beginning, someone discovered she could sing or what it was like, and you know, what gave her the inspiration.  But I do know that from the time she was perhaps sixteen, seventeen, eighteen, in that area, she started singing out professionally.  And one of the places she was with was with the Teddy Hill orchestra [Teddy Hill and His Orchestra].  And that's how they met and fell in love, and you know spawned me, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--that's your father, Ted- your birth father?
Speaker 2: That's my birth father, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Teddy Hill.  And he was a musician?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What did he play?  What was his--
Speaker 2: He played saxophone.  He was a jazz musician, but then his primary function as a musician was as a band leader.  He had a big band that became very well known, very successful.  She was the band singer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So did she start out--did she have a chance to finish school before she started singing--
Speaker 2: She finished high school but she wanted to go to college.  She didn't get to go to college.  I remember those things because, not so much because I know about the details, but I remember when it was time for myself and my three brothers [Dennis Moorman, Elliott Moorman, and Gerard Moorman] and my sister [Clementine Bettis] to go to school, and we discovered we all were musical; well they taught us music and music was always in the home.  But we discovered I really had a passion for it and I could sing.  She'd always tell me, she says, "I didn't get to go to college," you know.  "I was going to go to college, and I was an A student," you know, and encouraged us in that way to do well and academically but, she says, "No matter how much education you get, no matter how much training you get, it means nothing if you don't have passion in your singing."  My mother was a very passionate singer.  Consciously, purposely, and so am I (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did you have any--did she ever talk about her mentors or who--in music who mentored her or got her started?
Speaker 2: She probably did but I don't have much memory of that.  Of course, what I do know is what everybody knows about the era of the '40s [1940s] and the '50s [1950s], especially, that we were very, very, very rich.  And my natural father had a big band, but he was amongst people like Dizzy Gillespie and Duke Ellington, and you know, the great musicians.  There were so many of them and, of course, my mother was in the same time as Lena Horne and Sarah Vaughan and Carmen McRae.  So these were people that I can't speak of them as mentored her.  But even your competition is your inspiration and to have grown up around and being in the midst of those great talents in that great struggle, which creates such a great passion.  I know that was part of why she had such a passion for singing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, your mother sang under the name of Bonnie Davis [Gertrude Smith; Bonnie Davis]?
Speaker 2: Bonnie Davis.
Speaker 1: Now, how did--could you give us a--how that--
Speaker 2: Well, it seems to me that she thought that name was very glamorous because she really aspired to glamour.  She wanted to you know, the epitome of beauty with class, you know, it's sexy but tasteful.  And I mean, the name had to be.  So I think she thought Bonnie Davis was--I mean really she carried was like, "That sounds like a star."  I don't know where she got it from, but I know that's why she had it.  I could tell.  "My name is Bonnie Davis," you know, "and don't you forget it."  No, she didn't do it like that, but you know.
Speaker 1: So she earned her living primarily as an entertainer then.
Speaker 2: Not primarily.  That's all she ever did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm saying it like that because my stepfather [Clement Leroy Moorman] still practices his art.  And he's better now than he was.  He's ninety-two now.  And I used to hear them complain about the industry, and Daddy said he--I called him Daddy, he was my stepdaddy--said he was going to take the test to work for the government some kind of way because, you know, you don't never know where your work is coming from.  They're complaining this one cheated them and then you can't--and things are changing and--but they could never even think about doing anything else (laughter).
Story_ID: 630694
Speaker 1: Well let me ask you about your natural fa- father first, then I'll ask you about your stepfather [Clement Leroy Moorman], too.  But--well, tell us about--now what was your natural father's name again, it's Ted- Ted-?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Teddy Hill.
Speaker 1: Teddy Hill.  Okay.  And what's his date of birth and place of birth; do you know?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I know he lived in New York [New York].  I believe his family was from Detroit [Michigan].  I met him a couple of times.
Speaker 1: So he wasn't around much.
Speaker 2: Not at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So do you know much about his side of the family or what their history is?
Speaker 2: Nothing.  I know he has a daughter [Gwendolyn Louise Hill].  She probably sings too.  I have to meet her someday.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you never met his daughter at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We probably look alike (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I hope she don't mind (laughter).
Speaker 1: So is there a--so you're pretty sure he grew up in Detroit?
Speaker 2: I don't know where he grew up.  I heard that his family was in Detroit--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and when he knew that he was going to pass away, he--I think he had cancer.  I had gotten word that he was going back to his family.  That might have been his--maybe his estranged wife or, you know, that immediate family.  I don't know about before that, but I heard that they were in Detroit.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he wasn't really around at all when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Not at all.
Speaker 1: So you weren't close to him?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Only in my heart, you know.  You know how kids are.  They want to know their father.  They want to know.  You just have a natural longing to know who you come from, what--what it is you are, you know.  And I--my stepfather was very understanding and loving, and, you know, a lot of that especially in times when I was coming into my later teens, and--just so many things in that area are not resolved.  And so you, as a person are searching, and those are difficult times anyway.  But, basically, my parents' point of view was, "Well, he wasn't around and I'm your father now."  And my stepfather is such an incredible man, not just by my own standards, but he was able to step in, be there, be a presence there that was so imposing in terms of caring and love and joy; you know, I had a sister [Clementine Bettis] and I had a brother [Dennis Moorman].  These things just filled your life up until you say, "You know what? I'm going to try to let that go and enjoy and be a part of what I have now."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm looking back and remembering that even as a nine year old I made that choice.  But then as that grew in me, and I became one with my family as we've gone through losing my mother [Gertrude Smith; Bonnie Davis], we lost my brother three years ago, and me growing and saying, "Remember what God did for you?  Now, this is your father.  Look at what you have, look at who you are because of him.  See if you can let him understand what he has in his daughter because he decided to make you a part of his family the way he did."  As--so as a result of that, we have such a special and unique relationship within the family that--I think I was pretty smart to make that decision, you know, not that I don't love my natural father, but I also don't blame him.  I don't have any bitterness against him for not being there or anything.  Now that I'm grown and go through some difficult, you know, changes and mistakes and, just life, to say, "Well, okay.  I've got this, da da da da da.  You fight these battles now.  What do I have and what shall I really hold on to, and how can that make me kind of in harmony with all the different pieces."  I think that as an artist, as an entertainer, as you continue to grow and especially if you go through--maybe the threat of losing something that you now really know that you absolutely adore, and that is your ability to do your art.  You understand, the family man--of men is your family, and your family is not easy to get along with.  You can't throw them away.  You have to try to learn how to deal with this in a way that allows some resolution to happen, and for you to remain a family.
Story_ID: 630695
Speaker 1: What's your stepfather's full name?
Speaker 2: Clement Leroy Moorman.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you know his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I do but I can't remember right now.  I can tell you he's ninety-two.  See if you can figure that out.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: He doesn't mind me telling you now.
Speaker 1: You know what part of the country he's from?
Speaker 2: He was born in Newark, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Born in Newark.  Okay.  Now, is there a story about how your mother [Gertrude Smith; Bonnie Davis] and your stepfather met?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Now, I know that story.  (Laughter) As I told you, my mother was a band singer, and she worked with different bands.  And I don't know exactly how they met, but I know my father was--my stepfather was forming a combo or a little small ensemble of piano, bass, and drums, and he wanted a singer.  And how he went about finding a singer I don't know, but he found my mother; she probably auditioned for him.  They decided they would go--work well together as an ensemble.  And they fell in love, and after a certain point she brought him to meet me and told me that she would like to marry him and that he had a son [Dennis Moorman] and a daughter [Clementine Bettis], and we all agreed, and we became a family.
Speaker 1: You know, that's a beautiful way to do it.  So--
Speaker 2: Incredible.
Speaker 1: --she actually--she actually asked you about--
Speaker 2: She didn't ask me, but--
Speaker 1: Or she told--yeah--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: She let you be part--
Speaker 2: Of course, I had been--
Speaker 1: --of it.
Speaker 2: --telling her that I wanted a brother and a sister.  Of course, I forgot to mention I might want a father, too (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you remember the Piccadilly Pipers?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the group.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the group that they formed.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: It was the Piccadilly Pipers and Bonnie Davis.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So she was featured in the--?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: She was the featured singer and the featured star.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And they were based around Birmingham [Alabama], basically that was kind of their home base?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  She was in New York [New York].  She lived in New York at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She had relocated to Manhattan [New York].
Speaker 1: That's right because you were born in Manhattan--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --so she was already in New York.
Story_ID: 630696
Speaker 1: So the Piccadilly Pipers first, and--now, what--can you describe the kind of music they performed or what they were?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  (Pause) If you know anything about--say--say--Les Paul and Mary, I can't think of their names (unclear).
Speaker 1: Ford. Oh, yeah.  Les Paul and Mary Ford, I think; isn't it?
Speaker 2: I think that's who, I can't remember their names now, but there were a lot of combos which featured, like, guitar and the string bass, you know, up tempo; fun kind of jump music, dance music.  And with a beat sort of like this (makes sound), and I remember my mother [Gertrude Smith; Bonnie Davis] would sing a song called (singing), "Upstairs, upstairs, way, way upstairs.  You can get it in the kitchen, but you really get it on upstairs." (Laughter)  Like that, you know, a little party, you know.  (Singing).  You know, real, real joyful music, and a lot of pop music.  Like she would sing, "One little candle--," inspirational kind of message music, go like--it'll be songs like Perry Como might sing or like Sinatra [Frank Sinatra], whatever the popular songs were of the day.  And a lot of songs maybe that Nat King Cole might sing, you know, like 'Route 66.' Those kinds, since he was a black artist but, of course, he pandered it to everybody, but it was black music, you know.  But it as pop music, like, they couldn't sing songs like Bessie Smith or--what I want to say--Little Esther [Esther Phillips].  They were not gut bucket (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: You know, it wasn't like Muddy Waters, you know.  Did a little bit more work.  Refined, I guess because--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) because he was northerners, too, you know.  They really weren't like--mother was, she was--reminded you a lot of Lena Horne.  A beautiful southern lady.
Speaker 1: So it was more like a crossover style--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --in those days.
Speaker 2: They had a lot of those.
Speaker 1: And not so much what everybody would call like race music.
Speaker 2: What would we call it?  Right.  They would call it race music then.  And they really weren't bad.  They weren't that soulful or that, you know, yeah soulful, that's what we call it now.
Speaker 1: So when the music came out, the joints down south, and that's who--but more--
Speaker 2: Right.  They were more like hoochie coochie.
Speaker 1: --popular culture stuff (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I wouldn't know if that's what you would call it either (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well some of it was (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--okay.  They--
Speaker 2: What we would call crossover pop.  Like me.
Speaker 1: So--so how--right.  And so when they tour, like--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --did they have a part of the country they would tour in more than--
Speaker 2: Ah, yeah--
Speaker 1: --more than normal?
Speaker 2: --yeah, they were singing mostly at Italian clubs because that's mostly the people who owned the clubs, so that also meant that they did very well because those are the people that--that affluent they were.  You know, had the money to pay.  So one of my favorite songs and of my daddy's now--my stepdaddy's [Clement Leroy Moorman] is 'La Mia Famiglia Bella.' They worked for all the Italian mob.  They owned everything (laughter).  And everybody sang 'Danny Boy,' everybody sang 'Over the Rainbow.' You know, that's everybody sang.  That's the race--everybody sang those songs.  You know, the race people had their way of singing it, and the pop people had their way of singing it, and the real--you know, white people had their way of singing it.  So--it's very American, I guess, you know.  But they were--and they--they worked in Atlantic City [New Jersey] every summer.  Atlantic City is a typical--it wasn't typical anything.  It was like a one of a kind because everybody from everywhere came, although there was racism.  So you had, like, Kentucky Avenue where all the black clubs were, and they had the best, what you might call race music.
Story_ID: 630697
Speaker 1: --We'll have a place like Atlantic City [New Jersey], which was like the epitome of kind of a melting pot of all the best entertainment of America.  But it wasn't all mixed up.  It was--we still had racism.  We had Kentucky Avenue which had all of the--just one club after the other with all the beset organ players.  My god, that music was so good.  I remember because we used to go as their children every summer, and we had our heads out the window, and the streets were just filled with music.  But all the celebrities from all the white clubs would come down there after their shows and so it was exciting.  You could see Frank Sinatra walking down the street, you know.  It was amazing.  And you had Club Harlem [Atlantic City, New Jersey] and a few of the other clubs where the white entertainers would come to see the best of the black entertainers and they had the chorus line and they had big production shows, as well as the small clubs.
Speaker 2: So this was like the early '50s [1950s] to mid-'50s [1950s]?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  Okay.  Now, so--but your mother [Gertrude Smith; Bonnie Davis] and your stepfather [Clement Leroy Moorman] at one--at a certain point they just did a duet sort of right, of, act?
Speaker 1: Well, at that point, (unclear), they had a combo too, and they worked--they worked the white clubs.  And the--segregation wasn't so hardcore up north in those times and in Atlantic City that certain places--you know, there wasn't anger and that.  You could go any place you wanted to.  Nobody would tell you not to, but more than likely, you know, the black people would want to go and see their music, and they could afford to, and the white people want go see their own music.  You just go where you prefer to go.  So you could see it that way.  And mother and daddy would be, I don't know what, just--their music was more palpable to the white clubs because that's where they generally toured.  I'm mentioning Atlantic City because that was just a great, great place.  But the other places they worked were generally white communities that had a club that had a live band.
Story_ID: 630698
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Earliest childhood--just period?
Speaker 1: What's the first thing that you remember?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: What's the first thing that you remember about growing up (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The first thing--oh.  I remember being very, very small.  Small enough to even be in a playpen or something like that.  And it must have been down south because I remember being in a backyard and certainly ain't got no backyards in Manhattan [New York].  So my mother [Gertrude Smith; Bonnie Davis] must have taken me down south in the summers when I was with my relatives, and I must have been small enough that I don't remember who I was with or exactly what the occasion was, but I remember it being very hot and very bright outside.  And it seemed like I was crying about something, but I wasn't unhappy.  I was happy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I'd--shortly after that, like, I must have been like, I think around five or six, you know.  Old enough to walk around, maybe I was seven or so. I played a lot on my front stoop, and I must have been very young because, you know, you play jacks and you play, what's the thing on the street--hopscotch and maybe a little older--these kind of all mesh together, playing stickball and those kinds of things.  So those are early childhood memories that I--I think that's when I fell in love with New York [New York] (laughter).  Outside playing and fighting and going to Catholic school, and going to school by myself and going to, to the meat store by myself, you know, and learning to ride a bike in Central Park [New York, New York].  All those things.
Story_ID: 630699
Speaker 1: Now, what was the neighborhood that you--you grew up in Harlem [New York, New York], but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I lived on--I remember the address.  7-9 West 108th Street, it was between Manhattan Avenue and Central Park West.  I remember that.  Those were exciting and wonderful days for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were at 108th Street, so you're--you're just before you really get into Harlem proper, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter), but in the middle, like everything else.
Speaker 1: That's what--that's what they say that's the stop where all the white people get off--they all get off at 110th, right, before the train goes any further.
Speaker 2: Yeah. I think so.
Speaker 1: That's an old joke, you know, they--
Speaker 2: I know about it.  That seems to be the story of my life.  Right in the middle.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right on the cusp of and everything and everybody.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So you were at 108th Street.  Did they have a name for that neighborhood or was it--
Speaker 2: I don't remember that we did.  I went to school at St. Thomas Aquinas [sic. St. Thomas the Apostle School, New York, New York], who I'm very grateful that that happened because I understand now, St. Thomas is considered one of the doctors of the Catholic church, and in the area of the spirit of scholarship, so--well, first of all, I think I was very smart, too, to say yes to the Lord.  So that's the end of that.  But, I went to school at 116th Street.  So I did--I spent a lot of my life across the border of 110th Street, and that was, you know, where I had my cultural roots as well as on 108th Street, where it's very mixed.  Again, both, you know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --there it seems to be very typical of what mother [Gertrude Smith; Bonnie Davis] and daddy's [Clement Leroy Moorman] life has been.  You see, there were black people when we lived in Newark [New Jersey], but they traveled a lot, so we had both the culture and subculture of the black inner city, and yet, we were able to get out and see what the rest of the world was like.  So it was a combination of both.  That's what I mean.  That's what I feel like I'm definitely in.
Story_ID: 630700
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, in New York [New York], I remember--I can hear now the children's voices up and down the street, and in some cases I could recognize my friend if they were out there, you know, or looking up into the window to see if Ronnie [ph.] and Hazel [ph.] could come down and play, yelling at them up there to come down (laughter) and play.  And the sound of us skating up and down the streets, and sirens all the time.  And horses.  Horse--clop, clop, clop, the horses, and then the police or wagon. Different.  Lots of--my mother [Gertrude Smith; Bonnie Davis] used to take me to the Apollo Theater [New York, New York] when she was at home, and she would take me to see live shows.  And she gave me tap lessons.  And that was just--I don't know why it just such a big thing.  Loved tap dancing.
Speaker 1: Now, who taught to dance?  I mean, was it--
Speaker 2: I went to the Mary Bruce School [Mary Bruce School of Dance, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Mary Bruce.  Okay.
Speaker 2: It was known for teaching children dance.  That never, ever left me.  I could never dance, but I was always in love with it, and movement and just gave me a love of movement--not just dance movement, but playing and athletics and, you know, just movement and breathing hard and being alive (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, you've been involved in a lot of musical shows where you've gotta dance and--
Speaker 2: Always, yeah.  And I can't dance, but I still love it (laughter).  I think it started there.
Story_ID: 630701
Speaker 1: From what I read, at one time you wanted to--you aspired to be a professional dancer, right?
Speaker 2: I wanted to, I took all the dance lessons I could.  I always, always I went to all the dance recitals.  I knew who all the dancers were better than the other people--in beginnings.  Then later on I found out who all the musicians were because I fell in love with jazz, once Daddy [Moore's stepfather, Clement Leroy Moorman] made us take piano lessons.  I said, "Oh, my god, what is this?"  You know, we all listened to--
Speaker 1: Now--now--
Speaker 2: --you know--to everybody.
Speaker 1: How--
Speaker 2: And I thought I was going to be a piano player again.
Speaker 1: --old were you when you started taking dancing?  How old were you started taking piano?
Speaker 2: When I started taking dance, I must have been about six or seven.
Speaker 1: And piano?
Speaker 2: Nine.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--now, you said you knew who the dancers were when you--when you were growing up.  Who were some of the major figures that you, that you knew (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, when I was in college [Montclair State College; Montclair State University, Montclair, New Jersey], around that age, in--yeah.  Maybe a little after.  So I went to art and music high schools [Arts High School, Newark, New Jersey], so I really got brainwashed (laughter).  Just in the arts and being surrounded by--that was your whole world because, you know, you--
Speaker 1: Now, is that the one up on--near City College [City College of New York, New York, New York]?  Is that the same arts high school or was it a different one?
Speaker 2: It's on High Street [Martin Luther King Boulevard] in Newark.
Speaker 1: On High Street in Newark.  Oh, in Newark.  Oh, and this--okay.  So at a certain point the family moves to New Jersey, right?  I guess when I was reading I thought (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My daddy was born and raised in Newark, New Jersey.  And when mother dear [Gertrude Smith; Bonnie Davis] married him, then I and my nanny [Lulubelle Hattie Mae Stetley Hawkins], my grandmother, moved to Newark, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How old were you then?
Speaker 2: I was nine.
Speaker 1: Nine?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  All right.  So--okay.  So you moved to Newark and the ar- the arts high school you went to was in New- Newark, New Jersey (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's in Newark.
Story_ID: 630702
Speaker 1: Was New Jersey different from New York [New York] to you?
Speaker 2: Oh, Heavenly Father, yes.  I have never seen or heard of cobblestones.  What the heck is that?  What is these things?  I can't even walk (laughter).
Speaker 1: So they have cobblestone streets in New Jersey?
Speaker 2: Where I lived, I lived on Rose Street [Newark, New Jersey], and this what is this like slate--I don't know what you'd call it, you know, for the sidewalks because they're uneven and, you know what I'm saying.  It's--it ain't like--well, what are the streets of New York made of, you know, asphalt?  Not asphalt, that's the smooth part of the street, huh?  I mean it's not granite.  It's not granite. That's smooth too.
Speaker 1: Streets are--that's concrete, right?
Speaker 2: Basic--concrete, yeah.
Speaker 1: You mean the sidewalks?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the sidewalks, but they're still made of the same thing, you know, basic.  You know what New York streets are made out of.  No, this would--these were made something like this, you know, these little slabs of something (laughter).  I don't know.  With dirt in between them, it was uneven, you know.  You could break your ankle.  I mean it wasn't smooth.  You had to look where you were going.  And we lived across the street from the cemetery.  Instead of Central Park [New York, New York], I had a cemetery.  Was it different?  Oh, my heavens.  I don't think I ever adjusted to that.
Speaker 1: So it was different in a bad way rather than in a good way?
Speaker 2: No, I don't want say that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm telling you the things that, oh, it was really depressing in terms in visually what was around me and scary; that kind of thing.  That part of it was, but in terms of having a sister [Clementine Bettis] and a brother [Dennis Moorman], and then we had another brother [Elliott Moorman] and another brother [Gerard Moorman], and family, no.  That part was unbelievable.
Speaker 1: So where did you fall in the order--were you the youngest of your of the--
Speaker 2: I was right in the middle (laughter).  Started out being the only child--first child.  So in a sense, I as the oldest in a sense.  One sense being, since the family was broken, and in New York it's totally different--energy and you're kind of on your own, it's rough when you're sort of like the oldest.  You're smarter because so much happens to you.  But, chronologically right in the middle.  And in the other sense that my brother and sister had lost their mother [Edna Allen Moorman].  She passed away. But they had a grandmother.  They knew their history.  They were intact.  There're no floaters in and out.  They were not abused and, you know, so in that sense they were very much more solid, but in another sense, very much more pampered and not quite as maybe adult in way.  Because, you know, those kinds of things should not be required of a child, but they are.  The child is old before they're grown.  And so in that sense, I was the oldest.  You didn't ask me that, but chronologically, I was in the middle, but there's so much more going than chronology.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was Harlem [New York, New York] a lot tougher place than New Jersey for you, I mean, what do you think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In some ways because (laughter)--in some ways, when I got to be like thirteen or so, and I wasn't a tomboy anymore, and the hormones started to kick in, I didn't have my balance, I didn't have the strength I had; it was a lot more difficult.  First of all, I didn't have the communications skills because I was an only child, and because I was raised by a woman who wasn't articulate or she didn't even know how write her own name.  She was like--she was a real--we would call her Nanny [Lulubelle Hattie Mae Stetley Hawkins].  And she was from the backwoods of the South, and she--you know, kind of backwards.  Not kind of.  Very backwards.  So I was like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: So in your household growing up--before--before your mother [Gertrude Smith; Bonnie Davis] was married, your mother was performing a lot.  She wasn't home.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: You said your [maternal] grandmother was an invalid.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And then you have the caretaker who really was kind of backwards?
Speaker 2: That's right (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's right. Plus I had the incredible Catholic education.  But--what--getting in the midst of a family who's used to communicating with each other, that's a sort of education in a soc- what do you call it?  Socialization that I didn't have.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So with those kinds of things, I was really at a loss.  But I was anxious to learn, and but I was still very putative in--you know.  That's what I knew.   So the adjustments were very difficult for me.
Story_ID: 630703
Speaker 1: I'm not sure how difficult they were for my sister and brother, but I think they were more difficult for me because I was accustomed to being lonely.  They were accustomed to having somebody to deal with.  And--I don't know, but so--the thing that did happen between all of us, that I'm sure mother [Gertrude Smith; Bonnie Davis] and daddy [Moore's stepfather, Clement Leroy Moorman] made--made that effort to make it happen.  We were brought together.  We were encouraged to adjust to each other.  And we did that, and we love each other to the point where there is no difference.  It doesn't matter that there's not, not blood there are--things that are there.  We really loved each other.
Speaker 2: Okay. So sounds like there was a lot--it was better emotionally--
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  And that's the most important thing, that you make these healings and these adjustments emotionally.  In some cases, I felt like my sister and brother never really--they had some problems because they never were able to deal the loss of their mother [Edna Allen Moorman].  That's a big loss.  Nobody talks about that, you know, now you have someone else, there's a--but having been at such a loss from the beginning (laughter), and then having gained this incredible unit to belong to, and having to try to make these adjustments, both of my own choice, and under the authority of my mother and father, I felt like I could help bridge those healings, and I try to do that even though they are a latter day relationships, so that we don't drift apart because we have something that wasn't there that is there, that is very precious to me.  And you're an adult now, you can work at keeping those things, make them whole if they want to.  Even if it's something that happened, you know, that you had no control of before you were born, you can still, if you recognize it, now, understand what you have and make that--make the family well.  I don't know how to say it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Family is important.
Speaker 2: Now, did you continue to go to Catholic school when you were in New Jersey?
Speaker 1: Well, no.  I went to a public school, but I continued my Catholic upbringing in church, I was confirmed, the Queen of Angels Church in Newark [New Jersey], and continued to go to Catholic church on Sundays.  Then we went to a Presbyterian church, too, which was my dad's religion, and my--you know, my sister and my brother.  And my sister then converted to Catholicism.  And my brother, he really--not until actually just a little time before he passed away, I think he got born again.  I think he just--musically, he was so in love with music that, not that he meant to or would say that, because I don't even he knew that it became his religion.  But he had a kidney failure and over a pervasive long time and, in the process of struggling for life and struggling to find out what was important, and he found God and he--knew that--he knew at the end that he was going to--he was taking a risk by trying to get this transplant because he wanted to try to have quality of life, and new grandchildren, he and wanted to be--and he expressed this to me, that he knew that he was taking the risk.  And I know that he was--he was--began to play for, I think it was a Baptist church, and the minister is a lady minister; she was teaching him what it was to be in the light, and what it was to be born again.  She was teaching him these things.  So I think he found that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  What I need to do, I neglected to ask you the names of your brother and sisters--
Speaker 1: Oh, and I neglected to tell you.  My brother is Dennis Lee Moorman [Dennis Moorman].
Speaker 2: Is that the brother that we were just talking about?
Speaker 1: That we're talking about now that went home to be with the Lord, I pray.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Then I have another brother Elliott Dwayne Moorman [Elliott Moorman], and another brother Gerard Moorman.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And your sister?
Speaker 1: Clementine [Clementine Bettis].
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: Moorman.  (Unclear) (laughter).
Speaker 2: Are they all musicians or are they are like musically inclined?
Speaker 1: Dennis was a musician, Elliott was an attorney.  He's musically inclined, but he didn't become a professional. Gerard was born with Down's syndrome [Down syndrome], loves music but of course he doesn't have a profession. His profession is staying alive and he's doing a good job of that.  We didn't expect him to live to be a teenager, and he's forty years old now.  Something like that, yeah.
Speaker 2: And Clementine?
Speaker 1: She was an educator.  She's retired from public school education.  She's now in real estate.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So we're, we're studying entrepreneurism now (laughter).
Story_ID: 630704
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of the public school you attended in Newark [New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I started at Waverly Avenue elementary [Waverly Avenue School, Newark, New Jersey], then went to Cleveland Junior High, then went to Arts High [Arts High School, Newark, New Jersey], then I went on to what was then called, Montclair State Teachers College [sic. Montclair State College], which is now Montclair University [Montclair State University, Montclair, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Now the school for the performing arts, is that a--what's that--I mean, is that the same as Watts High or--
Speaker 2: It's Arts High.
Speaker 1: Arts High.  Arts High.  That's what you said.  Okay.  I'm sorry.  Arts High.  Okay.  All right.  But did you--were there any particular teachers or mentors that you had growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes. I remember in Cleveland Junior High School [Newark, New Jersey], you know, we're starting to blossom.  And first of all, I remember this incredible piano player, he couldn't read one note, in junior high school.  His name was Bernie Durent--Bernie Durant [ph.], and he could play that gospel piano, you know.  And if you could sing it for him, he could play it, you know (laughter).  And he could sing very well.  But our teacher was Miss Otoboto [ph.].  She taught vocal music and the chorus, and she really was a great mentor.  I can't remember the name of my--
Speaker 1: Otoboto?
Speaker 2: Otoboto.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in high school--see, his name--oh, his name was William Pickett.  I finna call him Wilson Pickett (laugher).  His name was William Pickett, and he taught vocal music in Arts High.  So he was a great mentor, he was a vocal cultural teacher, and he taught all the arias; and I had great instrumental teachers--
Speaker 1: Now, is--now, is Mr. Pickett black or--
Speaker 2: He was white.
Speaker 1: White.  Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: He was Italian (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you have many--
Speaker 2: He was an opera teacher.
Speaker 1: --did you have many--many black teachers at school at all?
Speaker 2: I didn't have any black music teachers come to think of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In--no, I didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It didn't make any difference.  All the kids were black, so.  They had to--they--they mentored us.  They had to under- they had to learn to understand our music, because; for instance, I remember, oh, god, cannot remember the young man's name in high school.  I can't remember his name because he's still very, very well known; his whole family for music.  And he went to Arts.  They all passed him because they couldn't teach him how to read music.  But he was such a genius.  And so I say, in those ways, they adjusted to--to our culture and our genius, those of us who were--well, I'm not saying that I was, but there were some very, very talented teachers and students.  So I was in a really good environment to have music grow.
Story_ID: 630705
Speaker 1: When you were an aspiring dancer, were you, were you aware of the, I guess, the black dance legacy that was going on?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I studied with, now I can't remember.
Speaker 1: You said you went to Mary Bruce School [Mary Bruce School of Dance, New York, New York], right?
Speaker 2: No, I'm talking later.
Speaker 1: Okay, a little later, okay.
Speaker 2: Who's it--the great dance company that [HistoryMaker] Judith Jamison heads now?
Speaker 1: Alvin Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater].
Speaker 2: I studied with a lot of his dancers.  They would teach at the, what was called the Clark school for dance [Clark Center for the Performing Arts; Clark Center NYC, New York, New York], which was on 8th Avenue.
Speaker 1: Now, is this in high school?
Speaker 2: No.  This was in college [Montclair State College; Montclair State University, Montclair, New Jersey] and afterwards.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This was just a hobby, I did it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A lot of the probably well known dance teachers in the dance world would be--I can't remember their names now.  It's too far in the past.  But I would take classes with some of the best of dancers.  The dance instructors were dancers.  They were professional dancers.
Speaker 1: I don't know who would be, besides--did you relic--well, let me get you out of high school first, and then maybe get into that, but--now in high school, did you have--did you participate in clubs or that sort of thing in high school or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  There were the vocal clubs, chorus.  We did operas.  We did 'Aida' [Giuseppe Verdi].
Speaker 1: In high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it was Arts High School [Newark, New Jersey].  We studied the arias and the operas.
Speaker 1: So you--
Speaker 2: We also--I also played with the jazz band.
Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to play 'Aida'?
Speaker 2: No.  'Aida,' because 'Aida' was played by a wonderful contralto (laughter).  I was a soprano.  As a matter of fact, I mean, the talent was so great, I don't remember doing much of lead solos.  Then, of course, we had programs where people just performed whatever they wanted to perform, you know, the shows.
Speaker 1: Did you have a sense that you were a good singer in those days?  I mean, did you really think that you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't want to sing, but I was amongst really, really, really talented people.  I was really happy to be there.  I went--I knew the reason I went and decided that I would take the chance and audition to get in is because I didn't know if I was talented or stuck out in any way--that way, because once again, even in junior high school [Cleveland Junior High School, Newark, New Jersey] I was around people that were very talented, but I knew I wanted to be in the world of arts.  So that didn't even matter to me.  I wanted to study music.  I just wanted to be in--I remember thinking, well, if it turns out that you don't have that kind of ability.  You do something in the arts.  If it's behind the scenes, if it's in studios, if you--maybe you'll be a man- I don't know what you'll do, you're going to be in the arts.  You're going to be around people who do it.
Story_ID: 630706
Speaker 1: Now did you have favorite black performers from movies or TV in those days?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sure I did.  I loved all the movie musicals.  Later, I remember just being an absolute awe of Miss Leontyne Price.  I'm still in awe.  Drop dead.  And, ooh, Miss Lena Horne.  I mean that energy.  And then the voice to go with it, and then she can just--you know, do whatever she wanted to with her body for the camera.  (Laughter) She made herself even more gorgeous than she was.  I mean, you could just see the spirit.  These are things that you know that inspire young artists just to be in the field, even if you can't do it.
Speaker 1: Now, when you--when you were, I guess--I guess when you were in school, 'Carmen Jones' came out, I guess, right?  Did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes! Pearl Bailey!
Speaker 1: You remember?
Speaker 2: Oh, my god.  And now, [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt and [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll, and--oh, who was the beautiful--she was a very young beautiful singer in 'Porgy and Bess'? I think she was married to Nat Adderley.
Speaker 1: Oh, who sang in 'Porgy and Bess'? Because I know Dorothy Dandridge was in it but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sing.  She sang--
Speaker 1: --she didn't sing.  She didn't sing herself.
Speaker 2: --'Summertime.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can't remember her name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know you go on and you don't forget these people because you're so concerned with what you're doing now, but when you invoke these memories, I remember, ah, how exciting, and the dancers and the music in the movie musicals.  Judy Garland.  We really had some--when you look at them today, not with just nostalgia, but look at those artists.  They really were special.  That was a special era that we had.
Speaker 1: So did any of the--
Speaker 2: We didn't have a lot of, say, black mentors and examples to look up to, but we were rich with art.
Speaker 1: But did you get a chance to meet any of the black stars, since your parents were performers in Atlantic City [New Jersey], did you get a chance to meet any of the big stars?
Speaker 2: Actually, not big stars, but big stars to us were their fellow musicians too.  And so, yes, we were--I mean, you know, I guess maybe that's where we learned the awe and respect for musicians and artists, and how special that they were, whether they were famous--I didn't even think about whether they were famous.  We were little kids.  So--but that still stays with you.  That--maybe the essence of makes people famous or what they could be.  And then, you know, mother [Gertrude Smith; Bonnie Davis] and daddy [Moore's stepfather, Clement Leroy Moorman] were still striving to be stars too.  So, you know, they could be famous.  That was the same thing.
Speaker 1: When you were a senior--well--well, your high school [Arts High School, Newark, New Jersey] was integrated, I take it?  It wasn't all black kids, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was integrated.  Yes.
Speaker 1: But what was the proportion you think?
Speaker 2: Blacks were a minority, but it's interesting in the arts.  There's the differences, but there's a camaraderie that just comes out of music (laughter).  It just is and, of course, I'm already prejudice by my parents in terms of what music does, and just taking you over.  You know, it's not that you forget racism, but you can surely erase it for a second somehow, you know.  You just--you know, I'm thinking about that because I never had any confidence and was very, very much race conscious because of how I was raised by my nanny [Lulubelle Hattie Mae Stetley Hawkins], her restrictions.  I had very, very much consciousness of that.  And so I'm talking about what happens when you get involved with music that just goes beyond that, you know.  And somehow, maybe that's why you want to be in it, because there you can go so many wonderful places.  And it's real, it's not, it's not untrue.
Story_ID: 630707
Speaker 1: When you were a senior in high school, what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Senior in Arts High School [Newark, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: --at Arts High School--what were your aspirations?  What did you see yourself doing in the future?  Did you see yourself as a professional artist or a teacher or what?
Speaker 2: I saw myself as a professional artist.  That was my dream.  That was what I was what I was in sight of, and that fostered in so much in an arts--from an arts school.  Because you're around musical geniuses and you're performing and--but I didn't see how I was going to do it.  I didn't know how I was going to get into a music school.  We didn't really have the money.  I didn't have the confidence.  I hadn't been built up by the family either to know, well you can get a scholarship, you know.  I didn't feel like that.  Also, all I was left with was: I can't do this, I can't do that.  That was--that was my attitude.  So I settled for, well, I was also brainwashed by my parents to get a real job.  And so, you know, they say, "Well, be a school teacher, work for the government," you know, get some security.  Of course, there's no security anywhere, but--
Speaker 1: Do you think that sort of backlashed in some ways of being a professional artist and see all the struggling with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh absolutely, they wanted better for us.
Speaker 1: --not having a salaried income and benefits and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: And also they wanted us to have a--we have so much stock in what an education would do for you.  And then when we get to high school and they wanted more for us, and they know that education is very important.  And so, they wanted us to have security and stability.  So they really encouraged us.  Not only to go to college, but then get a background, get something to fall back on, as they used to say.  So I went to teachers school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: So that's--Montclair teachers college [Montclair State College; Montclair State University, Montclair, New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: Montclair teachers.
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay.  Now, what year is this about?
Speaker 2: Sixty something (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  Well this is history, you know, so people are gonna--
Speaker 2: Well, you can go get it, but I'm not telling you (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Don't make me lie now (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 630708
Speaker 1: Okay, so you go to Montclair teachers college [Montclair State College; Montclair State University], and that's in Montclair, New Jersey, I suppose?
Speaker 2: Upper Montclair, New Jersey, it's called, yes.  Because there's a lower Montclair too.  Yes.  So--well, let me first say this, that in retrospect now, it was the absolute best thing for me, as my life has unfolded, I would have been better trained, perhaps, as a performing artist, but not as well rounded in the other areas of being and learning to care about somebody else, so as the teacher shows you how to do it.  The important thing about going to college is all research.  So whatever it is you don't know, you don't fear that.  Go learn it.  Go get it.  The downside is teachers, educators, are never taught about finance, economy, prosperity.  Basically, you're not really taught to lead.  You're taught to teach.  So you become, in essence, if you're not real careful, an educated fool.  Because you are a leader, but you're under the authority of whatever in the wrong way.  And I say the problem is, you don't have to be.  You could be under somebody's authority and be fine, if you have the information to continue to go, and rising and keep growing. If it's go back and get your degrees and be an administrator.  You know, aspire to continue to grow yourself, not to just to get a job and be safe and, you know, when your years is up, retire.  That's what I found to be the pervasive, mentality within the education system.  However, I met a woman who taught vocal music in Southside High School [Malcolm X Shabazz High School, Newark, New Jersey], which was tremendously, I don't know, good as far as music education and just general education.  When I practiced taught at Southside High, her name was Dorothy Schneider, and she was German a Gestapo, honey.  She was the vocal police.  And she really inspired me that teaching didn't have to be mundane, didn't have to be something you did because you couldn't do what you really wanted to do; it could be an inspired profession.  And so I took on her attitude and I really became a good teacher, the best thing is that we were brought out, even though I didn't have confidence, my inspiration was to show it--to see young people.  The best of who they were because we didn't have one thing in common, we--are families are broken, we were disrespected, we didn't know how to respect ourselves.  So of course we didn't know how to respect authority.  Many times we had no authority figure at home that was sane.  But I loved music, and I was a fighter.  And so one of the things that I had learned from being in this wonderful family was that, no you respect yourself.  You don't let that happen to you and then you won't do that to me, and I'll--because you're better than that.  And I can show you, and I'm not scared of you.  I know I'm little, but (laughter) because by the time you get to teaching high school, they're bigger than you.  And you know, they're hitting on you and everything, and you have to be able to understand how to move through that.  And if you have a love of something, you--if you don't know it, you'll learn it.  But if you come from the same background and you learn about caring because you've cared for, now, and you understand why they express themselves the way they do because you've been battered too.  You have a lot of weaponry that, when it's put in use and see the results.  I run into people that I taught (laughter), of course, they're grown and mature; they have grandchildren now.  And they tell me I told them I was going to be a star, you know.  But I told them in a sense that would inspire them.  I mean, they're telling me this now.  I didn't have the attitude, "Well, I hate teaching."  Now, I said, "You have to do this because this is important and you're somebody and I'm somebody, and we're going to treat each other with respect, and then I'm going next door to that big man who teaches and he's going to beat your head in.  You know, because I can't whip you, he can."  But the thing is, we learn to respect each other.  And with music that was quite an achievement because it wasn't an academic subject.  It was something you just automatically assume without knowing that you're going to throw away and use as a toy that, you know, break up and throw away before you even use it.  So we know that's not what it is. Here's what it is, we start maybe sometimes with the music of the day, music, that you know, you like.  "I can sing that too," you know.  And this is where it comes from, you know.  Once you start performing with somebody, they're mesmerized.  "You mean you could do it?" You have their attention.  Okay.  Now what are you going to do with it.  Well, here.  Now, we're going to learn how to read music.  This is how you do it.  It's very simple.
Story_ID: 630709
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you're saying that in high school, by time the students, a lot of students got to high school, they really couldn't read music in the--
Speaker 2: No, I'm not saying that.  I'm saying--first of all, but--student teaching under somebody like Dorothy Schneider, you learn the techniques of, first, you have to get respect.  You don't do it by screaming and yelling at--you have to dress a certain, you have to carry a certain way, you have to have order yourself, you come in with an agenda and you carry yourself in a certain way so they're paying attention to it because they're already looking to see how can they tear it down, you know that.  So you come in with a battery of things that you're going to do because you're prepared.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So we're talking about inner city school--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --in the black community, basically--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --is what we're talking about?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is your weaponry.
Speaker 1: But I was asking if they were taught how to reach music in grade school in New Jersey?
Speaker 2: What--what it depends on is if they were blessed like I was to get good music teachers and have it at home.  But if they didn't feel like teaching that because music was--you know--well, in the--the further you go back, you back to the '60s [1960s], '50s [1950s], '40s [1940s], the vocal music, they were taught the basic rudiments, but it became--as we came--as the family became less important, as respect became less important; a lot of things became less important.  And a lot of the people who were principals and running the schools, they were only concerned about themselves.  So these things became less important.  That's why it's not in the schools now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: Not that we can't really afford it, but because people don't care.
Speaker 1: So then when you were starting, these things were beginning to slip?
Speaker 2: They were beginning to slip.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now before we--let's see.  Let me go back to college though for a minute and just ask you, now you said you were taking dance classes with--some of the Alvin Ailey teachers [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in college [Montclair State College; Montclair State University, Montclair, New Jersey], and did you have it in the back of your mind that, well, all these things are going to help me, you know, maybe do something other than teach if I wanted to. Or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, no.  That's a good question.  What dance for me was then, was therapy. Now, we call it--what do you call it, those--those hormones that--I don't--I forget what you call it.  What happens, there are--there are hormones that are released that actually are here if you're depressed or something, you go and you take aerobics or something.  You know, you're uplifted.  You--when you come out, everything is--it was therapy (laughter).  It was a hobby and was therapy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: It didn't matter if I was going to do it or not.  I just knew that once--I noticed that when I came out of a dance class, everything was just fine.  I can't even remember what was bothering me.  But when I went in, I knew something was bothering me, but I couldn't even remember what it was.  So I knew it was something good just to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In New York and New Jersey, East Coast in those days, I guess, were--had a lot of cultural awakening going on in terms of--
Speaker 2: Cultural what?
Speaker 1: Awakening in terms of--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --African American culture, and dance and music.
Speaker 2: Yes.  You're around it, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I found, like, especially in New York, that's one of the things I did miss, in Jersey, there was not as much dance and cultural awakenings around for young people, the children, that kind of thing.  So I missed that.  But as soon as I could, like, in college, then I went back and got it myself.  Got into it, just as hobbies.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you were saying, would it make me think that I could be a dancer to do something other than to teach school?  No, I just loved it.  (Laughter) Like somebody plays checkers or, you know, has a hobby or something.  It was just a hobby.
Story_ID: 630710
Speaker 1: You were in, in high school [Arts High School, Newark, New Jersey], I guess, when the Civil Rights Movement was really, really making national headlines.  And do you have any personal recollections of--did your family talk about what was going on down south (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely.  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --with roots in Alabama and--
Speaker 2: Absolutely. We were always talking about what was going on there, and the violence, and the injustice, and my parents, too--one of the things that made us very sensitive to it was they're traveling all over the place.  And whether it was the North or the South or wherever, they were black people and they could run and they were in jeopardy, moving all around the country like this.  People seeing them affluent and the law was all white, and racist.  So they were always in jeopardy.  Always in possible harm's way.  And you had to know how to communicate with people to let them know right off the bat that they were lawful-abiding citizens and, you know, accommodating, whatever you want to say, "Mr. Charlie," you know.  It's very, very accommodating, you know, in that way.  And yet, having to understand how to keep your dignity, you know.  And not be somebody's red carpet.
Speaker 1: That's a fine line to walk on.
Speaker 2: Very fine line.
Speaker 1: Stressful as well.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Because you are so insulted by people who are so ignorant.  And they're brutes, so they don't have sense to--they don't even know what they're doing.  You have to be able to withstand that.
Speaker 1: Now, are there--
Speaker 2: Of course, it--to me, it doesn't necessarily take the form of racism always.  But if you have success, and if you have goals and you're striving for something, that's something that you always have to grow in.  If you were a celebrity, for instance, people will say things to you out loud, you know, like, you're a thing, like you're nothing, like, you know, like you have no feelings.  And they don't know any better.  And I'm not saying that they're ignorant because you can't say that because, you go through a great deal of training, both personal and every kind of way to become a celebrity or become good at what you are.  And so that's a specialized training.  But part of it should be in case (unclear) because it could be very hurtful, and it could be very damage- not really damaging, but you could let it damage you.  If you don't understand, then you have to understand for yourself, and for the person who's not a celebrity, and don't be upset with them (laughter).  Be gracious.  Don't say what's on your mind (laughter).
Speaker 1: So your parents' training in some ways kind of, I guess, may have helped you understand in what it's like to be--
Speaker 2: I believe--I believe so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or somebody who just achieved something, it didn't have to be a celebrity, whatever it is.  Because you're going to be around people that you need to support you.  And then you're going to have that training, whatever it is, that you have to set you above in this area.  You're not above them, but in this area you know more.  You know better and you--and they're looking at you and they're respecting you that way.  But in that process, they may say things to you or ask you things.  They shouldn't ask you, that they have no business to know, that if you told them, they're not going to do anything with it except damage you.  But you have to know that and be cool (laughter).
Story_ID: 630711
Speaker 1: Are there any--can you think of any specific stories that your parents told about encountering, you know, racism on tour, or?
Speaker 2: I can't at the moment only because our lives are so different now, and I'm not one that's--want to live in the past so much.  And I've so many challenges for the future.  I haven't had the luxury to sit down and kind of reminisce and--people who have the ability to do that, they can tell you what happened thirty years ago in a snap (snaps fingers).  I'm so busy keeping up with what's going on now, and I think a lot of that is going to be accomplished, and I'll be able to--because it's important to remember those things.  I'll be able to go back to say, "Remember this, remember that," you know.  Sometimes when I'm with my dad [Moore's stepfather, Clement Leroy Moorman], and, you know, I'll go over to hear him play.  He plays in a place called Bareli's [Bareli's Italian Restaurant and Bar] in Secaucus, New Jersey.  It's a beautiful Italian restaurant that has a piano bar, and when he--sometimes we'll go there just for dinner.  When he's not playing, then we'll go and we'll reminisce, and he'll bring up things, and I'll say, "Oh, yeah."  But other than, I don't remember specific stories because I'm caught up with now.  But I look forward to the time when I can sit back and reminisce.  I'll probably write books about it. Because it's--I haven't forgotten it but--
Speaker 1: Just an important point, your, your father is still performing at age ninety-one, you said; is that right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  So--and sometimes it's really important to go back and remember some of those stories, and sometimes he'll play a song or something and it'll revisit, you know, a particular thing.  I know he'll enjoy remembering that.  So I have a reason to go back and remember.  But other than that, I'm thinking, okay.  What's going on now, what's going next, you know.  And I'm trying to make sure so many of these things that I have to do now I've never done before.  And I could be in panic, and I can't do that.  I have to be, so I say, "Okay.  Well, don't think about that, think about I'll think about this," (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's the reason.  It's not like I don't remember or I don't want to remember.  It's just now is really important.  And right now, I'm like I'm again on the cusp of moving upwards and forward.  Everything I'm doing right now is--is new.  I'll give you an example.  I should have a makeup artist, and hair stylist, dresser.  I don't.  I have to do these things.  I think I look pretty good, but I don't know how to do these things.  But I have focus to look nice today, you know (laughter).  So it's a consequence, I can't remember a lot of those old stories.  But I will in the future.
Story_ID: 630712
Speaker 1: Now did you stay on campus when you were in college [Montclair State College; Montclair State University, Montclair, New Jersey], or did you commute--
Speaker 2: I commuted.
Speaker 1: --commute?  That's what I thought it was.  Yeah.  Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: On the bus every day, an hour and a half each way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember that (laughter).
Speaker 1: So did they have--were you a member of a sorority or anything like that or did you get involved with?
Speaker 2: I was never a joiner.  I--and then I thought, I don't have time to do this.  I'm commuting every day.  It's just--it's too much time.  The time you have to spend--get up and practice, that's hours and hours and hours; plus you do daily research for whatever courses you have.  I didn't have time for sororities, to be honest.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you work when you were in school?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, occasionally I would do some performance here or there singing or I would play with a band I used to like to play.  But really not a lot.
Speaker 1: So you would play the piano?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I developed into quite a good piano player for a while, my daddy [Moore's stepfather, Clement Leroy Moorman]--he'd ask me, "Mo' [HistoryMaker Melba Moore], you still play?"  I say, "No, daddy, I ain't got time right now."  And I'll go back to that too.  I loved it.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's something a lot of people don't know.  I wouldn't guess that you play piano well.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, I'd like to go back and take it up again, you know.
Speaker 1: In those days, were you considered more of a piano player than a singer?
Speaker 2: No, because as well as I played, I sang better (laughter).  It was like my dancing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So when you graduated, now, did you get a school assignment right away?
Speaker 2: I had--actually I had an assignment before I graduated.  And then, what happened, I got--I was practicing teaching and then I really got disheartened with teaching school because I wanted to perform.  And so, I left before I got my degree and before I--while I was still practicing teaching.  And I got involved with--my father saw--my stepfather saw my what--my grief really at not being able to explore at least being an artist.  And he started taking me around to some of his agents to get me started.  To make a long story short, I ran into two great people, Nick Ashford [Nickolas Ashford] and [HistoryMaker] Valerie Simpson.  They got me involved with a studio singing backup work, which is very, very good money, and I was able to use all my training.  It was so much fun.  So I started doing that.  Then later on I was called back to--I was invited back to get my degree.
Story_ID: 630713
Speaker 1: I read you were involved with a group called Voices?  Is that--
Speaker 2: Voices, Inc., yes.  See it was--
Speaker 1: Voices, Incorporated?  I know that group.  I mean the way my research was written, I didn't know that was it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The Voices, Inc.--is that the--well.  Okay.  Let's--is this all--it's all--it's an all African American group?
Speaker 2: What we did was we sang and dramatized African American history.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And we did it for the school systems.
Speaker 1: Right.  I saw Voices, Incorporated when I was in college.  They came out to the--
Speaker 2: Did you?
Speaker 1: --school and, yeah, and performed around the college, right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yes, in Ohio.  So they--they get around.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: I knew they were from New York (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They're very successful.
Speaker 1: --wore all black on stage.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: We were a very successful dramatic and vocal ensemble.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were with Voices, Incorporated. Did you--were they touring in those days--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --on college campuses and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This would have been--we're talking the late '60s [1960s] now, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Mid, late '60s [1960s].  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right. (Laughter) And--okay.  So--
Speaker 2: That's when I met [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis and [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee.  You had to go, did I meet any famous people (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--so you met them on tour, when you were touring with Voices?
Speaker 2: Well, yes.  I remember we were doing a PBS special [Public Broadcasting Service].  We were performing and they were guests on the show too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't know I was going to be the next Ruby Dee and Lutiebelle Gussie Mae Jenkins (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's right.  Now, we'll get to that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: I remember in 19--I guess it was 1967 or '68 [1968], I got a copy of--I was a teenager then, but I was trying to get involved in--you know, some people were telling me about jazz music, and I bought a copy of 'Silver Cycles,' by Eddie Harris, and Patti Austin, yourself, and one other person singing backup; I think it was--
Speaker 2: I used to sing backup for Patti Austin.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: She was just a baby, you know.  She started as an infant.
Speaker 1: But I was--I think back when I got it, it may have been '60 [1960] or '69 [1969].  When I got it, I said, I recognized it, "[HistoryMaker] Melba Moore was--is singing backup on this?"  That was--by that time you were well known.  And but--but I saw it and I said, "So here's Melba Moore, Patti Austin, and [HistoryMaker] Cissy Houston, singing backup on Eddie Harris' 'Silver Cycles.'"
Speaker 2: So that--you know, I tell people, but really it kind of points up that when I got into singing backup, I didn't start at the bottom of the industry, you know, is a very elite group of people in that field.  So--
Speaker 1: I mean, those are three great singers, you know.  And they're singing backup to Eddie Harris' saxophone music--
Speaker 2: It's not like that I was great, but I was with great people.  And they would--they were getting ready to be great.  I mean, they were already great artists, but they were ready to have great careers.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So I keep that album, and I'm going to treasure that because of the, you know, all the talent that's on it.  But that's, yes--
Speaker 2: That's--that's--
Speaker 1: --so you sang backup with--
Speaker 2: --that's the way my life was when I left teaching.  And God really had his hands on me.  And Daddy [Moore's stepfather, Clement Leroy Moorman] took me around to meet his people and I got in the company of some fantastically good people and great artists.
Speaker 1: You did some backup singing with Frank Sinatra, I read?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We did all the--all the top recording sessions.  We backed up all the--whoever the big artists were.  Because--[HistoryMaker] Valerie Simpson is still a genius, business lady.  Okay.  So because you have to negotiate those deals.  You have to contract them, you know.  It's more than just singing well.  And you have to be able to read music, and if they don't like that, then you make it up.  So it really calls for a variety of skills that make--make it work.  Exciting being around those, those, you know, really skilled people.
Story_ID: 630714
Speaker 1: Any good stories from those days of singing backup with--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Don't make me laugh.  There were so many, I can't remember them now.  I'm just not good for remembering independent stories like that.  When I sit down and write the books and stuff, I will, because.  I just remember sometimes we were so well booked and some of the sessions would go on so long until we were just--you know, a lot of times if you're hungry or if you're tired you get irritable?  We weren't.  We loved what we do.  We just get silly.  Just get silly. We'd be laughing and we have to stop because we ran ourselves out laughing. I just remember that's how it was, you know.  And so many good musicians and you listen to the playbacks and you just, ah.  You're just so happy to be, I know--I couldn't have been that smart because I remember saying to myself, "Well, if you're not a soloist, you want to be in it."  That was the smart thing to do.  Just to list- be around, listen to these other people.  Watch them.  That's incredible.  I mean, you don't have to be the star, especially when you're coming in.  You're there to learn anyway.  It's just incredible.  Just joyful and--it really is just fun, I mean.  It really is.  It's just fun.  I mean, I can't remember anything that would make me say, "Oh they wouldn't--." There was no downside (laughter).
Speaker 1: Is it--is there any one particular artist or couple people that you learned the most from or impressed you the most working with?
Speaker 2: The most--I would say Nick and Val [Nickolas Ashford and HistoryMaker Valerie Simpson], because they were songwriters.  That means you have to be--you'd be organized.  I know it's a creative, but being around them and seeing how they did things.  I remember Nick was always so humble.  It's just his personality, he's sweet and humble.  Not that he's not self-confident.  And Valerie's always feisty (laugher) that's just how she is.  Like a little Pomeranian.  And confident and bright.  And, "Well, it's like this and (unclear) okay, y'all."  She's a leader.  And to see how people's talents work and how their personalities are, how everybody is different, and we come together and everybody takes their place.  I remember the first time she and Nick saw me on the stage as a solo artist.  Hope I'm not jumping ahead but it was in 'Hair' ['Hair: The American Tribal Love-Rock Musical'] because we got the date.  We got it from a recording session that we were all on.  And Galt MacDermot was doing a solo album because he wrote the music for 'Hair.'
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And we were all the background singers.  And they said they needed some strong singers and they liked the way that we were singing.  But that took about two weeks so they couldn't--actually we didn't know we were being auditioned.  And Nick and Val said, "Well, no.  They don't get no money on Broadway.  We're going to go to Motown [Motown Records] and write hits.  We're going to make some money."  And I said, "Oh, I think I'd like to join Broadway."  And the first time they said, "Mel [HistoryMaker Melba Moore], I didn't know you could do that."  Because it's so different from what we did.  And, of course, I remember when Valerie first went out on her road and I went to see her in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] at this club, and she was by herself.  She was playing piano and doing her thing.  I said, "Wow."  You see each other grow.  You see each other in different facets. It's really quite interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were, so you all were singing--trying to help Galt MacDermot develop the music for 'Hair' or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, we weren't helping him develop it--
Speaker 1: I mean, singing the parts--
Speaker 2: We were hired to sing the backup.
Speaker 1: --the backup for the--
Speaker 2: It was all written out for us and everything.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was just another recording session.
Speaker 1: This was before they--the musical--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --was--
Speaker 2: Before it was put on Broadway--
Speaker 1: --put on Broadway.
Speaker 2: It has been in some other places, and at that time, I--I hadn't gone to see any Broadway theatre or anything.  I was just totally steeped in R and B music.  That was my dream then.  I wasn't going to be a dancer any more.  I was going to be an R and B diva.
Speaker 1: So this is what, about 1967, '66 [1966], '67 [1967]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Because I remember the first time I heard 'Age of Aquarius' ['Aquarius/Let the Sunshine In (The Flesh Failures)'] was on the radio, The 5th Dimension were singing it.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: In '67 [1967]--
Speaker 2: That was after--
Speaker 1: --I think.  Sixty-seven [1967], '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and then I was--I was a janitor then, working in the (laughter)--
Speaker 2: You've come a long way, Larry [Larry Crowe].
Speaker 1: Yeah, but people, you know, you look and say, well, but I didn't--I wasn't aware of the show, I think, until--I mean, I--
Speaker 2: You were aware--
Speaker 1: --somehow put it together--
Speaker 2: --you were aware of the music first--
Speaker 1: --yeah, right--
Speaker 2: --until the show.
Speaker 1: --of that song, and then I think I read Time magazine and read about the development--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --of the musical.
Speaker 2: But if your background was--I mean, and the black people had no reason to go to theatre.  I mean en masse.  So if they were to find out about it, it was going to be through the music that was marketed to everybody.  Maybe they would come.  Of course, a lot of black people did come to see 'Hair,' but it was primarily for white audiences.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now, was it--now, 'Hair,' when you--you--so you thought you want to be in it, and you decided you--
Speaker 2: I said --
Speaker 1: --you--
Speaker 2: --I said, "Yeah!"
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, at the time, did you know what it was going to entail?
Speaker 2: I didn't know what it was after I had been in it for a year (laughter).  I had no clue what those people was doing.  Because I didn't know really nothing about hippies except what I saw on TV.
Story_ID: 630715
Speaker 1: But, I wanted to ask you a little more about the woman you said that helped raised you in Harlem [New York, New York].  Not your mother [Gertrude Smith; Bonnie Davis], but the person who was the caretaker of you.  I mean that was a negative experience, I take it?
Speaker 2: A lot of it was.  But God is good, so it's not.  The woman who raised me, I used to call Mama Lu; her name was Lula Hawkins [Lulubelle Hattie Mae Stetley Hawkins], and she was from the backwoods of South Carolina.  She was orphaned, she was illiterate, and abandoned, and shuffled really from one sharecropper's farm to the other.  And I--I would say she graduated to become a house servant and was it--and then come up north from out of the backwoods of chopping cotton and tobacco and, you know, come to a big city; and really to find families to belong to.  But--so she taught me, I'm saying it in a nice way now because that's what it's turned into because I'm grown and a lot of that has been healed.
Speaker 1: You can understand a little more of the dynamics of it I guess--
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know if it's so much of just understanding because when you're steeped in that kind of thing, if you don't have experiences that are very different, that would show you and make you into something else, I don't even think we might survive very long to understand because it's ignorant; it's self destructive; it's brutal.  So you have to have God's goodness to bring you through these things and then maybe show you why he brought you up to be a fighter, to be at war, and then you understand, okay.  Well, I have to fight for humanity.  I don't let go of those pugilistic aspects that have become part of my nature now.  But I'm not angry anymore. You mustn't be angry, and you can't not be anything.  That's a lie.  You have to learn to be loving and look at those aspects of her bringing up that really were true love.  I'm probably spiritual as I am because she was.  She taught me about mother widow or the natural gifts of wisdom that we have from God 'cause that's what she knew.  There's nothing more powerful than knowing and being.  She taught me about--she would say, "God sit high and look low."  That means God always sees what you're doing.  If I don't see you, you do what's right because God is watching you.  Not that she did everything right, but she really did her best.  And I remember when she knew she was going to pass away.  Of course, I was, even of our whole family, I was the one close to her because we started out together.  And she would say, "Oh Melba [HistoryMaker Melba Moore], I'm gonna to die.  I'm gonna die."  And I hated to hear her say that.  She said, "I can tell I'm gonna die.  I'm gonna die."  And before she died, she made us take her to church.  I can remember now that beauty and peace.  And she had won.  She was part of the family.  That was brilliant.  That was what's more important to God.  In other words, if you can explain it or not, you try to learn what's important to God and try to be that.  You know, strive and fight for something you don't know what's going on.  Fight for that and you'll find out what's going on.  And she had strokes, so what it looks like to me now, because those are things I remember because it's so important.  That's my life, like my mother.  Wow, wasn't she blessed.  Not to have strokes.  What happened was she went into a coma.  She stayed that way for weeks, which meant that she went to sleep.  So now that's understand--I can understand that now.  Then it was just grief.  Why won't she just wake up?  How can I be with her now?  But--that's the grief that all human beings suffer.  Certainly kids suffered more than grownups do in some ways.  But she explained and lived those things, those rough things about life, like violence and death.
Story_ID: 630716
Speaker 1: --I heard you saying earlier was that your confidence in yourself in those formative years were affected negatively by the woman that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --the woman that raised you [Lulubelle Hattie Mae Stetley Hawkins].  And so--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --as you're on the verge of becoming a star and, I mean, you got to deal that confidence issue.
Speaker 2: That was very, very troublesome because if you have some knowledge of yourself, if you have some confidence in yourself, then you don't destruct, you don't go into drugs, you don't choose the wrong men, because you kind of know.  But if you don't, you're everybody's battering ram.  You're everybody's whore.  You're everybody's meal ticket except yours.  That's the down part of it.  But because God is who He is, now what I feel and what I've done, because lack of confidence--the upside of that is humility.  And if you are blessed to get to the point where you can understand some of that from what God teaches us, then you realize, you're pretty gifted and you're very strong.  Now, let's see if we can get some confidence.  You don't have to stay that way, and let's not be arrogant and cut it off, you know.  (Laughter) Let's try to learn--let's try to develop that part of you that's the natural of you and perhaps you hate it because it seemed to be a lack, and start to understand what the difference is between a lack of self confidence and humility, and develop humility and confidence.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's, that's understanding I think.
Story_ID: 630717
Speaker 1: We were talking about the beginning of 'Hair' ['Hair: The American Tribal Love-Rock Musical'], and, and you said you really didn't know what it was about when you got involved, you didn't know what a hippie--really what the hippies were doing and or what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, one of the things that happens, we were invited to do the recording session as with anything dates you know  that these songwriters and producers come in, and you meet each other, and you see the music and you say, "Hi," and,  you know, make friends with each other.  And when they came in the studio when Jim Rado [James Rado] and Gerry Ragni [Gerome Ragni] came in and Galt MacDermot, Jim and Gerry had no shoes, they had raggedy jeans that were tore up, you know, like it was on purpose, and they had these T-shirts on that I'd like to say looked like their mother didn't teach them how to separate the colors from the white in the laundry (laughter).  And they said they were tie dyed.  So I said, "Well, where the man's shoes at?  Why don't he comb his hair?"  You know, I mean, I said, "Oh, my god, these are hippies," (laughter).
Speaker 1: These guys were young men and in those days they weren't poor or were they?
Speaker 2: They very well to do.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think a lot of people would, you know, when they think of someone barefoot and, you know, dressed down, are poor but they are well to--okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you so--so you're confused about, "What is this?"  (Laughter) You know, and they were very happy.  I said, "What's wrong with them?"  (Laughter) You know, not that they shouldn't be happy, but, you know, you could see that.  They knew what they were doing.  They were very intelligent, you know.
Speaker 1: But they were counterculture, as we would say now.
Speaker 2: Yes, and we were culture (laughter).  We were upward mobile, we were BAPS, black American princesses, and well educated and, you know, on our way out to conquer the world and--
Speaker 1: We were two trains running in different directions in some ways, right?
Speaker 2: Not really, as I discovered.  Not really.  Because--and once I decided to do the play--first of all realize, I was learning acting.  I ran into people like Diane Keaton and Ben Vereen, and it was very obvious that Diane was straight.  It was obvious to me.  Yeah, she was there without her shoes and everything, but she knew exactly what she was doing as an actress.  She was just so cool and happy, you know.  And we would learn the script and do these acting exercises, you know.  "Oh, wow," you know. And I remember Ben was such an incredible athlete.  He played the role of Berger, and Berger was the wild crazy one, just swinging around up on the ropes.  Of course, the audience, they rolled all over the place--with the grace of a tiger, baby.  You know, so when I look at that, I didn't know what his background was and most of us he kind of got from different places, and many of us, we weren't trained at all, certainly not in acting.  But we were picked because we had certain personalities and certain talents.  So it was a wonderfully eclectic group and you're just observing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I didn't realize it but, Ben Vereen, I didn't realize he was in it.
Speaker 2: God, everybody in the world was--
Speaker 1: I never saw it, but I know Ronnie Dyson was one I remembered early on--
Speaker 2: Ronnie Dyson. Oh, Ronnie Dyson is a good example.  Just a kid with great talent, great sense of humor; his mother [Elsie Dyson] was hilarious.  And you could tell--
Speaker 1: Can we go to something she did?  I mean, is there a story about his mother?
Speaker 2: I can't tell stories about Ronnie Dyson's mother (laughter).  I can't tell those stories.  But they were hilarious.  They were funny people, they were good people, they were fun people. And, Ronnie, he was--he always had jokes.  He always had stories.  He was a good storyteller, a good--he could have been a good comic if he wanted to (laughter).  I remember him coming down, you know, the stairs, doing an imitation of Diana Ross, or whatever, you know.  Just like kids will do, you know.  And then just an incredible voice and talent.  And everybody was like that in their own way.  I worked with Jim Rado in later years, like fairly recently, we'd say about the last ten years.  He said I was always--I had a great sense of humor and feisty.  But these are--this is just how you were, so I don't necessarily remember, right, what I said or what I did.  But we all had, you know, interesting personalities.
Story_ID: 630718
Speaker 1: Now, 'Hair' ['Hair: The American Tribal Love-Rock Musical'] was--I know in the final finale of 'Hair,' everybody's nude, right?  Everybody's--
Speaker 2: Actually, that was the finale of the first act.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Of the first act.
Speaker 2: That was to make you to stay for the second act.
Speaker 1: Now, did that cause you any trepidation?
Speaker 2: At first, yeah, because what had happened was it wasn't in the script.  It wasn't part of the show when we first came in.  And we started doing previews, and they decided to put it in, and first they said it was, you can do it if you wanted to; it's voluntary.  Then the director changed his mind and said it was mandatory.  So then there was a backlash.  I say, "Well, ah."  And then once he said, "Well, do it if you want to," I thought, well, I'd like to know what it's like.  I want to see what it's like.  And some of the other people did too.  And eventually, most of the cast participated in it.  And, of course, it was, it was the thing that everybody talked about.  It's probably one of the things that we said that made it a hit show.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your--how did your mother [Gertrude Smith; Bonnie Davis] feel about it or--
Speaker 2: They were embarrassed and disgusted, and I was married at the time.  I had gotten married.  So needless to say, my husband [George Brewington] was not excited about me showing my nude body to the public.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But I wanted to know what it was like.  Now, I soon divorced after that.  Not because of that--well, maybe not because of that alone, but I think he thought that I was really joking about being a performing artist, because when we met I was teaching school, and he was--he said he was an accountant.  What I discovered later was that he had some mental problems and he became paranoid, so he would say no to everything, and then he was my husband so which meant that he had a very great impact on my life and my career.  So I said, "You know what?  This is not going to work."  So just got a divorce and decided to be on my own.
Speaker 1: Did you all meet in college [Montclair State College; Montclair State University, Montclair, New Jersey] or did you meet (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, we met while I was teaching school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So 'Hair'--now, how long did you--were you in 'Hair' or--
Speaker 2: I was in 'Hair' for a year and a half.
Speaker 1: And why did you leave?  Because it went on for a while, didn't it?  Didn't it go on?
Speaker 2: They continued, but once Diane [Diane Keaton] left they had a series of people doing the role Sheila, the lead role.  And one of the girls in the ensemble said, "Why don't you let a strong black woman audition for the role?  How come she gotta be white or blonde or whatever?  We been here, you got people coming and going, and you're not happy with them, you keep firing them.  Let somebody in the cast audition for the part."  So they said, "Okay."  And she and I and a few people that were in the--in the--that current cast auditioned for the lead role and I got it.  And then--
Speaker 1: So that's the lead role of the play, right?
Speaker 2: In the play of 'Hair.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that same girl said, "Well, Melba [HistoryMaker Melba Moore], you're on Broadway, you need to start--you don't even know how to audition.  Why don't you just start going out for things?"  And she told me about auditions for 'Purlie' [Ossie Davis, Philip Rose and Peter Udell].  And so I was going out to learn how to audition.  But I got the role for 'Purlie.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's why I left 'Hair.'
Story_ID: 630719
Speaker 1: So this is the musical based on 'Purlie Victorious' the [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis, play.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right.
Speaker 1: And you got the role that [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee played in the play--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --version, right?  The stage play version.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: What I was referring to before, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Ah.  It was too exciting. Too exciting.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your character?
Speaker 2: Lutiebelle Gussie Mae Jenkins.
Speaker 1: And you say that with a certain twang.
Speaker 2: I probably lost most of my twang.  It was so many years ago since I was around Mama Lu [Lulubelle Hattie Mae Stetley Hawkins].  Because by the time I was nine years old, I sounded like I was from you know, Lydia, South Carolina, or you know, Darlington [South Carolina] at least that's the big city (laughter).  But now I've lost most of it, but I really had a nice southern twang with all the colloquialisms that our people speak.  Got it from the backwoods.
Speaker 1: Well was it a big--seems like there would be a big difference between 'Purlie' [Ossie Davis, Philip Rose and Peter Udell] and 'Hair' ['Hair: The American Tribal Love-Rock Musical'].  I don't know--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) There's a huge--they're on two different planets, absolutely.  But that's America, isn't it?  And it's certainly New York [New York].  Certainly was my life, too, to be at once raised by Mama Lu and, yet educated at St. Thomas [St. Thomas the Apostle School, New York, New York] at the same time.
Speaker 1: It's that Langston Hughes--that split that black people have to do.
Speaker 2: Yes. Well, all American cultures, really, because we all have ancestors from another country, you know.  We have the cultures side by side.  That's what's so uniquely American.
Speaker 1: Now, did you get any particular advice from Ruby Dee about playing the part?  Did she talk about it?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Or any contact with them at all in terms of--
Speaker 2: No, I really didn't have that contact with them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I just was Lutiebelle.  And so was Ruby Dee.
Speaker 1: Now, did you get a chance--
Speaker 2: That's--that's Phil- that's Phil Rose.  That's the thing that we had in common.  He was the co-writer and director, and he also got Sidney Poitier in 'Raisin in the Sun' ['A Raisin in the Sun,' Lorraine Hansberry]. He brought Diana Sands in 'Raisin in the Sun' and 'Owl and the Pussycat' ['The Owl and the Pussycat,' Bill Manhoff].  Several Broadway plays.  He's really the mentor for black actors in, especially musicals on Broadway.
Speaker 1: His name again?
Speaker 2: Phil, Philip Rose.
Speaker 1: Philip Rose.
Speaker 2: And he cast the show, so he had a great talent for seeing people's potential for the pieces that he was doing.  And he launched and produced Lorraine Hansberry.  So he, to me, was a great figure, opened the door and fighting those battles of racism on Broadway, and the cliquishness, that is, yet, still Broadway.  And I don't say that in a negative way.  And if you get something, and you've worked for it, you don't give it away to somebody.  You want to get in there, you gotta work for it and fight your way and then prove that you can get in there and hang.  So that's the way I look at it.  And I see that Broadway is essentially, the place where you do historical pieces.  They don't-they don't really do that much with brand new things. But that's good.  You know once a thing has proven to be classic and is around and there's an audience for it, then you can go to Broadway.  That's, that's good.  You develop it in other places.  Get the kinks out and you can come to Broadway.
Story_ID: 630720
Speaker 1: Well, when you were involved with 'Purlie' [Ossie Davis, Philip Rose and Peter Udell], I mean black, black presence on Broadway and musicals was still kind of new, I guess when you--
Speaker 2: Very brand new.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We had Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis Jr.] in 'Golden Boy' [Clifford Odets and William Gibson]. We'd had Paul Robeson, I think before--
Speaker 1: That was way back then--
Speaker 2: Way back.
Speaker 1: --in 'Show Boat'.  Yeah, I think he--
Speaker 2: Right.  So we've had it.  We've had Leslie Uggams in 'Hallelujah, Baby!' [Arthur Laurents].
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: We have had [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll in 'No Strings' [Samuel Taylor]. We have had Pearl Bailey and Cab Calloway in 'Hello, Dolly!' [Michael Stewart].  And when we came, boy, we lit up Broadway (laughter).  And I think we still do.  We have 'Color Purple' ['The Color Purple'] and we just closed, but it seems that when we do bring something, it's something special.
Speaker 1: That's right.  Okay.  So--well, any stories from 'Purlie' about the--
Speaker 2: The one that comes to mind now is that, I never heard of a Tony Award [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre], of course black people know about Grammy Awards because we're in R and B music and that's recorded music.  That's what, you know, what, the best award you can get for achievement in music.  But not many of us were in theatre.  So among the many things that I never heard of in terms of legitimate theatre, was the Tony Award.  And one of the people that were in the chorus, one of the stories I remember, was [HistoryMaker] George Faison, of who everybody knows now from directing and choreographing 'The Wiz,' and having his own dance troupes, and being a major dancer in Alvin Ailey [Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater] and of course, Debbie Allen, who was in the chorus.  And there are some other people have gone on to be very, very great in the cast of 'Purlie.'  But I don't know what the Tony Awards was so George would always take me aside and tell me, "Girl, child, you gotta do this, and you gotta do that, you gotta do this."  We were coming up from the tour of--
Speaker 1: This is, George Faison?
Speaker 2: George Faison.  "Girl, you gotta have a--you have to have a gown, you have to do this," and I said, "But I ain't got no gown."  (Laughter) Well, he made my gown for the Tony Awards because he used to sew and design clothes to make extra money when he was in the chorus of 'Purlie.'  So the dress that I'm photographed in, it was a beautiful aquamarine long gown.  I think I wore my pearls.  It was designed and made by George Faison.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is 1970?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Tony Awards.  Now this is--yeah.  That's a--this is a big deal.  Tony Awards is always--
Speaker 2: It's a big deal.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: It's still a big deal.
Speaker 1: How long were you in 'Purlie'?
Speaker 2: I was in 'Purlie' for a year.
Speaker 1: A year.  Okay.  All right.  So I remember you were in what, 'Cotton Comes to Harlem' in '70 [1970] or '71 [1971], I guess?
Speaker 2: I don't know the year, but in that around that time--
Speaker 1: You weren't--you really didn't have a big role in that, right?
Speaker 2: No.  It was a cameo.  That's what you call it because features is bigger than what I had (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, you sung at the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York], I think, or something in that?
Speaker 2: That was a scene, yes.
Speaker 1: A scene, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We were in a scene.
Story_ID: 630721
Speaker 1: Where did you go after, AFTER the--now this was a Tony Award [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] winning role, and a lot of times actresses stay on Broadway doing the same role for years and years, doing the same thing.  So--
Speaker 2: Well, I was invited out to do the major supper clubs and concert halls, and I was invited to join with Clifton Davis and do my own TV show ['The Melba Moore-Clifton Davis Show'], summer replacement for 'Carol Burnett' ['The Carol Burnett Show'].  And after that, I think I was invited to do some recording.  So I started out a solo career after that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that--
Speaker 2: It opened the door for that.
Speaker 1: --so that's why you were more lucrative--
Speaker 2: Excuse me, all the TV guest appearances, too.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, because you were on the Johnny Carson show ['The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson'] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Everything.
Speaker 1: Show, on everybody else's show, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That--well, tell us about the show with Clifton Davis.  Now, is this a--
Speaker 2: It was a variety show, comedy variety show where we had guests every week, and we had regular skits for five or six weeks.  We had regular stars on the show.  One of our stars was Moms Mabley.  Another was Timmie Rogers, and then, we had some other regulars like--I can't remember all of them.  But they've gone on to be great character actors and actresses.  And then we would have guests, Cloris Leachman, like, who, the lady who's in 'All in the Family'? I can't think of her name now. (Laughter) The one who plays the wife [Jean Stapleton] on 'All in the Family'?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know who you're talking about.
Speaker 2: Who else did we have?  We had Gladys Knight and the Pips.  We had a bunch of really, really great guest artists who would perform skits and everything every week.
Speaker 1: So that was summer--
Speaker 2: Summer replacement, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Right.  How did people react to it?  Did they--
Speaker 2: They still remember it, and people tell me about like it happened yesterday.  But I didn't have management.  I really didn't have any representation, and so, it should have been picked up and I should be a TV star now.  But all of these things happened because God just had his hands on me, but I've never really had good management for any length of time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I wasn't able to make it, you know, continue into a secure career.  I should have been--I should have been the next Cher.
Speaker 1: Now, Cher was out--yes, she was on.  Her show ['Cher'] was big then, I believe.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but you know how she's continued, even though with difficulties, and--but she has a great sense of business and great sense of how to--how the business works.  I didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I mean I had a really series of great things happen to me, still continue to.  They just have--I haven't been able to be consistent because there's no business savvy.  But I'm getting that now.
Story_ID: 630722
Speaker 1: After the show, now, you're, you're still--you're doing Las Vegas [Nevada] shows and--
Speaker 2: That's right, everything (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and all kinds all over the country.  Guest appearances--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --on TV shows, and what's the next big thing after the TV show ['The Melba Moore-Clifton Davis Show']?
Speaker 2: Ah, the next big thing was concerts, but the next big thing was the first downfall, the first demise of my career.  The people I did have handling my career took everything and absconded and left.  And I had--was involved with cocaine and alcohol, and you know, I was my own worst enemy.  Clifton [Clifton Davis] also had a very bad problem with cocaine addiction, and I don't know what else.  And so, we both--we self-destructed.  We really didn't know where to go from there and what to do. So we just didn't have nobody to counsel us or to tell us the right way to go, so I lost everything.
Speaker 1: So this was like the mid-'70s [1970s] or--
Speaker 2: Well, mid to early '70s [1970s].  Really was--I got the Tony Award [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] and everything in '70 [1970] and by '73 [1973] everything had been destroyed and, finished.
Speaker 1: How were you able to rebound from that and how did you--and get out of it?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things that happened was that I had a very, very bad emergency surgery because I'd mistakenly used this IUD device [intrauterine device], which killed a lot of people, but it ruptured my appendix, it gave me appendicitis.  I had a dear friend whose mom was head nurse of what was then called joint disease hospital [Hospital for Joint Diseases, New York, New York].  And they brought me and they did emergency surgery, and told me that the IUD had done that.  And they removed it and I was able to recover slowly in a long, long, long, long time.  And they helped me, you know, recover from that.  And I went back to live with my family in Newark, New Jersey.  And that was the time that I discovered that my mother [Gertrude Smith; Bonnie Davis] and my stepfather [Clement Leroy Moorman] had separated.  I didn't even know that that had happened.  But she had her demise with alcoholism, and it had broken up the marriage and the family, and she had been suffering strokes.  And we really didn't know that she was really going downhill as far as her health was concerned.  So I was penniless and helpless, and so was she, so we took care of each other.  And we're back to Custer Avenue in Newark, New Jersey, the two of us took care of each other.  And that's when I contacted my stepdad and asked him what had happened, why didn't the family know. And of course I understand now that it's breaking up like that, they're not communicating, or members of the family are not really in touch with each other; everybody's going off in their own careers, their own selfish directions--as I had too--that's what happened.  You, also, you know, you're not paying any attention to all the good wisdom that you have been given, doing your own thing, and, of course, that's not working. And so, fortunately, in a sense, everything had been taken away and I'm left with just really my life.  Escaped with my life and I'm fine as long as I can recover properly.  And it was--at that time, I determined. I remember there used to be a commercial on, "It's not nice to fool Mother Nature."  I took as my motto (laughter) and began to try to start all over again in terms of thinking and learning.  I knew I had to be at peace and I had to be positive in order to heal, so I came back with my mother and it was my quest then to see what I could do to take care of her.  So we basically took care of each other.  And I learned how to book myself, be my own manager and my own agent.  Had to do that.  I felt, why not, I can learn to do this.  Can learn.  Will start over.  Let's first get well.  Let's make each other well.  I believed in love and nurturing, you know.  Certainly, my mother gave me that and my family gave me that, and we started with that.  And she was so dear.  She wanted so much to see me well and she--I gave her inspiration, too, to pull herself together, what was left to take care of me.  That's how we made it--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --through that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--well--what was you--what--is there any particular moment or thing that happened that signaled, you know, that things were changing and going in an upward kind of--
Speaker 2: Well, absolutely.  First of all, I don't even know how I had the money, but I did.  I don't remember how I had the money to live.  But I never lived beyond my means.  I was always to live on little or nothing. First of all, I'm always on a diet.  Never spent a whole lot of money on food (laughter).   And I don't know how my mother was making it, but we were living together in the home, so I didn't have a lot of expenses, basically.  Certainly wasn't running around a lot, so didn't have to make a lot of money.  But then I hated the telephone.  I hated speaking, but I learned to pick up the phone and start to call people and try to get things happening.  And I started to get myself some, some benefits.
Story_ID: 630723
Speaker 1: This is right around '73 [1973] or '74 [1974] you start coming out, you start making phone calls and kind of coming out of--
Speaker 2: That's right, book- getting myself--it's easier to get yourself booked if your fee is free (laughter).  So you can learn how to start to negotiate and speak for yourself and put together a little sales pitch and start to find out who people are that could book you.  So I start to learn how to be my own agent, my own manager around that time.
Speaker 1: Now, you still--now, artists, I mean, I guess that was true then.  You had residuals coming from things you'd done before?  Did you have some things coming in?
Speaker 2: There might have been some residuals, but, yeah.  There was probably some residuals.  Now, I guess, you know, once again, so crisis minded and not remembering like, all of how you--but I was sustained and I was not able to work because I was flat on my back for a year, from that surgery.  So it was probably residuals, and you bringing up some of the facts that had to be, because I'd done a lot of voiceovers in commercials and even television show appearances.  That would have been sending me residuals, yes.
Speaker 1: So money is trickling in, but not, not like--
Speaker 2: A little bit, but you could live, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: You're not able to work, so.
Speaker 1: What was your first big break after you started this comeback?
Speaker 2: There wasn't no breaks, Larry [Larry Crowe] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  You had kind of inch your way back?
Speaker 2: Inch by inch by inch.  Yeah, yeah.  But I guess, the major break really was getting myself booked on a benefit at the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York] and meeting with the gentleman who turned out to be my next husband, Charles Huggins; is still very talented at business.  And whose parents, my dear ex-in-laws were sharecroppers.  I mean, you talking about another country, boy.  But you can see how I understand country (laughter).  And he was very all, very dark, very charming, very--really sophisticated, but country, you know.  A country gentleman.  Not very well educated. Not that he seemed--but you could, you could tell.  There weren't--he's not rough--not rough edged, but the way he spoke, he spoke with such a southern dialect, most of our courtship was him saying something and me saying, "Huh?"  (Laughter) But that's charming, you know.  That was really the next big break because we dated each other, and we talked a lot, and he owned a business, he owned a restaurant.  So I could be able to see from the inside from a personal view, the business side--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in Harl- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So he was a Harlem businessman.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Harlem, Harlem businessman, yes.
Story_ID: 630724
Speaker 1: And I--that was fascinating to me--still is.  Matter of fact, I'm going back to Montclair University [Montclair State University, Montclair, New Jersey] and get my master's in the business of arts.  But that was the next big break, because what happened is, we developed our courtship and eventually we got married.  He, like most young black men and women, was very much interested in the record industry.  And that's open door for those who can figure it out and have the stamina and the genius, and the go get it to get in there and start something and make it work.  So we started to think about me getting a manager.  We looked everywhere because first we--we got married, but we--this is what we had in common, and I think he was fascinated with, first of all--I mean he had dated other artists and stars and singers before but I think he was fascinated that I had an interest and understanding of business, because most of us, we don't only think about ourselves and our side of it, you know, "You're paying attention to me," and "You're talking to me."  I remember saying he was fascinated that when he was on the phone all the time, and when he left, I wasn't upset with him but I seemed to understand.  And my view of it was that when I looked at him, he seemed to be very, very occupied with things on his mind, and he was busy.  He had things to do.  And he was bright and he was involved. And I loved that, and he took care of my sick mother [Gertrude Smith; Bonnie Davis] while we were dating.  And they hit it off like this.  They understood each other better than I did.  She was losing her ability to really be coherent because she was--I didn't even know it, but she was having strokes.  But she would tell him about the other guys that I had dated.  I'd say, "Mother."  (Laughter) And, of course, he didn't get upset about it.  That was their way of--because they were southern.  And she--she likened him a lot to my stepdaddy [Clement Leroy Moorman] because my daddy is very dark and very handsome, and she thought that Charles [Charles Huggins] was like my daddy was.  She says that, you know, what is it, "The blacker the berry, the sweeter the juice."  She could say that much, you know.  And he was very handsome and he was very gentle and he was a kind person.  He really--he took care of us.  He seemed to be--that part of the relationship it seemed to me like the way a woman and a man is supposed to be.  He's supposed to be good at ideas and creative.  What I realize now, one of the things I loved about Clifton [Clifton Davis], he was creative.  I didn't know that.  I think now, I'm in love with people's intellect (laughter).  No matter what form it comes in, I think I love intelligence.  Whether if it's raw or if it's educated--what, that's sexy to me, I think.  And, Charles is very, very, very bright, and very confident in himself.  And he was very caring to me and my mother.  And we would talk and he'll say, "Well, aren't you mad about people stealing your money?"  But I probably didn't know it, but I was probably already being born again, thinking about, well, what would God say?  "God, I need you now."  "Well, what are you saying?"  He says, "Well, let that go.  Let it go.  I'll give you something new."  I always remember, too, when I left teaching school, having the thought that, "Well, you don't know what you're doing.  You don't have anything secure."  "That's okay.  You can learn.  You'll be okay if it doesn't turn out, you can come back here."  That much I was confident in, even if I wasn't confident in myself.  And I felt that, with Charles, we could come together; we could think of things, we, we could help each other, we could love each other.  We could take care of mother.  And that was a good beginning.
Story_ID: 630725
Speaker 1: So you were married in, what, '75 [1975]?
Speaker 2: Around that time, yes.
Speaker 1: And then I think a year later your mother [Gertrude Smith; Bonnie Davis] passed, right--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --in '76 [1976]?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that must have been sort of a real dramatic time in your life.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  As a matter of fact, the person who was with my mother, her name is Anne, Anne Thomas, that was like his kind of right hand person, but in that sense we were really family then, so they were really taking care of my mother while Charles [Charles Huggins] and I were on the road trying to establish a recording career for me.  And together we had created a promotional tour with the record company that I with, which I think was Buddah Records.  I might be wrong about that.  But--and Anne called Charles and told her--told him that my mother had passed, she was in the hospital, she had got--gone to St. Vincent's Hospital [St. Vincent's Hospital Manhattan, New York, New York].  So of course we had to stop the tour.  You know, we never got in the right cycle of things after that.  We were always, like, the cycles, and you have to release your record at a certain time, and you have to, you know, get out--get out certain--get out of the way of certain big projects or you're going to get squashed, and get in the right flow of traffic. I mean, you know, I'd be going to Florida in the summertime (laughter), you know, I'd be going to Boston [Massachusetts] in the winter.  Could never quite get in on--in the right cycle of things.  That's one thing I remember.  Once we stopped that, that tour, we were always trying to pick up and catch the end of this or the parts of that.  But I gotta say this, Charles and I, we worked like slaves.  We worked, we worked, we worked; we never took no for an answer.  We built a multimillion dollar company and called it Hush Productions. And we learnt a lot of things because--it was difficult, but we had a passion for it, we had a talent for it, and we were a family.  So we did a lot of things.  It was very--well, a lot of things we did not accomplish, and essentially--eventually, the marriage broke up, and Charles is responsible for doing some very devastating things to the marriage, to me, to our family, to our daughter [Melba Charli Huggins]. But I learnt some things that are so important that I don't think I can ever be destroyed.  The one thing that we have in common right now is that both of us separately, I think, are nurturing our daughter in maybe ways that we wouldn't do if we were together.  So I'm not happy about the way things turned out, but I think some other better goods are coming that are coming to develop to who knows what--what kind of camaraderie that may still be able to be developed.  Because I believe God created the family, and if you're obedient to Him, you can't destroy it no matter what you do.  I mean, I'm not trying to destroy it.  What I'm trying to do, what God showed me, worked for me before.  It's not--pick the battlegrounds that I can win, and they are peace, harmony and rebuilding.  And in spite of what somebody is doing to you, do guerilla warfare at trying to do good.  And that's your battle.  That's what I use my fighting for.  And go get your support with those people who are good at that.  That's the church.  So I don't think our family will be destroyed.  I don't think it can be destroyed because I've got a good foothold in those areas that got good support.  My daughter and I really don't talk about my ex-husband or her dad.  She's with him every day.  I fought to have that to happen.  I don't talk about him because I can't really say anything good about him, and I don't want to tear him down to her.  She knows what I think about him and what's true about him.  But that's not part of our relationship.  We've got a truce area.  She knows I want her to love him.  I want her to have a daddy.  I know what it's like not to have a daddy, and I know what it's like to have a great daddy.  So fighting for that for my daughter, and I already won.  That's what I mean, you know.
Story_ID: 630726
Speaker 1: I don't know what all the other things you all did with Hush Productions.  But you, you all promoted Freddie Jackson, I know that was a big part of it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We spawned and developed Freddie Jackson's career.  Some other great talents like [HistoryMaker] Meli'sa Morgan, Najee.  We managed a lot of great songwriter producers like Kashif.  I don't know how many people know La La [La La Anthony].  That's the only name I know her by, but she's a great, great songwriter.  One of the great songs she wrote for me was, 'It's Really Love,' and 'Living For Your Love.' Some of my fans will remember those great songs too are from me.  Kashif and--I think Kashif--I don't who he wrote this with, but he wrote 'You Give Good Love' for Whitney Houston.  That spawned her career.  We managed him.  He also with Paul Laurence wrote 'Love Come Down' for Evelyn "Champagne" King.  Just to give you an idea of really how great the talent was, how successful we were.  And that's what our management company did--excuse me--leave me not forget my dear brothers, Gene McFadden and John Whitehead, who, of course, helped to build the Philly International [Philadelphia International Records] family; but we managed them in their latter days.  And so, they wrote a lot of great songs, and they are great.  Gene McFadden and John went and did the arrangement for 'You Stepped Into My Life,' which is a Bee Gees hit record.  But that arrangement that Gene McFadden did especially for me is what made it a hit for me.  So these were genius arrangers, singers, songwriters that were managed by myself and now ex-husband [Charles Huggins] under Hush Productions.  So we learned something.  This isn't, you know, a little cotton chopper from South Carolina, and me a singer trying to make it. But we came together.  We came together.  We learned how to do these things. And we fellowshipped with these great artists.  And he brought many of his family members in, like Beau Huggins and like Don Huggins.  Some of the people in the industry will know who they are. They're not famous people, but they're all part of what helped to make Hush Productions a success and--excuse me--and Anne Thomas, what had helped to give me the fire of the entrepreneur to put with--because I was married to a genius entrepreneur.  So some of these things are now me.  And he also understands what it's like to be an artist because he was married to one.  And a pugilistic one.  I'm a fighter.  People--you know, the things that he did to me, he didn't do easily because I'm a fighter.  I can't help it.  That's just what I am.  So--and like I say, he didn't win.  And the thing that I won, I won an education for my daughter [Melba Charli Huggins].  He didn't want that.  But she got it.  She got out of high school, I paid for it.  When he bounced the checks, God prospered me in the gospel plays in the Chitlin' Circuit where they pay you cash money (laughter).  And where we've spawned a whole new industry there.  Because I got that--I caught that spirit from him, the entrepreneurial spirit, which is, you take something, you take--he liked to say, "We fighting people with rocket ships with slingshots and stones."  And that's how you begin things.
Story_ID: 630727
Speaker 1: Your album 'Peach Melba' came out around the time that you all got married, right, around that (unclear) time--
Speaker 2: Yes.  He helped to make 'Peach Melba' happen.  He was really interested in the recording industry, and he worked like a slave.  He got the songwriters, he made the deals with the record companies, he created relationships, he made me important to those record companies.
Speaker 1: That album was Grammy nominated, I know.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That essentially produced by Gene McDaniels [Eugene McDaniels], who was a lover of fusion music.  And, I think, perhaps the one that's most identified with that kind of music after me was Angie Bofill [Angela Bofill].  That beautiful, lush synthesizer; peace music sound.  I don't know. It's beautiful.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I know.  The Mizell Brothers were really into the fusion, you know.  They were like that.  So--and you did a lot of--I know you did a lot of acting in the late '70s [1970s] and the early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: Well, that was my fault.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I made Charles [Moore's ex-husband, Charles Huggins] produce--this was in the '80s [1980s], I'm skipping a little bit--a video performance tape of 'Purlie' [Ossie Davis, Philip Rose and Peter Udell]. I just stayed on him.  Say, "I don't know anything about theatre, you know, plays and stuff."  But we stayed on him and we made Phil Rose [Philip Rose], revived it after--I can't think of the theatre now, I think in--what's the name of that theatre?  Uptown in Harlem [New York, New York] was a great theatre where they do theatrical plays.   I can't think of the name of it, but we videotaped it there.  It's probably first theatrical play on tape.  There's not still a lot.  And it's getting ready to be, I think, very big over because people loved 'Purlie,' and like they did our TV show.  I haven't had good management, but we've been blessed to do great projects.  And I don't why I had the insight to have him do that, but he had the entrepreneur skills and stick to it-iveness to go and put it together and make--and of course, Phil Rose was interested in directing the piece again.  So he, you know, came together and made the theatrical part of it happen.  And Charles and he put together the video production of it so that now it's on tape.  But before that, Charles was trying to see what I was talking about, about the theatre.  So he and Anne [Anne Thomas], arranged with [HistoryMaker] Geoffrey Holder for us to do 'Timbuktu!' [Luther Davis], which starred [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt and some other very, very talented and great people.
Speaker 2: When was this about, 1981 or so?
Speaker 1: No.  This was in seventy--seems like--
Speaker 2: Is that '77 [1977], '78 [1978]?
Speaker 1: I think it--
Speaker 2: Was that before 'Hair' because I know 'Hair,' the movie, you were in the movie version, too, in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Oh, I think the 'Hair' movie came later.
Speaker 2: Now it's '79 [1979], the 'Hair' movie I know--
Speaker 1: It did?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well, it's a little bit later, I think.  I think 'Timbuktu!' was '78 [978].
Speaker 2: Okay.  'Timbuktu!' came--yeah.
Speaker 1: I think so.
Speaker 2: That was with Eartha Kitt and--
Speaker 1: Right.  I don't know if you read about that.  It might have been a little later, because I'm thinking about the recording?  Oh, god, we're mixing--but it's in the late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Okay.  I know I got it here somewhere.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Seventy-nine [1979] was 'Hair,' and then--
Speaker 1: I think 'Timbuktu!' was '78 [1978], but I might be wrong.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  (Pause) Yeah.  'Timbuktu!' was '78 [1978].  You're right.  Right.  That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Thats just before and that was--that tour, well, it was on Broadway first, right, and then it tour the--
Speaker 1: It was on Broadway for about a year, and then they toured it--I left to start my record tour because I had a hit then with 'You Stepped Into My Life,' and that album with CBS Epic Records [Epic Records], which, again, I have to credit Charles with.  He worked and made those things happen.  He was going to be then next Clive Davis or [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy.  He was on his way to doing that, and he did a great job with that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So--
Speaker 1: He pulled in--oh, I remember.  We went to--I remember this story.  We went to Philly International [Philadelphia International Records].  We were doing some recordings.  It might have been before that one, but I have a picture of Teddy Pendergrass with his--what does he got on--it's like a stethoscope.  Look like he's looking to the baby in my tummy (laughter).  So that had to be around '76 [1976], '77 [1977] because Charli [Moore's daughter, Melba Charli Huggins] was born in '77 [1977].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So but we were fellowshipping and partnering with the songwriters and producers at Philly International to do all the current recordings, and that's how the relationship began, with Gene [Eugene McDaniels] and John [John Whitehead].
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is Gamble and Huff [HistoryMaker Kenneth Gamble and HistoryMaker Leon Huff]?
Speaker 1: Gamble and Huff, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Of course, I only remember Gene and John, right (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter).
Story_ID: 630728
Speaker 1: What was it like working with [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt?
Speaker 2: Ugh.  It was not a pretty picture (laughter).
Speaker 1: In 'Timbuktu!' [Luther Davis].
Speaker 2: She would go out to lunch, and when she'd come back, she was this person who just, just tore the whole thing down.  And from what I understand later, she had some kind of a substance abuse problem.  She has a beautiful daughter named Kitt [Kitt McDonald].  And Kitt would say, "I'm sorry.  My mother didn't mean to do it. She's--she's--she's having some issues."  (Laughter) Her daughter would apologize for her.  But she really kind of tore the show down.  It should have had a much longer run.  It should have had a cast album.  But Eartha was big and she was very important, and we had those backers because of her.  So they did whatever she wanted them to do.  Fortunately, she's not that way now.  She's clean and fine, and she's has a whole new career all over again.  So she's someone I look at as a model, you know.  And I know that during those times that she'd lost her husband.  He didn't die, but you know.  Anything that had been her support.  You know, it's that time in life when you're not beautiful and young and rich any more, guys go, you know.  You're the new kid on the block, so your career takes on a whole new meaning that you have to learn how to do, and she's done that and she's excellent at business.  She's an excellent artist.  She knows about how to keep the body and the mind so strong.  She's a really--she's a real good role model now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I look at her, I look at Cher, I look at Tina Turner (laughter).  I look at Miss Lena [Lena Horne]. I have some good role models.
Story_ID: 630729
Speaker 1: Oh, we mentioned the acting.  Now, you got this--you produced a lot of records, and you're getting a lot of acclaim for that.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: but you--
Speaker 2: Because I specialize in recording, part of it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  But you started doing a lot of acting, and you're not really a professionally trained actress--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: --as such.  But you do--you do a lot of acting.
Speaker 2: Well, what I discovered from 'Hair' ['Hair: The American Tribal Love-Rock Musical'] and 'Purlie' [Ossie Davis, Philip Rose and Peter Udell], and 'Timbuktu!' [Luther Davis], and then later on 'Les Miserables' [Claude-Michel Schonberg and Alain Boublil], and now my own piece, which I wrote entitled, 'Songs of the Soul' ['Sweet Songs of the Soul,' Melba Moore]. That's a blessing and a talent for me that I need to explore and build and learn now.  And as soon as I have an opportunity to, as I'm continuing to learn about the business of it as well, I'm going to go back, I hope to go maybe Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] or both, and study acting and learn about it because I'm gifted there.  I don't know anywhere near what I should and what I possibly can learn.  I think I'm just starting there.
Speaker 1: What was your first role where you didn't sing, actually?
Speaker 2: Where I didn't sing?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I did a play called--oh, god.  It's a three person play.  I can't remember the name of it, but it's the only one I've done that I did sing, but it was as a male preacher, so I had to make my voice real low.  And it as a capella; it was as an actor, not as a singer, which I thought was a wonderful experience.  Mississippi Delta. 'From the Mississippi Delta.'
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  Right. That's--
Speaker 2: Wonderful piece.
Speaker 1: Right.  It's written by Endesha Ida Mae Holland, who--who--
Speaker 2: Endesha Ida Mae Holland.
Speaker 1: --who passed not long ago.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right.  Who, from her own experiences (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was her autobiography.
Speaker 1: --during the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yes. Since actually the only piece I've done, I haven't any more since because what I knew I had to then was that's at the time that my marriage had crashed, I went to the mail and discovered that my ex-husband [Charles Huggins] had divorced me without letting me know.  He forged the documents so that he could basically transfer everything over to his ownership.  And by the time I found it out and started to try to counteract it, it was just a War of the Roses.  Well, I knew that if I was going to have a career, I had to establish myself as an actress, and though I've been very lucky haphazardly, there was no consistency.  And so I wasn't really what they would call an actor.
Speaker 1: So what year is this?  When is this?
Speaker 2: This is '93 [1993] or '4 [1994], '5 [1995], in that area.
Speaker 1: That--yeah.  Oh, that's '91 [1991].  Yeah.  Your div- divorce--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --yeah, that's in '91 [1991].
Speaker 2: So but it's--maybe it could be '91 [1991], it could be in that area.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Because--
Speaker 1: Maybe I'm jumping ahead too far.  I don't know.
Speaker 2: Well, you can check your dates, but it's in the early '90s [1990s], so it's early to mid-'90s [1990s].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Right.  Right.
Speaker 2: So I needed to get employment, of course, but I thought, I need to act.  I need to learn how to act.
Speaker 1: Now, you had roles before where you were featured as an actress, I mean as an actor.  Tell us about--I know you did a piece for public television on the life of Charlotte Forten ['Charlotte Forten's Mission: Experiment in Freedom']. That was in the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Yes.  That was in was in the mid-'80s [1980s].  And that was while we were still married and working together and trying to develop the pieces where I would--that was my motivation, to establish myself as an actress.  And I had thought that my marriage, my career was solid, so I needed to branch out and get more experience as an actor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: For once, yes.  So--
Speaker 1: Because that series featured a lot of good actors (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it was a good piece.
Speaker 1: Avery Brooks' first, I think--
Speaker 2: Good strong actor.
Speaker 1: --major role was in Solomon Northrup's--well, yeah.  But that series featured a lot of good actors too.
Speaker 2: Then the lady.  That other lady that was on there.  She's on a lot of the comedy shows now.  Tall, beautiful dark skinned.
Speaker 1: Oh, I know who you're talking about.  I can't--
Speaker 2: She's wonderful.  She has a lot of character.  She played Clifton's [Clifton Davis] wife on 'Amen.'
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  Anna Maria Horsford.
Speaker 2: Anna Maria Horsford.
Speaker 1: Anna Maria Horsford.  Right.  Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.  She was in it--
Speaker 2: Wonderful actors.
Speaker 1: --yeah.
Speaker 2: So I mean, I was trying to develop some experience as an actor.  That's what I was trying to do.  And I thought that, okay.  That was the right--and it was the right thing to do except once I found out that my career was finished, and my marriage finished, and I had to start again. I had to kind of rethink that.  But one of the things I still was thinking was, well, let's get some acting lessons, that's what I did for 'Mississippi Delta' ['From the Mississippi Delta,' Endesha Ida Mae Holland]. Then as I continued on I realized, okay.  First of all I've got to keep my chops up as a singer.  Second of all, if I don't sing, I'm going to lose my identity because that's destroyed now.  So, I said, "Well, you can't go on with this because you're going to lose this, so why don't you see what you can do first to keep and continue to develop as a singer."  So I did cabaret, where I could speak to the people, where you didn't have to have a hit record; where you could have both.  And I developed my one woman play ['Sweet Songs of the Soul,' Melba Moore] out of that.  And also, I was able to once again get involved with gospel musicals.  That was just an inadvertent and beautiful accident.  Start to go on tour where you continue to develop your talent as an actress, and really develop your talent as a singer because now you're up with the best gospel singers, and these are people who just are great singers.  They may never be famous.  They're just great.  So here we are in a sense back on Kentucky Avenue [Atlantic City, New Jersey], you know, where great artistry is being spawned again.
Story_ID: 630730
Speaker 1: I just want to go back to--now, '91 [1991] when you were divorced.  I read that you--that things really got bad financially where they hit the bottom (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.  Well, I was on welfare, I was homeless, I was blackballed.  My ex-husband [Charles Huggins] convinced the industry that I was a crack addict.  I still--I still don't even know what crack [crack cocaine] looks like (laughter).  Now in earlier days, I had learned to sniff cocaine, but even then I wasn't addicted to cocaine.  My basic problem was I can't drink alcohol.  So--I mean, I stopped, you know, that, because I know I can't tolerate that, especially when I saw what happened to my mother [Gertrude Smith; Bonnie Davis].  And once I had the surgery and I had a fresh start again.  I could see, "Okay.  You're too delicate.  You can't do that."  So that was never true, but he convinced the industry that that's what I was.  So they really shut me down.  And he turned my daughter [Melba Charli Huggins] against us, so she ran away.  I lost her.  So basically, I had to start from less than scratch.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 630731
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I am interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our interviewer--our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Melba Moore, M-E-L-B-A, M-O-O-R-E.
Speaker 1: All right.  And we're completing an interview that we started back in 2007, I believe [sic. 2008].
Speaker 2: That long ago?
Speaker 1: Yes, I think so.
Speaker 2: Wow. Well I hope you'll remember what we talked about (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  And so--I think we left--today's date is--
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is April 27, 2010.
Speaker 1: Twenty-eighth [April 28, 2010], I think.
Speaker 2: Twenty-eighth?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Right.  Okay. So were--we had just talked about your divorce and some of the obstacles that were placed in your path as a result of it, and you were talking about how you were trying to overcome those.  So can you pick up there for us?
Speaker 2: Okay.  So it's three years later (laughter) from the last time we spoke about it.  There's been a lot of progress and it's interesting.  Some of it is going very, very slow.  Even three years ago when we spoke, I was probably feeling, am I ever going to get out of this place? And there are certain things that you're trying to do.  I'll put it in a context.  My ex-husband, who's very talented--I probably said this--as an entrepreneur, and what I mean by that is anybody can do business or do a job.  But some people are gifted at it, just as you know how to sing or and, you, know, pretty much, a person can be gifted at anything.  They can just take anything and make an art out of it.  Well, he had ideas, he was very bright, and he was very assertive and aggressive, and he knew how to call whoever is the head of anything and make a deal.  So he was great at that.  But I wasn't.  So doing my own business and starting from scratch was probably the greatest challenge.  And I think I've done very well because I would challenge him.  If I said to you, "Okay, Charles [Charles Huggins], now, you can't do business anymore.  Now you have to put all that aside.  Now, I want you to get up and sing.  And you can't carry a tune in a paper bag," he wouldn't be able to do it.  So but I'm trying to say that a lot of times people take business and deal making as just nothing.  To get anybody--anybody cannot do it.  And so, I'm very proud of myself that I have been able to take some of the things that I learned from Charles, and hopefully he learned from me, and build my career back up to the point where I have a new CD [compact disc] out with Shanachie Records.  It's a beautiful duet project that's called 'The Gift of Love.' And my collaborator that I'm singing with is a great, masterful tenor, Phil Perry.  Actually, I'm calling him tenor because he can sing so high, he can probably sing low enough for a baritone, too, because his voice--his range is just incredible.  But I have a partner, I don't know if I want to call him a manager or not because we collaborate.  Generally, manager is somebody comes in and takes over.  But I co-manage with him. His name is Ron Richardson.  And the bulk of this is it just kind of basically started with where we were.  It's been over eight years now.  And we've built relationships.  People like--doing business with us.  If we don't know something, we say it.  We're honest.  And we ask people when we come to the table to try to make something.  If you don't know how to do this, please let me know, because what we do because what we'll do is we try to make it work either without it or we'll try to find somebody who really does that.  But don't tell me you can move the moon when you can't because then everybody's going to lose.  So I think honesty has helped us a great deal, and we love the industry.  That's the thing that my ex-husband and I started out with.  Neither one of us had really had--I had no business experience.  He did have entrepreneurial and business experience and he had some exp- business in the entertainment industry.  Well, for the most part, we pretty much started from scratch.  We were looking for a manager for me, we couldn't find one.  So we decided to work it out together.  And between us, we wound up with Hush Productions, which turned out to be a multimillion dollar entertainment management--one stop indus- entertainment company, when we booked people, we managed them, we started manage and--yeah, to manage songwriters and producers who were not only songwriters producers, but performers like--people like Kashif; people like Gene McFadden [Eugene McFadden] and John Whitehead, who are great performers but they were also songwriters; people like Freddie Jackson.  I don't know how many people know that he's a great songwriter.  They know he sings fabulously, but he's also a great songwriter and producer; people like Paul Laurence, who wrote, I think he wrote 'Rock Me Tonight' ['Rock Me Tonight (For Old Times Sake)']. I'm not sure if he wrote that, but he--'Love's Coming at You' ['Love's Comin' at Ya'] was one--one of my biggest hits.  And so, that's important because the songwriters and the producers are really the bosses of any record.  And when it comes down to it, we're just now getting to the point where people like [HistoryMaker] Dionne Warwick have fought for all these artists to get paid for the performer's rights.  But that's only, like, I'm talking about last year, like 2009, if I'm right.  So with all these years that these African Americans have to do record artists, basically, really didn't get paid for recordings except for what you got paid to do the recording.  You make your money on live performances.  See how much now I know about business now (laughter)?
Speaker 1: This was, this was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And lots of things like that.
Speaker 1: This is a long climb though from 1992--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and 1992--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you were in pretty bad shape, and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 630732
Speaker 1: I don't think we mentioned last time the role that Bill Cosby played in the life of you and your daughter [Melba Charli Huggins] at (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I've had a chance to say thank you to Bill Cosby since then, who has just been unbelievable, he and Camille [Camille Cosby] and the whole family have been just a set of angels that I didn't even know were there, to be honest with you.  And looking back on it, I can see that they knew what my situation was but--let me just put it into context.  During a war of roses between my ex-husband [Charles Huggins] and myself, it got so terrible until my daughter ran away.  She was just broken.
Speaker 1: How old was your daughter?
Speaker 2: At that time, she was about twelve.  She was just coming into puberty, and she'd be used to a beautiful, loving, supportive home, I mean, and she was in the middle of psychological warfare.  Actually, she was starting to get seizures. That's how bad it was.  And one day she ran away and I didn't see her, I'm not sure how long it was, it seemed like forever.  It seemed like it was over a year or two years, because at the time I was able to go on the road with some gospel plays that had just started during the '90s [1990s] but--and the gentleman who actually started these plays--no.  Wait a minute.  Let me give credit to Miss Vy Higginsen [HistoryMaker Vy Higginsen], who was the one to do one of the gospels, 'Mama, I Want to Sing!' and she still continues with different versions of that, and great things that she's doing with young people as a result of her foundation [Mama Foundation for the Arts, New York, New York].  But another person was Michael Matthews.  He started out in St. Louis, Missouri, and he did a whole bunch of gospel plays.  As a matter of fact, he's the one that Tyler Perry and Shelly Garrett and some of the other African American, I guess you'd call gospel musical--music plays.  They have--basically have a moral story, so that's why I call them gospel.
Speaker 1: Tyler Perry is sort of--out of that genre too.
Speaker 2: Tyler Perry is the biggest one that we know of that has been very, very successful. And if you've noticed it, you might not call his plays gospel so much anymore, but there's a very, very, very strong moral message.  And that gives it a very--
Speaker 1: The church involved.
Speaker 2: --very, very church oriented, yes.  I guess I could call it--yes, I'll call it a gospel play, and I mean that in an honorable way because that's our niche audience, it's our culture, and, has been the basis for great, great, great entrepreneurial expansion and growth forums.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It's almost like a new Chitlin' Circuit in the sense of, you know--
Speaker 2: Nouveau chitlin' (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And they tour from town to town.
Speaker 2: They tour from town to town but the most important thing about chitlin' theatre is they paid you in cash money.  And see you--one of the things that happened that we were talking about, Bill Cosby and his family helping, was I had been--I was saying I was getting ready to go out on tour with one of these gospel plays that was written by Michael Matthews, who started the genre, and I'd just been on welfare to pay my rent and I was able to pay the rent, but I was still evicted.  But around the time I got evicted, it kind of dovetailed when I went on tour with this play.  And they paid me seven thousand dollars in cash, and it made go in the back of the tour bus where they paid everybody and learn how to count the money.  You know, how bankers count money, because first of all, it comes from box office and there's a whole lot of singles and fives (laughter).  I had money all over the whole back of the bus.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're saying--I know you just said it, but I have to repeat it.  They actually pay you at the box--they pay the performers on these tours with the box office receipts?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's how much money they make too.
Speaker 1: And seven thousand dollars in your pocket?
Speaker 2: Well, I was one of the stars.  They didn't pay everybody that.  But they pay you.  Pay you good money but it's in cash.  But you know what's great about that experience, of course, I'm in shock; I just come from welfare, I don't know anything about business, I've lost my daughter, I've lost everything.  So I come and get plunked in to this touring company of super, born again, Pentecostal, religious, Baptist people.  Now from before, it wasn't nothing around me but heathens and non believers.  And fish eyed fools.
Story_ID: 630733
Speaker 1: You grew up in the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] Zion church, (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.  I grew up Catholic.
Speaker 1: Catholic.  Oh.  Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Now where was I?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was asking you about the A.M.E.--there's kind of A.M.E. Zion connection with you is it not or am I?
Speaker 1: Lately.  Yeah, I'm associated with--the church, well, really is my base because once I lost my career and lost everything--well, first of all, I was a born again Christian anyway.  I had become saved during those--probably the early '90s [1990s], I'd become saved.
Speaker 2: So well during that time, did you know where your daughter [Melba Charli Huggins] was at all?  I mean, did she--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --she disappeared?  Were the police involved and how--what happened?
Speaker 1: Well, I tried to get them involved but I didn't have any documentation.  I was just hysterical trying to get my daughter.  It just didn't work out.  I guess they thought I was some kind of a crazy--either crazy person or if you don't have a piece that says you have custody--I think we were in the middle of the divorce craziness, and his divorce documents never even said we had a child.  I had to find an attorney and eventually countersue--so I was in the twilight zone.  I didn't even know you had to get a divorce attorney.  I didn't know what you--so it was just a great deal of--great deal of confusion.  I didn't know what to do, and I was just crying out trying to get my daughter back.  So I did not get her back and I did not know where she was.
Speaker 2: So you're touring--
Speaker 1: After I got on to the tour, I spent a lot of time in grief over her.  I was about to lose my money again.  I had done that before and lost the man that I loved, I lost my career; so it was a very, very debilitating situation.  But I was in the midst of people, all who had been through crises and--they were just sensitive and they were--I guess generally speaking, if a person is born again, they've had some kind of either traumatic experience or just what we call an epiphany.  God is just intervening in some way and you know, I've got to give my whole being to the Lord, for whatever the reason is.  All of these people were like that.  So when you're in the midst of an environment like that, well, what happens is what's--whatever is going, the peace takes over.  And I don't know if you know about black people and church people, but they're hilarious.  They're just funny.  Well, black people are funny.  And so, there was always a great deal of laughter and this kind of joy and this kind of--just a great healing environment.  But I didn't know where my child was.  And many times I would kind of fall into a depression.  But there was always somebody that would be just there with me or just sitting with me.  Sometimes it's--still makes me cry to think about how sweet and--and then most of them would just sit and cry with me.  They really did know and they would pray with me.  And what I would do once we started touring, I would send a gift or note back to my office, where our office had been.  That's the only address that I had, never knew that she was going to get it or not and eventually she did call me back--I always left my phone number.  She called me back and said she'd like to come and be with me.  Well, to make a long story a little bit shorter, every weekend that she had the opportunity to come out and visit with us and be with the crew, the Christian crew (laughter), that was the first time she heard John P. Kee's music.  She said, "Ma, what's that?"  She says, "Ah, they're so sweet."  I said, "Honey, that's what saints are."  Because it was my first experience being with a whole bunch of people, I mean performers, and they were young people and they ran the company, so it was a whole entrepreneurial thing that she saw, and everybody was doing everything.  Then it's the actors say, "Get off the stage and go out and sell the program." Everybody did everything.  It was just a fabulously positive environment.  But it was during those times that I'll get to know my daughter again and woo her back and just take it very slowly.  But it was way after that 'til I got an apartment and a place for both of us to stay that I discovered little bit by bit that she had a lot of the time she had been with the Cosbys.  Nobody had ever said--Bill [Bill Cosby] never contacted me, he just did it.  But more recently, it was about--I guess it was about two years ago, Teddy Pendergrass, who has now since passed away, did an event and Mr. Cosby was one of the hosts, and all he said was, "Well, he used to call me Muscles."  He said, "Muscles, that's all right.  Everything is okay.  We just watch each other's back."  That's all he's ever said.  Never got into my business, never contacted me, and when I realized that that was happening I never contacted him because it looked like to me she had an area of safety away from me and away from her dad [Charles Huggins], where she was safe and loved and cared for.  So I left it like that, and I just said thank you (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's quite a story.
Story_ID: 630734
Speaker 1: One natural question that comes to mind is why did Teddy nickname you Muscles?
Speaker 2: Bill Cosby?
Speaker 1: No.  Why did Teddy Pendergrass call you Muscles?
Speaker 2: He didn't.  Bill Cosby called me Muscles.
Speaker 1: He didn't?  Well--why did he--
Speaker 2: 'Cause he's like that.  No, he likes to say that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Bill Cosby always says, "Well, she don't like that."  You know, we were doing the Doug Henning show ['Doug Henning's World of Magic'].  He used to be a musician, and I was the pretty young lady that goes into the box that you saw in half, and that's where he picked up that title he called me Muscles.  You want to know why, I don't know why.  He sawed me in half (laughter).
Speaker 1: It's tough to saw you in half?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, it makes a lot of sense, right?  No.  But then you, Cos is a great comedian.  You're not supposed to have to make sense.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So you and your daughter [Melba Charli Huggins] reunited.  This is--where we're about 1993, '94 [1994]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yes, yes.  And--let me see.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.  Well--
Speaker 2: I'm not sure if I have the dates exactly right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But I don't want to breeze by anything important, so stop me if I do.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I want to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But that was a kind of a key--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That's a big deal.
Speaker 2: --because I had no way of knowing where she was.  But the only thing I could think is that we prayed her back.  Because I didn't speak with her, I didn't write to her; I mean I was sending thing but we weren't in communication.  So one day she picks up the phone and she called me and said, "I want to come out."
Speaker 1: She knew the Cosbys then, I guess, before she--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  I'm sorry, I forgot to say that my daughter and the youngest daughter of the Cosbys [Evin Cosby] went to high school together, so they've always been best buddies and they're still close friends.
Speaker 1: This is in California or in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: This is in New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: They're New Yorkers.  (Laughter) Well, no.  They're--they live wherever they feel like living.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I'm sure where--I guess a lot of people are like me.  They're not sure where Bill Cosby lives.  I would assume it was California.
Speaker 2: And I'll leave it that way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they--my daughter and his youngest daughter went to high school in New York, yes, a private school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  All right.  I don't want to leave anything out (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I want to say that Mr. Michael Matthews and Chitlin'--Chitlin' Circuit paid for her private school (laughter).
Speaker 1: How long were you on the gospel circuit?
Speaker 2: Well, that show itself lasted almost two years because it was just starting, and the audiences were huge, and you could have a nice long run.  There are some of the ones I did later and never got anything and never lasted that long.  Sometimes as long as six months, seven months, you know, with some times out for Christmas and Easter holidays.  Other than that, you had a nice long tour.  So that really put me back on my feet financially.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  This is in 'Mama, I Want to Sing!'?
Speaker 2: No.  That's [HistoryMaker] Vy Higginsen's.  This is 'Mama, I'm Sorry' [Michael Matthews].
Speaker 1: Oh.  'Mama, I'm Sorry.'
Speaker 2: And I don't know if you ever saw--if he ever saw any or new about Vy Higginsen--it just--I don't think he copied her.  That was just, I guess, I guess black people and their mamas (laughter)--.  Topical, you know.
Story_ID: 630735
Speaker 1: In 1996 you were in the Broadway play 'Les Miserables' [Claude-Michel Schonberg and Alain Boublil].
Speaker 2: That's right. That's right.
Speaker 1: So how did that happen, and?
Speaker 2: Oh, how did Le- 'Les Miserables' happen?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Well, I was still struggling to continue to figure out how to rebuild my career, and I had started working on my autobiography as a means of--really a showcase and vehicle for myself because to me, although I had good success in recordings, good success in theatre, nobody quite knew how, what I was, because for a black artist, R and B music is very, very far removed from legitimate theatre.  And it seemed like to me I had a blessing in theatre, and I had tried to speak with or collaborate with all of the people that I knew then in theatre to help me figure out, how do you build a play from the bottom up.  But nobody seemed to know how to do it.  And I think part of it was a cultural difference.  You can't tell a Broadway person who is Jewish or white how to write or build a piece that's grassroots with no money and no attorneys and all that stuff that puts you in debt for you to begin; how to write a one person play about a black woman.  I realize now there was a cultural and economic way, two different ways of doing things.  So I wound up, just, you know, when I would book myself for anything, I would let them know that, "Well, I'd like to do a play ['Sweet Songs of the Soul,' Melba Moore], is that okay with you?"  And I started to get it booked and when they saw it, they loved it.  So I did start to develop the play that way.  And--trying to think.  What was your question about?
Speaker 1: We were asking about 'Les Miserables.'
Speaker 2: Oh.  I got it as far as--
Speaker 1: You thinking of writing your autobiography at the same time.
Speaker 2: I had gotten the play into like a loose script, and I put it up in showcase in Hollywood, Florida, a little storefront theatre, and I had invited people from anywhere, mainly critics and stuff, just to tell me what they thought because I didn't have a director, I didn't have a writer, I didn't have nobody to tell me if what I was doing was right.  I--just guidelines of, "Melba [HistoryMaker Melba Moore], you know what people want to see from you.  Try to go by that and then let professionals help guide you."
Speaker 1: Now, why Hollywood, Florida?
Speaker 2: I got booked there.  On one of the condos that they have a lot of retirement homes there, and they have entertainment and I got booked there and so, I would just commandeer whoever I was around to help me to do something.  And I think it was the--I can't remember if he played--one of the musicians said, "Well I know someone who has a little theatre, maybe he get--you know, put you there and you can split the door or something."  We don't really get paid, but you get it up and start learning how to do it.  That was the main purpose.  And I started there, but while I was there, a man by the name of Richard Jay Alexander, who has I guess a winter home in Hollywood, Florida, and, of course, just adores, and adores, and adores theatre, came to see me and he thought the piece was pretty decent considering he knew that I was not a playwright.  But the main thing he was excited about is that it really did showcase me.  And he said, "Well, I didn't know you had all these different voices.  I didn't know you could act like that.  All I knew about you was 'Purlie' [Ossie Davis, Philip Rose and Peter Udell]."  He said, "Would you like to do 'Les Mis'?"  I said, "Well, of course."  I said, "I've seen the play."  So he said, "Well, you know it's not R and B music."  I said, "No."  But he'd seen me do some classical music when I was talking about--I demonstrated how--what type of music you had to sing at my senior recital to graduate from Montclair University [Montclair State University, Montclair, New Jersey] in music education.  And, of course, we studied classical music.  So he said, "I didn't know you had a voice like that."  He says, "I know you think I'm joking, but I want you to come to New York City [New York, New York], come back to New York City on Broadway to do the role of Fantine in 'Les Miserables.'  So, I got it from my piece even before I developed the piece.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: To make a short story long (laughter).
Story_ID: 630736
Speaker 1: How did you enjoy being in 'Les Miserables' [Claude-Michel Schonberg and Alain Boublil]?
Speaker 2: 'Les Miserables' was just absolutely fabulous from a few points of view.  First of all, anybody who does anything likes to be challenged.  And I love classical music but, I mean, I want to be, you know, a pop singer. I want hit records so that you have to sing R and B music, gospel music.  Now I love R and B music and I love gospel music.  And the role of Fantine is like classical music but it's about the French Revolution [sic.], so they gave me a nice challenge as an actress, and I needed to do that because my repertoire is still very small because I've had great success in theatre and on Broadway, but I've done like about four plays.  And, you know, my play was to try to help me get back into theatre and to do some more theatre and we did it right away before--while it was still in workshop.  So the greatest thing about 'Les Mis'  was the costume because the costume is those corsets where they string--not strap you in but they pull the things so tight, you know, and I had to lose about thirty pounds; I had put on a lot of weight.  I have a weight problem.  I usually, you know--
Speaker 1: No one would guess that.
Speaker 2: No, I'm pretty good at it. But you know, during those times, I had quite a few challenges, and I probably took some of them my defeatism out in food (laughter).  So I was about thirty pounds overweight.  I had to lose all that weight and get nice and small.  And then they strapped me into this beautiful little corset, and then you had to learn--the other challenge was to work on the sets.  The sets moved, and you gotta go when you're supposed to go.  You could get very, very, very badly hurt.  And even the one scene where Fantine is in the bed and she's singing, "I Dreamed a Dream," you got to get the bedcovers or you get choked in the bedcovers.  You're supposed, you know, fall down and not--you're supposed to slide down, not fall down (laughter).  And you wind up on your knees on the floor singing sad, sad, sad songs.  So you have to do this very, very gracefully lay.  Every day in the rehearsal I'd get choked up in those covers, I couldn't get out (laughter).  And, of course, I one of these times---there was a piece of paper or something you have to give--a note to the foreman and I dropped the note and you cannot laugh.  It's a very sad play (laughter).  But it was fabulous to do because there were challenges.  You had to be very disciplined, you had to remember that this is not [HistoryMaker] Melba Moore singing; this is Fantine. Wonderful, wonderful.  And when I was having the first dress rehearsal in the costumes, the music director said, "Miss Moore, why have you changed the beat or the rhythm?"  I said, "Because, I can't breathe." (Laughter) So I learned how to breathe from up here up.  I'm just letting my whole tummy just go out and breathe, you know.  Now, it's all strapped and you ain't got that no more. So I said, "Oh, my god.   How am I going to breathe?"  But, of course, you make the adjustments.  So for those reasons, it was just absolutely great.  I was so excited and so scared, my daughter [Melba Charli Huggins] came to see me and she tells me now, I don't remember this, she said, "Ma, you did fabulous.  You got a standing ovation."  I don't remember it.  You know, there's so much to think about.  But, just music, you know, it was exciting.
Speaker 1: You don't notice your own standing ovation?
Speaker 2: You got a lot to pay attention to.  It's supposed to look easy to them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But for you, you'd better stay focused.  I'm not like great at multitasking.  I can do one thing at a time.  So I'll miss--and my partner Ron [Ron Richardson] says, you know, "You didn't see that standing ovation for you?"  I said, you know I go, "Oh, yeah, yeah."  But you know first things first.  And I guess, too, because of the losses in time of being on the stage and really growing in my career, maybe I'm still kind of paying attention to trying to get the job done.  And I haven't had it happen to me so consistently as, you know, so often, until I take it for granted.  I'm still, you know, excited about getting the job done.
Speaker 1: Now who else is in the cast of 'Les Miserables' when you were in it?
Speaker 2: Oh, there were, there were--I don't remember, because they were not like big names.  Just great, great talents.
Story_ID: 630737
Speaker 1: Now, you released an album in '96 [1996] too.  You did that too?
Speaker 2: Did I?  Was it the gospel album?
Speaker 1: It's called 'Happy Together.'  Was that right?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: Someone else probably released it on me.  Because a lot of people had licensing, you know, where they would re-release old things.  That wasn't me though.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It says it was your first--
Speaker 2: But I said--you know Ron [Ron Richardson] always told me, "You'd better get your money--."  I say, "You know what?  I don't have--I'm not a record company and I don't have the money to pay for promotion and advertising and all that, so hopefully, they'll keep me out there until I can get something out there."  So that's--a lot of people re-release things.
Speaker 1: That's how you have to look at a pirated--
Speaker 2: Well, how to run our own business and partnering really with the record companies and find out how the record companies do things.  You realize everything's not about the bottom dollar for you getting it because they spend a lot of money, a lot of time and talent for you to get where you are.  So the most important thing for you to do is say, "Well, what does it take to get you out there?"  And then if you don't have the money and somebody else is putting something else out on you, if they don't, you're silent.  And of course, I had enough of that.
Speaker 1: A hit record doesn't necessarily mean a lot of money.  That's that you were saying--
Speaker 2: No.  Well, if you have some really, really good hit records and you've had a great company and they put you out there in the right way, then the hit records continue to stay and you can continue to work from them and live from them and go on to other things.  So they really, really, really do help.  One thing that everybody in America and world understands is a bona fide true hit record.  Because it puts you in front of people.  You them all the time on the radio and see them.  It puts you mainstream.  So it's a great marketing tool.  But, now, in the other sense, the artistic sense, I don't know if it's always so great because in some ways I don't think you really learn how to be a great entertainer and good communicator because when people come in, they already know your music.  They don't really have to listen in a certain way.  They sing along for you and, because of that, you don't really have to work to get their attention.  You just kind of sing along. If they don't know you, they don't care about you, they don't know your record.  You have to make them pay attention.  And that means you'd better sing it, you better catch the notes, you better catch their heart, their spirit, and I think that develops a great artist.
Story_ID: 630738
Speaker 1: Well just tell us about some of your other activities in the '90s [1990s].  I have a note here that you got married at some point, I guess was it, were you married to George Brewington?  Was it--
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  That was way back in the--
Speaker 1: I don't have a year--I don't have the year here.
Speaker 2: He was my first husband.
Speaker 1: Oh, they got it out of sequence in this outline.
Speaker 2: Way out of sequence.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  I have to make a big circle around that.
Speaker 2: Out sequence, out of sight, out of mind, out of heart (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is way back.  This is way back in the what, '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1960s. Okay.  All right.  Okay.  So, all right. Now I know you've been in quite a few movies since--
Speaker 2: Oh, let me see.  What did we do?  We did 'Fighting Temptations' ['The Fighting Temptations']. I don't remember so many movies.
Speaker 1: Right.  Oh.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Certainly that one.
Speaker 1: That was in 2003, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's mainly the one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, I don't want to skip anything.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Tell me what from 'Les Miserables' [Claude-Michel Schonberg and Alain Boublil] through 'Fighting Temptations' what was going on?
Speaker 2: Well, that was primarily just live performances and figuring what was I going to do with a recording career.  I worked really and learned the church circuit with being a Christian.  That was a place for me to begin really to build my whole life over again.  And I started, since I was born and raised Catholic, I really didn't know the Christian hymns and songs, and I adored them, I loved them.  So it's am I going back to school again and learning them all over, and learning how to expand myself as a worshipper, and as a praise artist, and going and listening to all of the new and old gospel artists.  I spent a lot time doing that and getting to know, you know, who The Clark Sisters were, because we all knew who--everybody knew who Shirley Caesar is, but really getting into her music and discovering Yolanda Adams and discovering John P. Kee and discovering--rediscovering Albertina Walker and, then of course later on came Kirk Franklin and that style of music and The Hawkins Family, and I could go on and on and on, because I really just became immersed in Christian music because of my spirit and religion.  And then out of that eventually came some songs that were just the traditional hymns like--I'm trying to think.  (Pause) Praise hymns (singing), "Everything with breath, praise the Lord."  Everybody knows that one.  There's a zillion other songs written on that one, and then I had gone long enough and saved enough money to do my own CD [compact disc] because it looked as though to me that I wasn't gonna really--I didn't know how to businesswise even go about getting another label, plus they weren't really available and everybody was kind of like out in left field somewhere.  But then a lot of people started doing their own projects, and I thought, well, let me try that.  And I raised enough money to do my own CD and when I did, I said, you know what, I don't really have any songs that are my style.  I don't know what my style is.  So I went to Shirley Murdock and her husband Dale DeGroat and I asked her to help me with doing that, and she knew that--she only knew me from Broadway and theatre.  And, I didn't have any identity in gospel music so we were going to have to develop one.  So she said, "Well, I always remember--." I didn't remember this, but she said," I remember going to see 'Purlie' [Ossie Davis, Philip Rose and Peter Udell] and you were so nice to me."  I said, "God, thank God I was nice."  She said, "What you need to do is you, you need to have a song that tells your story; that tells your testimony."  Because, Shirley is, you know, she's dye in the wool gospel artist--I think she went to R and B, and then she went back to gospel, and I think she's going back to R and B now.  I mean, this is beside the fact that she's just a brilliant singing artist.  I'm talking about the spirit in her, a person is a gospel person.  And that's who I am now.  I'm going to do a lot of things but I'm really a gospel person.  So she wrote this--she and her husband Dale DeGroat wrote this song especially for me called "I'm Still Here." And it works like a miracle.  It sounds like I wrote it.  You don't know how I write, so I don't mean that.  But it sounds like--it sounds like I'm telling my testimony.  And when I sing it for people, they just, thank God, they just kind of go out to lunch because everybody can relate because of whatever challenges they've been through.  And then she wrote a duet that she sings with me called "Call Me," and it's just outrageously beautiful.  But it's just pure gospel.  That's what it is.  I mean, the style of music.  And that's why I'm so excited about that, too, because I mean we all love gospel.  But everybody can't just get up and sing it.  And I'm learning to sing it, and it's from my heart and it's my style and it's part of I think the new age of gospel or Christian music.  There's getting to room for all kinds of expression of the love of God, regardless of what your style is, and that's really as it should be, not just one.  So it's part of a new entrepreneurism and that comes out of that.  And then later on--I'm trying to think.  When was it?  Probably about 2000, what one [2001] or something like that?  That I did 'Nobody but Jesus.'
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's not on here.
Speaker 2: It's not on here?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But--
Speaker 2: Okay.  Maybe a little bit later than that.
Speaker 1: Maybe 2000?
Speaker 2: Maybe 2004, something like that.
Story_ID: 630739
Speaker 1: My friend Dunn Pearson [Dunn Pearson, Jr.], who's a great musician and did a lot of work with Philly International [Philadelphia International Records] people and The O'Jays, I think he was their music director for a while; but he was a great songwriter and producer and singer.  He partnered with me to go in the studio so I didn't have, you know, the costs of anything; we just put our talents together.  He had--you know, all the equipment and everything to be done.  And we did a second gospel CD [compact disc] called 'Nobody but Jesus.' You know, on that one I put my favorite singer, Mahalia Jackson's "Precious Lord." Of course, everybody sings it, but nobody sings anything like Mahalia Jackson "Precious Lord."
Speaker 2: Was she--she's your favorite of all?
Speaker 1: I think so, yeah. "Precious Lord."  There are some things that were written for me by Herb Middleton.  It was a duet called "Rise My Sister." People really, really loved that.  One of the great things I like about gospel music is the shelf life is much longer.  You don't have to be the latest flavor on the block.  If it says something, you don't have the ability to market it like you were Donald Trump [President Donald John Trump] or something.  Leave it out there and keep growing.  It's still going to be timely.  And so, I expect those two CDs--as I look back, too, especially having been my first production, they're very good.  And when I listen to the quality of production considering I didn't have any money, but one thing I did do--and I got to thank my ex-husband [Charles Huggins] for that--you choose good people and that'll bring quality. And if they're good at what they do and you have a good relationship, then they don't always charge the highest price.  And that's what Shirley Murdock and Dale DeGroat did for me.  Same thing with Herb Middleton.  He's written a lot for Ann Nesby and some other great, great, great artists.  And he, too, he had a studio in his home.  Everybody has a studio in their own home now (laughter).  But that doesn't make them great musicians.  But he's a great songwriter and musician.  And so, I really have two very--and so was Dunn Pearson--I have two very fine gospel albums that are going to stand up for themselves until I can get to, to the next one.
Story_ID: 630740
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were just discussing off camera some of the venues in the Midwest and other places for, you know, for gospel music, the big, for the big gospel touring shows.
Speaker 2: And what happened during that time--when was that, early '90s [1990s] we're talking about?  Theatre and a lot of the other entertainment venues weren't doing well at all.  And I had been plucked out from welfare and all that and Broadway (laughter).  Into this like paradise, where not only was it doing well but it's a whole new genre being created.  And these theatres were huge.  They had at least four or five thousand seaters.  And they were filling up the balconies and just--and we could stay in each city that would have a theatre of about three or four--three or five thousand seaters, we could stay there for a week.  So it was a real boom.  I said, "Oh, my god.  Ain't I glad I chose to be born again."  (Laughter) Because that's what led to it.  I said, "Oh."  Well, he really didn't explain to me until he said, "Come and see what I do."  And I said to Him, "Wow, this is, it's all church people."
Story_ID: 630741
Speaker 1: Can you explain your conversion, or your, or did you have an epiphany? What happened and was there a pastor or religious leader or guide, you know, someone that was--that changed the--that brought you this revelation of spirituality?
Speaker 2: There was no pastor, no person.  I was pretty much religiously or spiritually kind of isolated.  I met my husband [Moore's ex-husband, Charles Huggins] and I know that I was interested in deeper and higher things.  I didn't know that it was religion.  And I didn't really know what it was.  And I remember being on the road one night, and there were several things I'm sure that led to it, by me being interested in it, and I remember me studying the tarot cards and studying some Hindu religions and studying a variety of things because they interested me; Santeria, a bunch of different things.  And--I'm trying to think.  Because I never documented or thought about what--to remember what the path was, but I remember reading about magicians and reading about prophets and trying to figure out what they were and who was right and what was going on and at one point it seemed like all of it was just fine, you know.  Not really remembering my Christian upbringing so much or my Catholic upbringing so much.  But it started to narrow down because it seems as though, cumulatively speaking, wherever I went, somebody had something to say about Christ.  And they all said that he was a great prophet.  And I remember starting to read some things about him, and eventually, that lead me to the Bible (laughter).  I never left the Bible, and then once I got to the Bible, there became a yearning to fellowship with--and talk about--this became the most important thing of my interest and it was fascinating from all different kinds of levels.  And I remember thinking, I don't want anybody to convince me or convert me.  I don't want anybody tell me anything.  But I remember watching all the televangelists.  And one night, I think, I was watching Jimmy Swaggart, and he was inviting people to give their hearts to Christ.  And I was in my room and I gave my heart to Christ.  And I know I did it.  I know something changed.  But I also remember having some precognitions.  I forgot until we were talking about Chicago [Illinois], why I love Chicago (laughter) so much.  I remember going to a movie or something and it was it was early, early, way before this, and I was with--I won't mention his name--a boyfriend, and he had put some angel dust [phencyclidine] or something in my marijuana (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, that can really be a problem.
Speaker 2: And, fortunately, it didn't, like, send me wacko but I remember having a vision.  I remember everything I could see on the screen said, "Christ is behind this.  Christ is behind everything."  And I remember having the thought well, yeah, you see what's behind everything and it is Christ.  But you can't go this way.  You're going to get hurt or something bad is going to happen.  So don't do any of this anymore.  Don't do any--don't smoke this stuff anymore, don't drink any alcohol anymore.  And I stopped doing it.  And that was before.  So I'm--now you're reminding with it there was a path and I haven't had a reason to think about it until now.  And then, you know, continue to get interested and stay interested in and narrow it down to Christ and in to giving my heart to live.  But I was still isolated.  I wasn't in the church, I wasn't anywhere.  But I continued to have this yearning to talk about it all the time.  I was born again, you know.  You're full--you can't keep it to yourself (laughter) you know.  So I remember walking into--I was married already, but nobody was around me that had that experience.  So I really didn't--feel like--I felt like I didn't want to push myself onto people, so I kind of keep it to myself (laughter).  But I would go to church.  I remember going on a demonstration with Al Sharpton [HistoryMaker Reverend Al Sharpton] against the crack houses in Harlem [New York, New York].  And when we had a lunch break, we stopped in a little church called White Rock Church [White Rock Baptist Church, New York, New York], and Reverend Charles Kenyatta, who's a very, very well known activist in the Harlem community, that was his church.  So he invited me to come.  And by that time, I had been so enamored with the scriptures, I had, like, memorized the whole first chapter of Jeremiah because it seemed like it was speaking to me where it said, "Before I formed thee in the belly, I knew you and called you to be a prophet."  The whole thing I had memorized.  And what they had was a time what they called shouting of scriptures, and if you had a scripture on your heart (laughter), you can say it.  Well, I got up and quoted the whole first chapter of Jeremiah.  And I was going and going until I realized people were looking at me.  And I said, "Oh, I guess that's a little too much," (laughter) Those were the kinds of ways I realized that I was born again.  It had already took me over.
Story_ID: 630742
Speaker 1: Have you ever thought, and it pro- it's probably crossed your mind, that your life story as you have described it to this point, parallels some of the plays, actually, that you were in, in a lot of ways.  I mean, there's always a story where somebody who has a success or they had some problems, they seek other--many solutions and drugs and other--alcohol and stuff, then they come back to--they come back to Christianity, and they have some kind moral conversion.  A lot of those plays have the same.
Speaker 2: All of the plays have that pattern.
Speaker 1: All of do, yeah.  Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: There's a--what do you call it, not a pattern, a formula.  No, I never thought of it that way.  I guess probably because--but it fits the formula.  I'm not saying that it doesn't it, it's just that when I was doing them I guess I was learning--continue learning to be an actress.  I was learning about the born again experience.  I was wondering where my daughter [Melba Charli Huggins] was.  There were a lot of things on my mind that I didn't see that parallel until you mentioned it now.  Of course, I love the stories because they're like soap operas.  And they're always so hilarious.  And joy is such a healer.  And it reminds me of that now.  When I get everything that I want to where it's going to be, what I'm going to really focus on is comedy.  Because I'm very funny and I know that from 'Purlie' [Ossie Davis, Philip Rose and Peter Udell] because I had no training for that play.  But it was--she was just a country, silly, funny looking acting person [Lutiebelle Gussie Mae Jenkins].  So I got a Tony Award [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] for being myself (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes, you know, I've never, to tell the truth, when you were in the movies and plays--I mean the movies I've seen--I've never seen you live in a play, but you always play such serious characters--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --and in meeting you, you know, you're such a lively--you know, and you like to laugh and you know, it seems like a contrast.
Speaker 2: I think it is. I definitely both those people and I think one of the reasons I felt it necessary to write a play for myself ['Sweet Songs of the Soul,' Melba Moore] is because when you--are yourself, that's what you see.  So I'm not right for they--I could not.  I don't even know how to audition, yet.  I never got any anything auditioning, and I'm trained.  So I don't know to just go and be a, you know, what I admire, an actor and become this thing.  But then there are certain types of artists who become very, very well known and successful at playing themselves.  So you can do that too.  So I looked, I said, "Well what can you do that's really good that people can relate to that's professional, not just you yourself and where you're not trying to fit into somebody's daydream, because if you don't fit that, you get fired, but that doesn't mean I can't do something.  So maybe you have to try to create something for yourself."  So in my piece, one of the things that I do is because so much of the story is so sad, and I'm really that, I'm really pitiful.  I'm the very sad vehicle, but I'm hilarious, too, so.  So it gives me the opportunity to, first of all, use my skills as a person who's very joyful and funny.  And that's the other thing--that's the thing that is very important about joy and happiness is you can talk about some very terrible, serious things and not scare people off and they can still listen.  It's important for people to know these things.  So the importance of that is communicating still, I think, the gospel, not--the scripture, but, and whatever your vocation, your, your art is.
Story_ID: 630743
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar] wrote in a poem, and I can't think of the exact--he said that, that sadness and troubles are, is the finest foil for laughter, or something like that.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, I mean--.  So--well, I guess I'm thinking that, having met the challenges of at least creating the foundation of a theatrical piece that works for me, is also the centerpiece for music in bringing them all together. Is going to--I only have confidence in because before I even had it--past showcases, it got me back to Broadway in 'Les Miserables' [Claude-Michel Schonberg and Alain Boublil], which is not even about black people.  So I know I'm on--(laughter), I know I'm on the right track--and continue to study the craft as a gospel artist.  It's on the right track because first two reasons.  Artistically, it's always been the basis and inspiration for all of our music as it should be, and all of our artists should be.  Black people as playwrights and actors are still on, on the beginning.  We're still blossoming.  Black entrepreneurism is just blossoming, and the church is just getting ready to explode.  So as a niche market it is a very smart place to put your present and your future business aspirations.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you aim to be a part of that--
Speaker 2: And I see that I'm already am, so.  And it's been jumping all over the place for everything else.  I've been invited to do, as I said, the project with Shanachie Records, which is an R and B project ['The Gift of Love'].  But it's an R and B slash inspirational.  It is because they're business people.  They're going to go where the money is.  So that encourages that I'm on the right track--I don't have to divorce myself from God and then, you know, I'm convinced that He really is the maker of--but all belongs to Him.  What we have to learn how to do now is take all the gifts that He gives us and honor Him and not try to separate them.  There really is no such thing as secular.  There may be a difference between religious and something else, but they're not separate.  One is just not speaking in scriptures.  One is acting out, you know, whatever your language or culture is.  But it's--life comes from God.  You can't divorce that unless you don't want your life (laughter).
Speaker 1: Interesting.  Okay.  Now what you--do you have a, I guess, artistic philosophy?
Speaker 2: That was it.  Everything belongs to God.
Speaker 1: That was it, okay.
Speaker 2: So you can do anything and you find out what your vocation is, then you'll be a part of life, you know. If you never say what your religion is, you don't have to.  Now, at certain stages you don't have to.  I think in the beginning you have to proclaim it for yourself so that you know where you stand.  But later on once you begin to live it, you can go anywhere God sends and you never have say if you're Christian or Buddhist or whatever it is, you just have to live it.
Story_ID: 630744
Speaker 1: Tell us about 'The Jackie Wilson Story.'
Speaker 2: Okay.  Oh, that was a play (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, well before that, I guess, is 'Fighting Temptations' first or that?
Speaker 2: I think 'Jackie Wilson Story' was first.  That was another opportunity to do theatre.  Once again--I can't remember the lady's name.
Speaker 1: That's [HistoryMaker] Jackie Taylor.
Speaker 2: Jackie Taylor.
Speaker 1: This is a--
Speaker 2: Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the Black Ensemble Company [Black Ensemble Theater Company].
Speaker 2: Chicago, again--another example of great, hardworking entrepreneurs in black theatre companies.  Because Jackie has built that company with local people and raising funds, and it's a not-for-profit organization that does fabulous work.  And she's done my play ['Sweet Songs of the Soul,' Melba Moore], too, and then she hired me to star and she wanted a nationally known person in this particular one.  She does a lot of them-- she's done this one.  Just great, great, great local talent.  Then she wanted to take it nationally.  We went to the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York] and then we went to a few other--we went to Detroit [Michigan], and she--her skill has become in documenting and writing about our African American music heroes--
Speaker 1: Right.  That's right.
Speaker 2: --and of course, Jackie Wilson was one of the great ones.
Speaker 1: She's done Muddy Waters (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Muddy Waters.  And she's also recently, I think, done Teddy Pendergrass.  I don't know if it's up yet, but she's worked on his story.  So that was another opportunity to collaborate with someone--well, I'm an entrepreneur now, and so, I would understand the value of what she's doing in her theatre company as well as, you know, an artist.  You want it to happen, you got to be at the helm and, you know, and, well, everybody knows that now.  I'm talking about ten years old now because we've grown so much as business people, you know, with regard to whatever or our talents or our desires are, we know we have to be the chief, cook and bottle washer (laughter) as well as the CEO if we want to do something and own it and have it done the way that we wanted to do it.  I remember I had a friend who used to work for Disney [The Walt Disney Company], and he was always complaining that Disney didn't do this for black people and Disney didn't do this.  I said, "But it's Disney's company.  You want that done, you got to start your own company."  And that's what Jackie Taylor's done.
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's right.  She's found a really, a real niche with that kind of (unclear).
Speaker 2: A lot of this is hard, hard, hard, hard, hard work.
Speaker 1: Now this--now shortly after that you were in 'The Fighting Temptations,' right?  So in two thousand--
Speaker 2: I don't think it was shortly after--
Speaker 1: --what's this, 2003.  Maybe I'm wrong.
Speaker 2: I don't know the dates.
Speaker 1: It was two thousand--
Speaker 2: It could be, I'm not sure.  I don't remember dates.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well, tell us about 'The Fighting Temptations' (unclear).
Speaker 2: 'The Fighting Temptations,' I was invited to do by the young lady--I can't remember her name now either (laughter)--who was one of the co-producers.  I don't know if she had anything to write with, it was a black young lady, and she really kind of handpicked--they had casting but they really basically handpick everybody that they wanted for each of the roles, and I remember I also starred opposite Angie Stone and (laughter) Shirley Caesar and Mike--oh, he's a great comedian, I can't think of his name.  I'm going back in my past and I can't remember these.  But I got to remember this because it's just been put up on Pay Per View.  This is going to start--this is going to be exposed all over again, and of course, starring Beyonce [Beyonce Knowles] and Cuba Gooding, Jr.
Speaker 1: Oh, they're going on to do another version of it?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: That's what I was saying?
Speaker 2: This is--they're like re-launching it again.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: So we don't even have to go back do any more work, we just get paid again.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.  Things are different.  In the old days, that wouldn't happen, right or is it (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, in the old days they just kept re-releasing and doing everything.  You just never knew about it and you didn't get paid, there were no laws to cover it or anything like that.  But it's very different these days.  'Fighting Temptations' has already paid me very well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Very good.
Speaker 2: And I just had a little 'ole--you know, feature role in it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, since--
Speaker 2: Epps, Mike Epps.
Speaker 1: Mike Epps.  Okay.
Speaker 2: That I know because he's well known.  Mike Epps.  Oh, there's quite a few--Steve Garvey--Steve Harvey, excuse me, was in it; Yolanda Adams, and they just did cameos, but it was a lots of big names in it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's a great movie.  Everybody enjoys it.  It's very, very, very funny.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I played a little, kind of dried old lady with these big flowery hats.
Speaker 1: An old lady in this one, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay (unclear).
Speaker 2: I said. (Imitates) "I'm waiting on my Mercedes Benz when the choir wins the contest and we going too," (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's good.  It's hard to imagine you a little old lady, but that's--
Speaker 2: Good.
Story_ID: 630745
Speaker 1: You've done some recording, too, you know, recently, right?  It says here--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  Some recent recordings.  One song is called 'Been There, Done That.' It's a house record, house dance record.  Another one is called 'Book of Dreams.' Another one is called 'My Heart Belongs To You.' What's great about that market is really the deejays are the stars these days.  And so, what they do is, if you have something that they like, they'll fight over who's going to do the mixes.  And so you can have like a whole album with all these different mixes, and each one of the mixes can be totally different because it can sound like a whole different song.  But you can hear the person still singing the same melody, which I find is an interesting concept.
Speaker 1: Well, go ahead and describe that scene for us because I'm kind of unfamiliar with it coming from the cornfields of Ohio, so what is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it's music that really is exclusively in clubs.  I mean there are radio stations that highlight and focus on it.  Again, but--you know, like--say for instance, other music might be in concert halls or gospel music might be in churches, this is strictly in clubs.  And they're different kinds of clubs.  Of course, there's the gay clubs, and then there's the straight clubs.  But there's basically nightclubs where people actually really go to dance.  What I'm seeing now that I'm kind of out and seeing what people are doing, there are lots of places where--I mean, when we go, we would get out and get drunk and get high and party (laughter).  These people go to dance, and a lot of times you'll see them drinking Red Bull. So they'll have energy.  Or they'll drink coffee, you know.  But they don't necessarily drink alcohol, you know.  And nobody smokes anymore.  I think it's unlawful to smoke in most of the clubs, unless it's a private club.  So that means I can go to the clubs.  Nobody's going to smoke on me.  I don't have to drink, you know.  And so they have a whole other genre, it's sort of like a neighborhood community center type of thing where they'll play music back to Duke Ellington, and these are black communities.  But then, you know, we like that line dancing and you know they'll have--I forget what kinds of music they call--step.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Step music, and the music is good, you know.  And you bring your own food and everything, you know (laughter).  It's very warm and very community, you know, and everybody don't just sit by themselves.  It's not sophisticated.  It's--everybody just go and you don't know how to dance.  It's because you love the music and you love--you're going to get up and dance (laughter).  I don't care if you got five left feet.  I like that spirit.  Just go and have a good time, you know.  So that's--that's growing, where people can come out and just dance, and all ages.  I mean--I remember one place I went where they had this lady come and dance.  They used to be dancers.  So that means they're in their seventies and their eighties now.  And they have music back to that time, and everybody be dancing.  The young people be dancing to the old music, and the old people be dancing to the young music (laughter), and everybody enjoys all of the music.  I think that's good in terms of connecting us again because the commercial arenas have really separated everybody, and say, and well, if you don't belong to hip hop, you don't exist; or if you don't belong to jazz, ah; if you're not this kind gospel--it's really separating.  And these kinds of community things bring it all together.  And I think that's where the basis for anything that's going to work really happens.  If the people want it, they're going to buy it or they're going to promote it.  That's usually what happen that way any way.  And then someone will take something and make it commercial, which is fine, you know, because they know it's going to appeal.  They're going to sell it because that--we can see, that's what you want.  That's what you like.
Story_ID: 630746
Speaker 1: When you go to these places, do you go as somebody making a guest appearance or do you just go to have fun at some of these places--
Speaker 2: Not--I go as somebody making a guest appearance.  This is an important part of my formula in terms of getting back, because I don't have, you know, a ten thousand dollar a month marketing person to promote me, and it's my community so I can go if I want to or I can stay home if I want to.  But I like people.  So I go but I always ask--I had always, I don't have to anymore--ask to sing a song because if they haven't heard your record, they don't have a way of knowing you.  So you get up and sing a song, they say, "Oh, that's [HistoryMaker] Melba Moore, oh."  Then I have to go into hiding (laughter).
Speaker 1: You were describing when we were coming in, the scene of you watching the moon from a city bus, and I was just kind of surprised that you would be on a city bus, and you said, "Yeah, you can travel on the city bus from time to time." And you're not really trying to hide out anymore.
Speaker 2: No.  See--I--see, my vocation is not really as an artist anymore; my vocation is as a Catholic Christian.  So I do my job every day and go--I go to Mass every morning to hear what the word is going to be so it directs my day and try to keep myself in a state where I can receive the flesh and blood of Jesus.  And makes me Him. And so, it's like a commuter.  See and the bus comes from my door, takes me to the port authority [Port Authority Bus Terminal, New York, New York], and then I get the train and go to my church.  But what is also done, I have a new hip and a new knee, it's been therapy for me.  And the way I got my hips and knees, right, was genuflecting.  You know what genuflecting is?
Speaker 1: Bowing down and (unclear).
Speaker 2: It was--well, you don't bow down.  Bow down is like this (demonstrates), you can still stand up.  Genuflecting is you kneel down.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I can kneel real good now (laughter).  So it's activity, it's focus, it's having a regularity, it's having a job.  So I'm--like I said, that's the other person I get to be.  Because building and planning, and just like everyone else who has a job or has work or has a labor, to bless them and grow them and give them things to hope for and, and work at and dream--dream about.
Story_ID: 630747
Speaker 1: Well, I have to ask you this.  There's a--I noticed that there's a revival of 'Hair' ['Hair: The American Tribal Love-Rock Musical'] in the City of New York [New York] now.  What do you think about the new version of 'Hair' and about it as a revival?
Speaker 2: I went to the opening of 'Hair' and it's quite a bit the same but it's quite bit different because everything we did, now it's scripted.  So I feel good, and I think it's excellent they--
Speaker 1: So a lot of what you all did was ad libbed while on stage?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They picked us because we were interesting personalities, and it was obvious we didn't have any training (laughter).  Nobody could accuse us of being trained actors, okay.  Because we were supposed to be people just having a life, you know.  And of course, they directed us but not like you direct a--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --a structured play.
Speaker 1: You had the songs rehearsed and everything--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then kind of general areas that you go and things, and ask you to, please, like, keep with the--well I never was--but they asked us to keep the script (laughter) the same every night.  But if you're not a writer, you don't have that kind of discipline and you are spontaneous, like many of us were; well, something different would come to you.  You wouldn't even remember what you said before.  But after a while, certain things just work and so you do get the discipline of learning on the job, which is what we did. You say, "Oh wow." It's real good to see crystallize--who were--I didn't remember who, I'm sure I looked at the credits, but I didn't remember who did the direction, but I thought it was excellent because it seemed very, very, very natural.  If I didn't know because we helped create those things, I might think that we were doing it naturally.  And that's what--and that's what you're supposed to feel, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's very, very, very well done, and I think the singers are better than we were though (laughter).
Story_ID: 630748
Speaker 1: One question we always ask is what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, some of my concerns for the African American community are that we have people who will continue like you do raise up our historical figures so that we can know where we came from and have a sense of identity and role models to look at.  We need that.  And we need to be reminded of the struggles and the blood that we shed so that we could have these gifts of freedom.  I don't think it was hundred years ago that African Americans were not paid to do recordings.  There was no law to say that you had to do that.  And it wasn't a little bit longer than that, that anywhere you went on the face of the earth, if you were of African descent, even a portion, you could be made a slave.  We don't have the cognizance of that.  And I think as a result--well, as a result of us older generations having gone through that, that's why we're so religious; that's why God is important to us.  It didn't just come out of nothing.  Generally, what happens when things are nicely, you kind of forget that.  And that's where we are now.  Everybody thinks that whatever they think is right.  But the fact of the matter is, human beings don't know right from wrong.  That's why we need God.  We need good examples of that.  I mean, my inspiration to be successful, because if you broke, don't nobody listen to you (laugher).  But if I can be successful and a good example to my daughter [Melba Charli Huggins] and the next generations coming along that you can make a good living, you can have a great life by doing things the right way and taking a stand for the right things, then I want to be the inspiration for those to chose that way, the way the drug pushers and the pimps and the prostitutes have shown how easy it is to make money so our kids follow them.  And so that always leads to violence, degradation.  We have a whole generation of, especially our young men, who've made it all right with themselves to say, "Well, I'll dead before I'm twenty-one."  That's a very, very, very sad thing.  It's means that our morality and our lack of knowledge of who we are in terms of integrity and self-worth has waned away in such a pervasive way until we are in danger of losing a whole generation, population.  The arts can do that so, so powerfully because it's such a powerful medium.  Not that that's the only thing.  I mean, you want, want people to be inspired in all areas of, of living.
Story_ID: 630749
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, and you've done a lot to this point, and you still have a lot to go, but is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: No.  There's nothing I would do differently, not because I did everything perfectly (laughter).  I never know what God wants to do, but He'll show you.  And He's had His way, I know He has, because I'm healthy, I'm good, I have my life in front of me still.  I have much, much, much to accomplish because I haven't ruined it all, and again we don't know when we're young.  We don't know sometimes when we're older.  But if we can kind of hear and change, then we've done the best that we could, and we're going to be fine.  So there's no need to regret.
Story_ID: 630750
Speaker 1: Has the position of black women in, in the arts changed since you started?  I mean, how have you seen it change, 'cause I think that you seem a lot stronger than, you know, and in more control of what you're doing than--
Speaker 2: I'm a lot stronger and in a lot more control of what I'm doing, and I ain't nothing.  I mean, look at people like Oprah [Oprah Winfrey].  She's only one person that I can think of.  But our African American women have come such a long way.  We've created a whole new arena of achievement and integrity, and again, a lot of it you may not see on the silver screen, the big or the small one, but if you go in the churches you're going to see there's power there.  There's women and men coming back together and healing each other, and learning and teaching each other business and money and educational skills.  One good example I find, there's many good examples I can give you, but two are, T.D. Jakes [HistoryMaker Bishop T.D. Jakes] and Eddie Long [HistoryMaker Bishop Eddie L. Long].  I can give you Creflo Dollar.  I watch them all.  There are so many.  There's another gentlemen [Leroy Thompson], I can't think of his name, but he says, "Money cometh to me!"  Everybody knows who I'm talking about.  The reason why their ministries prosper so much is because they teach people and they empower them, and they empower them in the most effective way, from God down and explain how it works.  I'm Catholic but we do it even better, because we've been there longer because Christ started the Catholic church.  Catholic only means universal, and that's why if you go to many of the places around the world, you see the place where Christ died, you see the place where Christ was born.  There's a Catholic church there.  He put it there so that we can still have the physical evidence of what he did.  That's pretty doggone powerful.  But it's no less powerful for people not to have a physical evidence, but have the faith and the truth to live their lives like some of the people that I've just mentioned to you and to have it so strong that they're changing this world by droves. And we have many more multimillionaires because of some of these people and others who are teaching us how to prosper in, in a virtuous way.  'Cause you're not going to get killed that way, I mean, at least before your time.  We all got to go, but you know what I mean (laughter).
Story_ID: 630751
Speaker 1: Again when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today at this moment would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy.  Probably patience because I think what people are going to see that in the next ten to fifteen, twenty years, I'm going to be bigger than ever.  And that's not supposed to happen at the end.  It's supposed to happen at the beginning and then you're supposed to wane down.  But I'm not waning, I'm getting better.  Actually, according to scripture and Christ, and I'll give you some examples, Abraham; Sarah; Elizabeth; Zachariah; Anna and Joa--Joachim were the parents of Mary, so not only were they barren, but they bore the mother of God in their old age when they were barren (laughter).  So I feel like I'm their seed.  So it's not that supernatural is separate from natural, but when that rules you, it's like--the spirit rules the body.  That's what Christ always wanted to do.  We were never meant to get old and dried up and messed up and sick.  So when you get foretaste of that if we can follow and be patient, and when it happens later instead of or along with in the beginning, the one thing that you really have to have is patience.
Story_ID: 630752
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your family.  You've got a daughter, right?
Speaker 2: I have a daughter.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Okay.  And did you remarry or did you?
Speaker 2: I did not remarry.  I feel like I'm safer with Jesus as my husband now (laughter).  I really never chose well as far as men were concerned.  I think with Clifton Davis, we spent a good deal of time together, he's a brilliant man, he's a talented man, he's a good man; but we were not right for each.  I think the same thing is true of my ex-husband.  He's a wonderful man.  He's become a fabulous father.  He's continued to grow as a businessperson.  And this is a man, come from a family of sharecroppers, his parents.  He never spoke about it because I think he's not proud of it, but I don't think they finished elementary school.  And this man, he's a genius.  And--
Speaker 1: This is Huggins, right?
Speaker 2: This is Charles Huggins, and he's an excellent father to our daughter Charlotte, Charli Huggins [Melba Charli Huggins].  Because I think in the early days, he only knew what he was taught, but he hasn't remained that.  He's grown, grown, grown, grown, grown, grown, grown.  And, but, we were not together, but even so, we created a beautiful daughter who we still take care of so I can't say it was a mistake, you know.  Some things are great even though they may not last for a lifetime.  Yeah.  I'm really glad that those relationships happened even though they weren't permanent.
Speaker 1: Do you still have a lot of relations in the area--I mean relatives in the area?
Speaker 2: Well, I have my stepdad [Clement Leroy Moorman], you know, okay?  I like to brag and say that I'm at least to close to him as his own natural children.  So I want him to know what a difference a man, a caring man, a good man, good father means to the family.  It totally changed my life, so he's really my idol and my icon.  He's--I think he's ninety-four now.  See, we're in show business so we lie about our age (laughter).  And he still--he plays for a living.  And he sounds better than he ever has.  So that means that you have to focus and care, and at that age and you--these different maladies will come, but him and his wonderful wife, Kris [Kristin Moorman], have overcome them all and they take good care of each other, and they are--I finally in my life seen a marriage that works.  I wouldn't have been too happy about that because he married my mother [Gertrude Smith; Bonnie Davis], and they split up, and so--my mother's passed away now--but I am so grateful that he has her.  We've become friends and we're a family.  She's never going to replace my mother, but she takes care of him.  This is a marriage that works.  And so, I can go and see him play at Bareli's [Bareli's Italian Restaurant and Bar, Secaucus, New Jersey] because she takes care of him.  She's a beautiful woman because she has someone to love.  This is--it's--well, it's fabulous.  So I--and I have--I still have my sister Clementine [Clementine Bettis].  Well, she's my stepsister but my sister; our brother Dennis [Dennis Moorman] is passed away.  We have two other brothers, Elliott [Elliott Moorman] and Gerard [Gerard Moorman] that we still have.  And then, of course, now we have grandchildren and nephews and cousins and, and nieces.  Many, many wonderful family members, yes.
Story_ID: 630753
Speaker 1: Our last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess the first thing that comes (laughter)--you know what I'm seeing right now?  On my tombstone, it says, "I told you I was a star."  (Laughter) It came late, but here it is.  Well, when I say a star, I'm really an artist.  I love doing it.  I love being a Christian, I love being a gospel person because you can do anything, you know, but I think God made me a star to be with famous performers so that--fame is not something that you just want everybody to know your name.  Your name should be out there and they should know your face because you got something to say that God told you to say.  That's what a star is to me.  So I want y'all to know that y'all was amongst a star, and a prophet.
