Story_ID: 283377
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: It's Theodore McKee, T-H-E-O-D-O-R-E, McKee is M-C-K-E-E [HistoryMaker Theodore A. McKee].
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: A, Alexander.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, do you have any nicknames?
Speaker 2: Ted.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: June 5, 1947, in Rochester, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm currently federal judge among U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: February 10, 2005.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was a (unclear) exam (laughter).  Count backwards by fives.
Speaker 1: How many fingers do I have?  (Laughter) I feel like I'm asking that sometimes.
Speaker 2: When this is over, I'll tell you a story about that.
Story_ID: 283378
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, I've got five warm-up questions, they're People magazine-ish type lightweight questions that only require a short answer, and the first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food--I like so many different kinds of things, I couldn't tell you what my favorite kind of food is.  I like paella, Peking duck, maybe, although I can't eat it that much.  I'd say Peking duck.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Brown.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Brown, orange and--
Speaker 2: You got it (laughter). Brown and orange.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring, late spring.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Probably St. Croix [U.S. Virgin Islands].
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: People tell me I say all the time, putting the rabbit in the hat.  I don't hear myself saying that.  People say I frequently will say that somebody is putting the rabbit in the hat during the course of making an argument.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Another one I like is puke provoking that a friend of mine who was a mentor to me used that phrase and I thought it was a great phrase.  It sums things up so nicely sometimes.  I like that phrase.
Story_ID: 283379
Speaker 1: Well, I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Clarence V. McKee] side, but we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mom's name is Etta, E-T-T-A, Viola, V-I-O-L-A, McKee is her maiden name, her married name.  Her maiden name was Payne, P-A-Y-N-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 14, January 13.  She was born in Scottsville, New York, same place I grew up, and her birthdate was, I believe, 1919.
Speaker 1: Okay, 1919.  So she was born in Rochester [New York]?
Speaker 2: Yes, right outside of Rochester.  The house she was born in is still there.  Was last time I was there, anyhow, it was still standing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what is exactly, it's not Rochester itself, but it's another--
Speaker 2: It's a small town outside of Scottsville.  When I was there it was turning into a bedroom community and it's probably now a suburb of Rochester.  When Mom was there, it was a farming community, separate from Rochester.  It's about eight miles [sic.] outside of Rochester on the way to Buffalo, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Before they put the main thruway through.  If you took the highway from Rochester to Buffalo, you'd go not only through a town right past my house, right past the house that mom was born in.
Story_ID: 283380
Speaker 1: What can you tell us about her [McKee's mother, Etta Payne McKee] side of the family?  How far back can you trace the ancestors on that side?
Speaker 2: On mom's side, you can go back quite a ways, because my grandmother lived to be ninety-four, and I was sensitive enough to be able to talk to my grandmother about her recollections; in fact, I had a tape which I need to be able to find.  When they moved there I lost track of it.  I know I have it.  I sat down and spoke to her about her side of the family.  Grandma was born in Culpeper County, Virginia; in fact, the farm she was born on, it was either the Fantes or the Coates.  She told me that her one family owned her mother and the other family owned her father.  I can't remember which was which, but the two families involved, because they were both slaves, were Fantes, F-A-N-T-E-S, and Coates, C-O-A-T-E-S.  Her father was a blacksmith; in fact, he died when a horse he was shoeing kicked him in the chest, and I'm not sure what her mother was, I think she was just a seamstress and did domestic work.  I got the feeling they were fairly well off, because her dad, who is my great-grandfather, had a craft and during slavery, obviously, that was a good thing to have so that after emancipation, he had some way of making a decent living and he wasn't necessarily tied to the land, although they did have a farm and she grew up on a farm, my grandmother did.  Her mother, she told me, my grandmother told me that her mother was, I think, fifteen years old when the slaves were freed.  I'm not sure about my great-grandfather.  I'm not sure how old he would have been.
Speaker 1: They would have been like free colored people in upstate New York.
Speaker 2: Pretty much.  In fact, my grandmother told me the story that one day the house that they built themselves after slavery ended, it burned down and one day either Fantes or Coates, the old man who had owned them, got drunk and was socializing with them and while he was drunk, he admitted that he had come over and burned that house down, and as far as I know, nothing, I didn't get the feeling from grandma that there was any kind of retribution toward him.  They probably couldn't have done anything about it had they wanted to, or any kind of hostility, although I'm certain that they were very angry about it.  But, he would have been, as you're describing, kind of like a free, black, I don't want to say mercantile class, but free black grass person.
Speaker 1: This is in Culpeper?
Speaker 2: I reckon, Culpeper County.  I think the actual name of the town was Edmondsberg [ph.], or Edmundsville [Virginia].  I'm not sure how she spelled it, but I think it's E-D-M-U-N-D-S-V-I-L-L-E, I believe it is.  Many years ago, when I was in Culpeper, we were in the Blue Ridge Mountains, and I just drove into Culpeper to try to see what I could find, because Grandma had told me that the plantation where her parents were was at the intersection of the James River and, now I'm forgetting, but there's another river there that intersects with the James River in Culpeper, and where those two rivers intersected, that's where the plantation was.  And I drove through trying to find it, but the town of Edmundsville was not there anymore.  I did find an old, what I thought was a barn, and a sign--I have a picture of it somewhere--that said Edmundsville General Store, and the sign had just fallen over and was laying on the ground.  So, I assumed that it's a town that just kind of died and people moved into the City of Culpeper [Virginia] as Culpeper began to grow and that little village probably just died out.
Speaker 1: Was that the Rappahannock River?
Speaker 2: Doesn't sound like Rappahannock, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thought I'd try.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any stories, any other stories from that side of the family?
Speaker 2: From Grandma's side, that one that I mentioned to you about the former owner coming by and admitting to having burned the house down, and that's really about all that I can recall.  If I sort of sit down and think about it, I probably could come up with some that she had mentioned to us.  And if I could find that tape, I know there's some on that tape, because I had her recount those stories on the tape recorder, but I can't think of any off hand.
Story_ID: 283381
Speaker 1: --Is there a story about how the family [McKee's maternal family] got to New York?
Speaker 2: As I recall, Grandma came to New York by way of Rhode Island.  She lived in Providence, Rhode Island for a number of years.  I'm not quite sure how or why that happened, because that is on the, that tape.  And then after living in Rhode Island, she came to Scottsville [New York] and actually purchased this house that was part of what is now land owned by the Whaley family that owns Genesee Brewery [Genesee Brewing Company, Rochester, New York], and for a number of years both my mother [Etta Payne McKee] and grandmother did domestic work for the Whaley family.  Eventually the firm that my grandmother owned which was, from what I can tell, a pretty sizable piece of land in Scottsville, she sold to the Whaley family and it became part of the Whaley estate.  I never found out how much they got for the land, but dad [Clarence V. McKee] was always very, I won't say bitter, but very displeased about that.  He always said that they were swindled out of their land and didn't get what it was worth.  I just don't know.  It may or may not be true.  I wouldn't be surprised given the history of those kinds of relationships if that were true.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your mother talk about growing up in Rochester [New York]?
Speaker 2: Mom talked about it a little bit; not as much, actually, as my grandmother did.  I'm not quite sure why that is.  I think because I made it a point to talk to Grandma more.  Mom has actually sat down with both of our daughters [Emilia McKee and Marisol McKee] in the process of her taking care of them, which she was their babysitter and still is for when we need somebody to take care of our younger daughter.  She would share stories with them.  I do know that she grew up without electricity and grew up on the farm that they had.  I've seen the one-room schoolhouse that she attended, and that is still there.  It's on Scottsville Road as you leave Rochester.  You go past the one-room schoolhouse, that stone schoolhouse where mom went to school, and last time we were there, this was maybe ten years ago, we went by that building.  The woman next door is kind of a caretaker for the school, and she had the keys, so she actually would let us go inside the school room and look around, and mom would tell stories about how each day a different kid would be in charge of making sure the fire was going during the winter, and the windows up there are pretty bad and there was no heat except for the coal stove, so you had to make sure that the coal fire stayed on or else the school would get pretty cold, and she explained to me how the teacher would work with different grades in the same classroom, and I still have a hard time imagining how that would work when you have some people in twelfth grade and first grade in the same one room, but that was the kind of school system that she grew up in that, I guess, a lot of rural people grew up in.
Speaker 1: Okay.  About how many people would be in a classroom?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: As I recall, it seemed like fifteen to twenty.  It's a small town.  That feels right.  I'm not sure if I'm guessing that from the size of the room, or from something that Mom told me, but fifteen to twenty seems right.
Story_ID: 283382
Speaker 1: Now, we mentioned before we started talking about Frederick Douglass having lived many years in Rochester [New York].   Were there any stories about Frederick Douglass' stay there or people that knew him or anything?
Speaker 2: No, my dad [Clarence V. McKee] told me where his house was and showed that to me, and dad was always much more conscious, I think, of the history than mom [Etta Payne McKee] was.  It may have been because of some of dad's struggles that he had to undergo growing up, but he was always much more attuned into that, but I never heard any stories from him about people who knew Douglass or had worked with his paper.  I'm sure there are people probably still there who can trace their lineage back to people who were involved in the production of the Northern Star [sic. The North Star], but I don't know of any.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your mother have a chance to go to college?
Speaker 2: Mom didn't finish high school.  My dad was the first person in our family to finish high school.  Mom left school, I think, when she was a sophomore or a junior, because she had to work on the farm and she was an only child and my grandmother and grandfather needed her on the farm full time and so she left school to do work on the farm full time.
Speaker 1: She was like a young woman during the [Great] Depression growing up, I guess.
Speaker 2: She was; in fact, she did tell me that she worked when--you're good at bringing out buried details (laughter).  She did live in Buffalo [New York] for a period of time, which is where she met my father.  I know she worked at the Curtiss-Wright Airline, Airplane [Curtiss-Wright Airplane] factory in Buffalo, and that would have been during the war [World War II, WWII], after the Depression, and I'm not sure how old she was then, but she told me one story of a plane that crashed into the factory in Buffalo, and I just heard this recently, within the past couple of years Mama told this story.  She had told it to my daughter and I heard part of it, and apparently it was this terrible fire at the Curtiss-Wright Airline factory.  I could probably go online and find the date of this, and she remembers the people that were burned to death and she told me that for a long time after that she still had this aroma of burning flesh in her senses that she couldn't get out of, which is maybe why she didn't tell me the story earlier.  Maybe it was something she tried to put out of her mind.  But she didn't tell me that many stories about earlier in her life other than the struggles of the farm and how hard it was growing up with no electricity, using an outhouse in the middle of winter in Rochester, New York, was not, (laughter) I can imagine.  Five degrees below zero and you've got to go to the bathroom is not a good thing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Rochester has some mean winters, a lot of snow, all right.
Speaker 2: A lot of snow and very cold.  We have times when they could go a week or two and you wouldn't get above zero.  It didn't happen often, but it happened so regularly that it wasn't a surprise when that would happen and it wouldn't be uncommon if we got a blizzard to get a couple of feet of snow within two or three days.  I remember one time, this, I think was when I came back from college.  We must have gotten about three feet of snow in the course of, I think it was three days.  As I recall, I remember hearing on the radio that we were getting about a foot of snow for a day, and it wasn't that cold out (laughter).  It was maybe only twenty [degrees], but there was an awful lot of snow.
Story_ID: 283383
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Dad's name was Clarence; C-L-A-R-E-N-C-E.  Middle name was a strange name; Vanzandt, V-A-N-Z-A-N-D-T, McKee, and I don't know what--it's a Dutch name.  I don't know where that came from.  I don't know if that was related to a slavery name or where that name Vanzandt came from.  Dad knew very little about his parents.  I don't think he knew his father.  His mother, he did know, and I never sat down with dad to get from him the same kind of history that I sat down with my grandmother and I really still deeply regret that, 'cuz I feel like there's a big piece there that's missing.  I know he was born in Tennessee, and left Tennessee and he went to Indiana; Bloomington, Indiana, where he was raised.
Speaker 1: Do you know his birthday?
Speaker 2: June 4, I believe it was 1904.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he was born in Tennessee--
Speaker 2: Dickson, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay, and wound up in Bloomington.
Speaker 2: In Bloomington.  How he got to Bloomington, I don't know.  I do know that Knox [County], Tennessee, where some people in the family still used to go to when I was growing up, is not that far from Bloomington, and so there may have been some connection there.  I know we have relatives, I think, in Knox, Tennessee, but I am pretty certain, I remember hearing the name Dickson.  For a long time, I thought they were talking about Dixon as in Mason Dixon [Line], but then I came to realize that apparently there is a place in Tennessee called Dickson, and that's where Dad was born.  He grew up in Indiana.  He was the first black person to play high school basketball in the State of Indiana.  He played for Bloomington High School [Bloomington, Indiana]; in fact, he told me many stories of how he was not allowed to play until the, he had either circulated it or the school circulated it.  I think he circulated a petition in the city and had to get a certain number of white signatures on the petition before the school would let him play.  But now, the number is escaping me.  For some reason, I'm thinking of the number three thousand, but I don't know if that's right or not.  He did tell me also that when he was playing with the team, he wasn't allowed to sit on the bench and stay in the locker room.  If the team got ahead enough, he would stay in the locker room.  If the team was behind, they'd bring dad out, put him in the game.  If he was able to get a lead for the team, they'd put him out at the end and put him back in the locker room, which is always something growing up that I was always very upset about, because I never told Dad this, but I was always thinking, Dad, why would you subject yourself to that kind of humiliation and punishment?  But now, I'm proud of the fact that he did, because I think it opened a lot of doors; doors that would have been opened sooner or later, but I think because he was willing to undergo that, he opened them sooner than they otherwise would have been opened.  He got, and his mom got, an awful lot of death threats from the [Ku Klux] Klan [KKK], and he ended up not finishing high school in Bloomington.  He went to Buffalo, New York, where his brother was at the time.  He lived with his brother, finished up high school in Buffalo.  He told me, when I used to go back to visit Bloomington, the old timers would tell me these stories of how Dad could ride a bicycle.  They said that he was like a streak of lightning on a bicycle, because Dad would tell me he would get on a bicycle after school and not stop until he got home 'cause he was terrified he was going to get ambushed and beaten up or worse by Klan and people who didn't want him on the basketball team.  He would take a different route to school and from school every day and finally his mom just got, I think, afraid for his safety and sent him to Buffalo to live with his brother, his older brother.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now that is the story that, I guess, lives up to the Indiana reputation of being a northern/southern state.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, and my image of Bloomington.  That is always just seared in my brain.  When I would go back there, growing up we'd go back over the summers and over Christmas vacation to spend time with my aunt and uncle, who still live there.  I'd never encountered any of the hostilities there, but I remember one time going to the Monroe County [Indiana] fair and a very vague recollection of seeing a Klan booth at the fair and asking my aunt what that was all about, and my aunt just kind of pulling me back and saying, "Well, you leave those people alone, just, you know, don't go over there."  But, I had no idea what the heck it was.  I must have been about eight or nine years old at the time, but from what Dad has told me, that was not a pleasant place to be if you were a person of color, at least when he was growing up.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think that they elected the Grand Dragon as governor in 1928 in Indiana [sic.].  I mean, that was his [Edward L. Jackson] platform.
Speaker 2: Right.  That would have been the time that Dad was a young man.  He was born in '04 [1904]. He would've been twenty-four at the time.  You know, that was, that's my image of the place.
Story_ID: 283384
Speaker 1: Yeah that's an incredible story.  The first black basketball player in Indiana--
Speaker 2: In high school.
Speaker 1: Which is in basketball--
Speaker 2: It's like a religion out there--
Speaker 1: Reigned supreme--yeah, it's a religion.  It sure is.  So, he goes to Buffalo [New York] to join his brother to escape all these threats and--
Speaker 2: Now from what I can tell and these stories I only got when I was older, but from what I can tell, the uncle that my dad [Clarence V. McKee] went to stay with, his brother, was really for a while, at least I viewed him, as being the only one in the family who had any money.  His name was Buck [ph.], and he always seemed to have a new car when we would go there.  It was a Buick.  It wasn't a Cadillac.  He always had a new Buick.  From what Dad had told me, I believe Buck was involved in either making, or at least distributing, booze during the Prohibition, which is how he made his money.  He made his money bootlegging (laughter), so he had this money and apparently he didn't squander it because Buck was kind of always the person who had some kind of independent support.  When I knew him, he was living in Indianapolis [Indiana].  He had moved from Buffalo to Indianapolis, and I'm not sure why or when that happened.  And Dad had worked while he was in high school [Bloomington High School, Bloomington, Indiana].  I remember him telling the stories of him falling asleep in class and, at one time, in fact, he was going to be suspended because the teacher asked him to go see the principal because he was upset.  The teacher was upset because Dad was always falling asleep in class, and the principal sat him down, Dad explained, "Well, when I leave here I've got a job I'm going to."  I'm sure he wasn't working eight hours a day, but he was working close to full time and saving his money, taking a sandwich for lunch to school, and then he would fall asleep in class.  When he told the principal what he was doing, the principal went to the teacher, apparently, and said, "Look"--his nickname was Mac, it was either Mac or Pete, I know in Bloomington [Indiana] they called him Pete.  In Scottsville [New York] they called him Mac, and I'm not sure at that time what his nickname was, but I'll say it was Pete--he said, "Leave Pete alone.  He's working a job at night.  If he falls asleep in class, just work with him on that."  Obviously, that's not exactly what he said, but that was the feeling that Dad gave to me from the principal, and he was very sympathetic and Dad ended up being the first person in the family to graduate from high school.  He played basketball in Buffalo.  From what I can tell, it was with a semi-pro team and my mom [Etta Payne McKee] has a picture of the team that I could probably get the names from, but I can't remember the name off hand.
Speaker 1: Okay.  He was apparently a good basketball player.
Speaker 2: He was; in fact, people, the old timers used to tell me that had he been growing up at the time that I was growing up that he would have been in the NBA [National Basketball Association].  He may have had a tryout with the [Harlem] Globetrotters, and I'm not sure if I'm remembering people telling me he had a tryout and people saying that had the Globetrotters been around he would have had a shot at that team, I can't remember that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Trotters were formed in the '40s [sic. 1920s] or something, I believe?
Speaker 2: And he would have been too old then to play, he would have been too old then to play.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He would have been in his forties.
Speaker 1: He missed the big basketball era, right?  He actually did.  Gee, that's the first black basketball period in Indiana.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and folks were telling me that he was dunking the basket.  He wasn't that tall.  He wasn't as tall as I am.  I'm six feet.  My guess that Dad was five feet nine, five feet ten, (laughter) and folks were telling me, the old timers would always talk to me about how they called him Pete, about Pete could dunk a basketball and that always impressed me as I played high school ball and I was taller than that, and I had trouble dunking a basketball (laughter) so, that was always one of the things that stayed in my mind.
Story_ID: 283385
Speaker 1: How did your parents [Etta Payne McKee and Clarence V. McKee] meet?
Speaker 2: In Buffalo [New York] during the war [World War II, WWII], Mom being at the air plant [Curtiss-Wright Airplane], dad was on the railroad and from what I can tell, they met while dad had a layover in Buffalo, and they were at a restaurant, or a bar, and they were both there at the same time and met that way.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, they decided to live in Rochester [New York] after the war?
Speaker 2: They did.  They came back and lived in the house that my grandmother owned in Scottsville [New York], outside of Rochester, and the way that story was told to me was that when my older brother [Clarence McKee] was born, they were living in a boardinghouse and I think Mom was working, I know Mom was working during the day.  My younger brother was with a, I'm not sure if it was a friend of the family or whoever ran a boardinghouse that my dad knew, but her name was Mrs. Mitchell [ph.] and I remember Dad telling me, and Mom telling me too, that they came by one time, one night to pick up my brother.  They pulled back the covers and there were bedbugs all over my brother and they decided they had to get out of Buffalo and they had really no place to go, no savings or anything.  So that was when they went to live out with my grandmother, who owned this house; actually, owned two houses right next to one another, one she lived in and another one right next to us that she rented out to neighbors, and they went to live with my grandmother and when I was born, they were living in Scottsville with my grandmother, and that's the house I grew up in.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what did your parents do for a living?
Speaker 2: Mom did domestic work.  She, when I was, I think, in third or fourth grade, she got a job at the school district working in the cafeteria, but she always supplemented as a cook, and she always supplemented that doing domestic work.  She took in laundry, she did housekeeping for the Whaley family that I mentioned earlier.  There are two or three brothers, and I think she did housework for all three of them, as well as one of the daughters that had a family.
Speaker 1: This is a family that ran a brewery, you said?
Speaker 2: They own Genesee Brewery [Genesee Brewing Company, Rochester, New York].  They do a little bit of everything.  Bob Whaley owned a lot of land; as I said, part of that was what my grandmother sold to them.  He also raised English pointers and I think he bred them and, I know he did, and he got some money from breeding the English pointers that he raised.  His brother, Jack [Whaley], I think, derived most of his income from the brewery, but the basic income from the family was from the Genesee Brewery, Genesee Beer.  They also had a farm, but I don't think they did much in the way of raising crops for sale, as I recall, as I worked on that farm during the summers and I remember baling hay and doing things like that, but most of that was, I think, for their own local use.  I don't think they did much crops for sale time.  Now that I think about it, I think part of the hay I baled was not for them but for my neighbor of them that had a farm, and they used their hay primarily for their livestock.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what did your father do?
Speaker 2: Dad was later in charge of the railroad, worked on the New York Central [Railroad] for, I guess, about twenty-five years, maybe longer than that, and then emerged with the Penn C., Pennsylvania Railroad [Penn Central Transportation Company, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  Became the Penn Central, and he worked on that railroad until he retired when he was sixty-five years old.
Story_ID: 283386
Speaker 1: Who do you think you take after the most, your mother [Etta Payne McKee] or your father [Clarence V. McKee]?
Speaker 2: Oh, Dad, (laughter), not close (laughter).  Mom was very much a kind of, took care of the house and pretty much traditional stereotype of the so-called woman's role in the family.  Dad was gone an awful lot because he was running the railroad, so she was primarily involved in raising my brother [Clarence McKee] and I, but in terms of the discipline, that came from Dad and some from my [maternal] grandmother.  My grandma was somebody that you did not mess with and Dad was somebody that you did not mess with, and I would pretty much obey Mom, not because of Mom per se, but I knew if I didn't obey Mom, Mom was going to tell Dad and then I was going to be very sorry, so I would say Dad, yeah.
Story_ID: 283387
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I remember when my grandfather was alive sitting in the kitchen.  He was sitting in the kitchen.  I remember helping him with his boots.  He had a, I think he may have almost been blind, totally blind.  I don't know if it was glaucoma or what the problem was, and we had an old coal-burning stove in the kitchen which, now that I think about it, that was our heating system.  It was a long time before we got a heating system.  Grandma finally put in an oil heater.  That was, I was maybe in the fourth or fifth grade when that happened and I'm not sure, now, how we heated the rest of the house before that, but I remember there being a coal-burning stove in the kitchen.  Come to think about it, we had a coal-burning furnace when I was younger before she converted it to oil.  In the kitchen, though, we had basically this big stove that we cooked on.  That was the heat for the kitchen and it ran on coal.  I remember my grandfather sitting by the stove and me putting his boots on or shoes on, and I'm not sure how old I would have been then; I'm guessing five or six.  It's probably the earliest memory that I have.
Story_ID: 283388
Speaker 1: Tell me, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's interesting that you'd ask that because as soon as you said smells, I got this image of my mom [Etta Payne McKee] making biscuits and apples and sausage for breakfast, and that came on very, very vividly.  That, I guess would be the strongest one.  The sounds would be just the traffic, because we live pretty close to a very busy street.  As I said before, the main interstate, or thruway, the New York [State] Thruway.  Before that was constructed, the main, one of the main routes from Rochester [New York] to Buffalo [New York] was right past our house and the house did not have much of a setback, and it's on a fairly sharp curve.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  So, cars are coming right by there.
Speaker 2: They'd come right by and they'd miss many times.  There are a lot of car accidents outside of our house and across the street was a little tavern called the Oasis Restaurant, which I think is still there.  Last time I was home, it was still there.  It looks very different, but it's still there, which dad [Clarence V. McKee] used to call that a little watering hole and it was like a place where local folks would come in and have beer and hang out.  It's where I remember the cars coming in out of that parking lot, cars trying to negotiate that curve and the smell of the kitchen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about sights and sounds?
Speaker 2: I don't remember many sounds other than the cars, and sights, I can't really think of any other than there was a road, (unclear) road, I believe it was, that came down and intersected with my street such that it formed a kind of a T, and our house was at the end of that T on the curb.  I remember sometimes looking up that street because it was a small, it wasn't a body of water because the water didn't flow.  We called it the creek, or crick.  I remember that creek kind of sitting there because in the summer it would get pretty stagnant and pretty nasty, covered with moss and a lot of frogs and snapping turtles, and I built this raft when I was, I don't know, maybe in third or fourth grade.  It didn't really float but the water wasn't all that deep, so I could kind of take a pole and push myself over the mud, I guess.  That's probably what I was doing, and I remember the sight of that water and the smell of that creek, and that's not a very pleasant smell (laughter).
Story_ID: 283389
Speaker 1: Were there any industries around close by?
Speaker 2: Farming; although most people when I was growing up worked either Kodak [Eastman Kodak Company, Rochester, New York] or Xerox [Haloid Xerox; Xerox Corporation] in Rochester [New York], or some other outfit in Rochester, 'cause it was kind of transitioning into a bedroom community.  The people who work in town, thinking back now, I don't remember anything in town other than people who did farming.  The people who were middle class, upper middle class, or upper class, all worked in Rochester, except for the Whaleys who weren't right in town.  They were between (unclear) town and Rochester and they, as I said, had the brewery [Genesee Brewing Company, Rochester, New York].  When I was, I think, in junior high school [Wheatland-Chili Central School, Scottsville, New York], an outfit came in, Rodney Farms [Scottsville, New York]; that was a trotting horse racing concern.  I think they're still there, and they didn't employ that many people, and they also had a large agricultural concern they raised on land across the street from where the oysters were.  They raised corn, beans, and that kind of thing.  There were, now that I recall, there was a migrant farm population that would come through.  They'd come late August and they'd leave, before fall, they had good sense.  (Laughter)  Virtually all of them were from Sanford, Florida, and they would come through to help with the farming in (unclear). I think they were pretty much bean pickers, maybe corn, because that's what would have been harvested then, because I remember until they came through I was, not the only black kid in the school, but pretty much my brother [Clarence McKee] and I were the only black kids in the school.  There were maybe three or four other black families in town.  We called them campers.  When the campers came to town, then there were a lot of black kids in the school, but there was, I didn't realize it at the time, but there was an incredible class stratification between the Scottsville [New York] kids and the campers.  When I got older, I cut across some of that because I found myself, especially my junior and senior year in high school [Wheatland-Chili High School, Scottsville, New York], gravitating toward them and I remember going up to their camps, sometimes on the weekend and just kind of visiting with some of the guys, my friends who were in my class at school or a class ahead of me, but when I was younger that did not happen.  I was very much distant from them, didn't feel very comfortable with them and I think a lot of that was just that it was such a small town.  No one felt comfortable with folks coming from the outside and I think, sure as I think back I was probably also having some identity problems too, in having to deal with folks who were very much closer to what the stereotype of a black person, especially a black rural person would be, than I was.  When I got older, that didn't bother me.  I was just proud of my association with them and I wanted to spend more time with them.  But, when I was younger that was something that I think, thinking back on it that I probably had some trouble adjusting to.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And probably the best way to say it is they may have been, I may have perceived them as a threat to my own zone of comfort when I was younger.  They clearly weren't, but I'm sure that I saw them that way because I was incredibly comfortable there, I was freshman of the student body, my brother was president of the student body, but he graduated four years ahead of me.
Story_ID: 283390
Speaker 1: Race was, I think, a factor in the town [Scottsville, New York].  In fact, I had situations where I went to a barbershop when I was, I think I was a junior in high school [Wheatland-Chili High School, Scottsville, New York] and, no, I was a freshman because I remember I was on the JV [junior varsity] basketball team, and the barber wouldn't cut my hair.  I did not want to go to him because I heard he wouldn't cut black folk's hair.  I told my dad [Clarence V. McKee] that, and dad said, "Well, how do you know he's not going to cut your hair?"  And I said, "Well, I don't think he'll cut my hair."  We would always go to Buffalo [New York], which was about an hour-and-a-half bus ride for me to get haircuts.  Later on, we'd go to Rochester [New York], which was a lot closer, but we had friends from the railroad in Buffalo and we'd go there, visit them, and I'd go get a haircut.  So, dad said we'll go there and see if he'll cut your hair.  I went in and when I walked in the barbershop, he looked at me and asked me if I had an appointment.  I said, "No, I don't have an appointment."  There were about four or five other people in the barbershop at the time, so I asked each one of them, "Do you have an appointment?"  And they all said, "No."  So, I said "Okay" and I went back home, told my dad.  I don't know what happened.  Dad didn't drive a car until I was older, but dad got on his bicycle, went up to the barbershop, (laughter) and he was really somebody you didn't mess with.  He did not take a lot of stuff.  But, dad called me from the barbershop and he said, "You come up here.  He's gonna cut your hair."  And I remember, it was getting close to the time I had to be at the school for a basketball game, and dad was very, very much into sports.  In fact, what he said to me when I was leaving for college, his parting advice was, "Make the football team," because he knew I wanted to play football and I never played football in high school.  So, I was concerned I was gonna be late to the game.  If I was late getting to the game, I was going to get benched.  So, I said, "Well Dad, I'm not sure I have time now to get the haircut, because I'm gonna not get to the basketball game on time."  And Dad said, "Fuck the basketball game.  You get up here.  He's gonna cut your hair."  I'll never forget that, 'cause Dad, he cursed a lot but he never used the F-word, and for him to use the F-word, number one, and tell me that getting this haircut was more important than playing in the game that night, it shocked me.  So, I got up there as fast as I possibly could.  I came in and there was incredible tension, but he did cut my hair and then he gave me this lecture about how he didn't think that a lot of people would like to go where they weren't welcome--where they weren't wanted--and I'm just gonna try to keep my mouth shut while I cut my hair.
Speaker 2: That's what the barber--
Speaker 1: The barber said that, yeah.  Daddy wasn't there, though; he wouldn't have said anything.  Daddy had gone back home.  And he did an okay job.  He didn't do a Mohican [Mohawk] or anything on me, which I was afraid of.  I got home and Dad said, "Well, let me see what he did to your hair."  And he was okay with that, and I did get to the game on time.  I remember I got home and maybe ten minutes later, the folks that I was riding up to the high school with came by and I got a ride uptown.  That's a very vivid memory.  As I said, that's not that early.  That's probably--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You could imagine.  Did your father ever talk about what happened when--
Speaker 1: He never told me, no (laughter).
Speaker 2: He was apparently highly agitated.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  He was upset.  Dad was very upset.  He was somebody who had to go through so much stuff growing up, and he never wanted us to have to go through that, and he was very upset.  For him to get on the bicycle and ride up to there, and he was not a young man when this happened, and then telling me basically, "If you get benched tonight, or you miss the game and get thrown off the team, that's all right and you're gonna get your hair cut."  That was something I could not have imagined Dad ever saying to me, given how important he viewed sports.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he would have had to have been, if you were in high school, he would have been in his sixties; early sixties.
Speaker 1: Yeah, probably close to that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Born in 1904.
Speaker 1: Yeah, late fifties.
Speaker 2: He would have been--
Speaker 1: Because I graduated in '65 [1965], so probably early sixties.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 283391
Speaker 1: We didn't get a car until, I think I may have been a junior or a senior when they finally got a car.  Before that dad [Clarence V. McKee], he had a cab driver in Rochester [New York] who would take him in to town to Rochester to catch the train to go out on his run and around town he rode a bicycle, and he loved fishing and he had a fishing kit that he had strapped to the back of his bicycle and when he was home off of runs, he would spend all day long fishing.  He would just ride into the fishing hole, and one of the places he liked to fish was about a mile-and-a-half away down a very, very steep hill, and it got to the point where it was across from this place I mentioned, Rodney Farms [Scottsville, New York], the horse breeding place.  When the rains came and when it got wetter in the spring when it was muddy from all the snow melting, if you couldn't make it, you couldn't ride your bicycle back in there because there was just too much mud.  He'd have to push us right back in.  Sometimes he'd get a ride but with somebody else who was going down there. Most of the time he just get on his bicycle and ride his bike down there.  In the wintertime, he just stayed at home.  He had one friend they were ice fishing with one time (laughter) because the friend went out on Lake Ontario and it was the first time they had ever been and he wasn't used to the sounds of ice cracking, and he thought the ice was going to crack and dad couldn't swim.  The guy name was Latimer [ph.].  I can't remember his first name.  He was a professional chauffeur.  He always had nice cars also.  Latimer came to get Dad, took Dad fishing, and to Dad's, I guess, utter shock, he drove the car out onto the lake (laughter) and how far he went, and Dad told me the story of how he drove the car out onto the lake and then when he gets there he proceeds to cut a hole, one hole in the ice where they can do ice fishing.  He walks down a little ways.  They start getting some wood together and Dad ask him, "What are you doing?"  Latimer said, "Well, I'm starting a fire to get warm."  And Dad was thinking, well, wait a minute.  You got a car here on the ice and you're starting a fire and the fire's going to melt the ice (laughter).  That was the last time Dad ever went ice fishing, never caught anything.
Story_ID: 283392
Speaker 1: Tell me about grade school.  What was the name of the grade school you attended?
Speaker 2: Wheatland-Chili Central School [Scottsville, New York].
Speaker 1: It's called Wheatland--
Speaker 2: Wheatland--Chili is like chili, C-H-I-L-I, Central School.
Speaker 1: Central School.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And, because it takes in the town of Wheatland and the town of Chili, that's where the name comes from.
Speaker 1: Chili is spelled just like chili.
Speaker 2: It is.  Everybody who is not from the area calls it chili and I always called it chailai.  In fact, it was weird 'cause I remember, well the country Chile would be Chile, but it is like the spice chili, and I remember for a long time going Chile-chailai, but I don't know where that pronunciation came from, no idea.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  Okay.  So this is a--well, how'd you like grade school now?  There weren't that many black students in school.
Speaker 2: No, I liked it.  I had a real good time growing up; in fact, when my wife [Ana Pujols-McKee] went to my last student union with me, this was maybe fifteen years ago, she said it came as close to the whole Dick, Jane, Sally, Spot thing as anything she could imagine.  She grew up in the South Bronx [New York, New York], and her upbringing was very, very different than mine, and I was with a friend that I grew up with and her husband said the same thing.  He said that his reaction was upon going that it was kind of like a Dick, Jane, Sally, Spot thing.  It is very rural.  Most of the kids there, they said their parents were into some kind of agrarian thing; either farming, or worked for somebody who did farming.  There was a certain class of kids whose parents worked at primarily Kodak [Eastman Kodak Company, Rochester, New York] then; not so much Xerox [Haloid Xerox; Xerox Corporation, Rochester, New York], primarily Kodak 'cause that was like the main employer in the area, but I (unclear) I loved playing outdoors in the snow.  I don't like snow now, but I grew up with a lot of sledding, ice skating, though I never was very good at it; even, we had a little group who would get together and go out on this crick [creek] that I mentioned and play hockey after school which, again, I never was very good at because I couldn't skate that well.  But I remember getting for Christmas one year a hockey stick and some hockey skates and as I think back on it, I never got a hockey puck.  I don't know why (laughter) but we took a tin can and crushed it and we would use that, and it was a nice time growing up.  High school [Wheatland-Chili High School, Scottsville, New York] was, I have fond memories of that, I was very active in the student government, president of the student body my senior year, and didn't play baseball, but I lettered in soccer and in basketball on the varsity and played junior varsity soccer and basketball, and before that junior high soccer and basketball.
Story_ID: 283393
Speaker 1: What was your favorite subject of school?
Speaker 2: You know, I think it came to be English.  My later years in high school [Wheatland-Chili High School, Scottsville, New York], it was definitely English; one, because I had an incredibly demanding English teacher who, everybody was afraid of, including me, but I learned so much from her.  She, Ms. Spence [ph.], she's still alive and every now and then, I will contact her.  My brother [Clarence McKee] is still in contact with her, and I knew when I was in her classroom I was learning a lot; even though I was very intimidated I knew that I was learning a lot, and when I got an A from her, and I think I got an A from her either my second or third quarter as a junior, and then that just did it, because to get an A from Ms. Spence, well that was an A.  That was not your ordinary A.  And, I so appreciated being able to achieve at that level from that difficult and demanding a teacher.  And I, as I said, I enjoyed the subject matter.  My other favorite teacher, Ms. Nesbitt [ph.], I'm still in touch with.  She lives in Georgia now and we, for a while there, we were exchanging emails maybe a couple times a week, and Ms. Nesbitt I liked so much, just 'cause the readings were so interesting.  We read some [Charles] Dickens.  I think she had--I don't know--she forced or had me read [William] Shakespeare or Ms. Spence had me read Shakespeare, but I grew into not a love of, but an appreciation of Shakespeare and later it became a love, and when I got to college [State University College of Cortland; State University of New York College at Cortland, Cortland, New York] I decided, I fell in love with it now even on vacation sometimes, causes (unclear) kids me about this.  For a leisurely reading, I will go back and re-read '[Julius] Caesar' or 'MacBeth' or 'Hamlet.'  I just love what he does with the language, and the human drama that he brings out in it.  I find that very compelling.  My favorite subject would have been English and my favorite teachers would have been Ms. Nesbitt and Ms. Spence.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: Biology, also.  I liked biology a lot.  I also had a very demanding teacher, Mr. Stevenson [ph.], but I liked the subject matter and when I was in his classroom, I knew he was learning.  He took no nonsense, kind of like Dad [Clarence V. McKee] (laughter) in a way.  He didn't take any nonsense.
Speaker 1: So you had a pretty nice little town there to grow up in.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a nice little town.  My math teacher in eighth grade, Mrs. Brody [ph.], had been in that town so long she not only taught my brother math, which is no big deal, because he is only four years older than me, she taught my mom [Etta Payne McKee] math when Mom was in school, and that would have been, I guess, after they built the high school and after Mom left the one-room school house, and she remembered my mom.  It was the kind of community where the whole saying, it takes a village, was very, very true because I knew if I got in trouble, before I got home Mom and Dad would have gotten seven or eight telephone calls telling me, "You need to know what Ted [HistoryMaker Theodore A. McKee] was up to today."  So, you just didn't get in trouble because you knew (unclear) find out about it.  I could probably have withstood Mom learning about it.  I could not have withstood my father finding out about it.  So, I knew I didn't want to get in trouble because I knew I didn't want Dad having to talk to me.  It wouldn't have been a conversation, you know (laughter).  That conversation would have been with his belt.  He could get his belt off of his waist faster than anybody.  Remember the old show, 'Have Gun-Will Travel', Paladin and the gunslinger?  Well, Dad could get his belt off of his pants faster than Paladin could get his gun (laughter) out of his holster.  We only saw it a couple of times, but I remember the image of Dad unbuckling his belt and doubling it over and calling me to him, and you don't want to have that happen to you too many times.
Story_ID: 283394
Speaker 1: Was a church a big deal when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Not really.  It was for my grandmother.  She was religious.  I was a member of the church, but my brother [Clarence McKee] was more active in church than I was.  We were raised in the Episcopalian church.  There were only two churches in town; the Presbyterian and the Episcopalian, and there was a Catholic church in town, but that was it.  There was a Baptist church in a neighboring town called, of all things, Caledonia [New York], which was where most of the black folks in the immediate vicinity live and there were black Baptist churches, obviously, in Rochester [New York], which we had no way of getting to either one.  But even had we had a way of getting to them, I'm not sure that we would have gotten to them, and I don't know how we became Episcopalians.  I don't know if it was because of my grandmother who was very religious, or how that happened, but that was the church that I--(unclear) grew up in a church at all, it was the Episcopalians.
Speaker 1: So, you didn't become an altar boy or anything like that--
Speaker 2: No, my brother did.  I didn't.  I remember my church attendance was not very good.  I remember the minister talking to him one time and making a deal either with me or through my father [Clarence V. McKee], that I think you had better get into church, and so I promised that I was going to go to church every Sunday, and there were two services; one was, I think, seven in the morning and one was at eleven in the morning, and I had to ride my bike to get there.  The seven service was about a half an hour.  The 11:00 service was an hour-and-a-half, so as difficult as it was to get up at 6:00, or 5:30 in the morning, get dressed, and ride my bicycle to the church, that's what I did.  I went to the early service; plus, I knew if I went to the later service, by the time I got back home on my bicycle, I would miss the football game.  So, I'd miss part of the ballgame, and I wasn't going to miss the beginning of the [Cleveland] Brown's game, because we got the Browns where they rotated between the Browns and the [New York] Giants, and I didn't want to miss any of that, so I went to the earlier service because it was shorter, and I knew I'd be home in time for football.  I could take a nap and then wake up and watch the football game, and I do remember a couple times in the winter where you couldn't, I'd try to ride my bike if the sidewalks were shoveled, but you'd basically have to push your bicycle through the snow (laughter).  Couldn't really ride it very well and I would get in the church and spend the first ten minutes just trying to thaw out because it was so darn cold, and then I'd spend the last ten minutes trying to get ready to go back outside, get on the bicycle and ride home.  It was not a fun experience at all.
Story_ID: 283395
Speaker 1: Now you played basketball and soccer in high school [Wheatland-Chili High School, Scottsville, New York], and became the class president of your senior class?
Speaker 2: The student body president. President of the student council, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Student body president, right.  One more thing before we get away from this, now how did you become a [Cleveland] Browns fan instead of a [New York] Giants fan?
Speaker 2: You know, I'm not sure.  Everyone asks me that question.  I'm not totally sure.  My brother [Clarence McKee] was a big time Giants fan, but he's not true fan.  He lives in Washington [D.C.], he's a [Washington] Redskins fan, he lives in Florida now.  He's a big Tampa Bay [Buccaneers] fan.  To me, that's just kind of going with the flow.  That's not being a fan.  But, he was a major Giants fan.  My dad [Clarence V. McKee] just enjoyed watching football.  He wasn't really, he was a big Jim Brown fan, huge Jim Brown fan, and maybe that's how I got into the Browns, 'cause I remember watching Jimmy Brown when I was in grammar school and middle school [Westland-Chili Central School, Scottsville, New York]--or they didn't call it middle school then, they called it junior high school--and we would, I remember this big debate in town because it was before the Buffalo Bills, before the American Football League was born.  So, in New York State, we just had the Giants and the Browns, and the carried the Giants game on CBS then, and a number of Browns fans circulated a petition in Rochester [New York] and got them to show the Browns games.  It was channel 10.  When they switched to the Browns the Giants fans got upset and circulated a petition, so then they would alternate.  One Sunday we'd see the Browns and the next Sunday we'd see the Giants (laughter).  So, the only time people were happy was twice a season when they would play each other, 'cause they were in the same Eastern Conference.
Speaker 1: And that was a big game, too.
Speaker 2: Huge game.
Speaker 1: Browns and Giants in those days.
Speaker 2: Huge game, yeah.  They were both such strong teams.  They had such strong personalities between Charlie Conerly and [Sam] Huff and those guys and the defense line of the Giants and the offensive line of the Browns and Jimmy Brown.  Those were big games.
Speaker 1: Now were you influenced by the persona Jim Brown?  He was sort of a revolutionary sports figure for those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wasn't influenced when I--that came more when I was in college [State University College of Cortland; State University of New York College at Cortland, Cortland, New York], and then I was already so tuned into political things, I respected him all the more for it and to me, it just reinforced my feeling about what a unique individual this was, and it showed me the difference between him and so many members of our community who get into sports, because it's all about me and they forget that they can really use that platform for something bigger than themselves and very few of them are wanting to do it.  I remember when he, Jim Brown, and he was then Lew Alcindor, Kareem [Abdul-Jabbar], and a number of people met with Muhammad Ali (unclear) to basically dissuade him or to talk to him about his position on the draft and Vietnam [Vietnam War], and I remember them coming out of there and seeing this on TV, and Brown saying, "You know, we talk to him and he's sincere and I respect his beliefs and those were his beliefs," and I remember how gratified I was that Jim Brown took that stand, because I had seen earlier film clips of, and I don't mean to be denigrating or disrespectful because I didn't experience the pressures that they experienced, but I remember when Jackie Robinson was used against Paul Robeson to criticize Paul Robeson and I just saw that, you know, we've gotta do better than this (laughter), you know.  Robeson needs to be supported, not attacked from within and I was so proud of what Jim Brown was doing 'cause it struck me that that's what we should have done with Paul Robeson, and Jim Brown was doing that with Muhammad Ali.
Story_ID: 283396
Speaker 1: Now, just for the record, now, what was the name of your junior high school?  Was it the same?
Speaker 2: The same, yeah, that was the name of the school district.
Speaker 1: In high school too?
Speaker 2: Same, yeah, same.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, you graduated from Wheatland--
Speaker 2: Chai-Lai Central School [Wheatland-Chili High School, Scottsville, New York].
Speaker 1: Chai-Lai, yeah, instead of, I want to say Chili (laughter).
Speaker 2: I know, everybody does.
Speaker 1: Central School in 1965, okay.  Now, when you were on the verge of graduation did you know, now--you're up here, you're a good student, you're student body president, you're an athlete, you're one of the few black kids in the school, so I mean there's a lot of attention being focused on you, I would guess.  What did you see, what did you have in mind career wise at that point?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  I really didn't.  I kind of had in the back of my mind going into law and I don't particularly know why other than it was something that was just there that I kind of always had considered.  I had a guidance counselor in high school, who actually tried to talk me out of going to a four-year college, and I hear this story an awful lot.  I can't tell you how many very successful black folks have a similar story where they have had guidance counselors who have not, only not pushed them but who have pulled back on them.
Speaker 1: There are too many stories.  I've heard so many stories like this.
Speaker 2: Oh, it's epidemic.  I remember going into her voice.  Her name was Mrs. Putnam [ph.], and I remember talking to her and my brother [Clarence McKee] had gone to Hobart College [Hobart and William Smith Colleges, Geneva, New York], and I would guess that I was maybe a B student.  I had some Cs, not many 'cause again, you didn't want to go home with a report card with a C on it and show that C to Dad [Clarence V. McKee].  You just did not want to do that.  So--(laughter) I didn't have an awful lot of A's, but I did have an awful lot of Bs and my guess was I was probably a B student.  Not (unclear) but probably a pretty solid B student and most of the grades that I remember were Bs, but thinking back on it, I later worked in college admissions and so I got an understanding of how this worked.  Thinking back on it, I was incredibly salable to college for the reasons that you just mentioned, between being student body president; I would have gotten great letters of references from some pretty powerful teachers, pretty demanding teachers who had they put how demanding they were into letters they would have been pretty strong letters, and a solid academic performance.  My SATs, I can't remember what they were, but they were solid.  They weren't off the charts and Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] wasn't going to start coming to Scottsville [New York] to say we gotta get this kid in our classroom, but it was solid and I remember going to Mrs. Putnam's office and talking to her about college, only because Dad was telling me that I needed to think some about college, and her response was, "Well, you know" I mentioned Hobart to her because that's the only college I knew, 'cause that's where my brother went, and she said, "Well, you know, you may not want to think about a four-year school.  You might want to consider a two-year school."  She knew that I liked working with my hands.  I tooled leather and I still do as a hobby, although I haven't done it in a while.  I used to go to school with these leather briefcases that I made that were nicer than anything that any of my teachers had (laughter).  So, she said, "You know, you like working with your hands.  Delhi [State University of New York at Delhi, Delhi, New York], I think it was Delhi Tech, has a two-year program in ornamental horticulture and you might want to consider that."  She gave me literature from Delhi Tech.  I had never heard of Delhi Tech.
Speaker 1: So, you were going to be, she suggested you train to be a gardener.
Speaker 2: Yeah, a flower arranger, basically.  Yeah.  I told Dad about it and, you know, he didn't get on his bicycle (laughter) but I know he thought about it and he said, "Well, forget that, you're gonna go to a four year school."
Story_ID: 283397
Speaker 1: So, then I started thinking about four year schools.  We could really only afford the state university system.  I wanted to play football, as I mentioned earlier, because I never played football in high school [Wheatland-Chili High School, Scottsville, New York] and I absolutely loved football; in fact, my senior graduating picture, underneath the picture, it says football fanatic from high school.
Speaker 2: Now, did they not have a team?
Speaker 1: Didn't have a team.  The school didn't have a football team.  I had heard that they used to years ago and some kid got very seriously injured or killed and they dropped it.  I don't know if that's true or not, but we didn't have a football team.  The neighboring town, Caledonia [New York], did have a football team, and I actually thought about transferring high schools, just to be able to play football.  I talked to dad [Clarence V. McKee] about it and to my surprise, Dad said, "If you want to do that, that's fine but we had no way to get there if you don't have a car."  The school bus wasn't going to take me there, and there was really no public transportation.  So, that was pretty much out of the question, and getting to Rochester [New York] would have been harder.  So, I just went to high school without playing football, which I still to this day regret, but I knew that I was going to try to play in college.  I wasn't sure I could.  The only two, at the time, the only two branches of the state university that had football were Brockport State [The College at Brockport, State University of New York, Brockport, New York] and Cortland State [State University College of Cortland; State University of New York College at Cortland, Cortland, New York].  Brockport was too close.  It was right outside of Rochester, and it seemed like everybody from my school went to Brockport, and I didn't want to go there, so I centered on Cortland.  Cortland, I was leery of because it was a physical education school.  It was probably then and may still be the preeminent school in the state for turning out physical education teachers, and that was very intimidating and the sports teams were incredible.  I know, they played Hobart [College; Hobart and William Smith Colleges, Geneva, New York] where my brother [Clarence McKee] went, and the scores would be like forty-eight to nothing.  (Laughter) Forty-eight to nothing.  So that was somewhat intimidating, but I knew I didn't want to go to Brockport, so I thought, "Well, let me go to Cortland and see what I can do."  So that's kind of how I decided to go to Cortland.  I did get in there. I was wait listed at Hobart.  I did apply to Hobart but I was waitlisted, and my guess is we would have had a problem affording Hobart anyhow.  We had to take out a loan, Dad did, and my grandmother mortgaged her home to send my brother to college, and that's a private school.  My family never could have done that for me.  No one said that to me, but I couldn't imagine that they could have done that, because the house was already mortgaged and I just don't think that would have worked, so I kind of on my own decided I've got to do this taking a risk thing.  If push came to shove, I guess that Dad would have tried to get the money together for me to go to a private school, but it would have been an incredible burden, but he never shared that with me, just that in retrospect I realized that.
Speaker 2: So what's the name of Cortland--
Speaker 1: Cortland State.  State University of New York at Cortland.
Speaker 2: Okay.  SUNY Cortland, I guess.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Or, actually then it was the State University College of Cortland, SUC Cortland, but because no one liked the term SUC Cortland, although we got a big kick out of it, so it became SUNY Cortland.  Rather than State University College, it became State University of New York.  It sounds a little bit better than SUC Cortland (laughter).
Story_ID: 283398
Speaker 1: All right, so you're at Cortland [State University College of Cortland; State University of New York College at Cortland, Cortland, New York] and how did you like Cortland?
Speaker 2: I liked it at the time.  It was during the '60s [1960s], and it was a very tumultuous time at Cortland as well as nationally.  It was so close to Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] that when the students at Cornell, the black students, took over the student union at Willard Straight Hall, they went in with rifles and guns and took over the building and occupied that, oh, for a week if not longer.  That impacted Cortland only because a number of us knew some of the students who were involved in that takeover, but I enjoyed it.  I got a very sound education and I think I was dealing with growing in a way personally and politically that I am very, very pleased with.  I know in retrospect in the universe I have to deal in, I understand the value of a pedigree, and I clearly didn't get the pedigree coming from the State University of New York [SUNY], but I'm not worried about that.  I'm fine with that because I do think that it often leads to some other things in terms of involvement in student politics and an opportunity to grow personally, and some academic experiences that I wouldn't have gotten other places because of some people that I was able to be exposed to.  I am really glad I went there.  At the time--I'm one of these folks, I enjoy reading, I enjoy learning, I always have enjoyed reading, and at the time I was there I knew this was a good life.  I knew any environment where you can get up in the morning and all you have to do that day is read and think and write, I knew that was a very, very good life.  It's one of the reasons I think I like this job so much, because in the large part, that's pretty much what I do.  So, I was happy there.  There were times when it was a lot of anger around what was going on with the Civil Rights Movement and Vietnam [Vietnam War], and some of that was focused at the administration at Cortland.
Story_ID: 283399
Speaker 1: Did you have a Black Student Organization?
Speaker 2: We did my senior year [at State University College of Cortland; State University of New York College at Cortland, Cortland, New York].  When I first went there, there was so few of us.  I mean, if there were a black student union, it was almost the kind of thing where you could have been president, vice president, secretary, treasurer, and a quorum in one person (laughter).  I think that my entering class was a class of eight hundred kids and there were four other black kids coming into that class out of eighty, out of eight hundred.  On the campus, I think, there was one brother from Nigeria who was a graduate student, I believe, in physical education.  There was another guy, and I can't remember his name, but someone just told me that they read something by him recently.  He's got some youth program going in Nigeria, and he's back there now.  And another guy named Leon Hawkins [ph.], was a year ahead of me, and Gary Hall, who is an attorney in Syracuse [New York] now; in fact, he represents the NBA Players Association [National Basketball Players Association].  So, I see him periodically; when the NBA Players Association had their annual meeting here, Gary came down.  Gary was a year ahead of me.  There was a woman who was teaching in the Pennsylvania, in (unclear) Juanita Brooks [ph.].  Boy, that may have been it; the entire campus of only about five thousand students.  That may have been it.  If I'm missing anybody, there's only one or two people that I'm missing.  My junior year, they began admitting more minority students through efforts of, especially admissions effort, to make an effort to recruit more minority students.  I think there were maybe fifteen to twenty students who were admitted that year, mostly from Central New York, I think of Syracuse, but a few from the New York City area and when I graduated  I think the entering classes had about twenty students coming in that year.  With the black student union, when I formed it, it was called Uhuru and I think that formed, as I said, my junior year and I remember going to meetings with maybe twenty people, if it was well-attended at the meeting, and some issues came up with student government around that.  We had some internal debates about whether or not we wanted to have a black dorm, I think it was my junior year.  But those kinds of issues never would have happened when I was a--it was a black wing in a dorm--you couldn't have a black dorm because you couldn't have a dorm with twelve people (laughter). A black wing in a dorm.  When I think about a black wing, that's kind of ridiculous too because with roommates, you've got enough people to fill maybe five rooms.  Those kinds of discussions, we began to have.  And the way I think I've probably seen us being, I don't want to say an outcast but I had, I was able to function very comfortably within the white universe.  I had grown up in that environment.  Many of the incoming black students were not nearly as comfortable functioning in that arena because they had not grown up in that environment.  They come from almost all black schools in Syracuse or even Ithaca [New York].  I'm not sure if there's an all-black school in Ithaca, but it's predominantly black and the kids coming in from New York were from a very different environment, but I was so active politically that I couldn't really be branded as an Uncle Tom, because whenever they wanted money they came to me for the money, because I was running the student government and could travel in that circle.  I was head of the speaker's bureau and I was bringing in people like Muhammad Ali was there, [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory, boy I have to run down a list, but I would bet you would be hard placed to name an important political figure in the '60s [1960s] that we didn't have on our campus while I was head of the lecture series, but with the possible exception of (unclear) Brown whom we tried to get and could not get him.  I don't know, just problems with the communication with his agent and I was on the phone oftentimes with his agent, but could not close the deal to get him on campus, but we tried.  So, I was very comfortable there.  It's almost, as I think about it now, kind of like the environment with the migrant workers coming into town because I was able to function so well in the white world that was the town I was growing up in.  Once they came and once I developed a better sense of awareness and consciousness, I was also able to function in that world and have friends in that arena.  Then became a very--I won't say a source of pride.  I didn't think about it.  In college, when I did think about it more, it was more of a sense of pride.  It impressed upon me what the boys talked about, the kind of bilingualism that we all develop and being able to function in both worlds.  But I really experienced that primarily, I think, when I was in college when everything was going down on campus and nationally with the Student Rights Movement and Civil Rights Movement, and being part of and being affiliated with a very radical group of black students, but also being able to function within the confines of student government and being able to work with the administration--
Story_ID: 283400
Speaker 1: --I remember one student, whose name I forgot when I was running down the list, Chuck Wilson [ph.], Chuck was thrown out, I think it was my sophomore year, because there was suspicion of him having marijuana and there were problems with, I thought, the due process he was afforded.  I didn't think that he had any proper caring, so I called up the president of the university [State University College of Cortland; State University of New York College at Cortland, Cortland, New York] and I said, "You know, this is something, you really need to have a sit-down and need to have a meeting and talk to Chuck because nobody's heard his side of the story."  And Chuck didn't ask me to do that.  I just thought it was the appropriate thing to do.  President said, "Well, okay," and had a faculty member come in, asked me to attend the meeting, Chuck attended, was invited to the meeting.  I don't know if he was told he could bring a lawyer or not, but I remember showing up to the meeting and the meeting was at 8:30 in the morning.  I was there, the president was there, faculty member was there, Chuck never showed up!  (Laughter) That was the first time I began to understand what the word jive really means.  Chuck never showed up! (Laughter) So I'm going out on a limb for this clown and he doesn't bother to roll out of bed to get to the meeting.  So my attitude after that, basically was well, ask Chuck.  If Chuck's out of here, Chuck's out of here.  You know, Chuck, don't let the door hit you on the way out (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's sad.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 283401
Speaker 1: Well, did you have any favorite professors in school [State University College of Cortland; State University of New York College at Cortland, Cortland, New York]?
Speaker 2: I did.  One, who was a mentor to me; in fact, I was thinking about him this morning, a guy named John [Langston] Gwaltney.  John was a black anthropology professor.  He came my junior year.  He was the most remarkable human being I ever met.
Speaker 1: How do you spell his last name?
Speaker 2: G-W-A-L-T-N-E-Y.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, G-W-A-L-T-N-E-Y?
Speaker 2: G-W-A-L-T-N-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Gwaltney.
Speaker 2: Gwaltney, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Probably had more of a profound academic influence on me than anybody.
Speaker 1: This is a black anthropology professor.
Speaker 2: Black anthropologist, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now that's unusual.
Speaker 2: Very unusual.  He studied under Margaret Mead.  His doctoral thesis, 'Thrice Shy[: Cultural Accommodation to Blindness and Other Disasters in a Mexican Community,' John Langston Gwaltney], was published by Columbia University [New York, New York]; in fact, I have a copy of that that he sent me at home.  He died about eight to nine years ago, and the thing that really makes stand out is he was totally blind.  He's been blind, I think, since he was two years old and he was the best informed person I have ever met in my entire life in any arena, be it law, the judiciary.  You could--I've been in situations with him in faculty settings or at his home or in social gatherings, where he would carry on conversations about the politics of some country I had never heard of, some social phenomena.  The only thing I know that he wasn't really adept and in that I know of was mathematics.  I never heard him get into an in depth discussion in math; but aside from that, he was incredible.  I think he spoke seven languages, six or seven languages.  When he finally retired, he said one of the things he wanted to do was brush up on his Russian, that he was conversational but he wasn't really fluent and wanted to get to the point where he was fluent.  He must have been sixty-seven or sixty-eight then; just an amazing human being, and John's favorite word was rigor.  (Laughter) In a way, maybe I gravitated toward him so much, because he kind of reminded me of my dad [Clarence V. McKee].  He was no foolishness whatsoever.  When you were in his course, you knew you were there to learn.  It wasn't a very exciting presentation or lecture, but the readings were incredible and, you know, if you gave him a good effort and did the material, you were gonna get a good grade.  You probably weren't gonna get an A for him, although I did manage to get an A from him, but you were gonna get a strong B from him.  His wife took a course from him.  She decided she was gonna just enroll and took a course, and he gave her a B minus (laughter) and I remember her, I was at their home one time and she was talking about this and she said that when you were over today John just said that you were maybe the only one of three students in all his years of teaching he's ever given an A to, because he doesn't give an A and then she said, "I took a course from him and he only gave me a B minus."  And John was sitting there and his wife's name was Judy [Gwaltney], and John said in a very deep voice, "Well, Judy, based upon your paper that you turned in, you didn't deserve anything more than a B minus" (laughter).  He was a very rigid scholar, and he thought a lot about academic standards that are not to be toyed with, and I'm not talking about the affirmative action thing because he believed strongly in affirmative action, as do I, but in terms of in his classroom, you are there to learn as much as you could possibly learn; otherwise, he thought you were wasting your time and his time, and he made a big impression on me.  I think he's part of the reason I did so well in law school and my karate instructor also, I think is part of the reason I did so well in law school, and my dad, and the discipline that I got from my father reinforced by the discipline that I learned from my sensei and the academic approach to learning that I got from John Gwaltney.  I think that's why I succeeded so well in law school.
Story_ID: 283402
Speaker 1: When did you start taking karate?
Speaker 2: Actually, soon as I got out of college [State University College of Cortland; State University of New York College at Cortland, Cortland, New York].  My first job was in Binghamton, New York, and that was in '69, 1969, and something I've always wanted to do, and it was really the first time I thought, well, I've got an opportunity to do this now, so I went to the yellow pages to see if there was a karate instructor in town.  There were two of them, and I didn't know anything at the time about karate, but I know one guy had a Japanese name, the other guy had an American name.  So, if I'm going to study karate, I'm going to go with the guy with the Japanese name (laughter) and unbeknownst to me at the time, he was one of the world renowned practitioners of karate.  He was internationally renowned and so I just kind of watched out.  It's amazing that he was in Binghamton, New York, and that I had the good fortune to get hooked up with him, but he's somebody I'm still in touch with and I try to get back to to train periodically.
Story_ID: 283403
Speaker 1: So, what did you do in Binghamton [New York]?
Speaker 2: I was in charge of, the formal title was director of minority recruitment for the university [State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, New York].  It was a really unique program, where I was, basically my office was within the admissions office.  I did not report to the director of admissions.  I reported to the person who was the director of what we call the Special Admissions Program, which was a program to get more minority students into the university.  I think it's now called the Educational Opportunity Program, EOP.  I reported to him, and I was literally given the authority to decide who got into the school and who didn't.  I did pick a student committee to review applications with some resistance from the director of admissions, who was very old school and didn't think the students be reviewing personnel files, and he had a point.  I think it was wrong, but I understood what he was saying, and the students helped make recommendations, but it basically was my call on who got into the university.  If there was an applicant that I wasn't really sure of that I was on the fence about, I would ask the students to take a look at the folder and then I'd kind of use that to help advise me, but sometimes I'd do what they ask me to, and sometimes I wouldn't.  I also, and with the admissions decision came financial aid package if they qualified for financial aid.  I didn't handle the financial aid but I worked closely with the director of financial aid to put packages together for students and it usually was some combination of work study and loans and some grant money depending on need.  And I also had the opportunity to recruit for the graduate school.  SUNY Binghamton had a graduate division there and I was able to get under Jackson State [College; Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi], which is kind of like a sister school with SUNY Binghamton.  They look for people to bring into the master's program.  I think I only found the few years I was there I really only found, I think I found three people that looked like they would be strong candidates that were interesting.  One of them was really scarcely able to considerate it because the other two just couldn't leave Mississippi.  At the time, I couldn't understand why somebody, this was in 1973, right after the students were shot on--no, it was '69 [1969], 'cause I left Binghamton in '72 [1972].  It was '69 [1969], '70 [1970], after the students were shot at Jackson State.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's like '70 [1970].  That's the spring of '70 [1970, right].
Speaker 2: Right.  And I couldn't figure why anybody would, when given up to be a leader in Jackson, Mississippi, would not get on the next plane out of there, but for some folks, that was their home and they were not that much interested in going to a different, a very different environment to go to school.
Story_ID: 283404
Speaker 1: So how long did you work as recruiter for--
Speaker 2: Three years.  I went from there to law school [Syracuse University College of Law, Syracuse, New York].  One other thing that I did, and I was thinking about this the other day.  In fact, it's not on my resume because I don't think about it that much, and it really is a reflection on the kind of administration we had at SUNY Binghamton [State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, New York] at the time, as well as the sign socially of what was going on.  I was able to develop a very informal program--none of this was written down--to get people included from the state prison system into the state university system.  I think we brought in like thirty guys, and I think back on it now.  One, it was crazy.  (Laughter) Maybe that's a function of my having gotten to a point where I see things differently and maybe it's a function of just realizing the difficulties of that kind of programming.  A couple of the guys were real successes.  There's a fellow, Ron Benjamin [Ronald R. Benjamin], who is now an incredibly successful attorney in New York City [New York, New York].  He was written up on the front page of The Wall Street Journal three or four years ago, with one of those little sketches that they do.  He had, at the time, recovered the largest verdict in a toxic court case against a pharmaceutical company.  I can't remember the drug that it was.  It's basically a one-person office.  He goes in and he takes on these large corporate entities with large corporate law firm backing.  He's been pretty successful doing it.  Has a residence in Trump Towers--in fact, two of them because he broke down a wall and combined two condos in there--an office in Binghamton [New York], an office on Park Avenue in New York City.  He came--I think he had been in prison for five or six years for grand theft--and he came into school, graduated in three years, went to the University of Buffalo law school [University of Buffalo School of Law, Buffalo, New York]. Buffalo was telling him they weren't going to allow him to sit for the bar exam.  He sued the State of New York, telling them, look you knew I was a convicted felon when you let me in law school.  You didn't tell me I couldn't take the bar exam.  I don't know if they relented or if he won the law suit, but he was able to take the bar.  Another guy, Louis DelValle, he is now, I think, he's now retired, the head of the program that I talked about, Equal Opportunity Program, at SUNY Binghamton.  Another guy, Freddy Foss, played for a number of years.  I don't think he graduated, but he played sax with Lionel Hampton for a number of years.  He came in being a very competent musician.  Most of the guys were in prison because of drugs.  Ron, the lawyer, wasn't.  He had an alcohol problem but he wasn't a junkie.  Most of the other guys were in because of drugs.  Some were able to get to the university and deal with it, most of them weren't. Most of them just got there, after a short period of time couldn't do it and left.  One of them, in hindsight, one of the big mistakes we made was we really didn't have support services in place for them.  If I were to use this now, I would have such a system support, realizing that you can't go from six years in a state prison--almost all of them, I think, were maximum security prisons, on Friday to the State University of New York on Monday.  You can't do that.  And we rolled in a full time course load so you can get your financial aid package, and all this freedom that you were denied for six years is now going to be given to you in a dorm in a situation where a lot of kids coming out of high school can't do it.  Right now, as I think back on it, we were very successful. Not in terms of--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that is a big challenge, I mean, to think about it, I mean college life is not even real life.  I mean, it's not--so they're going from like a penitentiary to something that's almost fantasy life.
Speaker 2: Yeah, totally open, yeah.  Totally freedom; in fact, one guy, his nickname was Hassan [ph.]--I can't remember his real name--told me that he took seven weeks before he could get out of the habit of in the morning standing up next to his bed at attention, getting ready for the count, 'cause every morning for so many years he had to stand outside a cell for the count and when he went to the dorm, that was his initial inclination.  You get up in the morning, you stand there, you get ready for the count.  I think Hassan probably left after, I think he finished one semester and that was it, but you know as I think back on it now, as I said, as I was starting to say, it wasn't, we did do fairly well.  Most of the guys got off of heroin and did not go back to it.  There were only one or two really bad cases of relapse.  Most of them stayed clean.  My guess is that right now most of them are doing okay.  Some are doing very, very well, like the attorney in New York, which is atypical, and the fact that they were able to deal with that change in environment without much support--the only support they had was their probation officer--we had a counselor who was part of our program who was not very good, really pretty much into his own kind of agenda, more so than the students, and somehow we got through that without any major incidents.
Story_ID: 283405
Speaker 1: Tell us about law school.
Speaker 2: Law school I did not enjoy.  I had this conversation--
Speaker 1: And how did you choose, you went to University of Syracuse [sic. Syracuse University College of Law, Syracuse, New York], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I knew I had to be in central New York and my dad [Clarence V. McKee] had just died and Mom [Etta Payne McKee] was trying to deal with that, so I wanted to be somewhere that was fairly close to Rochester [New York], which kind of meant Buffalo [New York] or Syracuse [New York].  I was wait-listed at Buffalo [State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York]; as I said, I think I was in Cortland [State University College of Cortland; State University of New York College at Cortland, Cortland, New York], I think I was probably a strong B student.  I did take a graduate course at SUNY Binghamton [State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, New York] that I did very well in, but I was not coming into law school fully getting straight A's.  On the LSATs, as I recall, I did very poorly in, which doesn't--I just don't do well on standardized exams, a lot of black folks don't.  I went in thinking to myself I'm not sure I can do this.  I was incredibly intimidated by the aura of law school, by the different way of learning, (unclear) method I had to get used to.  I remember reading cases in the case book and not knowing for sure what it is from that case I'm supposed to understand, and end of the semester was, I understood, that everybody is in the same boat.  Everybody has to go through a similar kind of adjustment, but I came in not having the kind of confidence in myself that I would have liked to have had.  Some of that, I think, was a social thing, coming from the perspective of how the society looks at black folks and I remember a quote that Malcolm [X] had, that the worst thing or the biggest evil in society is perpetuated against black people to teach us to hate ourselves.  I think there's an awful lot to that.  In my situation, it wasn't internalized as hate so much as internalized as a lack of confidence, and that what that I think that Dad was always trying to do was to get me to, in many different ways, believe in myself and tell me that I could do it.  Not law school, 'cause he died before law school, but in athletics.  I think a lot of the drive that got me to the point of thinking well, maybe I can compete at an athletic school like Cortland and make the football team, was Dad's not being willing to tolerate my saying I can't do this, because you didn't say that to Dad (laughter).  If you were going to get into it, you were going to have to say you were going to do it.  And, you allow for failure only because that informs what it is you have to do to succeed.  That's the only way you allow for failure.
Story_ID: 283406
Speaker 1: And so, I kind of went into law school [Syracuse University College of Law, Syracuse, New York] with that approach, but at the same time I'm thinking of myself that it's going to very, very difficult and maybe I won't succeed, and I thought, well, if I don't succeed, then I can talk to my sensei about teaching karate, and I did actually teach karate part time my freshmen year.  I was there with another student, who is in Syracuse [New York], and we got permission from the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] to do some karate lessons, purely on a volunteer basis for my sensei, so I thought about doing that full time, but at the time I was only a brown belt, so that wasn't really--you need to be a black belt to have your own school, so that wasn't very practical.  I remember going to buy a 'Black's Law Dictionary,' the law dictionary that we use, and as I left the book store, I looked down at the book and I said, "You know, this is a really impressive book!  If I don't do well here, this is a book that will still look nice on my book shelf" (laughter).  And, what kind of turned the corner for me was a professor named [Peter] Herzog, who taught torts who had been there, I think, forever.  He gave us a practice exam toward the end of the semester, and graded all the exams and he said in giving it, he was going to give the same level of question that he was going to give on the final exam, he was going to grade it every bit as difficult, if not tougher, so that we'd have an idea of where we were and what we have to do.  When I got back my practice exam fearing the worst, I looked at it and it was an A, and he had written on the face of the exam, "I really liked this exam and the way you express yourself."  I remember flying home on my bicycle and telling Ana [Pujols-McKee], my wife, "You know I think I can do this stuff.  Look at this exam."  And that just kind of set the trend for how well I did in law school, once I realized that I really can do this stuff and I just started to perform academically at a level that I never had performed before, but I didn't enjoy the experience.  I never enjoyed the pressure.  I got to the point, even when I felt comfortable because my class rank at the end of this first semester, I think I was seventh in my class out of 180, and when I got my class rank I looked at it.  My initial reaction was I wanted to make certain that the person knew my name, because I said, "This is McKee [HistoryMaker Theodore A. McKee], Ted McKee, M-C-K-E-E?"  And the registrar, Janetta [ph.], knew me and she said, "Ted, I know who you are" (laughter).  And I said, "Well, what is that number?"  And she said, "Well, you asked for your class rank.  That's your class rank."  So I started feeling very comfortable.  I knew that I could do the work academically if I studied and did my preparation, but I just did not like the, I guess, the atmosphere of it.  Even once I got comfortable knowing I could function in the atmosphere, knowing that my professors really respected me.  The rigor of it and the tension was something I never felt totally comfortable with.  In a way, I enjoyed it because, again, I was in an environment where all I had to do was read and think, and I loved that, as I said earlier, but there was still something about the, maybe it was the competitiveness of it, maybe it was the quantity of stuff that I had to read on a given day, and having very little time for anything else, that I was never in a situation where I could look back and say that I enjoyed law school.  I know a few people who have said that, most people that I know, law school was not something that they've enjoyed.  Most of my law clerks when I've asked them have not enjoyed law school.
Story_ID: 283407
Speaker 1: You mentioned your wife.  Now, you got married at some point along the way here.
Speaker 2: Yup, '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: You've got to tell us (laughter).
Speaker 2: Somebody I'd met in Binghamton [New York].  We got married when I went to Syracuse [University College of Law, Syracuse, New York] and we've been married since then, so that's, that was '72 [1972], thirty-three years.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Was she a student at--
Speaker 2: She was a student at Binghamton [State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, New York], not somebody that I recruited.  She was already there when I got there.  Her sister was there also.  I actually knew her sister better than I knew Ana [Pujols-McKee], my wife.  Her sister's name is Ada [ph.], A-D-A, and I was friends with her there before I got to know Anna, and when I went we became very close at Syracuse [New York].  We lived together for a while, I'm sorry, Binghamton.  When I went to Syracuse, then we decided to move together.  She was graduating the same year that I left my position at Binghamton.  She had one more course to complete and she took that at Syracuse University, an astronomy course, and transferred the credits back to Binghamton to finish up, and then, and we've been together since then.  She's now a physician here in town.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, after law, when you graduated from law school what did you do next?  Did you start working in Rochester [New York], or did you--
Speaker 2: I came right to Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], my first job out of law school was Wolf Block [Wolf, Block, Schorr & Solis-Cohen, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], a firm in town.  The way I coordinated my job search was I knew Ana wanted to go into medical school.
Speaker 1: You came out in what year?
Speaker 2: In '75 [1975].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I would kind of coordinate my applications to jobs in cities where she was applying to medical school.
Story_ID: 283408
Speaker 1: Now, you're at the firm Wolf, Block, Schorr, Solis, and Cohen [sic. Wolf, Block, Schorr, & Solis-Cohen, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And we were saying off-camera that's a Jewish firm basically,
Speaker 2: It was an all Jewish firm.  I think it pretty much still is.  I don't want to say it's an all Jewish firm, but predominately Jewish firm.  It started, as I recall, right after the [Great] Depression or right before the Depression, because the firms in town were not allowing any Jews, they weren't hiring Jews, no matter how talented they were.  So, they formed their own law firm and it became WolfBlock [LLP, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and it became a very, very big prestigious firm in town. For a number of years they represented the movie industry, because of Samuel Goldwyn and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer [MGM], which was a Jewish enterprise.  It was a movie enterprise run by Jewish folks, and so Wolf Block, because of the natural connection there, represented MGM.  I don't know how it came that we lost that client; maybe, that MGM, when the founding fathers of that died, they may have thought that they had to a West Coast law firm.  I went there because during the interview, they struck me as being much more concerned with the kinds of things I was concerned about, than any of the other big firms in town.  They seemed to be very focused and, on not necessarily pro bono work, but community involvement, and one of the people who interviewed me, a lawyer named Alan Davis, who was kind of a mentor for me in the legal arena and still kind of is.  Alan had just written the Mental Health Act [sic.] and was involved heavily with that and I wanted to work with Alan, and I knew he had an excellent reputation, so I went to Wolf Block.  I began my job search looking at the firms where Ana [Pujols-McKee] was trying to get into medical school, and also the firms that were paying the most.  When I went to law school [Syracuse University College of Law, Syracuse, New York], I thought I would be doing some kind of community activist kind of a role, or community legal office, but when I realized that Ana wanted to go to medical school, then I thought all of a sudden I gotta make some money here, because tuition and living expenses, so I moved away from the community legal center to corporate firms, 'cause that's where the money was, and fortunately I had done so well in law school, I pretty much had my pick of jobs and I could pretty much go to any firm that I wanted to go to; certainly in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], but I probably could have ended up going to a Wall Street law firm, but Ana's first choice of medical schools was here in town.  My first choice of jobs was Wolf Block's, where it just worked out that's where we came to.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, what kind of cases did you work on at Wolf Block for the most part?
Speaker 2: Pretty, mostly corporate.  I actually ended up thinking that I wanted to go into initially real estate, and then I gravitated toward litigation, but the real estate cases that I had, I really enjoyed, and that was just drafting work.  Drafting new apartment ship agreements, leases, which sounds, I'm sure, as boring as hell, but it can be interesting; however, maybe it's my affinity for English again.  Even though it's a very cramped, artificial language, trying to get the language to say what you want it to in a way that people will understand that eliminates ambiguity, I like that.  I like sitting down and playing with the language.  I like that the corporate work that was straight corporations work was (unclear) that I did not like at all.  I couldn't stand it.  And the tax aspect of what I was doing, I did not like because I didn't have a strong background in tax.  I just didn't like tax work, but the good thing about a place like Wolf was, it was so big that if you encountered a tax problem, you'd take it to the tax department.  Even if I had a strong tax background, that's what I would have done anyhow.  I wouldn't have done it myself.  I would have taken it to the lawyers and the tax department.  I got a very, very good extension of my legal education there, which is really why I went there, and met some people that I'm glad I came into contact with, people whom I still respect a lot, some of whom have been very helpful to me, so I'm glad I did it.  It was a very good thing for me to do.  Plus, at the time the money was absolutely necessary.  I left there. I went there in '75 [1975] and I left in '77 [1977].
Story_ID: 283409
Speaker 1: I went to the U.S. attorney's office.  That was really because I wanted to get some trial work and I knew if I stayed at Wolf Block [Wolf, Block, Schorr, & Solis-Cohen, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I would be there maybe seven or eight years before I got my own trial, and then if I didn't like it, I was gonna be too late.  When I went to the U.S. attorney's office, the person--
Speaker 2: Now what year was that?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: That was '77 [1977].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: When I went there, the person who was then the United States attorney for the district, David [W.] Marston [Sr.], had a philosophy which was unlike a lot of the officers now, that rather than bringing somebody in with a lot of trial experience, which is pretty much what these officers, including my old office, is doing now.  He would want to bring somebody in who did not have a lot of trial experience so that you could basically be trained the way they want you to try a case.  You get your experience there and they would start you out with little cases that I didn't realize at the time were cases that you couldn't lose.  My St. Bernard that we had that time, if you probably groomed her and propped her up and got her to bark so that it sounds like English, she probably could have won some of the cases that they train you with.  They're bank robberies where you can get a teller ID and I soon came to realize, once I got over the initial anxiety of going in front of a jury, that there was almost no way to lose a bank robbery case, unless it's a sophisticated enterprise.  That's very different, but if it's just some cat going in off the street, they go in thinking that it's them against the teller.  They don't realize it's not about the teller, it's about the technology and that there's a whole industry that's evolved to keep them from doing what they're trying to do, and they're not a point where they can outwit that industry, but they have no idea of that, so they'll walk in and there'll be a surveillance camera and they will undoubtedly stop to write out a demand note in good legible handwriting, so that the handwriting expert can say, yeah, the person who wrote this demand note is the same person who wrote that handwriting exemplar, and I saw that defendant write those handwriting exemplars, saw them leave their fingerprint on the counter next to the surveillance camera so that a fingerprint expert can say, "Yes, this fingerprint has enough indicia of similarity to the defendant's to match the defendant's print, so I can say yes, to a reasonable degree of certainty the defendant left this fingerprint; oh, and by the way, if you look at the surveillance film you'll see him leaving the print, and the bank teller will come in and say, "Yes, that looks like the person who robbed me that day."  You can't lose that case. But they're fun to try and they teach you how to prepare a case, how to ask a question, how to object, and how to present a case for a jury and make an open and closing statement, and from that, there are more involved cases.  I ended up working with a grand jury that was in town to investigate police brutality and actually coordinating the presentations before that grand jury; really, because nobody else wanted it and I loved it.  I thought this was part of why I wanted to go to law school; to try to make sure that everybody got a share of justice, and it wasn't as Malcolm [X] said, "Just us."  I saw the grand jury as a way of doing something about what I saw as a problem, and that was the police brutality that was going on in this town at the time, under then Police Chief [Frank] Rizzo.  So, I told Dave Marston, you know, I'd be happy to take some of these cases, and Dave ended up putting me in charge of the investigations, which was wonderful.  And I did that for about a year and a half, I guess.
Speaker 2: Now this is, we're talking about Frank Rizzo, who eventually became the mayor.
Speaker 1: Became mayor.
Speaker 2: He's a, I know in a lot of circles he's an unsavory figure.
Speaker 1: And certainly in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  I know, for a number of years when I was just learning Philadelphia politics, it seemed like the only way you could get the black community in Philadelphia to turn out and vote in numbers was for Frank Rizzo to be on the ballet, and then we would turn out to vote against Frank Rizzo.  It didn't matter who was running against him, as long as it was vote against Frank Rizzo, we'd turn out in numbers to vote.  It was very polarizing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm just amazed when I come to Philadelphia where his statue still stands in the plaza--
Speaker 1: I know (laughter).  It's--part of the community absolutely loved him and worshipped him and thought he was the greatest thing that ever happened to Philadelphia, part of the community thought he was incredibly divisive and destructive, but his statue is in front of the Municipal Services Building [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] now--
Speaker 2: Waving--
Speaker 1: Waving towards [Philadelphia] City Hall [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], yeah (laughter).  I did that.  I did some political corruption cases that I really enjoyed; and in fact, I liked that job so much, and it was a wonderful job and I still think, probably that the best job you can have practicing law is a U.S. attorney's office if you have the right administration and the right U.S. attorney in the office.  I liked it so much I knew I was going to stay here for a long time and get comfortable, and I really did not want to do that.  I didn't want to stay there and get comfortable and turn into a career prosecutor, for no particular reason other than I just, perhaps got to the point that it wasn't as rewarding or challenging as it might otherwise have been, but it was an awful lot of fun.  I enjoyed it.  It was meaningful, and I thought I was doing something other than just drawing a paycheck.  I was making a contribution to my community, which I enjoyed.
Story_ID: 283410
Speaker 1: I remember calling Alan Davis, whom I mentioned a few minutes ago, when Alan was appointed city solicitor by then Mayor [William J.] Green [III].  I called Alan to congratulate him and Alan asked me if I could consider working at his administration in the city law department.  I gave it some thought and he wasn't quite sure in what capacity.  He said, you'd be one of my deputies, but I'm not quite sure doing what.  I said, well let me think about it, and I called him back and said, "Yeah, I'd like to talk to you about it."  So, I went to work with the Green administration as a deputy city solicitor for three years.  While I was part of the City Law Department, the city began to move to try to take over on-street parking.  For a long time--I'm sorry, for taking over off-street parking.  The City Parking Authority, the Philadelphia Parking Authority, is a state agency, although most folks think it's a city agency, it's a state agency that was by statute in charge of off-street parking only and there was movement afoot to try to get the parking authority to take over on-street parking as well as off-street parking and coordinate and centralize the parking in the city, and also there was an attempt to see whether or not the parking could be made more efficient so that it could turn into a revenue-generated mechanism and become more self-sufficient.  So, in order to do that, there had to be some legislation and enacted in Harrisburg [Pennsylvania] to change the authorizing and enabling statutes of their authority to allow it to move on street, to on-street parking.  Ordinances had to be gotten through the city council.  It required gearing up the Parking Authority to get a lot of equipment to do the on-street enforcement, pick-up trucks and things like for the booths, getting the booths, tickets had to be purchased; so that became a large part of what the administration was going to do, and they wanted someone to be general council to the Parking Authority, in-house rather than all the work being farmed out.  So, it may have been the mayor who asked me, if it wasn't the mayor, it was Alan, but I think it was the mayor, who asked me if I was interested in doing that because I was doing code enforcement work anyhow, and they thought it would be consistent with that and somewhat consistent with my work in the U.S. attorney's office.  When I think back on it in retrospect, my guess is because of some of the Parking Authority's historical culture, he probably wanted somebody in there also that they could feel comfortable with, because of the opportunity with all that procurement, but it was tremendous opportunity for graft and kick-backs and bribes with all the bids coming in.  So, my guess is, although they never told me this, they may have thought that my connection with law enforcement and the U.S. attorney's office may have been a helpful image to put into the Parking Authority; I don't know, but I then went to the Parking Authority.  The other advantage of that was that, at that time, I was pretty certain I wanted to run for judge because it's an elected position, state court judge in Pennsylvania.  I could not do that as a city employee because a city employee by restrictions in the (unclear) charter, cannot be political.  You can't be involved in politics, can't be a political candidate.  The Parking Authority, however, is a state agency that not only can be involved in politics, it is up to its knees in politics (laughter).  Everybody over there was, at the time, a ward leader or a committeeman, but you almost couldn't get into the Parking Authority unless you had some kind of political connection.  It was a patronage haven.  I think that's changed a lot recently, but it was at the time.  So, the other advantage of my going there was that I could campaign and become a pleas court judge, which I saw as immediate benefit.  The benefit I did not see, but which became very helpful was I got to meet a lot of the people that were in charge of the machinery of the local election; a lot of the war leaders and committeemen work at the Parking Authority, and those that didn't work there knew somebody who worked there.  So, when I was running for election, when I went to the ward meetings at night, invariably I would see somebody that I worked with in the Parking Authority.  So that was a huge help.
Story_ID: 283411
Speaker 1: I was elected to Common Pleas Court [Court of Common Pleas, First Judicial District, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] judge in '84 [1984] and sat in that court for ten years and then Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] appointed me to the federal bench [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in '94 [1994].
Speaker 2: Hmm.  Okay.  You can tell us about some cases now, but you know, you can't, I know some things you can't tell us, but what--
Speaker 1: As a judge?
Speaker 2: Yeah, what are some of the more memorable moments of the Common Pleas Court judge?
Speaker 1: A couple that really stick out in my mind.  One was a sanction--oh, they're both sentencings.  There was a woman who was on trial for having basically starved to death her two babies.  She was a crack addict.  These babies were both twins.  They were born prematurely and it was what we call a stipulated trial, where they basically stipulated to the facts and they asked the judge to decide what the (unclear) of the offense would be, and what she agreed to was that the babies were born premature, that she had gone out on a crack binge, she had five other kids, as I recall, she had gone out on a crack binge for four or five nights, come home and the babies were--actually, the babies died while she was gone and the police were called to the house and the police found this incredible squalor and found these two infants on the bed, dead, having starved to death.  The issue at trial really became whether or not what she did was manslaughter or murder.  Manslaughter would be criminal negligence.  Homicide would be third degree murder.  It would be not intentional killing or killing in the course of felony, which would be second degree murder.  Intentional killing would be first degree murder, but another form of killing with malice and whether or not a frame of mind was just negligence, criminal negligence, or malice.  The D.A. [district attorney] put on testimony about PEP (unclear) testimony really to show that even though these two babies were born very prematurely, that everything that had been to done to them by the time they died, they were basically at a point where they were thriving.  Their body weight was back up to normal and they, but for the fact that they were deprived of food for four or five days, were perfectly healthy and would have thrived.  It became difficult because 1) The legal question for me was incredibly difficult.  Is this malice or is this criminal negligence, because she clearly did not mean to starve her kids to death.  She got into a crack binge and, as she said, she got so wrapped up in the crack and that became the only thing on her mind.  It wasn't that the babies weren't on her mind.  She said it wasn't that the babies were not as important as the crack; it's that the babies were not part of my reality at all.  The only part of my reality was the crack.  It was intriguing intellectually, although I hate to demean it by saying that because of the legal issue, I was able to find a couple of state cases that helped me put together an approach to the case and I did end up concluding that it was homicide.  It wasn't criminal negligence, because the conduct was malice.  So she was convicted of two different counts of third degree murder.  And in trying to put the sentence together, since she still had these five other kids that were still alive, I remember trying to do something that would give a sentence that would sufficiently punish her for what she did to these two babies, but at the same time gotta reconstruct the family and allow her to get back with her children.  I was thinking out loud in court with her as I sometimes do with some defendants.  I couldn't always do it, but with some defendants, you can kind of reach a certain level of communication with them and you can think through a sentence with them and it's a sign of leniency, because sometimes the sentence you get is a hell of a lot tougher than the sentence you'd get otherwise.  In fact, I'd let the defendant sentence themselves and the sentence they come up with was always a tougher sentence than the guidelines would call for.  I do that with probationers a lot, you know.  I'd ask them, well, if you'd come back here on a violation, what do you think would be appropriate?  And they'd give me this number (laughter) and their lawyer would sit there and go, oh, my God (laughter).  And after a while, the lawyer would tell them basically shut up, don't answer that question.  And the lawyer would say, well your honor, before my client answers, let me throw out some considerations that you might want to consider and my client might want to consider before he answers.
Story_ID: 283412
Speaker 1: But anyhow, in thinking the sentence with her, I ended up giving her a sentence of seven to fifteen years.  I mean, that was the total sentence.  I think the most I could have given her, Pennsylvania's homicide sentencing is weird.  As I recall, the most that I could have given her for third degree murder at the time was three-and-a-half to seven years.  So, I think I ended up running the sentences consecutively to one another, taking some time off because it was a stipulated trial, treating it kind of like a guilty plea and it really was what we call a slow guilty plea and giving her a total of seven to fifteen years, but then saying I want to try to structure this somehow be it partly in a halfway house or something to kind of get you in a position where you can reconnect with your kids.  She said to me, "You know, Judge, I think I can do the time but I gotta deal with my addiction, I gotta deal with the time.  That, I think I can deal with, but if you put on me the consequences of my failure and what that's going to mean to my five other kids, I can't do that.  So, you just need to give me a sentence that doesn't take into consideration the kids and hopefully I'll be able to do my time, get my head together and get back with my kids.  But, I have to do that knowing that if I fail, it's not on the kids, so you need to try to put them out, if there's an agency or someplace where they're going to be safe, do that 'cause if I have them on my shoulder, I'm telling you right now I'm going to fail.  I'm going to get out of prison and I'm going to go back to the crack, 'cause that's the only I'm gonna--she said that's the only way I know now that I can deal with that kind of a situation."  I thought to myself, wow.  So, I just gave her seven to fifteen years and that was it, and she's out by now.  I see her lawyer periodically and I'll often ask him does he ever hear from her.  He was getting letters from her, but last time I asked him he had no idea where she was.  One of the reasons it's haunted me so much was not just because it shows the human tragedy of it all, she wrote me a letter from prison and I saved it.  I have no idea where I put it and when I moved from state court [Court of Common Please, First Judicial District, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] to federal court [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], it was probably on papers that I threw out, but it was an incredible letter, and she basically explained her life to me in ways that went beyond the pre-sentence report, and I think it was sincere.  I don't think she was just selling me a bill of goods, although possibly she was.  She, when I had her I think she was nineteen years old, when she committed this offense.  Maybe twenty-one.  She had, when she was eight years old, been raped by her father.  These two, each one of the seven kids she had was by a different father, except for the twins.  The father of the two twins was indicted on a homicide charge doing life in prison.  She had no idea who the father of these other five kids was.  When she was nine, her uncle raped her.  When she was fifteen, her boyfriend's father raped her, and this was a woman like--and I read this and thought for myself, Jesus Christ.  No wonder she's doing crack.  I read that after I had sentenced her.  I'm not sure if it would have made a difference in the sentencing; it may have, 'cause I thought I still had to give a sentence that would have done something to dignify the life of the two babies.  That was the hardest part of that sentence, 'cause I felt sorry for them from the very beginning.  But it may have made an impact on me to the extent that she would have gotten a little bit lighter sentence, not much of a lighter sentence, but a little bit lighter sentence.  She sticks in my mind.  I think about her all the time; whenever anyone talks about criminal sanctions and criminal sentencing and I'm trying to explain to somebody how hard it is to sentence somebody if you think about it and do it right.  I use that as an example.
Story_ID: 283413
Speaker 1: The other guy also who was sentenced in the case was a guy, and I can't remember his name, but I'll call him Larry.  I always had this thing of probation that if you're on probation you ought to be doing something to get your life together on probation, don't just go pee in a little bottle once a week, and then go on about sleeping all day long and watching TV.  So, I'd construct these conditions of probation that would almost always have the guy working on a GED [General Educational Development] if he didn't have it already, looking for employment, most of the time employs a curfew and it would be those kinds of things.  Sometimes I remember that there was one guy, his first name was Paul [ph.], I can't remember his last name.  I gave him homework.  He had, he was still in school and I'd give him homework assignments.  I'd make him do a paper and bring it in to me every two weeks and I would look at the paper, and then I'd stop doing that 'cause I realized I can't be sure this cat wrote the paper, and then I thought well, if he doesn't bring me the paper, what am I gonna do, am I gonna put him in prison because he doesn't do a homework assignment basically?  So, fortunately he always did the paper but I began thinking about it and I thought, well, it makes sense to do this, but it's just too risky because the penalties for his failure are just out of sight.  If I'm not going to put him in prison then what's the sense of having him do this, and I'm not giving him a grade, so I just, I thought that, I hadn't thought it through well enough.  I thought the probation officer maybe could do that kind of thing because the probation officer had more flexibility than I did.  But I stopped doing that.  There was this one guy, I knew I had given him a curfew.  I had him work on his GED and look for a job, and he had to keep a diary so that when he came into court periodically and I had him report to me, I think once a month he came into court and in addition reported to a probation officer.  I'd ask him how he was doing and I'd look at his diary and I looked at the diary and I tried to see what he was doing and he was trying to find a job and I'd ask him to put phone numbers of the people that he was contacting for a job, and once or twice I actually called these people to try to find to try to check to see if he was looking for a job, but with this one guy I imposed that sentence with a GED, find employment within a certain period of time, keep a diary while looking for a job, and there was no other condition in there.  He looked at me and he said, "Judge, I know what you're trying to do.  You're trying to get me to fix my life 'cause it's broken."  He said, "If I could do all the stuff you're expecting me to do, if I was organized enough to do that, I wouldn't be here right now.  I would never have gotten in trouble to begin with."  I thought about that for a second and I said, "Damn.  You're right.  You are absolutely right."  I said, "Look.  Just work on the GED, all right?  That, you gotta do that, and do that much.  But forget about the looking for the part time job, forget about it--," and he totally changed my philosophy of sentencing.  After that, I never, ever put those kinds of conditions on a probationer.  I'd always impose GED if they had a GED, or high school thing.  I'd impose some kind of employment search, but that was it because I realized the cat's right.  You know, if he was structured enough to do all that, plus he was giving up urine because he had a history of an addiction, and if he could do all that, he wouldn't be in the criminal justice system.  For him, it was a big enough challenge just not getting high.  But I do want him to work on the GED and I couldn't tell him, look, if you just keep giving clean urine you'll be okay, 'cause I wanted him to go beyond that because he could lay in bed all day and give up clean urine.  That wasn't going to help him get himself back together.
Story_ID: 283414
Speaker 1: These days with the disproportionate number of black people in jail on drug charges, I mean is there, I know the law is the law right now, but you gotta, you know, deal with it as it's written, but is there an ideal, what do you think would be ideal in terms of dealing with all these drug cases?
Speaker 2: I thought--I go back and forth on legalization.  There are times when I think that it's the only way to fix it.  There are other times when I think it would be a terrible way to try to fix it.  I'm more inclined recently to think that it really has to be legalized and controlled.  I hesitate because I'm not well enough informed of those societies where it is legalized.  I don't know enough about what's going on in those countries.  I know they don't have the violence there, but I'm not sure if the violence is tied to drugs.  This is such a violent society anyhow.  Theoretically you could remove the drugs tomorrow and you'd still have the most violent society on the face of the earth; so, drugs are a part of the violence, but I don't think it's all of the violence.  I do think the advantage of legalizing it is you would remove the profit motive from it and that would, I think, go a long ways toward people living in communities that are infested with cats selling drugs on the corner and all the violence that comes with that, the turf wars and things.  I think it would give the people in those neighborhoods a better quality of life, but I'm just really not sure.  I've got to think that through a little more carefully, but right now I think that may be the only way to try to get a handle on this thing.
Story_ID: 283415
Speaker 1: How would you explain your legal philosophy?
Speaker 2: Hmm.  You know, it's interesting, 'cause I was reading a case, a couple cases last night.  In fact, this morning,  I was up until about one o'clock working on this dissent I'm trying to get done, reading some [U.S.] Supreme Court cases, and a couple of them were by Justice [Antonin] Scalia, and a couple of the cases I really found myself saying things in there in terms of the right of privacy; then I thought to myself, I didn't know if he has changed or if I was viewing his writings differently, but it's a very liberal position and it may just be that people on the right have the same fear of big government and the privacy ramifications that the people of the left have had all along. But, I think my philosophy, I'm sure that most people view me as being very liberal and my guess is if you would ask some lawyers who know the court who's the most liberal judge in the court, they'd probably say that I am.  When I was a state judge [on the Court of Common Pleas, First Judicial District, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], that probably was not true because I was known as a very tough sentencer, but I think a very fair sentencer, but a very tough one, and most of my tough sentences came in on probation violation, so if somebody messed up on a probation, I would be, until I had that one conversation with that guy I would be draconian on the sentence.  I changed that 'cause another defendant told me along with this guy that, he taught me, he didn't tell me this, but he taught me that failure is a part of the addiction and no one just has an addiction and then stops it overnight.  If they do, then that's, maybe it wasn't an addiction to begin with.  Maybe that was just a habit.  Part of being an addiction is viewing it as a continuing relapse disorder, and so if somebody is on probation and a condition of their probation is abstaining from drugs, if they relapse into that, the way to respond to that is not by putting them back in prison, necessarily.  That has kind of focused into my philosophy.  It's hard to put into practice now, because I don't sentence people now, but I think about it in terms of trying to look at the person on the other side of the bench, if you will, and trying to have an understanding of where they're coming from as well as the victim and the impact of their crime on the victim.
Story_ID: 283982
Speaker 1: I was asking you about your judicial philosophy and have you really finished that (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I think that the hard thing I find, especially on the Appeals Court [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], is that we all have a certain political view and there are some judges who will deny it, and if they deny it, it's because they're not being truthful with the person asking the question or themselves, because you can't help but view the world in a certain way and that can color how you do the cases.  I try hard not to do that.  I'm sure there are times when adjudication is colored by my worldview, by the very fact that I see myself as being more liberal and I'm proud of that.  I don't check away from that label at all.  But, I just wish some of my colleagues who are more conservative would realize that their conservatism arises us from their worldview and their social view rather than denying that they have any particular orientation; and they do have a particular orientation.  It's almost impossible as a human being to avoid that.  The trick and the difficult thing is to, in every given case, do the very best you can to reach a decision that is a fair and unbiased application of the legal principles and first selecting the right legal principle and then applying it in a fair and unbiased way.  And I tried to do that.  I think we all tried to do that.  In some cases, it's harder to do than other cases.  There are some cases where you want to get a particular result.  The hard thing is to decide the case in a way that doesn't guarantee a particular result, but guarantees a particular process; the process of the neutral application of a set of principles, which may get to where you want to go.  It may not.  Several years ago, I do not believe in the death penalty.  I think that's a very counterproductive thing.  I don't think that it is ever imposed fairly or impartially in this society.  There is a wonderful dissent by, I think it's Justice [William J.] Brennan [Jr.], in a case called McClesky v. Kemp [1987] where he lays out what I think says it all about the role of race and the death penalty, but I had a case about three years ago where the district court had granted a writ of habeas corpus and basically overturned the death penalty, and I was presiding judge on that panel.  I was the senior-most judge and it was a unanimous decision to reinstate the death penalty, and I assigned myself the opinion because I didn't want to do that to anybody else, and I also thought I could write it in a way that would not create some of the dangers that might be created if it was written more broadly.  But I wrote an opinion reinstating the death penalty, when I didn't believe in the death penalty.  I say that by way of example in terms of what I'm talking about with neutral application of, unbiased application of neutral principles.  Sometimes it's harder than others.
Story_ID: 283983
Speaker 1: I hate death cases for that reason because it's very difficult and I go into them knowing it's very difficult, and they're usually very emotional, because usually if the defendant got the death penalty, especially if it's coming out of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], which is a county which is kind of numb to law and they don't just automatically impose the death penalty like they might in a more conservative county.  It's probably a pretty heinous crime, so you look at the gruesome details, you see what this individual, and usually there's not much data about the identity of the person, it's an issue of legal error but not identification.  You look at what the individual has done and what the individual is capable of doing, and it becomes very difficult.  You sympathize with the victims, usually.  It becomes very difficult to get through all that in a way that you can stand back later on and say I did a good job with that case, being fair to defend that what you have to be and being fair to the victim and the survivors of the victim, and then applying a body of law which you don't really believe in, because I think it's naive in a lot of ways to say, and there are cases that say this, the death penalty cannot be the result of emotion or there's another term that's used, but basically emotion.  Well, that's the only thing it can be the result of (laughter).  If you take the emotion out of it, you're not gonna get the death penalty because it's not a high recidivist crime.  It's probably, at one time I knew it was the lowest, the crime with the lowest rate of recidivism, and there are maybe a lot of reasons for that.  It may be that the person's apprehended and then they're incapacitated, so they can't commit the crime again, but I think most of it is because most crimes of that level of balance are of crimes of heated passion and they're not crimes where, and they're, also the person ends up victimizing somebody they know, and it's just by the bright dynamics of the crime, it's not a crime which is likely to reoccur.  It's not like pedophile, or a burglary, or--
Speaker 2: Serial killer, where they--
Speaker 1: --serial killer, being exception to that.  It's not a crime which by its nature is likely to be another offense.  That's just one of many reasons why I think it's not a logical response to the death penalty.  The only way it makes sense, I think, is that if you can show us a deterrent and by killing the defendant you save other lives and the debate between [Al] Gore and Bush [President George Walker Bush], the first debate, I remember this coming out and I was shocked by the response, where they both were for the death penalty and Bush said that he was for the death penalty because it's a deterrent, and then he said that's the only way you can defend it.  You defend it because it's a deterrent, because it saves lives.  I thought to myself, well, if you are right about it being deterrent, you're right, that is the only possible defense for the death penalty, but I just don't think it's a general deterrent.  It might be a deterrent in a certain case, a given defendant might say that they're not going to commit a murder because of the fear of the death penalty, but I think as a social policy matter, it simply does not deter (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I think like criminologist are showing over and over again, so that the punishment doesn't deter crime.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it doesn't deter, because you're assume you're not gonna get caught.  If you're dealing with somebody who assumes they're not gonna get caught, it's not a deterrent.  The other thing is it's a heated passion crime very often.  It's a spur of the moment kind of thing, and you kill out of rage.  If you kill out of rage, you're not processing, that kind of thing.  You don't do a risk and benefit analysis, 'cause if you did a risk and benefit analysis, nobody would commit murder, even if they thought they were going to get caught, what that's going to do to their life and the way they have to lead their life in terms of flaying apprehension, people just wouldn't do it unless there was an awful lot of money in it, and most of the time, they are not very well compensated in terms of the money.
Speaker 2: They're not the Perry Mason-type crime (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they really aren't. Yeah, they really aren't.
Story_ID: 283984
Speaker 1: I had a lot of homicides.  One guy, when I was in homicide in the criminal division, I remember this one guy kicked to death a street person, a vagrant, to steal his sneakers and he knew the guy was a vagrant.  He knew he wasn't going to get any money out of the deal.  He stomped him to death right around Christmastime, and what I was talking about before the heinous kind of crime, that was one of the kinds of crimes I'm talking about.  That was not a first degree case.  It was a second degree murder.  It wasn't a capital case, because the D.A [district attorney] didn't try to get a death penalty out of it, but it was a second degree murder, life imprisonment.
Speaker 2: Did the person have a record of this kind of violent activity in the past, or did, was it just something--
Speaker 1: That's a good question.  I don't, he had a horrendous record.  I don't remember a record with that kind of violence.  He may have had it.  He was one of the few people that I presided over during the course of that trial that scared me.  This guy, all I can remember was Abdul [ph.].  That was his last name.  I can't remember his first name.  May have been Rashid [ph.].  He was the only, when I think back, there's one guy who prosecuted who scared me.  He scared everybody in the office who prosecuted.  I remember he was a hit man for the mob and one of the labor unions, a very, very bright guy, made his own silencers.  He was a scary guy.  But, in all the people that prosecuted, nobody ever really scared me.  All the trials I presided over in seven years of criminal trials, three of those were homicides.  Nobody ever really bothered me, except this guy.  I just thought that he was so crazy and out of his mind that I could see that he was capable just out of pure vengeance, striking back at the system, including me being part of the system.  I would go into Graterford Prison [Graterford State Correctional Institution, Graterford, Pennsylvania], the maximum security prison nearby, at times with the group I was working with and I'd walk around in the-not in the open cell block but (unclear) in the corridors and in this meeting room and I would occasionally run into guys that I had sentenced and we'd have nice little conversations.  One guy sentenced, I think it was ten to twenty years on a rape charge, and we talked about the rape and he joked about it.  I left it at, you know this cat, not only did he seriously hurt this woman, but he's in here for ten years because of it and he's still joking about it.  He just does not get it.  And another guy who was in for killing a cop that was sentenced to life in prison.  We also had another case that was a death case that was still pending, and I remember when I saw him, there's a little mosque in the basement of Graterford Prison that the inmates themselves had constructed and they pretty much ran.  When I first saw this guy coming out of the cell block, he was, I guess, on his way to lunch or something.  No books or anything in his hand, and I was talking to the guy that I was with and I was telling him that I was going to go down and take a look at the mosque.  Well, the defendant must have heard me, because when I get down to the mosque about a half hour later, he's down there praying (laughter) and I thought to myself, well this is cool.  I mean, he's on his way to lunch but he cuts it short to go down to pray, but I already sentenced him.  I felt like saying, look man.  I already imposed your sentence.  You can pray all you want.  Thirty days after the sentence is imposed, I lose jurisdiction.  I can't change it. If I wanted to cut you a break because now you're in here praying, I couldn't do it.  So why don't you go eat your lunch?  (Laughter) You know?  I thought, well, you're into that whole con thing.  It's probably second nature to him.  He may have been down there because all of a sudden, he decided to pray but my guess is that he's just trying to run down one more con on the judge.
Story_ID: 283985
Speaker 1: Maybe I, I hope I speak for a lot of people when I ask this question, but insanity, when you hear about some of the things that people do, the first thing you think of is, that person's crazy.  They're out of their minds.  And, but, the law doesn't necessarily always see it, I mean, they see them as being evil or having committed a crime or, you know, they can make crimes but you say, well gee, these people are insane.  You know, they don't, they must not have their right mind or they would not do these things, like some serial killers, or some child molesters, they do it over and over again.  They don't seem like they can help themselves.  They have a wire loose or something.
Speaker 2: You know, there are tests in Pennsylvania and it's been so long since I looked at a legal insanity case in Pennsylvania.  As I recall, Pennsylvania is the classic M'Naghten test and that is not because of a disease of mind, not being able to tell the difference between right and wrong, and I do think there are crimes like that.  The problem is that it's a kind of a paradox, because when you get a crime that is that horrendous where you look at what the person did and you say nobody in their right mind could do that.  I tend to think that's right, that usually, if not always, no one in their right mind would do that on the one hand, and maybe they would at the time of the offense, meet the legal definition of insanity.  The problem with that, though, is to get a jury to absolve the person in a sense from the consequences of their action.  Even a judge, for that matter, and the classic case that comes to mind is, blanking on his name, Heidnik, Gary [M.] Heidnik.  He was a mass murderer here in town, but it was this house of gore, I think that's what the people called it, where he was keeping these people and I think they were all women, prisoner in his basement, killing them.  He was undergoing this long protracted sexual thing with them.  He would kill them.  He would then cannibalize them.  He was, I think, when the cops went in there were kettles in the kitchen with skulls that he would boil, but he would literally, he was a cannibal and the man was, I think, clearly crazy.  He was convicted of many counts of first degree murder.  On his post-conviction relief act hearing where we're trying to get some kind of post-conviction relief act that was his argument, that he was insane at the time.  My guess is, and I said this in a dissent I wrote, my guess is that everybody in the system knew that this guy was insane in one form or another, and that he may well have criminally insane to the extent that he shouldn't have been found guilty, and maybe he should have been found not guilty by reason of insanity, but no one is going to want to see this guy escape the consequences of his action.  In Pennsylvania they also have another category of verdict, which is guilty but insane, which allows you to be treated, I think for life, until the root of the insanity is cured, and I could be wrong about that.  I just haven't looked at that and that offense in a long time, as I said, and haven't looked at that.  I've never had a case dealing with that defense, but that's my understanding of it, but I wouldn't want anybody seeing this to think that I've just given them an analysis of Pennsylvania law because I'm doing that from a very vague recollection.  But my understanding was that a number of states did this after the [President Ronald Wilson] Reagan assassination [sic. attempted assassination] when [John] Hinckley [Jr.] was found to be criminally insane.  States were trying to move toward a situation where they could allow under the system justice.  People that they punished only when they were culpable in that they knew what they were doing, and therefore preserved the not guilty by reason of insanity, but at the same time create another category of offenses to get at people and confine them and treat them, when the insanity was the cause of the criminality.  So, the legislatures began enacting these not guilty but insane statues, which is different from saying not guilty by reason of insanity.  Not guilty, but insane, allowed the state to lock the person up and treat them.  Not guilty by reason of insanity would mean the person walks, and that's the end of it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  I don't think anybody would not want a person to walk after those kind of crimes.
Speaker 2: I wouldn't; especially, if they lived next door.  They can be a menace.
Story_ID: 283986
Speaker 1: But you're right, some of the things that get done, and I see it being done, I saw it being done by younger and younger kids, which made me to think there was some kind of a group kind of--insanity is just not a good word, but there's a group kind of culture emerging, particularly in our neighborhood that was really scary, because the normal, well what you and I would think of as very admirable behavior, became the accepted norm; not only the accepted norm, but if you didn't behave that way, you were ostracized, and remember one of the older guys in Graterford [Graterford Prison; Graterford State Correctional Institution, Graterford, Pennsylvania], this prison that I would go into periodically, we were talking about this and this guy looked like, you know, Mr. T, the guy who used to be on TV.  He looked like Mr. T on steroids.  I mean, he had huge biceps.  His biceps were the size of my chest.  And he was telling me that he was afraid of the young guys coming into the prison.  I said, you know, what really hurts people when I was out on the street, if you didn't give me your money, I'd hurt you.  But I'd hurt you 'cause I wanted you to give me the money and I knew if I didn't hurt you, I wasn't going to get that money, so I would F you up to get your money.  But if you gave me the money, that was it.  I got your money and that's all I needed, that's all I wanted, I'd leave you alone.  He said, these young guys, they will F you up just for the fun of f-ing up.  He said, first, he said, they'll F you up for the sake of f-ing you up, and then he said, no-no. They'll F you up for the fun of it.  He said, you know, for them it's all about a power trip.  It's not about your money.  If they get your money that's cool and that's nice.  But for them, it's all about the power trip.  It's not about the money with them, and they don't have any fear of consequences.  He said, you know, when I was doing this I was afraid about getting caught.  I was afraid of going to prison.  The fear wasn't weight enough to stop me from doing what I was doing, but I was aware of that possibility and I allowed for that possibility but I still engaged in criminality.  The young guys, they don't acknowledge that possibility.  It's just not part of their consciousness.  They don't think about tomorrow.  They just are in it for today, they want to have fun today.  Part of the fun is this ego trip, and that's as far as the thought process goes.
Speaker 2: That raises a juvenile court issue, too.  A lot of people, I mean so many youth, especially since the crack [crack cocaine] thing started in the late '80s [1980s] so many youth being tried as adults, now is there, it seems to subvert the whole reason of having juvenile court in the first place, because being a juvenile is, there's been actually some brain studies.  The juvenile brain really doesn't work like the adult brain (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Doesn't process info right.
Speaker 2: It doesn't process stuff, so you have like juveniles raising each other with a group compulsion to, for power and out in the street, and it's a whole new thing.
Speaker 1: It is a thing, and my understanding why it's being done, and I'm sympathetic to why it's being done.  I'm not sure if it makes a lot of sense.  It may be that the people are just so fed up and tired with the level of violence and what it's doing to our communities especially, so that they're at the point of saying I don't give a darn if this cat matures or not.  I just want to make sure that he's out of the neighborhood, and if that means incapacitating him in an adult facility through the criminal justice system, then do it.  And people are much more willing to exercise that option now.  In the end of, I don't know if it's counterproductive or not.  I can't really say.  I don't blame people who are doing it, 'cause I can sympathize with why they're doing it.  If I lived in those neighborhoods, I might be part of that voice, too.  I don't know.  It's not, it is a logical response in a sense, but in the long range sense, it's so inconsistent with the whole criminal justice concept, and you're only punishing people for what they're blameworthy or culpable for.  It doesn't make a lot of sense.  Driving home with my daughter the other day on the radio, I heard of this twelve-year-old kid who's on trial for killing both his grandparents, and I'm not sure what state that's in.  I want to say Texas (laughter) as it seems to me like all that stuff seems to center in Texas, but I'm not sure if it was Texas or where it was.  And I wanted to get her engaged in a dialogue about blame and is it right to take somebody that young, the kid's now fifteen, and it was right after she had played basketball and we got to talking about that, but I want to come back to her for that discussion, because I might be able to get some insights from her about that 'cause I'm not, it's troubling.  It doesn't make a lot of sense in one way and in another way it does make some sense.  I don't know what the answer is.
Story_ID: 283987
Speaker 1: Now there are two famous murder cases here in the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] area.  I don't know if you had any, probably, you probably don't have any direct association with either one of them but one is the case of Rubin "Hurricane" Carter that was released and then Mumia Abu-Jamal, who is still in jail is the celebrated case.
Speaker 2: Carter, I know of, that was actually [New] Jersey.  I know of that only because of our former colleagues, [H.] Lee Sarokin, was the judge in that case.  I've only seen parts of the movie ['The Hurricane'].  I wanted to see how much was real before I saw the movie.  I'm told both by the judge and by interviews I saw from Carter, that apparently it is very, very accurate.  Lee had been somebody who was on this court for about not more than maybe half a year and then he retired. He actually tried out for the role of the judge in the movie and he didn't get it.  He told me the reason he didn't get the part was because the director said he wasn't a convincing actor.  He didn't look like a judge.  He said, well wait a minute.  I'm the judge.  It was me.  The director said, I don't care.  You don't look like a judge (laughter).  So Telly Savalas [sic. Rod Steiger], I think got the part instead.  I think it was Telly Savalas.  Mumia, I know I don't know him well, but I knew him, so that's the case I--fortunately I remember keys from it.  It was an incredibly difficult case for a lot of reasons.  Evidentiary problems are there.  There are some problems with the trial.  I don't know if the problems were so great as to justify a new trial or not, but I do think there were some problems for the trial that may well have been the kind of problem we call harmless error.  I haven't followed it that closely.  What amazes me about it is the international backing, and I don't quite understand how this happened.  Basically, somebody who was on death row for having committed a homicide, I'm not certain he's given his side of the story other than to say that he's not guilty.  As I said, there's international ground swell around him.  I was in Ghana two years ago, and I remember seeing a poster in Ghana, Free Mumia.  I thought to myself, whoa, wait a minute.
Speaker 1: Yeah, every march in Chicago [Illinois] against police brutality has more Mumia posters and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I can't figure out how it happened.  I don't know if he's innocent or guilty.  I don't know if he should get a new trial or not.  But the whole phenomenon, it really amazes me.  I just don't understand it.
Story_ID: 283988
Speaker 1: One of the other issues I want to ask you about is television judges.  What do you think about the TV judges?
Speaker 2: You know what I see?  I see bits and pieces of them and I see, is it Carter [ph.] with his brother, Thaddeus [ph.] somebody or other--
Speaker 1: I know there's Joe Brown, there's Judge [Glenda] Hatchett, there's the famous one out of Detroit [Michigan]--
Speaker 2: This guy wrote a book recently, grew up in the projects.
Speaker 1: I think that's the one out of Detroit, oh gosh.  I just saw him yesterday.  I can't think of his name.
Speaker 2: Probably that's him.  You know, I've seen so little of them it's hard for me to tell.  One thing it doesn't show, it doesn't show you the hardest part of being a judge, and that is that cerebral exercise that I mentioned earlier of what I went through with (unclear) Miller is that third degree murder, is criminal manslaughter, criminally negligent manslaughter, and the kinds of sentencing issues that we get into.  From the little bit I have seen from the TV judges, not the televised trials, per se, I think that's a different kettle of fish.
Speaker 1: Judge Mathis [HistoryMaker Gregory Mathis]--
Speaker 2: That's it, you're exactly right.  It seems very, I guess animalistic.  I also think, I understand people have their own ways of expressing themselves, but I would like to think that at a certain level, there's kind of a uniformly accepted way of communicating and expressing yourself, and when I see that standard not being expressed, I think to myself, you know I wonder how much of this is just kind of feeding to the whole stereotypical black thing for sales purposes, and to play to an audience, how much of it is real.  That, I find that a bit off-putting.
Story_ID: 283989
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I guess school.  My two kids [Emilia McKee and Marisol McKee], my youngest daughter is still in school, my oldest daughter graduated from high school last year, and I really wish that my, that every kid had the same options that my kids have and that those options would be in the public schools, as opposed to paying for next year, it's [$]18,500 for my youngest daughter to go to tenth grade.  That's more than I paid for tuition for all three years of law school, and I had a scholarship at the university [Syracuse University College of Law, Syracuse, New York].  The university paid my tuition.  But, when we create a situation in a city where a large percentage, if not most of us who are black or Latino live, when we don't have the, I won't say it is a luxury, it is a luxury, but don't have the ability to use public schools and your access to education depends totally on how much money you bring home, and the kids' access to good education depends on how much money they bring home, the society will never get fixed.  We do have some very good public schools here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], but they're magnet schools, it's a competitive entry to get into them, they're high schools, and by the time the kid is old enough to compete for that exam, my guess is the damage is already done, and at the lower level although I think things are changing, and a lot of people are working on the problem, a lot of good people are working on the problem, at the lower level is where most of the education takes place.  It's almost like the vast wasteland that Minnow [ph.] talked about years ago with tunnel vision; that kids are simply not being prepared to compete with their more affluent cohort in another community, or even in their own community, and this obsession toward the SATs was a large part of that.  At any time I think a society can build itself around an intellectual endeavor that is so largely determined by the income of the person taking the exam, there's something very wrong with the educational system and the people running it.  Some schools are starting to confront that, but most of them are not because of this drive toward the U.S. News and World Report rankings.  Everybody wants to move up in the U.S. News and World Report rankings, even though most educators that I have spoken to, if not all of them, realize the ratings don't mean anything in terms of the quality of education.  What it does mean is the number of applications you get, because parents and students look at those damn ratings to decide where they're going to apply to school.  The bigger applicant pool you have, the more you can begin to get the kind of student body you want, so everybody's trying to maximize their applicant pool, which means U.S. News and World ratings.  One of the things they rate and look to is the SAT exams and the SAT exams of the entering freshmen for undergraduate school, all LSAT exams for law students, they may do the same thing for the MCAT for med students; I'm not sure how they read those.  So, there's this vicious circle, and it's now becoming a very large multi-million dollar a year industry, this whole thing of testing and moving further down that road, rather than retreating from that path.  That, I think, is a huge problem.  Because, I think, I don't think education is the answer.  I do think given our history that everybody could have a wonderful education and you still would have problems of race and caste and class in this society.  I think it was Thurgood Marshall, I remember reading him.  I didn't hear him say this, but he's reported to have said that even after office he was on the U.S. Supreme Court, he never had to look at the back of his hand to know that he was black (laughter).  I could understand what that's about.  I mean, it may surprised a lot of folks, but I'm sure it's not surprising to you, and it's not surprising to me.  (Laughter) Thurgood Marshall was incredibly well-educated and at the universal everyday level it still didn't make a difference to the extent that it should have. So, I think education is part of it, but there's an underlying class issue, part of which is education, but part of it goes beyond education.  Part of it is the old boys' network, which is why I alluded earlier to affirmative action, and affirmative action being so important, because now that I can begin to travel in a little bit more diverse circle and understand how the connections work and how the pedigree I referred to earlier works, if that ground entry thing is not broken, it's not going to change until black folks and Latino folks could have the same kind of pedigree, and we're not going to have the pedigree if it's just relying upon or primarily relying upon the kinds of exams that are so largely geared perhaps toward racial ethnic bias; I think that's there, but I don't understand the statistics well enough to be able to say that, but I do know the economic bias is there. I could see that in my own experience with the kids who can afford to pay for the Kaplan prep exams and other prep exams.  I read an article in The Wall Street Journal the other day about how much you can improve your SAT exam by taking a course like Kaplan.  If you can't afford to take that course, by definition, you're not going to do as well on the exam, unless you are an incredibly unique individual.
Story_ID: 283424
Speaker 1: Tell me, when you look back at everything that you've done so far, and you're still young by the standards that we use to interview usually, is there any major thing that you would do differently at this juncture?
Speaker 2: Hmm.  I don't think so.  Not within my power, no, ironically, but if it were in my power, I would have had a football team in high school [Wheatland-Chili High School, Scottsville, New York] and played high school football (laughter).  But, within my power--I don't think, I wish my dad [Clarence V. McKee] could have lived longer--but I don't think there's anything in my power that I would have done differently.
Speaker 1: Okay. What, do you have any ambitions beyond being a federal appeals court judge?
Speaker 2: No, I know I love my job, and I'm not, I'm realistic enough to know that this is probably the court that I'm going to end up my career with.  I'm not having illusions about U.S. Supreme Court, and I'm sure if, by some miracle, and it would be a miracle on a par with the bread and the fishes, and this would be a bona fide, certified miracle if I were ever to be nominated for the court.  I'm not sure it's anything that I would want because I'm content with my life, I love Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I have a very nice home that I'm happy with.  The quality of my life is something I'm content with and happy with.  I think all of that would change with the Supremes.  The quality of life issue, I think, I would be a real one for me.  The impact you'd have on the law is something that anybody offered that court would have to consider, I think, before saying no to it.  But, and for purely selfish reasons between my own dynamics with my kids [Emilia McKee and Marisol McKee] and my wife [Ana Pujols-McKee] and my community, it's not something that I would be very happy about getting.  The recognition would be nice.  Everybody would like that kind of recognition, I think, but beyond that kind of ego satisfaction, I don't think it would be a very good thing.
Story_ID: 283425
Speaker 1: Now, your parents [Etta Payne McKee and Clarence V. McKee], your father died while you were in high school [Wheatland-Chili High School, Scottsville, New York] or in college [State University of New York College at Cortland, Cortland, New York] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was out of college, between college and before I went to law school [Syracuse University College of Law, Syracuse, New York], he died.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, he had a chance to see you go to college and all that.
Speaker 2: He saw me graduate from college and actually was able to go there.  So many times, Dad couldn't be present for things 'cause if I was doing it when he was on the road, he couldn't take off and we were at the point where he could afford to lose the money that he would lose, 'cause he couldn't just take off one day.  If he missed a trip, he missed a week's worth of work.  So, his presence really turned serendipity really.  He was able to attend my college graduation.  I'm not sure if he attended my brother's graduation or not.  As I recall, I think he was on the road.  I'm pretty sure he was on the road, because I think my graduation was the first college graduation he had ever attended.  My brother's high school graduation, I'm almost certain he did end up taking off for that, but he just said I'm just going to take off from work, but for my graduation, he was actually home, for my high school graduation he was home for that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What does your brother do now?
Speaker 2: He's a lawyer.  He is not practicing any more, though, he's getting back into practicing.  He owned channel 13 [WTVT-TV] in Tampa [Florida] for a number of years.  His background is communications law.  He worked for Ben Hooks [HistoryMaker Reverend Benjamin Hooks] when Ben Hooks was at the FCC [Federal Communications Commission], and Butch, my brother, his name is Clarence [McKee], he's a junior but everybody calls him Butch, then went to work with a [Washington] D.C. firm and worked with a guy named George Gillett [Jr.], who had a lot of TV and radio stations.  My brother worked out a deal with him where he ended up purchasing channel 13 along with Gillett in Tampa; it's the, I think, NBC affiliate in Tampa, channel 13.  He sold that several years ago and he's been trying to put together another deal.  Deregulation has hurt him because everything now is consolidation.  Nobody's selling.  He was explaining to me that when there was a limit on the number of, a more aggressive limit on the number of stations that an entity could own before a big player bought a TV and/or radio station on the market, would often have to divest itself with something it owned someplace else.  He was in a position to go after those smaller deals.  But, with the area of consolidation, that's something he's basically by himself.  He's not part of a large corporate enterprise and he can't really compete with that.  He's now a vice president of a consulting legal firm in Miami [sic.] called, I think it's Ruden [McClosky Consulting, Fort Lauderdale, Florida] (unclear) I'd have to check that.  I just call it Ruden.  I just started that about four or five months ago.  Before that, he was really just president and CEO of his own company, McKee Communications [Inc.,], and trying to put together some deals on TV stations. He still is trying to do that.  He has one in Ghana, in fact, that he was looking at, that had moved pretty far toward fruition.  There was an election in Ghana, and I think between the election in Ghana and trying to put the financing together, it went on hold, but that's until something which is in the works, may or may not ever close.
Story_ID: 283426
Speaker 1: Well, speaking of Ghana, now you've been involved in training judges, I mean trial justices, in Ghana.
Speaker 2: Working with them in the Court of Ethics, it started out as something I did kind of as a volunteer on a vacation, a family vacation where we went to Ghana, and I just called some people and said I had already been to Moscow [Russia], and I called a woman that coordinated the Moscow trip for me and said, "You know, I'm going to be here.  Is there any way that I can take just part of my vacation,"--emphasizing that it is a vacation--"and do something to help out?"  And they ended up giving me this three-day itinerary where, in a way, I was sorry that I had volunteered, because they picked me up at eight in the morning and I was signed up from ten o'clock at night, they being the embassy people, and then I went back really totally with the state department [U.S. Department of State] without my family, with two other judges, Ann Williams [HistoryMaker Ann Claire Williams], who you probably know in Chicago [Illinois] in the Seventh Circuit, and Vicki Miles-LaGrange, who is a district court judge in Oklahoma, and we basically just put in a workshop for the Ghanaian judges dealing with judicial ethics, mediation arbitration, and automation.  The first time I went, I had an opportunity to see a traditional court, which was fascinating, because my family was able to go too.  The second time, they did take us to a traditional court, but it wasn't the same thing that I saw the first time.  The second time was more of a formalized mediation program.  The first time was just a traditional complete with drums and a totem, a judge who was sitting with a, who was the town chief, the village chief, sitting over the council of elders, the two parties coming and telling the story to the chief, the chief conferring with the elders and rendering decision.  It was absolutely incredible.  As I said, with the drums.  It was just amazing.  I'm sorry my colleagues didn't get to see it when we went back, 'cause they all said they wanted to see--we were calling it, I call it a tribal court, but it really is technically a traditional court is the better term for it.  We were saying we wanted to see a traditional court, and when they finally arranged it, it was just a very different thing.  It was still very interesting but it was not anywhere near the thing that I saw when I first went back and saw the gathering of elders with the chief.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was that the new chief justice was somebody that had a good, not a close relationship but a cordial relationship.  He's visited here.  He's been at our home and he's somebody I have a great deal of confidence in, Chief Justice [George Kingsley] Acquah, A-C-Q-U-A-H, I believe it is, and I think that he's going to do a lot with the Ghanaian Judiciary.  He's trying to modernize it to bring in reform, to get some of the corruption that is so problematic out of it, which we find that any third world country, I think with the conditions of them so bad.  I find, I saw it in Moscow; in fact, the chief justice of the Constitutional Court was lecturing the Council of Judges that I was making my presentation to about corruption within their ranks.  This was the cream of the judiciary in Russia.  He didn't get a very warm reception (laughter), so I just think it's an endemic problem and one of the reasons so many societies are so strung, they're looking for the U.S. is it's because it's something that we don't have a systematic problem with, and the judicial independence that is part of that is something that I think Ghana is very aware of and they're trying to build toward.  It's hard to do, but I think given time they'll get there.
Story_ID: 283427
Speaker 1: Now, your mother [Etta Payne McKee] is still alive, right?
Speaker 2: Mom is still alive.  She's eighty-eight, lives in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  She spends the weekend with us usually.  She's about ten minutes from us.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you have some children as well.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My youngest daughter is now fifteen, my oldest is eighteen.  She'll be, she just turned nineteen.  January was her birthday.  She just turned nineteen.  She's a freshman at Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  My youngest daughter is still a freshman in high school.
Story_ID: 283428
Speaker 1: Well, when you look back at everything you've done, as I said before, is there, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Hmm.  Boy.  I really am not even sure I have one.  I guess I do, but I'm not sure what it is.  I guess being in this court [U.S. Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] is part of a legacy, cause Higginbotham [A. Leon Higginbotham, Jr.] was here. [William H.] Hastie was the first black federal judge was here, and even Tim Lewis [Timothy K. Lewis], my immediate predecessor, who resigned and went into private practice, who is now making some money (laughter), some real money.  Tim was part of that legacy because Tim and Clarence Thomas were the only black judges that were appointed in twelve years of Republican administrations under two years of Bush I [President George Herbert Walker Bush] and then a year of [President] Ronald [Wilson] Reagan; I'm sorry, two years of Reagan and one year of Bush I at the appellate level, not the (unclear) but the appellate level.  That's my understanding, anyhow.  I think this is right.  There are only three appointments to the appellate judge, appellate courts.  Tim was one to this court.  The other one is Clarence Thomas twice; first in the [Washington] D.C. court and then to the [U.S.] Supreme Court.  So, in a sense, Tim is part of that legacy and he was really a dear colleague.  But I don't think of that in term of a legacy, I guess.  I just think about trying to do the best you can with the time you've got to do it in.
Speaker 1: Is there anything we haven't asked you that you want to--
Speaker 2: You know, it's like (unclear) the hardware store:  if they don't have it, you can get along without it.  If you haven't asked then it's probably not anything anybody needs to know about (laughter).  I can't think of anything.  My guess is later on something will come to mind, but yeah, I can't really think of anything.
Story_ID: 283429
Speaker 1: Our last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Hmm.  As I said, I guess somebody who tried to do the best that they could in the time they had to do it in, who tried to, who was aware of the importance of the quality of life for everybody, and tried to conduct himself in a way which helped other people and didn't just draw a paycheck.  I really think that when you get up in the morning, you've gotta be able to get up for some reason other than if you don't, you're not gonna get a paycheck.  You're gonna get a smaller paycheck.  I don't have to worry about that as a judge.  I am saying that metaphorically.  That I really do think that part of the meaning of life is living life in a way that makes life better for other people; be it your own immediate family, be it society at large, be it district community, and hopefully that's something that I will have been able to do.  It's the old saying, I guess, first do no harm, first don't mess anybody up.  Don't hurt anybody while you're here.  Some of my defendants watching this might look at that and scratch that and say, then why the hell am I in here, who put in prison.  But most of them even understand what the deal is.  I mean, they are very good about that but beyond not doing harm, I think it really is about trying to make life better for other people, so that when you end up checking out, you can look back and think that somebody other than just the oxygen and nitrogen cycle benefited from your presence.  There ought to be something that you've done while you're here other than putting nitrogen into the air and taking oxygen out of the air, (laughter), which we all manage to do from time to time, and hopefully that's something I will have been able to achieve.  I think about a lot of the Wizard of Oz, when he's giving out hearts to, he gives out a heart to, I mess this up, with the Tin Man.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And he says that the measure of the size of someone's heart is not how much you love, but how much you are loved by others.  I really think that's very true.  And hopefully, that's the way I could be remembered, as somebody who viewed, who measured their own endeavors, not by how much I think of other people, but by how much other people think of me within the confines of still doing my job no matter who that might have been, no matter who that might upset, which is sometimes not that easy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you very much, sir.
Speaker 2: Okay, well thank you.
