Story_ID: 99772
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines with The History Makers.  Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Would you state your name and spell it for me, please?
Speaker 2: Sure.  My name is Vanzetta Penn McPherson.  The first name is V-A-N-Z-E-T-T-A.  The second name, P-E-N-N.  And my surname is M-C, capital P, H-E-R-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Your date of birth?
Speaker 2: May 26, 1947.
Speaker 1: And the place of that birth?
Speaker 2: Montgomery, Alabama.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a lawyer and I retired on October 31, 2006 from the District Court here in Montgomery.  I was a federal magistrate judge.
Speaker 1: And tell me the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: We are on Martha Street in Montgomery, Alabama.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is March 19, 2007.
Story_ID: 99773
Speaker 1: All right.  We're gonna start with what I call People magazine-ish type questions.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, my favorite color is brown.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's not any particular shade of brown, just all shades of brown--tan, taupe, chocolate, caramel, sand, beige.  I just like earth tones.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about a favorite food?  What do you like to eat?
Speaker 2: Oh, don't ask that.  That's so revealing.  I love nuts.  I actually like peanuts.  I like caramel peanuts.  I--I eat mostly unsalted nuts now, but I love peanuts.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: I'm known to eat them green from the hull.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Pausing tape.  Okay.  Very good.  We're rolling again.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you go on vacation, what is your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination is Hilton Head, South Carolina.  We've been going there for a long time.  And I just like the tranquility of the island.  And, of course, it's very beautiful.
Speaker 1: It is.  What is your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's very easy, Christmas.  Very easy.  I'm a Christmas nut.  I'm not so nutty that I start decorating in October, but I'm nutty in that there's something in every room.  I love the colors of Christmas.  I love the fact that the colors of Christmas have expanded over the last twenty years.  It's not just red and green anymore.  I like the feeling of the season.  It's such a time of renewal.  It's not as much renewal as spring is for me, but it's a time of renewal.  It's a time of inspiration.  And it's a time for family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I enjoy it very much.
Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite saying or phrase?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And it's been with me since probably the beginning of my law practice back in 1978.  And the phrase is, "What you are is God's gift to you.  What you make of yourself is your gift to God."  I like that phrase because it forces you to focus on your part.  Because the eyes, the ears, the hands, the nose, the mouth, you didn't do that.  You really didn't even do mental capacity, or in many instances, physical capacity.  So it's what you make of what you already had, which is considerable in any particular case, that's your gift back.
Story_ID: 99774
Speaker 1: Let's begin by talking about your family.  Let's start on your mother's side.  How far back in your family tree can you go on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: I can go back to--and this is without any genealogical research my part.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: I can go back to the 1820s on my mother's, mother's side.  The oldest ancestor of whom I'm aware is a woman named Peggy Williams.  Peggy Williams was my mother's great-grandmother.  She obviously was born into slavery.  I did not know her.  Her daughter, Mary Sanders, Mary Williams Sanders I did know, my great-grandmother.  She was born in 1874.  My mother's family hailed from Lowndes County.  Both my mother's parents were from Lowndes County, Alabama, the county that's adjacent to Montgomery.  The county where The Black Panther Party was born.  Mary Sanders was born in 1874, a few years shy of official slavery.  Her daughter, Luvenia Sanders Gardner, was born in 1899, my grandmother.  Luvenia was Mary--was Mary's only child.  And, of course, Luvenia Gardner married my grandfather [Monroe James Gardner], thus my mother [Sadie Gardner Penn] was born in 1919.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you have a personal relationship with your grandmother?
Speaker 2: My grandmother and my great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I lived with my grandmother growing up until I was approximately ten.  My grandmother was--my great-grandmother, Mary Sanders, was eighty-four years old when she died in 1954.  She was--she used to say she was half Cherokee.  She obviously was a mixture of Cherokee.  You could look at her and see that.  A very stern, but gracious and kindhearted woman who favored boys.  Which means she favored my brothers.  She was a very church going woman.  And a woman given to the most wonderful sayings you could ever think of in your life.  She had a saying for everything.  She liked to cook.  She liked to quilt.  And I count myself extremely blessed that in my family we still have some of her quilts.  We called her "Sweet Mama."  As I said, she died in 1954 when I was seven years old.  She died of pneumonia.  I was present when she died.  The first person I had ever seen pass away.  And her passing was extremely peaceful.  And she knew she was passing.  On her deathbed just before she passed, she looked at my grandmother and said, "I'm leaving you now."  I'll never forget that.  I was a very young girl, but within twenty seconds she was gone.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: So I had a really good relationship with her.  She called me "Gal."  For some reason, she just called me "Gal."
Story_ID: 99775
Speaker 1: My grandmother, Luvenia Sanders Gardner, I had a very close relationship with.  She, as I said, was my primary caretaker until I was ten, along with my grandfather [Monroe James Gardner].  She was seventeen years old when she married my grandfather.  She was born and reared in Hayneville, Alabama--or Burkville, Alabama.  And she went to Tuskegee for one semester, Tuskegee University [Tuskegee, Alabama], it was Tuskegee Institute at the time.  And because she and my grandfather got married, she dropped out of college.  And I think there was a part of her that always regretted that she dropped out.  But in any case she and my grandfather had five children together.  One of whom died at three days old.  My mother was their second child.  One of the more fascinating things about my upbringing and I'll get back to it later I'm sure, is that two of the children whom my grandparents had, were mentally retarded at birth.  They were congenitally retarded.  It was not until I was an adult that we determined that my grandmother had toxemia during her pregnancies both times.  She--they were two girls [Wilma Gardner and Ceola Gardner].  She had them approximately one year apart.  One's birthday was October 16th, the other's birthday was October 17.  And they lived until they were in their 80s.  They just died in 2003 and 2004.  So for congenitally--congenitally retarded people born in 1921 and 1922, respectively, they had quite a lifespan.  But my grandmother was a very stern woman.  Very active, very lively woman, who had the most beautiful silver hair.  My earliest memories of her are of her silver hair.  She is the reason I do not dye my hair, because her hair it was so silver.  It was her crown, it was her glory.  And I always wanted her affections.  The story I never forget is that I wanted her to like me and love me so much that one morning I did something for the express purpose of gaining pity and therefore some affection.  I grew up in a house with wood stoves.  No central heat, just wood stoves.  There was a little wood stove in each room.  And therefore, only the room that had the stove burning was warm.  The other part of the house was cold.  So my grandparents heated all of the bedrooms and of course the kitchen was always heated.  But what we call the breakfast room, which is where we ate when everybody sat around the table, was not heated when it wasn't in use.  I got up early one morning and sat in the breakfast room deliberately for about an hour in just a gown and a negligee.  My grandmother found me sitting there shivering.  I thought that this little act on my part would--would engender the biggest display of pity and affection and "come here honey let me get you warm" that you could think of.  Instead I only incurred my grandmother's wrath.  When she saw me sitting there, she said, "You fool.  Why are you sitting here (laughter) in the cold?"  So from that point on, I never tried to engage in any machination to get her love.  I just accepted it as it came.  And it was fulsome as it was, I was just being greedy.  As kids are inclined to be.
Story_ID: 99776
Speaker 1: What are some of the things that your grandmother [Luvenia Sanders Gardner] taught you as a--as a young--young lady?
Speaker 2: Oh, my grandparents were strict in their upbringing and I'm so glad they were.  Because my parents [Sadie Gardner Penn and Luther Lincoln Penn] were too, and I have been, I think, a strict parent myself.  One of the things I remember as far as becoming a young lady is concerned is that my--is my grandmother's membership in the Missionary Society of her church.  My family has been Baptist and I've never known anyone in my family on either side to be anything other than Baptist.  My grandmother was a member of the Missionary Society of the Bethel Baptist Church here in Montgomery [Alabama].  And she and her Missionary Society members held, I think it was weekly meetings at their homes, Tuesday at four o'clock.  My job when she hosted the meeting was to serve.  My grandmother loved to cook.  She baked the most delicious cupcakes that you've tasted.  So she would bake cupcakes or something else for every meeting.  I would have to put the icing on, and I would have to serve.  We served on her silver tray.  So when it was time for the ladies to eat after they finished their Bible study, I had to bring the silver tray in, serve each lady, and as each lady took her cupcake or her cupcakes in some cases--
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: --I had to curtsy.  So I would serve each lady and curtsy.  And call that lady by name.  So I can almost go around the room now and say, "Good afternoon, Ms. Jen Wright [ph.]."  And then I'd curtsy, Ms. Jen Wright would take her--her cupcake.  "Good afternoon, Ms. Marcus."  And I would curtsy and she would take her cupcake.  My grandmother also taught me how to set a table.  We had a formal dining room and she had her china in her china cabinet, and she taught me how to set a table.  She taught me where to put the--the knives, the forks, the plates, the bread and butter plate, the glasses and all of that.  She was a very gracious woman.  And I learned a lot from her and my mother.  And I learned a lot from my grandfather too because he too was a gracious man and a thorough gentleman.
Story_ID: 99777
Speaker 1: Tell, me about your mother.
Speaker 2: My mother is a whole book.  She's probably three or four volumes.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).  Tell me her name.
Speaker 2: Her name is Sadie, S-A-D-I-E, Gardner, G-A-R-D-N-E-R, Penn.  She still lives.  She's eighty-seven years old.  She lives here in Montgomery [Alabama] within ten minutes of me.  She was widowed in 1980 when my father Luther Lincoln Penn passed away.  My mother grew up in this family that I just described.  And she was as I've said the second of five children.  The third child, Leo, died after three days.  Her older brother, whose name was William Monroe Gardner, died a few years ago at 71.  My mother had two younger sisters [Wilma Gardner and Ceola Gardner] whom I've just described as retarded.  Their retardation shaped her upbringing quite a bit.  They were born in 1921 and 1922 at a time when people simply didn't know what to do with retarded children.  There was no formal education for retarded children.  So my aunts went no further than the second grade in a public school.  My mother went to junior high school here in Montgomery at Loveless Junior High School.  When she graduated from Loveless Junior High School she went to Alabama State College Laboratory [High] School.  It was the laboratory school of what is now Alabama State University, a historically black college [HBCU] here in Montgomery that was founded in 1874.  She graduated from there in the 1940s.  And once she graduated she attended Alabama State College, where she received her bachelor's degree.  She ultimately received her Master's Degree in Education from that same institution.  Mother is a very, very strong-willed, determined and at times stubborn person.  And it's not necessarily stubbornness associated with age.  This has been a lifelong thing for her.  She's always been a leader.  She's always insisted that we, my two brothers and I, become leaders.  Some, I'm sure, regarded her during her upbringing as a pushy mother.  I never regarded her as a pushy mother, but I always regarded her as an insistent mother, someone who had very high expectations.  She named me Vanzetta because during the year that I was born, it was during a time when Alabama had separate everything by race.  One of the things that was separated was--or segregated, was an annual academic competition involving high school students.  I wish I knew the name of it, but I don't.  The young girl who won that year, the black academic competition which according to my mother's story about it was held in Mobile [Alabama], was named Vanzetta.  She had never heard that name before.  But she gave me that name with full plans that I would exceed or surpass her, this other Vanzetta, academically.  And that's how my name came about.  Mother went on to teach very early.  And she became within three years I think of graduating from--with her master's, a Jeanes Supervisor.  Jeanes Supervisors were black females who essentially supervised black principals and teachers throughout the South.  They were called Jeanes Supervisors as a result of the Anna T. Jeanes Foundation, J-E-A-N-E-S.  Anna T. Jeanes was a Pennsylvania Quaker woman.  Who came South to teach and became an education missionary.  And my mother along with a number of her friends became Jeanes Supervisors.  And as a Jeanes Supervisor in Shelby County, Alabama which is the county immediately south of Birmingham, Alabama.  Mother reigned supreme.  And my father was a high school principal in Shelby County.  Principal of Prentice, P-R-E-N-T-I-C-E, High School there for over ten years.  Mother was a Jeanes Supervisor in Shelby County for ten years.  She had all three of her children while she was in that position.  And she was a role model of sorts for being able to leave your three or four month child and go back to work, confident that your child would not die or otherwise become so deprived that something horrible would happen.  I was born in 1947.  My older brother Ojeda, O-J-E-D-A, was born in 1943.  And my younger brother, Wilbur, W-I-L-B-U-R, was born in 1954.
Story_ID: 99778
Speaker 1: My grandmother passed away very suddenly from a heart attack, Luvenia Sanders Gardner, on March 7, 1957.  My parents [Sadie Gardner Penn and Luther Lincoln Penn] were still working in Shelby County, but when my grandmother died, my brothers and I were living with my grandparents here in Montgomery and going to school at what we affectionately call Lab High, the same school my mother graduated from, Alabama State College Laboratory High School.  When my grandmother passed away, essentially we lost our axis.  We had my grandfather [Monroe James Gardner] still, but my grandfather was a very busy man.  And in 1957 being a house husband was the farthest thing from any man's imagination, much less my grandfather.  My aunts [Wilma Gardner and Ceola Gardner] were there, but as I said they were both retarded.  So while they were adults, they could not and did not exercise the kind of authority that parenthood required.  So mother left her job as a Jeanes Supervisor in Shelby County and moved back to Montgomery.  My parents maintained a home here, one that they had built in 1954.  So we then moved into our house that we had occupied before that time only on the weekends.  And my father left his job as a principal in Shelby County and moved here in 1960.  And my parents both taught in junior high and high school here in Montgomery, Alabama until they both retired.  Mother was extremely active in any number of things.  She would--is a member of Sigma Gamma Rho Sorority.  She ultimately became president of the Montgomery chapter of the American Association of University Women.  She belongs to the League of Women Voters.  She was a member of the Optimist Club [Optimist International].  She eventually came--became president of the Montgomery chapter of that organization.  She belongs to the Camellia Garden Club.  She belongs to the Phi Delta Kappa Education Sorority.  She directed the Bible school at our church for at least ten years before she decided that she would stop last year.  Of course, it remains to be seen whether she truly has stopped.  In 1989, approximately nine years after my father died mother was afflicted with neuropathy.  That was very sudden.  No one knows to this day where it came from.  Her upper body muscles began to weaken, and she began to lose feeling in her lower limbs.  By 1993, she was confined to a wheelchair after going through a procession of ambulatory aids.  First she used a cane.  Then she used a tripod for approximately a few months.  Then a walker for about a year or two.  Then a rolling walker.  It really was a gradual process and she hated the onset of disability.  She's been confined now to a wheelchair for approximately fourteen years.  But, of course, the wheelchair is motorized.  Which means that she travels along at a speed of about five miles an hour, which is speeding.  And she absolutely refuses to allow anybody to adjust the speed.  So she goes pretty much where ever she wants to go.  She's still very mobile, though she's not ambulatory.  And about three years ago, she began experiencing memory loss.  She has so many people around her, however, who remember just about everything that she does, that we can easily substitute when she loses her place.
Story_ID: 99779
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your mother [Sadie Gardner Penn] share any stories about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  She shared stories about being picked on because she was a smart girl in class.  And her older brother's protection of her.  Willie, as they called him, his name was William.  She has shared stories with me about becoming a [Jeanes] Supervisor in a county during segregation.  And what it felt like to be an African American professional woman during that time.  One of the more poignant stories that both my parents shared with me repeatedly during my upbringing, poignant in that it is memorable and that it is sad.  When my parents [Sadie Gardner Penn and Luther Lincoln Penn] were educating themselves, Alabama was so thoroughly segregated that it along with some other southern states, would actually pay African Americans to go out of state for terminal degrees--law degrees, medical degrees, Ph.D.'s, such that no one, no African American Alabamian, who has a Ph.D. or a law or medical degree, who is over the age of seventy or perhaps even sixty secured that degree in Alabama.  My parents desperately wanted the Ph.D. degree.  They desperately wanted the terminal degree.  Because of family circumstances, however, neither could afford to leave Alabama to secure the degree.  So one of my mother's sad stories and one of my father's sad stories is that racism prevented in a very tangible, tellable way them from securing their terminal degrees, because they couldn't drive the fifty miles to Auburn [University in Auburn, Alabama] or the eighty-two miles to Alabama [Alabama State University in Montgomery, Alabama] to secure those degrees.  A related story is this, my parents worked on their master's degrees during the initial years that they worked in Shelby County, Alabama.  Montevallo, M-O-N-T-E-V-A-L-L-O, is the small town where they lived in Shelby County.  In Montevallo, at that time, was Alabama College.  Alabama College was a segregated four year state supported institution for women.  It is now the University of Montevallo and it has become co-ed.  But at that time it was a four year all women's state supported college.  The house that my family--my parents purchased in Montevallo and lived in during the time they worked at Shelby County, was approximately a ten minute drive from Alabama College.  Montgomery is sixty-five miles from Montevallo. When my parents wanted to use the library, they had to get in their car and drive sixty-five miles to Montgomery, Alabama to Alabama State College to use its library, rather than drive ten minutes to Alabama College to use its state supported library.  That's one of the sad stories.  I don't know what impact that has on someone's psyche because I have not personally experienced that.  But I'm very sure that it has a permanent impact.
Story_ID: 99780
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's talk about your father.  And you told me his name was Luther Lincoln?
Speaker 2: Penn.
Speaker 1: Penn.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Actually when he was born his name was Theodore, but he hated that name.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: I don't know that I blame him, but he hated that name.  At the age of twelve he had it officially changed to Luther.  Daddy was born on May 29, 1912 in Bullock County, B-U-L-L-O-C-K.  Bullock County is adjacent to Montgomery County here in Alabama.  To Sydney Washington Penn and Ella Pickett Penn.  He was his parents' eldest child.  They had five children.  My father grew up and had a very normal upbringing as a little boy.  I don't know very many stories about his childhood because he never told me that many stories about childhood other than the friends he made.  His nickname was "Sport."  And all of his family called him Sport.  And his family that's left still calls him Sport.  And if you want to know anything about him, all you'd have to do is go to Bullock County and say Sport.  The Penns didn't migrate very much.  So Bullock County is still full of Penns.  As a matter of fact, I have a cousin, Myron Penn, who is in the Alabama Senate now.  And we all hail at least for my purposes, paternally from Bullock County. Daddy had two sisters and two brothers.  And when he graduated from high school, my--my grandfather on my father's side Sydney Washington Penn was a--was a minister, a Baptist minister.  My grandmother was a housewife.  I don't know of anything that either of my grandmothers ever did outside the home.  They were both housewives.  When my father graduated from high school, he went to Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama].  And his work-study job at Tuskegee was working in the laboratory of George Washington Carver.  That is what he did for his work-study job.  I wish he'd stayed at Tuskegee so he could have done that for four years.  He would have developed a relationship with George Washington Carver and maybe by now some of this art around here would include one of George Washington Carver's famous paintings.  But alas he left after his second year at Tuskegee because he was drafted into World War II.  He served for two years in the United States Army.  He never went abroad.  He never fought in World War II because this very persistent, determined, stubborn person whom I previously described, otherwise known as my mother [Sadie Gardner Penn], had the temerity to make a telephone call to his commanding officer when she learned that his unit was about to be shipped abroad, to beg that he be allowed to stay.  How she managed to pull it off, I'll never know.  But she pulled it off.  And she did this without his knowing it.  So I don't know what his macho went through during that time.  But she loves to tell the story.  We've never been able to document it, but on the other hand I have no reason to doubt it.  She tells the story that the whole unit that was shipped abroad perished.  So she takes credit for not just saving him from going, but saving his life.
Story_ID: 98449
Speaker 1: Before we go on talking about your father [Luther Lincoln Penn], I'd like to go back and talk about your great-grandparents because you said that you do know their names.
Speaker 2: On my father's side?
Speaker 1: On your father's side.
Speaker 2: All right.  My grand--my father's parents were Ella Pickett Penn and Sydney Washington Penn.  My grandfather, Sydney, and we called him "Granddaddy Sydney," was born to Sydney Penn and Larcenia Penn, L-A-R-C-E-N-I-A.  My father's sister, Larcenia, is named for her grandmother.  I did not know my great-grandmother, Larcenia.  By the time we began visiting my grandparents in Union Springs, Alabama, which is in Bullock County, my great-grandmother had passed away.  But I knew my great-grandfather, Sydney Penn, very well.  We called him "Papa Sydney" as opposed to "Granddaddy Sydney."  By the time I knew him, however, he was an old man.  He lived alone.  He was talkative but crotchety.  And I didn't get to learn much about him or talk one on one with him very much at all.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: But I did know him.  He lived until I was a little under ten.  And I enjoyed the fact that I knew him.  I enjoyed the fact that we could go back that far.  My grandmother's parents, my grandmother, Ella Pickett Penn's parents, I did not know my great-grandmother.  I knew my great-grandfather, Bill Pickett, her father.  But as was the case with my great-grandfather on my grandfather's side, by the time I knew Papa Bill, he too was on old man.  So I remember him.  I remember what he looks like.  I remember how tall he was.  How big he was.  But I never got any stories from him because he was on old man by the time that I knew him.  My grandparents lived in their own home in Union Springs and when we would visit them about twice a month, we'd go to their house.  And my grandmother was distinguished when I was a child by the fact that she made the best iced tea.  She just made the best iced tea.  And she had a number of antiques in her house.  I didn't know when I was little girl that they were antiques.  I learned and appreciated when I got to college that they were antiques.  My grandmother on my father's side and I corresponded in writing when I was in college and I enjoyed that.  By that time my maternal grandmother [Luvenia Sanders Gardner] had passed away.  But I enjoyed my correspondence with her.  I was always a bit shy around her, unlike the case with my maternal grandmother.  And I remember going to her house once when I was in college and as soon as I got there, I missed a clock.  It was a regulator pendulum that she had on the mantle of one of the bedrooms.  I asked her what had happened to it.  She told me the saddest story.  She said, "Baby, I didn't know you wanted that clock.  A man came by here looking for stuff to buy and he came in and looked at my clock and asked--told me he'd give me $20.  And I sold it to him."  I determined from talking to her later that it was a white peddler.  I surmised that he knew exactly how much that clock was worth, and my grandmother did not know.  And she, as a result of that, alienated what was probably a 2- or $300 clock for $20.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: She was a fulsome woman.  Very fulsome, very lively.  A real preacher's wife.  Very Christian woman.  Very lax.  More lax than my maternal grandmother.  And it could be because she hadn't been charged with the task of rearing us.  When we visited her, we could get anything out of her we wanted.  In fact, she would scold my parents [Sadie Gardner Penn and Luther Lincoln Penn] for scolding us.  And so visiting her was a favorite time.  She kept an immaculate house.  And her house was always very interesting.  Because things were in their place.  And it had a certain smell to it.  And it was always the smell of warm food.  When she passed away in 1974, the year I had my son and the year I graduated from law school [Columbia Law School in New York City, New York], it was a sad time.  Sad time indeed.
Story_ID: 98450
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your grandparents and great-parents own the land that they lived on?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  I have never--I never lived in rented property until I went to graduate school [Columbia University] in New York [New York City, New York] and had to rent an apartment.  Before that time I always lived in--in homes that my parents [Sadie Gardner Penn and Luther Lincoln Penn] and grandparents owned.  As I just said, my parents in Union--my grandparents in Union Springs [Ella Pickett Penn and Sydney Washington Penn] owned their home on Locke Avenue in Union Springs.  It was a--for the time, a big house.  It had three bedrooms, a living room, dining room, kitchen, bathroom, back porch, front porch.  It was just an old southern home.  And we loved it.  My grandparents on my mother's side [Luvenia Sanders Gardner and Monroe James Gardner] owned their own home.  As a matter of fact, my mother has told me that they bought that house in 1920 and they bought it for $500 and she and my uncle, my Uncle Willie, were charged with walking downtown, the first Saturday of every month to Bear Lumber Company to carry the payment for the house.  Fred Bear the--is or was a man who was from a quite prominent family here in Montgomery [Alabama].  And his family owned a lumber company.  And my mother and my uncle would walk every first Saturday to carry the payment.  By the time I was born the house had long since been paid for.  But it too was a grand old southern house.  Living room, dining room, kitchen, bath, three bedrooms, and a central hall.  I loved that house.  And I was very sad when it was torn down as a result of urban renewal.  Now for the first, oh, six or seven years of my life, that house did not have indoor plumbing, so we used an outhouse.  I'm really very glad that I had that experience.  I used to hate the idea of the outhouse.  But throughout my adulthood I have become increasingly grateful for that experience because it broadens your horizons.  It helps you understand what people go through and how people live.  The--the house had a bathroom, a room set aside as the bathroom and it had a sink in it.  But because there was no indoor plumbing, nothing worked.  So it was the room where my older brother went to play whist.
Story_ID: 98451
Speaker 1: Okay.  You--you said you had a story that you can share about your grandparents and how they met.
Speaker 2: Oh, my grandparents.  My maternal grandparents--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --met in Lowndes County [Alabama].  Both of them were from Lowndes County.  And we always thought that my grandparents maybe related because my grandfather's family is a family of Gardners.  That is my mother's [Sadie Gardner Penn] maiden name.  And as a matter of fact, I have a photograph of my grandfather and his nine brothers.  My grandfather's parents Monroe James Gardner, and Sylvia Gardner had twenty children.  Two sets of twins.  Evenly divided, ten girls, ten boys.  And my great-grandmother, Sylvia Gardner, didn't lose a child, which is unbelievable for that time.  Because my grandfather [Monroe James Gardner] was born in Burkville in 1892.  He was the fifth brother.  I'm not sure what the--what his order is in the whole family.  But he was the fifth brother.  And he and my grandmother met in what they loosely called "downtown" one day when he went with his father shopping.  And he claims, or claimed all the time, that it was instant.  That this woman was just beautiful and he just fell in love with her right away.  And he courted avidly.  He courted enough for her to leave Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama].  So it must have been a--a really true courtship.  I loved their relationship.  She called him "Red," he called her "Lu."  Her name was Luvenia [Luvenia Sanders Gardner]. And they had a very loving relationship.  And needless to say, because they were 1800s people, their gender roles were strictly divided and never crossed.  My grandfather couldn't boil water.  And my grandmother didn't know how to do anything mechanical.  She was a strong woman physically, but she just didn't know how to do anything mechanical.  But I loved their union.  And I loved observing it.  And he was--she was charged with spanking the kids.  But if it was grave situation, he came in as reinforcement.  He spanked me one time in my life.  I will never forget that, it was just awful.  It wasn't that hurt that bad, it's just that my feelings were so hurt because my grandfather spanked me.  And I knew that it meant I had done something really wrong.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You talked about one of your grandparents being Cherokee Indian (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: My great-grandmother, Mary Sanders.
Speaker 1: Great-grandmother.  Were there any other Indian or mixtures in your family that you know about?
Speaker 2: Well, no, there's no other Indian mixture that I know about.  But I do know that my grandfather, Monroe James Gardner's, grandfather [Penn's great great-grandfather] was white.  So that my great-grandfather Monroe James Gardner, for whom he was named, had a white father.  My mother's ancestors are all very pale.  And my mother's cousins are all pale.  I'm not aware of any whites in--among my paternal ancestry.  My father was himself a very dark man and all of his relatives whom I knew including his ancestors were dark.  I believe, now that you bring it up, I believe that my Papa Sydney [McPherson's paternal great-grandfather, Sydney Penn], my great-grandfather on my father's side, was a--a mixture.  And the likelihood is that it too was Cherokee because Cherokee and Creek populate the south central portion of Alabama.  He was a caramel colored man with straight hair, which could only have come from another race.  And therefore I believe he probably had some--some Indian ancestry as well.
Story_ID: 98452
Speaker 1: Now, share the story about how your mother [Sadie Gardner Penn] and father [Luther Lincoln Penn] met.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, how they met.  My mother left Alabama State [College, now Alabama State University in Montgomery, Alabama] after two years.  When my mother graduated from the two year college, from two years of college in the 1940s, people were allowed to teach with two years of college.  They were not required to have four years.  And I don't know whether that was both black and white or just black, but I know that blacks were allowed to teach after two years.  So when she got her two year degree, she found a job in Bullock County [Alabama], my father's home county.  It so happened that when she went there to teach, my father had already gotten his two year degree and was the principal of a school in Macon County.  They met through a cousin of my father's whose name was Douglas Bethune.  Douglas now lives in Detroit, Michigan.  Mother likes to tell the story that it was Douglas who was really interested in her.  And that on some family event Douglas invited her to the family event.  And introduced her to my father, his cousin.  Douglas's parents, Sheffield [ph.] and Ernest Bethune [ph.], lived across the street from my grandparents, my father's parents [Sydney Washington Penn and Ella Pickett Penn].  So they--they were cousins and they grew up very close together.  So my mother met my father at a family event.  And she insists that she liked him from the very--well that she did not like him at the beginning because she thought he was haughty.  He doesn't tell a similar story.  But he never has--he never did say before he died that he was star struck or that it was love at first sight.  So I suspect that each regarded each other--the other from a distance at first.  And they just grew together.  She tells the story and I--I--as I recall he always agreed that they had a talking relationship before they actually fell in love.  They talked.  And talked quite a bit.  That story is buttressed by the fact that throughout their lives they talked.  They could communicate, very, very well with each other.  And did.
Story_ID: 98453
Speaker 1: Now, you were born in 1947?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And the house that you described earlier, do you remember the address?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  The house that--that my grandparents [Luvenia Sanders Gardner and Monroe James Gardner] lived in?
Speaker 1: No, the one that you (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: That I grew up in?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: My mother [Sadie Gardner Penn] still lives there.
Speaker 1: Oh, does she?
Speaker 2: It's 2228 Chappell Drive now.  It was street at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it's C-H-A-P-P-E-L-L, 2228 Chappell Street.
Speaker 1: Tell, me about the neighborhood and the people who lived in the neighborhood (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, I can tell you about the neighborhood.  Alabama State College Laboratory [High] School was located--is located or was at the time on the east side of town.  We lived on this side of town which is the west side of town.  My grandfather took us to school every morning, but every afternoon I road home on the bus.  The back of bus until 1956.  When I got off the bus, I walked one, two, three blocks home.  When I turned the corner of Hill and Chappell Street, my grandparents lived at 431 Chappell Street.  When I turned the corner of Chappell Street, I was on my block.  My grandparents lived three houses from the end of the block.  And therefore, as I walked up the street I had to speak to everybody on either side of the street.  Because in those days people sat on their front porches in the afternoon.  I can still tell you the names of all the people on the street.  So as I went up the street it was, "Good afternoon, Ms. McBride [ph.]. How are you doing, Ms. Simms [ph.]?  How you doing, Ms. Dubose [ph.]?  Hello, Ms. Brown."  Mr. and Mrs. Hamilton also sat on the porch together.  "Good afternoon Mr. and Mrs. Hamilton.  How are you doing, Ms. Poole [ph.]?"  Then there was an empty lot.  "How you doing, Ms. Geri [ph.]?  How are you doing, Ms. Shelley [ph.]?  And then I got to my house.  Everyday, when you do that everyday at five, six, and seven, you never forget it.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: That was the street.  My parents [Sadie Gardner Penn and Luther Lincoln Penn] built their home in 1954 as I just said, down the street from my grandparents.  When my grandfather bought his house, for which my uncle and my mother went to pay the mortgage every month, he also bought a whole block down the street from him.  Still on Chappell Drive, but in the next block.  The first lot was the lot which was on the corner of Hill and Chappell that my parents ultimately built their home on, where my mother still lives.  My grandparents gave my parents that lot for their tenth anniversary.  Adjacent to that lot, my grandfather built a rental house which was 2222 Chappell Street.  Adjacent to that house he built another rental house, which was 2216 Chappell Street.  He sold the other three lots ultimately.  By the time I was born, he had sold the other three lots.  So that's how my parents came to own their house, my grandfather gave them the lot for their tenth anniversary.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: And on it, they built a house in 1954.  A big rambling two-story white house.
Story_ID: 98454
Speaker 1: The people that lived in the neighborhood, what type of--of professions were they and what--what type of jobs did they have?
Speaker 2: Oh, as befits the time, the men were laborers and the women were domestics.  Especially the older women.  Some of the younger women had hourly wage jobs.  There were, as I recall, five or six teachers who lived in my neighborhood as I was growing up.  Their husbands--five or six female teachers.  I did not know any male teachers who lived in my neighborhood as I was growing up.  In fact, now that I think about it, there were more than five, there were closer to ten or eleven teachers.  One of the most wonderful things about segregated housing is that everybody has to live next door to everybody else.  So if you are a doctor, you don't necessarily live next door to a doctor.  You can live next door to a truck driver.  Who in turn could live next door to a meat packer.  Who in turn could live next door to a drunk.  Who in turn could live next door to a family on welfare and the next house could be the house of a lawyer.  Segregated housing integrated the community by class.  And that's a phenomenon that's awful--that's often lost when people write about segregated housing.  It's a phenomenon often lost when people write about segregated education.  Because the class integration during racial segregation was complete.  And therefore, different attitudes developed about other people and their worth.  So that when I grew up, no one was less than anybody else because people lived next door to you, those were your neighbors.  So you didn't as readily form these class prejudices that people form now.  But you didn't ask me that.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) that's fine.
Speaker 2: What you asked me about was the neighborhood.  It consisted mainly of working people.  Everybody worked.  Men and women worked.  Except my grandmother [Luvenia Sanders Gardner], and there were maybe three or four other people, Ms. Brown [ph.], Ms. Hamilton [ph.], Ms. Poole [ph.] they were housewives.  But the other women worked.  And they got up and went to work every day.  Two women in particular I remember.  Mary Crowe, C-R-O-W-E, and Katie Reese [ph.].  Ms. Crowe and Ms. Reese were domestics.  They were typical domestics of the time.  They were women in their late 40s, early 50s who left and walked to the bus stop everyday.  Rode the bus to their white employer's homes.  Occasionally, occasionally, the white female of the household would bring them home in the afternoon.  More often than not, each would also walk home from the bus.  And they would leave empty handed and they would return laden with stuff.  Probably food, clothes, or other things that had been given to them by their white employers.  Each woman, wore heels and stockings.  I don't mean stilettos.  But they wore these sel-- selby shoes (laughter) and stockings and hosiery to work everyday.  Neither wore a uniform.  Each reared the children in the household and each was apparently well-loved by the members of their respective households.  Each lived to a ripe old age.  Each was a member of her church, a functioning member of her church.  Neither was embarrassed about being a domestic.  And neither did anyone else look askance at either of them for being domestics.  That's just what they did.
Story_ID: 98455
Speaker 1: Did your parents [Sadie Gardner Penn and Luther Lincoln Penn] tell you any stories about the Montgomery Boycott, bus boycott?
Speaker 2: My parents didn't tell me any stories about it, but I lived through the boycott.  So my knowledge of the boycott is first hand.  My--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were you--how old were you?
Speaker 2: I was eight years old.
Speaker 1: Eight.
Speaker 2: When Rosa Parks refused to give up her seat on the bus.  It was December of 1955--
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: --and I had turned eight that previous May.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My parents were then still working and living in Shelby County [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Shelby.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Coming to Montgomery only on the weekends.  I was very familiar with--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the bus situation.  Because as I said my brother and I, my older brother, Ojeda and I went to Lab High [Alabama State College Laboratory High School] which was located on the campus of Alabama State University.  Both of us went to nursery kindergarten there and stayed there until we graduated from high school.  So I've only gone to three schools in my entire life.  We went there from age 2 through age 18, so we rode the bus home everyday.  So I was very familiar with getting on the bus and moving to the back of the bus beyond the little sign that--that said "whites only."  When the boycott occurred, my grandfather [Monroe James Gardner] then had to carry--not only carry us to school, but pick us up during the boycott and that's what happened for a whole year.  So I watched those things developed.  I was an eight year old child.  I wish I had been older.  I'm happy that I witnessed the boycott firsthand, but I wish I had been older because I didn't appreciate what was happening at the time, the way that I do now.  I have a best friend who is three years younger than I, she has a greater appreciation for the boycott because her aunt was a very active member of the Montgomery Improvement Association [MIA].  Neither of my grandparents was involved in that organization.  So I did--my fingers weren't in it.  I was a part of it because I was a bus rider and because I lived here, but my friend Delores is--is very, very knowledgeable about the boycott.
Speaker 1: When we were talking about the women who were domestics in your neighborhood, during that time you said occasionally their employers would bring them home, did they pick them up or did they ride with the black people who had cars to take people to and from work?
Speaker 2: No, they picked them up.  You mean during the boycott?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  White females were frequent visitors to our community during the boycott because they then had to pick their domestics up and bring them home.  And, of course, the domestic rode in the back.  It was a chauffeur situation.  We didn't realize at the time that it was a chauffeur situation because they rode in the back because they couldn't ride up front with the driver.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: If you've seen the movie "Long Way Home" it very accurately depicts the domestic employer relationships in Montgomery.
Speaker 1: Do you think the reason--well was it a main reason that the white people would pick up their domestics just because they needed them to work or did they have sympathy for what was going on or concern--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --for what was going on?
Speaker 2: I think the prevailing reason was that they needed them to work.  I think the prevailing reason was that they wanted them to work.  Erase the word need.  The domestics by and large weren't doing anything that the female heads of households couldn't do.  More often than not these white females were not employed outside the home.  So what the domestics did was what women do now in the home.  They cooked.  They took care of children.  They cleaned.  They answered the--the telephone.  They took messages.  They washed.  They did laundry.  Any woman can do that.  Having an African American domestic in the '50's [1950s] and '60's [1960s] was a status symbol.  So you had them not necessarily because you were in such need of household help, you had them because it was proper to have them.  And they reared your children because that was just something you didn't want to do.
Story_ID: 98456
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now tell me about school [Alabama State College Laboratory High School].
Speaker 2: My school?
Speaker 1: Elementary school.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: I went to school at age two.  And thus began a wonderful association with a delightful little lady named Willette, W-I-L-L-E-T-T-E, McGinty, M-C-G-I-N-T-Y. Willette McGinty was 4 feet, 11 inches tall.  My older brother, Ojeda, had already withstood her tutorage.  Ms. McGinty helped--I don't know how many families rear their children.  She was the nursery kindergarten teacher at Alabama State College [now Alabama State University in Montgomery, Alabama], what we now call early childhood.  She single-handedly managed the forty or so children who attended that nursery kindergarten.  We had a unisex bathroom.  We got there at 7:30 or 8:00 in the morning.  We raced to get the big red bicycle.  There were others, but everybody wanted the big red one.  We had gingersnaps--yes gingersnaps and orange juice promptly at nine.  Playtime until 9 o'clock.  After gingersnaps and orange juice, was story time.  And at 12, nap and lunch.  The lunch was from a hot kitchen.  And Bebop [ph.] who was a man, whose real name we never knew, drove a Jeep.  He was an employee at Alabama State.  He bought the orangeade and the milk.  So when we heard Bebop's Jeep, we all ran to the door.  Bebop gave us the orangeade and the milk.  We sat down, we had lunch and for the next, oh, maybe an hour or so lunch and nap.  Lunch took about half an hour and then you napped for half an hour.  You had to bring your own rug.  And there were cots, and you had to bring your own sheets.  And you laid your sheet out and you put your rug down by your bed.  You said your prayers.  You got it on the cot went to sleep.  And you had to go to sleep.  And Ms. McGinty would wake you up and then it was time for song.  And so it was then songs and music and by that time it was 2:30 or 3, it was time to go home.  So I spent the first three years of my formal education doing that.  A delightful time.
Story_ID: 96932
Speaker 1: Tell me about some of the teachers in her elementary school [Alabama State College Laboratory High School in Montgomery, Alabama].
Speaker 2: Okay.  First let me set my elementary--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and high school for you so that--that what I'm going to say has more meaning.  Lab High was a private school.  And therefore the classes were very small.  I don't know that I ever had a class larger than 32 or 3 students.  More often than not it was--it hovered around 30, which by today's standards is a big class, but in those days it was not necessarily a big class.  So the first grade was, the first grade.  There was only first grade, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth teacher.  The same rule applied in high school.  There was only one tenth grade.  One eighth grade.  And so anybody who was in the eighth grade was a classmate of everybody else in the eighth grade.  When I went to school first through sixth grade stayed in the same room all day and the same teacher taught all the subjects.  I don't know how they do it now, but that's the way it was done when I was growing up.  Therefore, one had extended exposure to the same teacher.  Your teacher in the first grade was your teacher.  She was your reading, social studies, and anything else teacher.  Because Lab High was a private school, another aspect of my education that has to be emphasized was that we weren't as wed to the State Department's [U.S. Department of State] rules.  I didn't learn this until I started talking with my best friend, Delores.  So therefore, we spent a fair amount of time in art, music, painting, coloring, drawing, play acting, and so forth.  We thought it was part of the curriculum, our teachers made it a part of the curriculum.  So in the fourth and fifth grade we had a flutophone band.  You know what a flutophone is?  It's a little white piccolo looking thing that a nine year old can play.  We also had a rhythm band throughout elementary school.  Now because we were a private school and not a public school, we lacked one big thing that the public had and that was a cafeteria.  Everybody at Lab High brought his lunch every day for twelve years.  There was no cafeteria.  So you developed a real relationship with your teachers.  But even more important, you developed a real relationship with your classmates because they tended to stay your classmates.  So quite unlike my son's experience or the experience of kids today, I started school at age two with Ms. [Willette] McGinty with several other students.  Among them four people who went to school with me until we all graduated from high school.  So there are now five people, at least in my class, who went to school together from nursery school through high school.  Three of those people here--are here in Montgomery [Alabama] now.  The fourth lives in Palo Alto, California.  But there is nothing we don't know about each other.  There is nothing we wouldn't share with each other.  And needless to say there's nothing we wouldn't do for each other.
Story_ID: 96933
Speaker 1: Now back to the teachers.  Every one of them had her own significance.  I was taught by all women until, oh, ninth grade, ninth or tenth grade when we began to branch off into subjects.  Until then they were all women.  They were all women who were in the strict tradition of teaching.  They were all women fiercely dedicated to the profession of teaching.  Every single one of them had a master's degree.  Every single one of them save one, no two, were married to men who were similarly educated, which informed their strictness and their expectations.  Cleonia Taylor [ph.], my first grade teacher, was a prim and proper Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority].  That's what you knew about her.  You knew that she was prim and proper and you knew she was a Delta. Ms. Taylor would probably be arrested today for some of the things that she did when we were in first grade.  I had a cousin who was in my class named Julius Anderson [ph.].  Julius had this problem.  He couldn't sit down.  He simply wouldn't sit down.  Ms. Taylor always attributed it to the fact that Julius didn't go to kindergarten.  I don't know what it was, but Julius couldn't stay in his seat.  Ms. Taylor tied him in his seat.  Put him right by her and tied him in his seat.  Julius' parents never complained.  Today Julius' parents would sue Ms. Taylor and the school.  But tying him in his seat worked.  After a week or so she untied him and he stayed in his seat.  Reading was first grade.  That's what I remember about first grade, reading.  I was very jealous of Azalie Brown, A-Z-A-L-I-E, who attended school with me through not only through twelfth grade, but went to Washington [D.C.] with me to college, though she went to a different college.  Azalie passed me in reading and I couldn't abide it.  I hated her for a long time.  And then we leveled off and we decided we'd just do reading together.
Story_ID: 96934
Speaker 1: Second grade was Dorothy Draper [ph.].  Her husband taught at Alabama State College [now Alabama State University in Montgomery, Alabama].  I think Mr. Draper taught math or some such.  She had children who attended Lab High [Alabama State College Laboratory High School in Montgomery, Alabama] as well, so her children were my friends.  But that didn't stop her from spanking me.  Dorothy Draper was the only teacher at Lab High who ever spanked me.  I needed it.  But she distinguished herself in that way.  Very good teacher.  Short little lady.  Third grade was Nell Rice [ph.].  Nell Rice was one of the two single women, and in those days they were horribly called "spinsters."  Nell Rice was a beautiful woman.  She also had a thing with Julius.  She didn't tie him, but she did threaten him.  Nell Rice, I loved her class because third grade was when we started fractions and times tables.  And she had a wonderful way of teaching it to you.  Interestingly enough, when I was getting my master's degree at Columbia [University in New York City, New York] in the early '70s [1970s] I ran into Nell Rice who was working on her Ph.D. at that time.  It was an amazing reunion.  By then she was Nell Rice Anthony [ph.].  She had gotten married.  She left Lab High I think at some point before I graduated from high school because I remember the teacher she was replaced with.
Story_ID: 96935
Speaker 1: Fourth grade was Effie Frances Wheat [ph.].  The name describes the person.  She was almost six feet tall.  She too wore those selby shoes.  She wore her hair in bun.  Very smart lady.  Very no nonsense, intolerant person.  No misconduct in Ms. Wheat's class.  Everybody was afraid of her, with just cause.  You learned a lot in Ms. Wheat's class.  She had  a--a partiality toward math.  So she wasn't one of my favorites because I wasn't very good at math.  Fifth grade we lost a teacher.  So Effie Wheat [ph.] and Maddie Gilchrist who taught sixth grade jointly supervised the fifth grade.  One would ask how could that happen?  Well, the reason it was a laboratory school is because it was a laboratory.  It was the primary teaching agency, if you will, for college students training to be teachers.  It was like a teaching hospital today somewhat like Grady [Memorial Hospital in Atlanta, Georgia].  So the first site, if you will, for education majors at Alabama State College was Lab High.  Every semester we had a cadet teacher in almost every subject, because that's where they came to learn to teach.  So I was a guinea pig for twelve years along with all my other classmates.  We loved it.  So the practice teachers as we'd call them 'cause that's what they were doing, practicing, taught us in the fifth grade supervised by Ms. Wheat, the fourth grade teacher, and Ms. Gilchrist, the sixth grade teacher.  Fifth grade was characterized by the fact that I learned that this boy I had this crush on didn't like me.  He liked somebody else.  That was horrible.  When I was in elementary school.  Fess Parker, Buddy Ebsen, and Davy Crockett ruled television.  Particularly Sunday night "The Walt Disney Show".  So everybody wanted to be Davy Crockett.  And all the little girls wanted to be Polly Crockett.  So when this boy I had this crush on, was the natural choice for Davy Crockett, chose somebody else on the playground to be Polly Crockett, well my world ended.  It was just too much.  So that's how fifth grade was characterized.
Story_ID: 96936
Speaker 1: Sixth grade, Maddie Gilcrest [ph.], we started learning to type.  She insisted that no one would leave the sixth grade without learning to type.  So everybody's parents had to get a Royal portable typewriter.  And we all got Royal portable typewriters and lugged them to school every day along with our book cases.  And the first period after big recess, we had little recess 10 to 10:15 and big recess 12 to 12:30. Remember no cafeteria, so lunch was 11:30 to 12 out of your lunch box.  So by 12 o'clock it was time to have big recess.  Right after big recess was typing.  You had to practice typing.  And everybody who left Maddie Gilcrest's sixth grade class could type.  It was the most wonderful practical lesson she could have taught us.  Because other 11 year olds weren't learning to type and we learned to type.  It was also the year you had to learn the poem, "What I Live For".  Maddie Gilcrest made sure everybody knew the first Psalm, the 19th Psalm, the 100th Psalm and the poem, "What I Live For".  Interestingly enough, yesterday at church the responsive reading was the first Psalm and I surprised myself that I could still recite it without looking at it.  Of course, you had to remember the 23rd Psalm but she didn't bother teaching you that because she knew church would teach you that.  So whenever anybody says, "Blessed is the man who walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly," I feel at home.  And I remember Maddie Gilcrest with a great deal of fondness.  Maddie Gilcrest was also a violinist.  So if you wanted to take violin and could get to school by seven o'clock, she'd also teach violin.  And a few brave souls did manage to do it, I wasn't one of them because I was taking piano all for naught because I still can't play the piano even though I took it for several years.  I was also very much involved in tap and ballet, however.  Now ballet I did manage to do something with and tap as well.  I love dancing.  But I--I just never could get the hang of the piano.  Although I enjoy playing now, but I wouldn't play in front of anybody.  But in the sixth grade you learned William Burns Paterson's favorite poem.  William Burns Paterson was a white Scotsman who came to Alabama like Anna T. Jeanes came to the South as an education missionary.  And one of the things he did was he founded the institution that later became Alabama State College [later Alabama State University in Montgomery, Alabama].  His hometown was Tullibody, Scotland and therefore the building we went to school in was Tullibody Hall.  He had a favorite song, "The Bluebells of Scotland" which we all had to learn.  And he had a favorite poem, "What I Live For".  Which during all of my high school years was anonymous.  I later learned that it has been attributed to a man named George Linnaeus Banks.  "What I Live For" had five stanzas.  In Maddie Gilcrest's sixth grade class, the whole year was spent learning and reciting that poem.  And in February the student who did in Maddie Gilcrest's opinion, the best job of reciting the poem was allowed to recite the poem during the all school Founder's Day Convocation.  It happened that year to be Linda Alfreda McKenzie [ph.].  Who is one of those five people who went to school together with me through twelfth grade, who still lives here in Montgomery.  She could really recite it.  And I'd like to recite the final stanza if you don't mind.  It's such a poignant poem. "I live for those who love me, whose hearts are kind and true, for the heaven that smiles above me and awaits my spirit too, for the cause that lacks assistance, for the wrong that needs resistance, for the future in the distance, and the good that I can do."  I believe that the fifth, sixth, and seventh lines of that poem had as much to do with what I have done with my life as anything.  "For the cause that lacks assistance.  For the wrong that needs resistance.  For the future in the distance."  Those little words informed us, all of us, really for the rest of our lives.  And it's hard for me even today to resist the cause that lacks assistance.  But anyway you learned that poem.
Story_ID: 96937
Speaker 1: Sixth grade--seventh grade Ollie Phillips [ph.].  Ollie Phillips, very stern, proper woman who had been educated at Columbia.  Who had a bent toward science.  Among other things, she was responsible for my going to the eighth grade science demonstration school, and annual science summer camp at Virginia State College in Petersburg [Virginia].  Which is what I did during the summer of 1960.  Met some lifelong friends at Virginia State too.  Still correspond with one of them and had a reunion with two of them when I went to Howard [University in Washington, D.C.] after graduating from high school, with three of them actually, when I went to Howard.  In Ollie Phillips class we learned how to make a tornado, if you can believe that.  We actually made one.  And we learned how to build an electric motor from scratch.  I didn't like science that much, but it was interesting to learn how to do those things.  Ollie Phillips had a saying, that along with those lines from George Linnaeus Banks' poem, also has informed the rest of my life.  Because we were in a private school setting, and because most of our parents were professionals, I had some classmates who were given to insisting that they knew quite a bit more than they actually knew.  And therefore were surprised when they encountered something they didn't know.  Ms. Phillips would call on people from time to time and I remember the first time she said this early in the seventh grade.  She called on a young man in my class who couldn't give the answer and when she then supplied the answer he responded by saying, "I never heard of that."  Which did two things, both improper.  It suggested that what she had said was not legitimate.  It also suggested that because he hadn't heard of it, it must not be so.  Twelve years old he has this much temerity, right?  She said to him something I will never forget.  She said it a thousand more times while we were in the seventh grade.  She said, "The world is made out of what you don't know."  Such a powerful thing to say.  I have never forgotten that.  "The world is made out of what you don't know."  When you--when you start learning material with that in mind, when that perspective hits you and grabs you, you understand how little you know.  And you understand how much there is to know.  And hopefully it makes you more thirsty.
Story_ID: 96938
Speaker 1: Eighth grade, Clara Davey [ph.].  Homeroom teacher by this time.  Clara Davey was an English nut, and therefore I loved her 'cause I like English.  Every morning--first of all every year at Lab High starting with about the second grade, the first thing you did on the first day of school was write your autobiography.  Now what eight year old, has an autobiography?  You'd be surprised.  I still have a few of mine at my mother's [Sadie Gardner Penn] house.  You'd write your autobiography.  And, of course, the autobiography was always school tied, it was tied to the school year.  In the second grade we did so and so and so.  In the third grade we did--but nevertheless it caused you or forced you to reflect and to write and to think and to relate.  And to try to give meaning to some of things that had happened in your life and to try to merge, if you will, family and school because when you're a child that's what you have, family, church, and school.  In any case in Clara Davey's class, 8th grade through the 12th--because she was the only English teacher there so she taught you English, 8th through 12th--beginning in the 8th grade she had what she called, no she didn't call it, we called it, the "surprise composition."  So you would walk in her classroom on Tuesday morning and she'd have a subject on the board, and you'd have to sit down and spend the rest of the period writing a composition on her chosen subject.  Enormously valuable.  Enormously valuable.  First of all, it allowed you to talk about what you didn't know and it taught you to makeup what you didn't.  And--and you know pretense and--and--and fiction are not without their value.  People become millionaires writing this stuff.  So we loved, we loved that aspect of it, or at least I did.  She also was a stickler for grammar.  Clara Davey booked no grammatical errors.  If--and she taught the way that teachers tended to teach during that time.  The English book had a sentence in it, had a series of sentences in it, you had to evaluate the sentence, you had to tell her the function of every word in the sentence.  So if the sentence read "Tomorrow we plan to go to Washington for a vacation," if that was your sentence you had to take each word and tell her the function of every word in the sentence, including its part of speech of what it did in the sentence.  If you made the first mistake Clara Davey had one word and it wasn't even spoken very loudly.  Her one word upon your first mistake if you called a verb an adverb or a noun a pronoun she said, "Next."  And it moved on to the next person and you'd messed up.  Oh, your feelings were so hurt.  And that's the way she taught.  She taught split infinitives.  I didn't learn until I had law clerks in the 1990s that nobody does split infinitives anymore.  I still do them.  But I--I mean still believe that one shouldn't split an infinitive.  But all my law clerks tell me, "Judge, that doesn't happen anymore.  Nobody pays any attention to that.  So if you wanna say to properly go or to comfortably sit, you can say that."  And I always tell them, "Not in anything you're writing for me.  Clara Davey would turn over in her grave."
Story_ID: 96939
Speaker 1: Ninth grade, Etta Alexander [ph.].  Etta Alexander was a rotund little woman who--whose subject matter was home economics.  She was the homeroom teacher for the ninth grade.  She believed in propriety.  Her subject matter was home economics.  She taught home ec one and home ec two.  While they were electives, no girl who wanted to live beyond the first semester dare not select home ec one and home ec two.  In addition to that, the only alternative was shop, which the boys took.  So you didn't wanna go to shop.  You took home ec.  My friends tell me that Lab High was also distinguished by the fact that Lab--that Etta Alexander visited every girl's home who was in her class in the ninth grade.  So when we were in the ninth grade Etta Alexander taught us among other things how to maintain our bedrooms and our closets.  And on a given day she would tell you, while you were in school that that afternoon she planned to visit your home.  She insisted that all hangers be turned in the same direction.  You could turn them outward or inward.  She preferred inward everybody knew that.  And when she came to your house, she graded you on whether all your hangers--to this day I cannot stand to have one of them out of line.  It just looks wrong.  It's something just unwieldy about having hangers some of which face me and some of which don't face me, lasting lesson.  Shoes lined up on the floor of your closet, dresses in a certain place, coats together, pants together, blouses together.  Very strict.  She also did budgeting.  I liked that.  Because she insisted that a household without a budget was a loose household.  She's absolutely right.  So we did budgeting.  We did--we did a little cooking.  I don't do cooking very well.  And my sewing was atrocious.  Atrocious.  I could not sew a thing.  Even though my mother [Sadie Gardner Penn] was a master seamstress, and a practiced master seamstress until her arthritis made it impossible for her to do it.  But the sewing and the cooking I just never got a hold of that.  I was very good at cleaning and love it to this day.  Love it to this day.  Now what happened in the ninth grade that sort of changed the flavor of my high school experience, I had been valedictorian of my class for a number of years by the time we got to the ninth grade.  The Betty Crocker Foundation sponsored a test.  Performance on which could lead to the Betty Crocker Award.  I don't even know if it's still done.  It was a written test, therefore it was academic.  Just because I couldn't cook and couldn't sew didn't mean I didn't know the answers.  So when the Betty Crocker test was administered to us that year, I made the highest score.  I got the Betty Crocker Award.  I couldn't cook.  I couldn't sew.  And every girl in my class knew that I couldn't cook and I couldn't sew.  But when I walked on that stage and got the Betty Crocker Award, I incurred the enmity of every single female classmate.  And for the rest of the year they let me know it in no uncertain terms.  It was illogical for them that someone who couldn't cook and couldn't sew could get the Betty Crocker Award.  When I think about it, it is rather illogical, and one ought to have to have performed some clinical in order to be recognized for that.  But the quality changed after that.  It really did.
Story_ID: 96940
Speaker 1: By tenth grade when Faustine Dunn [ph.],   F-A-U-S-T-I-N-E was our homeroom teacher it had--it had somewhat changed.  But in ninth grade we also took Latin.  And I was--I was and have been since that time, thrilled that I took a basic course in Latin because it really does help you use the language and understand the language in a way that not having Latin doesn't allow you to do.  But by tenth grade Faustine Dunn was our homeroom teacher.  And tenth grade was an interesting time because Loveless Junior High School [Montgomery, Alabama], which I mentioned earlier the school from which my mother graduated, went only to the ninth grade and in the tenth grade Lab High [Alabama State College Laboratory High School in Montgomery, Alabama] had a tendency to be flooded with kids who had graduated from Loveless.  So the tenth grade was always bigger than the other years because we had this influx of kids mainly from Loveless.  And that happened in my tenth grade year as well.  We had these new kids all of a sudden appear.  And they were new kids because all of us had gone to school together since first grade, so we all knew each other.  We knew each other's proclivities, faults, short comings, strengths, everything we knew all the boyfriends and girlfriends.  And sometimes when these Loveless kids came in they upset the social balance, as they did in my year.   It's very--made for a very interesting time.  Otherwise tenth grade was not characterized by anything spectacular except November 22nd [1963] when [President] John F. Kennedy was assassinated.  I was in physical education that afternoon and we were doing theory.  We were inside for some reason that afternoon.  Tim Sanders was my physical education teacher.  A man who is now a deacon at my church.  That too was an awful time.  We had educational television courses and therefore we had ready access to a TV, so along with the rest of the nation we were stunned and silent and bewildered with everybody else.  It was a tragic time.  We didn't lose our childhood at the time--it didn't have that kind of significance for us.  But our perspective on the world did change.  You know you have these expectations the President serves until he's through.  And after that, that was no longer the assumption.  He serves until something happens that keeps him from serving.  And no one knew who [President] Lyndon Baines Johnson was.  Fortunately we found out, to our utter delight, but at the time no one knew who he was.  In any case 11th grade--
Speaker 2: Well, before you go to the 11th grade, '63 [1963], was also the March on Washington.
Speaker 1: Yes.  But not something that had a terribly--
Speaker 2: What impact on what was going on here?
Speaker 1: Significant impact--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --on my tenth grade and childhood years.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I'll venture to--to suggest something that my son experienced when he was growing up and even now.  When you're born and reared in Montgomery [Alabama], civil rights is second nature.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: And you don't tend to be as wowed by, excited by, moved by, or otherwise similarly influenced by these things as other people.  I have seen Rosa Parks more times than I can count.  I have a photograph, a lovely treasured photograph with Rosa Parks.  So it's just--it just wasn't that kind of feeling.
Story_ID: 98457
Speaker 1: So you were gonna tell (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I was making the point about--
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: --about how much we take things for granted.  The first thing I'll tell you is that when we were growing up, our family belonged to a national organization called Tots and Teens.  It's an organization somewhat like Jack and Jill.  It still exists.  Well, one of the families who belonged to Tots and Teens, was the Fred Gray family.  Fred and Bernice [Bernice Hill] and their four children.  Their two daughters, Vanessa and Deborah, and their sons, Fred and Stanley.  I didn't know that Mr. Gray was Rosa Parks' lawyer and he was the one who had gotten her out of jail and he was this renowned Civil Rights lawyer who was responsible for carrying go--Gomillion v. Lightfoot [1960] to the United States Supreme Court.  He was Deborah and Vanessa's father.  That's who he was.   And--and while I never took him for granted, nor do I now, I see him in a different light.  Now to illustrate that story, many years ago I used to go to a hairdresser who's near here.  She hated for customers to bring their children.  With good reason.  One day I was in there and a woman had her eight or nine years old son with her.  Now mind you this was in the 80s [1980s], thirty years after Rosa Parks refused to give up her seat.  This boy was no more than eight.  So he had to have been born 1980 or later.  He had no personal connection with Rosa Parks, but he grew up in Montgomery [Alabama] or was growing up in Montgomery where on every December 5th, there is some convocation in memory of the boycott.  And where on every March 1st there is a reenactment of the bridge crossing forty miles to the west in Selma [Alabama].  This boy was running.  He was running like a wild man.  They told him to stop, he wouldn't stop.  Finally I was sitting in a--in a dryer chair.  This boy ran by me and almost fell out into the chair next to me.  He's eight.  Fell out into the chair next to me.  He said when he fell, "Huh.  Oh, my feet hurt.  I feel like Rosa Parks."  This child was eight.  The whole beauty shop, lost it.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: Because that was what he related too.  His feet hurt.  He felt like Rosa Parks.  So his take on the story was that she didn't get up because her feet hurt.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: And that's a common take around Montgomery.  Another take of course is that she was angry and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] had planned the whole thing, which is not true.  Another take is the take that she was just tired of racial segregation and was determined to make a stand.  In any case, this boy and his comment about why he was tired and the intermingling of Rosa Parks in that very simple expression demonstrably demonstrates or demonstrably shows how much into Civil Rights you are when you grow up in Montgomery.  It's a part of the air and the atmosphere.  Not just the local sites but the local lore is inundated with stories about civil rights and Rosa Parks and [Edgar Daniel] E. D. Nixon and Fred Gray and Ralph Abernathy and Clifford and Virginia Durr.  As a matter of fact, the Clifford and Virginia Durr memorial lectures will be--lecture rather will be given this coming Sunday at Auburn University in Montgomery.  So when you're constantly exposed to those reminders, you know the stories very well.  Now getting back to the tenth grade which is when, in fact, on August 28, 1963 before I began the tenth grade [Alabama State College Laboratory High School in Montgomery, Alabama] or just before school began, the March on Washington [D.C.] was held.  One has to remember that all through that period there were these mini-demonstrations in Montgomery [Alabama] over something.  And then Greensboro [sit-ins in Greensboro, North Carolina] happened.  And, of course, a year earlier Emmett Till,--not a year earlier before that, but some years earlier in '55 [1955] Emmett Till had happened.  And then Philadelphia and Mississippi had happened.  Goodman, Schwaney--[Andrew] Goodman, [Michael] Schwerner, and [James] Chaney had happened in [Neshoba County] Mississippi.  So these things were happening all the time.  And--and when you're in the midst of it, even a 250,000 member march in Washington doesn't leave the same impact on you.  And [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] had lived here.  We'd all seen him.  We all knew who he was.  We knew Yoki [Yolanda Denise King].  We didn't know her, but we knew her as a real live breathing little girl.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: We had gone to Coretta Scott King's concerts, operatic concerts at Dexter [Dexter Avenue Baptist Church], so we knew her as an operatic singer, not just his wife.  We knew he was pastor of Dexter.  We went to school with children whose pastor he was and who related to him as a real breathing, red-blooded pastor.  So his bigness was relative to us.  It wasn't diminished, it was just relative.
Speaker 1: I understand.  Okay.
Story_ID: 98458
Speaker 1: So on to the tenth grade.
Speaker 2: Oh, the eleventh grade, yes.
Speaker 1: Eleventh grade, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Murillo, M-U-R-I-L-L-O, Garner. The third in the trilogy of single women who taught me through high school.  Ms. Garner--first of all, Ms. [Faustine] Dunn or Mrs. Dunn our tenth grade homeroom teacher had also taught my mother [Sadie Gardner Penn] when she went to Lab High [Alabama State College Laboratory High School in Montgomery, Alabama].  Ms. Garner, had also taught my mother when she went to Lab High. So these are people you can't fool, right.  Because they taught your mother.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: Ms. Garner was a history scholar.  The woman knew everything that had ever happened.  It is said that when [William] Blackstone wrote his legal treatise [Commentaries on the Laws of England] that he included every case that had ever been decided.  I'm convinced that Murillo Garner knew everything that had ever happened by the time I got to the 11th grade.  She would teach history in the first person.  She would teach it as though she were there.  So when she talked about Marc Antony and Cleopatra, she inserted herself into the story.  When she talked about Alexander the Great or Napoleon--she taught world history--or anything or oh, one of her favorites, Leif Erikson.  I mean when she talked about Leif Erikson, it was as though she were there.  She talked about [French President Charles] de Gaulle as though she knew him.  And she called these people by their first names as she was talking about them.  So her mode of teaching history was memorable because you came to know these people as people rather than names in a book.  And she also was the most eccentric person I ever knew.  She has to get the prize.  She had so many eccentricities that together--to this day, when Lab High people get together, Ms. Garner is the first person impersonated.  She is always bar none the first person who's impersonated.  She had what she called her tele--what we called her telescopic view like this.  When she did that, you were a target.  And you were either going to conform your behavior or leave.  She knew everybody's name and she knew many people's pedigree.  So it was very difficult to fool her from the standpoint of what you may have been doing.  But because by the time we got to her she had achieved seniority, if you will--I suppose when I was in the eleventh Murillo Garner may have been 62 or 3, but in 19--in the 1960s 62 or 3 was 80 now.  She too wore selby shoes every single day.  The 11th grade was distinguished by the fact that the junior prom committee and Ms. Garner had a permanent parting of the ways.  Murillo Garner was advisor to the 11th grade.  The highlight of the 11th grade was the junior prom.  Ms. Garner we suspect, liked to collect the money and reuse the same stuff from the previous year so she could save it for the next year.  No one ever really suspected her of stealing anything, but she hoarded.  She was a little miser.  And therefore the reunion--I mean the--not the reunion committee, the--the--the junior prom committee and Ms. Garner had this permanent parting of the ways because she controlled us for the most part we were after all only 11th grade, but in the battle of wits over the theme for the junior prom we won.  She insisted that we do Song of my Heart from the previous year.  We insisted that we would do Roman Holiday.  It was such a nice time.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: These days proms are just dances.  Where a band comes in and everybody dresses, but there's no theme, there are no real decorations, there's not the excitement and hoopla that attends prom preparation.  But just imagine our excitement when we prevailed and we did Roman Holiday, it was the first time that anybody ever really thought about the fact that if you blow up some purple balloons and blow up some green balloons and grow up--blow up some yellow--gold balloons, and string them all together and put them in at the top of a tall column, they actually look like grapes.  So those things were just wonderful.  And you had your prom book that recorded whom you danced with.  And it was thematic and it was wonderful.  But Ms. Garner was having none of it.  She didn't come to the prom that's how angry she was.  But we got through the 11th grade just fine.
Story_ID: 98459
Speaker 1: Twelfth grade was Annetta [ph.] Baugh, B-A-U-G-H.  Annetta Baugh was the only teacher I think I had other than Nell Rice [ph.] who wasn't an Alabamian.  She had come from Beaumont, Texas.  And she loved to say she was from Beaumont, Texas.  She too was single as I think about it.  So there were four of them actually.  Her field was math.  But she was the senior advisor at the time.  And twelfth grade was distinguished by the senior prom.  I didn't attend the senior prom.  I was away because at Lab High [Alabama State College Laboratory High School in Montgomery, Alabama] you could do a number of things with college kids.  So one of the things that I--that I did with the college kids is I played in the college band.  The college marching and symphonic band.  Some of kids could--could do sports with some of the college teams.  They didn't play on the team, but they could do sports with them.  And because the band was away during the senior prom, I elected to go with the band instead of going to the senior prom.  Another reason I didn't go is because my boyfriend by that time was a freshman at Hampton [Institute, now Hampton University in Hampton, Virginia] so why should I worry about going to the senior prom?
Speaker 2: What instrument did you play?
Speaker 1: I played clarinet in the marching band.  I played oboe in the symphonic band.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So twelfth grade spun its course.  And I was valedictorian of my senior class and my valedictory was entitled "The Dangers of Conformity".  Based on a few things not the least of which is a quote from James in the Bible, which I cannot now remember.  Yes I can.  "Be ye not conformed but be ye doers of the word."  Yes, that's what it was.
Story_ID: 98460
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now let me ask you, let me go back just a little bit because we talked about organizations that you and your family belonged to--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: And one you said was [National] Tots and Teens [Inc.] which was something like--
Speaker 2: Jack and Jill [of America] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Jack and Jill.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Was this an organization that parents were invited to like Jack and Jill?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's modeled--I don't know which came first quite frankly.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm
Speaker 2: Because I reared my son in Jack and Jill, I know that it was founded in 1938.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: But I have no idea when Tots and Teens was founded [1952].  But each organization is similar.  It was a family organization, the mothers are the members.  And it was an organization that grew out of racial segregation, particularly social segregation.  Whose function was to provide meaningful social activities for black children.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you think that in either one of these organizations that because it--as you said it started so that African Americans could come together, that there was a division because it was a type of organization that you had to be invited into, that everybody didn't have a fair opportunity (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Was it class division?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Unquestionably.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: Unquestionably.
Speaker 1: I was trying to get--
Speaker 2: Two stories.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have a colleague who practices law here, who is a native of Dayton, Ohio.  One of the first things I learned about her when she moved to Montgomery [Alabama] with her husband with whom I grew up here in Montgomery, was that she hated the Tots and Teens in Dayton because they were hotsy-totsy.  And she--she has acknowledged that she thought that the existence of the organization made certain kids feel left out because you did have to be invited in.  And with us now it's a running joke, but that was her experience.  And--and I always felt bad because I had grown up in Tots and Teens.  As I said I reared by son in Jack and Jill.  He married the most divine woman from Baltimore, Maryland who did not grow up in either Tots and Teens and Jack and Jill.  Nefertiti is my daughter-in-law's name.  Nefertiti hated Jack and Jill kids.  She too felt left out.  She thought they were hotsy-totsy.  She thought that they thought they were better than everybody else.  She thought they had exposure to things that she couldn't have exposure to because she was not in Jack and Jill.  Reagan, my son, loved Jack and Jill.  And has a tendency to cling to certain Jack and Jill paraphernalia including a Jack and Jill gym bag.  Nefertiti has appropriated that gym bag and will not let it go.  And is determined to rear her children in Jack and Jill.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: It is.  No one wants to be left out.
Story_ID: 98461
Speaker 1: So you graduate from high school [Alabama State College Laboratory High School in Montgomery, Alabama] in--
Speaker 2: On May 28, 1965.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Bound for Howard University [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: And what made you decide on Howard?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was a capstone. That's what made me decide on it.  Along with the fact that my brother [Ojeda Penn] before me had gone, he hadn't competed successfully academically but he'd gone.  But it was a capstone.  And besides which when I was growing up in Montgomery [Alabama] everybody went away to school.  Few people stayed and went to ASU [Alabama State University in Montgomery, Alabama].  Some went to Tuskegee [Institute, now Tuskegee University, in Tuskegee, Alabama], but for the most part people left home.  People went to Spelman [College in Atlanta, Georgia].  They went to Morehouse [College in Atlanta, Georgia]. They went to Fisk [University in Nashville, Tennessee].  They went to Hampton [Institute, now Hampton University, in Hampton, Virginia].  They went to Howard [University in Washington, D.C.].  I went to Howard because it was a capstone or at least that's what they told me.  By that time I had been awarded a national achievement scholarship so I had a four year academic scholarship to college.  But I wanted to go to Howard.  I didn't pay--pay too much attention at the time to the fact that it was in D.C.  Although that fact, I think, enhanced my education as much as anything.  But when I went, I went for the school not the city.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And was this really the first time you were away from home?
Speaker 2: No, I had gone to the eighth grade science demonstration school [Virginia State College in Petersburg, Virginia] for the whole summer of 1960.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: After my seventh grade year.  I wasn't a girl scout so I hadn't done camps or anything like that, but I had spent a summer away from home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So tell me about your experience.
Speaker 2: Oh, (clicking).
Speaker 1: I mean from Montgomery to D.C. is a little different (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, the summer before I went to college.  I went to precollege.  Precollege at that time was a very popular thing to do.  It was at Hampton.  And you went to precollege for about eight to ten weeks and you took mainly English and math.  At precollege I met several students who went to Howard with me, including my roommate.  So we remember each now back from Hampton as well as--as Howard.  But I went to school from '65 [1965] to '69 [1969].  If there is a four year period for an African American student to attend college in the twentieth century I don't know a better one than that--those four years.  America changed between 1965 and 1969.  Descent changed.  Education changed.  Our self-view changed.  Relationships between men and women changed.  Our blind allegiance to the government changed during those four years.  The way we rear our children changed.  Unfortunately some other things changed that I think created some social negativity that has persisted to this day.  But you can never accuse those four years of not fostering change.
Speaker 1: This is true.
Story_ID: 98462
Speaker 1: You talked about your brother going to Howard before you--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What about Vietnam [Vietnam War]?  Was your brother involved in--
Speaker 2: I think his number was--
Speaker 1: the draft there (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: --4 million and 2.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He had such a low number.  A high number I'm sorry.  He had such a high number there was never any danger that he would be drafted.  Thankfully.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I don't--I did not have any other close relatives who were exposed.  So I don't have a personal experience with Vietnam.  In fact, I know only one person who died in Vietnam.  And that's usual for my generation I've learned.  Because a lot of my friends knew more than one person.  I know of only one person.  A young man who was a year behind me at Lab High [Alabama State College Laboratory High School in Montgomery, Alabama].  And I have found his name at the Memorial and memorialized him in my own way.
Story_ID: 98463
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was the climate of the university [Howard University in Washington, D.C.] while you were there?
Speaker 2: Howard was and remains at once an eclectic and traditional environment.  It is such a volatile venue.  Something is always happening.  But again, during those four years not only was something happening every day, something was happening almost hourly.  When I went to Howard--when my son went to Howard in 1992, Bill Cosby frequented the campus.  He ran around the track very often.  When I went to Howard you could look up on any given day and Stokely Carmichael, who also went to Howard, would be up in the upper quad, holding court.  I graduated in 1969.  Phylicia Rashad graduated in 1970.  Her sister, Debbie Allen, graduated in 1971.  When I was a freshman, Roberta Flack was a junior.  Donny Hathaway was a sophomore.  Jessye Norman was a junior.  That's the school I went to.  That's the environment I was in.  Those are the mindsets that I was in the midst of.  I was Phylicia Rashad's dorm counselor.  I hated her, she hated me.  I'm convinced to this day, and I hope she sees this one time so we both can laugh.  I'm convinced to this day that the person who wrote either "I hate you" or--or something--something else foolish on my mirror in my dorm room with a tube of toothpaste is Phylicia Rashad.  I'm convinced it was Phylicia.  Which is something dramatic that she would do.  The woman was talented even then.  I mean we all knew that.  I still hated her.  In any case, that was the milieu in which I found myself.  Ron Karenga [HM Maulana Karenga] was at Howard when I was there.  I know a girl who washed her hair in peroxide for two or three weeks so it could get frizzy so she would be more appealing to Ron Karenga while I was there.  For the time that he was alive, while I was there, [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] was on and off campus.  Shirley Chisholm was my commencement speaker.  [President] Lyndon Johnson was the commencement speaker for the class ahead of me [1965].  Things were happening.  Howard, contrary to popular wisdom, was the site of the first college demonstration.  When students largely from my class, though I regret to say not me because my parents [Sadie Gardner Penn and Luther Lincoln Penn] threatened me if I participated, took over the administration building [1968].  And as a result of that demonstration one of the things that came out of that was something that's very common now and that's student membership on the trustee board.  But things were happening every day.
Story_ID: 98464
Speaker 1: I was a member of the debate society.  That was my one big extracurricular activity in college.  I didn't play in the band at college because Howard's [Howard University in Washington, D.C.] band was horrible.  Just as Howard's athletics was horrible.  But anyway, I participated in the Kappa Sigma Debate Society.  I thoroughly enjoyed that.  It was a learning experience for me.  I pledged Alpha Kappa Alpha [Sorority] for three whole days.  I wanted to be an AKA or so I thought.  I participated in the rush.  I became an Ivy.  I am now an "Eternal Ivy" as I'm told by those who know.  One of the big sisters who held sway when I was there was a woman named Melba Watson.  Melba was tough.  But what I learned and what I now know like this, is that you will endure anything if you want the outcome badly enough.  And those who don't endure when the going gets rough, tend to be those who simply don't want it badly enough.  And that can define anything.  It can define running after a guy so you can be his wife.  Trying to get pregnant.  Trying to get through school.  Trying to live in a certain neighborhood.  If you want it badly enough you'll do almost anything.  If you don't want it that bad, you won't subject yourself to it.  And this all, of course, assumes you have options.  On the third day of my pledging--I was wearing at the time shaded glasses.  My glasses they were prescription lenses, but they were tinted at my doctor's advice because my eyes receive too much light, and so my lenses were tinted so that my eyes wouldn't receive that much light.  I had some kind of visual problem.  So at the time I was wearing tinted lenses.  Melba decided that I was being cool.  I explained to big sister Melba that my glasses were prescription and that I indeed needed them to see and they were tinted only because my doctor had prescribed tinted lenses because of this problem I had.  Melba, I now know, pretended that she didn't believe that.  She took my glasses.  She lived in the dorm next to mine.  Howard has a group of five dormitories called the Harriet Tubman Quadrangle.  She lived in Truth Hall.  No, she lived in--yes and I lived in Crandall Hall.  She told me to get my glasses back I'd have to come to her room.  I went to her room that evening to get my glasses back.  Feeling my way part of the time.  Her roommate, to nobody's surprise, was also an AKA.  But she was a gentle soul.  Sandra Miller (ph.) was her name.  Melba came out into the hall in view of everybody and told me if I wanted my glasses back, I'd have to pray to her to get them.  I decided at that moment I didn't wanna be an AKA badly enough to pray to Melba.  I told her that's okay.  I got up, I went to the fine arts building and found the dean of pledges and told her I've decided I don't wanna do this.  She obligingly tried to talk me out of it and explained to me that pledging is really just pledging.  It's an endurance test and all of that.  And I understood that it was an endurance test.  I just wasn't in the mood to endure.  So I got my glasses back.  I never pledged anything and I have felt enriched by that decision ever since.
Story_ID: 99856
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about some of the students that you named earlier that were attending Howard [University in Washington, D.C.] at the time and--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --many of them came from well-to-do families, did you experience or know about class division at Howard during those years?
Speaker 2: I did.  I was--I was aware of class divisions.  Our awareness of it has to be considered, however, in the capsule of the time we were there.  I'm very sure that my awareness of it from '65 [1965] to '69 [1969] was much different from any awareness I would have had, say from '58 [1958] to '62 [1962] just because of what was happening in America at the time.  It was during that time that Stokely Carmichael coined the phrase, "Black Power."  And before that time calling someone "black" was offensive.  So when one understands the continuing sociology of the decade, then you have to put in proper perspective class distinctions.  In my freshman year one of my two roommates was Carol Steele [ph.].  Carol was from Newark, New Jersey.  Carol's parents were not college educated.  Almost all of the kids I went to school with at Lab High [Alabama State College Laboratory High School in Montgomery, Alabama] had parents who were college educated.  Almost all--not all.  So I was accustomed to talking about where your father or your mother went to college.  And when we went to the Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Commissions Tournaments, the SIAC, when I was growing up in Montgomery [Alabama], not only were kids rooting for certain teams, their parents were rooting for their alma maters.  So where you went to college was something really ingrained in me by the time I got to Howard.  Carol didn't come from that background.  And so when I asked or when we asked Carol where she'd grown up in Newark and she said "Hayes Homes," it never occurred to us that she was talking about a housing project.  We thought she was talking about a subdivision.  She said Hayes Homes.  I had a similar experience when I learned about Carver Homes in Atlanta [Georgia].  Because here in Montgomery the housing projects are not called homes.  But we had to factor that in to our understanding.  I'm reasonably sure that Carol felt the distinction between herself and my little clique and me because all of us as I think about it save one person, were from homes in which both parents had graduated from college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, it was very, very obvious at Howard that the institution had what I will call a light complexioned tradition.  For example, Howard's Queens like queens all over the HBCU [Historically Black Colleges and Universities] spectrum tended to be light skinned black women.  In 1968, as I recalled, Robin Gregory was elected Miss Howard.  She was the first Miss Howard who had an Afro.  And it was a big deal at Howard.  Noticeably when I was at Howard if you looked at twelve o'clock on Friday when all of the Greeks demonstrated in the upper quad, if you looked at the AKA's [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] demonstrating around their tree, and you looked at the Delta's [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] demonstrating in their spot, it was very clear that there were more light skinned AKA's than there were light skinned Deltas.  And, in fact, there were very few black skinned AKA's.  I don't think that was an accident though I'm not prepared to say that anybody legitimately discriminated based on color.  It could be legacy.  Legacy plays a great role in these things.  So a person whose mother was an AKA will naturally be the same complexion as her mother.  But somewhere along the line I think that something decisional happened which caused the outcome that I just articulated.
Story_ID: 99857
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your major.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: How did you decide to--
Speaker 2: Oh, when I was in the tenth grade I wanted to be an obstetrician.  I just was determined that I was gonna be this grand obstetrician and deliver these babies and just have this wonderful time as a doctor.  I rather think that my decision to become an obstetrician had something to do with the fact that my mother [Sadie Gardner Penn] always wanted my brother [Ojeda Penn], older brother, to be a doctor.  And when he made it clear that that wasn't what he was going to do, I think that subconsciously I think I stepped in.  I had none of these thoughts during my childhood.  But as I have reflected on it as an adult, I think that subconsciously I slid in and--and I was currying favor as I was with my grandmother [Luvenia Sanders Gardner] by sitting in the breakfast room.  By the way that's a trait I've abandoned.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: I no longer do that.  In any case, I learned that I could not be an obstetrician when something happened, I think I witnessed some accident and--and--and blood and gore upset me so that I knew that wasn't it.  Throughout my childhood, I had a very close relationship with both of my retarded aunts.  One's name was Wilma Gardner.  The other name's name was Ceola Gardner,         C-E-O-L-A.  For a long time I thought they were my big sisters because mentally they were not adults.  And so we related to each other as peers rather than parent child.  Neither of them spoke clearly.  I spent a lot of time during my childhood teaching them to say certain words.  I spent a lot of time during my childhood teaching them to write their names.  I never succeeded with my Aunt Ceola. Her IQ when she was tested was thirty-five.  Which I learned in graduate school was the level of a moron.  Moron being used as a term of art.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: My Aunt Wilma's IQ was 70.  Which meant that she was certainly trainable and arguably educable.  So she was ahead.  She learned to write her name and she learned to recognize it in print.  She also learned her phone number and learned to recognize it, though she could not write it interestingly enough.  Their language deficiencies utterly fascinated me as I grew up.  Their inability to say words clearly.  And their inability to manipulate the language.  I hadn't made the left brain connection at that point.  But based on that whole experience, and I'm sure for some other reasons, I decided to major in speech pathology, and so I did.  I majored in speech pathology and that is what I secured my bachelor's degree in.  When I left Howard [University in Washington, D.C.] I went to Columbia [University in New York City, New York] and secured a master's degree in speech pathology and audiology.  The academic part of it was fascinating because of course I learned a lot more about language development which enabled me to understand them a lot better.  And that's how I came upon my major.
Story_ID: 99858
Speaker 1: Who were some of the professors--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --that taught you at--at Howard [University in Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Well, let me tell you the most embarrassing story I can that's professor related.  The most embarrassing thing I did at Howard University is I did not take Sterling Brown's English class.  When I got to Howard, I didn't know who Sterling Brown was.  The fact that I was there while he was there and could have taken his English class is something I'm thinking of putting on my--on the other side of my tombstone.  So that people will see that this woman didn't have sense enough to take Sterling Brown's English class.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: I am very embarrassed about that.  Sterling Brown was at Howard when I was there and I didn't take his English course.  The professor who influenced me most was probably William Bonner [ph.].  Dr. Bonner was a philosophy professor.  And it was from Dr. Bonner that I formalized what I had always suspected was the way to address, consider, analyze, and resolve issues.  I'd never taken logic before Dr. Bonner, but when I took his logic course, it was affirming because I had intuitively gone through those steps in considering issues in high school.  But Dr. Bonner's declarative statement number one, declarative statement number two, draw the line, conclusion.  When I learned that there really was a such thing as a syllogism, I was thrilled 'cause I didn't odd any more.  And I didn't let people tell me that this was foolish or this was needless or this was crazy.  This is the way you think for God's sake.  And years later when Reagan, my son, was at Howard I wrote Dr. Bonner a letter.  He was still there and he wrote me back.  He didn't remember me, of course, but it was enough that I had in my possession and still do this letter from Dr. Bonner.  He had more influence on me than anybody else because he taught me how to think.  And he--he--he breathed life into something that I was doing, but didn't understand why I was doing it. Now of my speech pathology professors frankly, the one who I remember most was, I guess Sadanand Singh.  Dr. Singh is, of course. Indian, but a very disciplined little man.  He was probably two feet tall and weighed all of ten pounds.  But a very disciplined man who really introduced us to the notion of speech pathology as science as opposed to arts.  Speech pathology when I was at Howard was in the School of Liberal Arts.  Howard has now reorganized and now speech pathology is in the School of Communications which is closer to science that it is to arts.  But Dr. Singh introduced us to speech pathology as a science, as opposed to exclusively an art.  And so I appreciated him for--for that reason.  I was a grad--I was a student assistant of his when he was doing much of his research.  So it was a good learning experience and one of my best friends was also a speech pathology major and that made it more fun.
Story_ID: 99859
Speaker 1: Did you have any jobs while you were going to college or before college?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Oh, yes.  And every single one of them unknown to my parents.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yes.  When I went to Howard [University in Washington, D.C.] my tuition--my scholarship, my National Achievement Scholarship paid all of my tuition, all of my room and board, and left--had some left over for --for a little stipend.  My parents [Sadie Gardner Penn and Luther Lincoln Penn] sent me $20 a month.  That's what they sent me when I went to Howard.  And I had this little bit left over from the scholarship.  My scholarship was sponsored by Shell Oil Company.  For years I would buy nothing but Shell Oil.  And whenever I see a Shell station now, I try to stop.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Because I'm really grateful.  But in any case I became a dorm counselor for money.  My parents didn't know I had that little job.  And I did that, I think, for two years.  My best friend in--in college and I did that together.  Margaret Poles is her name, Margaret Spencer now.  She went to University of Virginia Law School [University of Virginia School of Law in Charlottesville, Virginia].  And I also got a job at the law school.  I was secretary to the Student Bar Association.  At that time it was a work-study job.  So needless to say in 1966, '67 [1967], law school was about ninety or more percent men.  And so there were all of these guys who wore suits every day.  And I was in enamored of every one of them.  And so I became secretary of the SBA.  And I met a lot of very interesting people, including the law students.  Some of whom I know to today.
Speaker 1: What--
Speaker 2: Including my husband.  My first husband [Winston Mortimer Dansford Durant].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 99860
Speaker 1: You received your master's from Columbia [University in New York City, New York], is that right?
Speaker 2: Yes, in 1971.
Speaker 1: Its 1971.  So, now you have two degrees in speech pathology and you're working at the--at the law school.  Is this--is this what makes you decide to go to law school?
Speaker 2: No, I can't say that that's what made me decide.  Mind you, I worked at Howard's Law School [Howard University School of Law in Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 1: Oh, oh.
Speaker 2: While I was an undergraduate at Howard.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I worked at Howard's Law school then.  And that was pure work study.  That was extra money that I didn't want my parents [Sadie Gardner Penn and Luther Lincoln Penn] to know I had.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In any case, I graduated cum laude in May of 1969.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm
Speaker 2: And went to Columbia to get my master's degree in speech pathology.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: When I graduated in January--or when I finished my course work in January of 1971, at that time one did not have to write a thesis to get a master's degree at least in speech pathology.  So when I graduated, I began to work for an organization called the Association for the Help of Retarded Children, AHRC.  It was a citywide nonprofit group that provided services for the retarded.  It was right down my line, needless to say.  I'd grown up with my Aunt Wilma [Gardner] and my Aunt Ceola [Gardner] and I thought it was something that I could do as my life's work.  Was I ever wrong.  I was assigned to an elementary school that had special education classes for the retarded.  I worked with them for about three months before I decided I can't do this the rest of my life.  I can't even do this for an appreciable part of the rest of my life.  The children were adorable.  I loved them.  I remember at least three of them to this day.  There was a little Hispanic girl named Yvonne [ph.].  All of these children were substantially, if not severely retarded.  There were gradations of their mental ability, but no one was more than trainable.  There was a little Hispanic boy named Jose [ph.].  Jose was not very communicable or communicative.  They were a joy to work with, but at the end of every single day I was drained.  I was not physically drained, I was psychologically drained.  Progress with the mentally retarded is minutia by its definition.  It's very difficult to look back over a week or even a month and sometimes even a semester to see what tangible progress has been made.  And in many instances, the progress made isn't progress that's expressed by the student, because you're necessarily dealing with someone who's not adept at expression.  So you may have made progress, you just don't know it.  That drained me.  My husband [Winston Mortimer Dansford Durant] at the time was a lawyer.  He had graduated from Howard's Law school.  I had sufficiently minded the waters during my little SBA [Student Bar Association] job to marry someone who was a lawyer.  And I decided that his profession allowed him, and I watched it in him, to feel as though he had made a difference and to feel progress.  When he handled a case, he knew what he had done.  He could touch it.  He could show you.  It's probably cowardly, but I chose law for that reason.  I chose law because in law I felt like I could make a difference.  I didn't feel like I was making a difference with the kids at AHRC.  I felt like I could make a difference as a lawyer and that's why I chose it. []  I applied to Yale [Law School in New Haven, Connecticut] and Columbia [Law School in New York City, New York].  Yale rejected me out of hand.  Columbia had mercy and in September of 1971 I found myself in its first year class.
Story_ID: 99861
Speaker 1: Okay. And what was that experience like for you at Columbia [Law School in New York City, New York]?
Speaker 2: It was a delightful experience.  I'm a Martian in that I really enjoyed law school.  I had a very good time in law school.  I think part of the reason is that I was married throughout.  So I didn't have to juxtapose, if you will, law study with trying to have a social life.  But I also think that the fact that I was pregnant my entire third year made it just a wonderful time.  And the fact that I had an easy pregnancy, made it a wonderful time.  When I was a first year student at Columbia, you walked in the door and to your right was a room full of students mingling over doughnuts.  We don't know where those doughnuts came from, but they were there every morning, along with coffee.  That was a real thing.  I was in law school when Roe v. Wade was decided [1973].  A delightfully intriguing time for change.  I was in law school when Willis [L.M.] Reese taught conflicts.  When Michael [I.] Sovern was the dean.  Which E.--which [Edward] E. Allan Farnsworth taught first year contracts.  When Professor [Albert J.] Rosenthal taught secured transactions.  And people who are lawyers will understand why this was such a wonderful place to be.  When Curtis Berger taught real property.  I was in law school with professors who wrote the law books.  That in and of itself was fascinating.  But I was also in law school when [Supreme Court Associate Justice] William O. Douglas, who graduated from Columbia in 1925, visited the law school and signed my constitutional law book.  I was also in law school when Howard Cosell, another graduate of Columbia law school [sic, Cosell attended New York University School of Law], regularly came and waxed eloquently about first one thing and then another.  Not the least of which was Muhammad Ali.
Story_ID: 99862
Speaker 1: So it was an exciting time to be in law school. It was an exciting time to be in New York [New York City, New York].  And after a couple of semesters I figured out that Columbia [Law School in New York City, New York] was in Harlem [sic, Columbia University is in the Morningside Heights neighborhood].  So it was an equally exciting time to be in Harlem.  I enjoyed my classes.  It was my first exposure to open book exams.  Which, of course, we all naively thought would be terribly easy, only to learn that they were much harder.  But thanks to Maddie Gilcrest [ph.], way back in the sixth grade, I typed my exam.  So I was able to get in a lot more information.  And I tell you but for the quantity of my answer, I would have been gone long ago, because I'm sure the quality of it was lacking indeed.  In any case, as I said, it was a delightful experience.  My--I was part of the organization-- the Association of Women Law Students.  I was part of that.  When I was freshman at Columbia Law School, the women's bathroom had three stalls.  Well, our class was twenty percent women.  It was the largest class of females Columbia had ever had.  We had to deal with that.  So we protested and wrote letters and petitioned.  And all of sudden the women's bathroom was completely remodeled and we had ten stalls.  Now Columbia is over, I think either at 50 percent women or perhaps a little bit over 50 percent women.  The female population in law schools has grown exponentially since I graduated.  The only black female Columbia law graduates I knew when I went were Constance Baker Motley who ultimately became Chief Judge of the Southern District of New York and sat on--yeah, Southern District of New York.  And [Florynce] "Flo" Kennedy, an absolute rebel rouser, who endeared herself to the women's movement in the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s].
Story_ID: 99863
Speaker 1: You talked about some of the professors.  Tell me some of your class mates.
Speaker 2: My classmates at Columbia [Law School in New York City, New York] include some really interesting and bright students.  I hope to work in a few short months with one of my classmates whose name is Bill Lann Lee, middle name, L-A-N-N.  Bill is remembered by many to have been appointed as Deputy Attorney General [sic, Assistant United States Attorney General] in charge of civil rights [the United States Department of Justice Civil Rights Division] after [HM] Lani Guinier was dropped unceremoniously by President [Bill] Clinton.  Bill is a stellar labor lawyer who practices in California.  He was a classmate of mine.  I have several classmates who now sit on the federal bench, but whose names are not necessarily nationally known.
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: One of my classmates was Mary Jo White.  Mary Jo served as United States Attorney for New York, the Southern District of New York which includes New York City, during the Clinton administration.  Another of my classmates was Ellen Futter, F-U-T-T-E-R.  Ellen left Columbia and got on what I call the academic track.  She became president of Barnard College [New York City, New York], the female college at Columbia University.  And is now, and I can't remember the name of her museum, but she's now the executive director of a museum [the American Museum of Natural History] in New York.  Her husband, John, is also a classmate of mine, John Shutkin.  Laurance Rockefeller [Jr.] was also in my class.  I didn't know Larry very well.  But a story I remember about Larry, which was also instructive, is the story of our lining up one day for the book store.  Larry may not remember this, but I remember it very well.  We lined up one day to buy our books, freshman year.  Larry unbeknownst to me as Larry until later on, was in line behind me.  We announced the books we needed and the clerk gave us the books.  Larry had holes in the soles of his shoes.  Not holes you could see through, but they were worn to the point where--
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: --the epidermis, if you will, of the shoe was gone and you could see its dermis.  Larry got to the front of the line and pulled out a wad of cash that was probably as thick as you are.  The lesson that that taught me was that one has money by keeping it, not by spending it.  Because Larry should have had on better shoes.  But the lesson it taught me was that one has money by keeping what one gets, rather than spending it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's now a great environmental lawyer in New York by the way.  Now, my close law school friends--
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: One was a woman who had graduated from NYU [New York University in New York City, New York], whom I asked to be my son's godmother.  Who has since passed away.  I became very, very good friends with William Walters, a lawyer who now practices in Denver, Colorado who just finished a term as--as President of the Denver Bar Association.  We still communicate very regularly.  I had a reunion with Philip Asbury a law school classmate of mine some years ago when my husband and I went to the Centennial Boule Convention in--in--in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  We all envied Phil because he became general counsel to Philadelphia International Records, where he still is by the way.  I had lots of good solid law school friends.  I enjoyed law school.  The third year I spent as executive director of the Moot Court Executive Committee, judging Moot court and trials and appellate arguments.  As I said it was a very good time.
Story_ID: 99864
Speaker 1: The last thing we talked about was the fact that you were the--about moot court--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --executive committee [at Columbia Law School in New York City, New York].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you also said that in your third year you were pregnant, but we didn't talk about a marriage.
Speaker 2: Yes.  That's right.  Well, it so happens that one of favorite past times of young ladies at Howard [University in Washington, D.C.] in the '60s [1960s] was scoping law and medical students.  And as I've said already they were mostly male.  The med students distinguished themselves by making absolutely certain that at least two inches of the stethoscope was showing above the pocket, lest they be mistaken for orderlies or something else.  The law students wore suits every day and in the 1960s that was indeed a distinction because it was the 60's [1960s] and nobody wore a suit.  So you could always tell the--the law students because they were grand and prim and thinking much of themselves.  And the med students made sure that wore their white coats.  My three or four girlfriends and I who were in this clique used to do law school--law student watching.  We left the med students alone.  We did law student watching.  This little clique of law students every day sat at the same table and they did what they thought law students should do, argue.  So they argued every day.  One of them was my future husband.  The other was a man named Carl Callender, who along with his twin, [HM] Clive Callender was from Harlem [New York City, New York].  Carl is now a lawyer in New York.  Clive is frankly, I think, a kidney transplant specialist at Howard [University] Hospital in Washington at the time.  They are identical.  Another was J. Clay Smith.  Smitty as he was affectionately called, went on to write a treatise, if you will, a full study entitled "Emancipation".  It is the study of African American lawyers in the United States.  Another was Nate Smith, who was also called Smitty for some reason, who was kind of a--a tweak of the group because he was from Rhode Island and probably was one of the few who had gone to integrated schools for all of his life.  But anyway, those four were a group.  Now they had a little peripheral clique which included Ralph Cook, whom I meet while I was at Howard.  Ralph became the first black to sit on the Alabama Supreme Court and now practices law in Birmingham [Alabama].  And it also included Earl Hilliard who was in my husband's law class, and Earl became the first black member of Congress from Alabama since Reconstruction and he now practices law in Birmingham.  And Ira Simmons, it included Ira as well. Ira was the first African American to sit on the Oakland City Council.  And I think he's still in California.  But anyway, all these interesting personalities were there at the time along with those people I named who were undergraduates.  And we watched them every day.  I didn't know Winston's name at the time.  His name is Winston Mortimer Dansford Durant.  So we nicknamed him, we--we gave him a name.  So we called him "Darryl" because he looked like a Darryl.  We didn't know that they knew we were watching them.  One day specifically, January 11th of 1967, I was in the cafeteria eating breakfast I happened to be alone.  Darryl walked in, with no intent to--to have breakfast, grabbed a chair, drew it up to me, turned it backwards, sat in it and said in his inimitable British Guyanese accent, "What's your name a?"  There began my relationship with my first husband.  We sat in the cafeteria for about two and a half to three hours and talked.  We too had a talking relationship.  And he came to Montgomery in August of 1967 to ask my father [Luther Lincoln Penn] for my hand.  We set a marital date, and did in fact marry in August of 1968.  And our son, Reagan Winston Durant, was born on June 8, 1974, two weeks after commencement for law school at Columbia.  So when I graduated I was hiding a lot under that robe.
Story_ID: 99865
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So after you received your law degree [from Columbia Law School in New York City, New York] in 1974, what happens next?
Speaker 2: Well next, I go to work.  Columbia is one of those places that has an active job placement office.  And I had interviewed for work the previous August, that is August of 1973, at the job fair and had been notified in December of 1974 that I had been hired by Hughes Hubbard and Reed.  My letter of notification came from Amalya Kearse.  Who was a partner at Hughes Hubbard at the time.  Who went on to become the first African American female to sit on the Second Circuit Court of Appeals in New York.  Charles Evans Hughes was the founder of the law firm.  He was a Columbia grad and had been a Supreme Court Justice.  And I spent a very delightful year at Hughes Hubbard.  I worked there from September of 1974 until October of 1975.  I met good, decent, hard-working people there.  I worked hard there.  And I learned a lot there.  I learned a lot about billable hours.  I learned about the law as a business.  I learned about the law as a profession.  I learned something, a little bit, about how to relate to clients.  I learned a lot about law firm competition at Hughes Hubbard and Reed.  But I also learned how to work hard in a genial environment.  Hughes Hubbard was not, and--and I don't believe it is to this day, a pressure cooker environment.  But not withstanding that, the lawyers there worked hard.  Got a lot done.  Accomplished a lot.  It still is one of America's leading law firms and I'm very proud of my association with it.
Story_ID: 99866
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in 1975--
Speaker 2: In 1975, Winston [her first husband, Winston Mortimer Dansford Durant] and I made the decision to leave New York [New York City, New York].  And I emphasize we made the decision to leave New York.  We did not know where we wanted to go except we were pretty sure we wanted to come South.  And let me go back and add a footnote to the Hughes Hubbard [Hughes Hubbard and Reed] experience.  One of the--the reasons why I have such fond memories of Hughes Hubbard is that I didn't pass the New York bar the first time.  I took the New York bar for the first time in July of '74 [1974] while I was nursing my son.  I don't think that's the reason I failed, I think I didn't study hard enough.  But I failed the bar the first time.  The son of one of the named partners at Hughes Hubbard, Allen Hubbard, Jr., brought me into his office, sat me down in the midst of my tears and told me that I should not be embarrassed.  And that it was all right.  And that I could take it again as he had done.  It was the most heartwarming thing for someone to do, who didn't have to do that.  I felt very affirmed by that experience.  And the second time I did pass.  But I didn't want to leave the Hughes Hubbard experience without mentioning that because it was a signal moment in my time at Hughes Hubbard.  And it characterized the kind of place it was. In any case, we decided we wanted to leave New York.  New York is a wonderful place and if I were the dictator of America rather than its president, I would mandate that every living American spend at least three months in New York.  Its absolute charming requirement for understanding who we are, why we do what we do, and why we think the way we think.  One has to experience not only the New York exuberance, but the New York sheer arrogance to relate, I think, comfortably with anybody else.  And it really is true that if you can live in New York, you can live anywhere.  It's just a thoroughly wonderful, engaging place.  But I concluded that it was not the place I wanted to rear my child [Reagan Winston Durant].  It's too fast.  It's too busy.  It is too occupying, if you will, to leave you the energy, the focus that I thought I needed.  And I knew I wanted to rear my family.  At the time, one must remember, I planned to have more than one child.  I ended up having only one.  But we decided we would leave New York for that reason.  And I was not one of those who wanted to live in Morristown [New Jersey] or Nyack [New York] or Chappaquiddick [Island in Edgartown, Massachusetts] or someplace else where I had to drive an hour to see a Broadway show.  If I was gonna live in New York, I was gonna live in New York or else I'd just assume move.  So we moved.  We gave long thoughtful consideration to Atlanta [Georgia].  We nixed Atlanta after a very good friend of mine told me that it was cliquish.  Very cliquish.  I believe that to this day.  Probably a nice sweet clique, but cliquish nevertheless.  Two, I considered the fact that my parents were aging.  And decided that I was--if I were going to be in a clique, I may as well be in the one I knew.  So we came to Montgomery.  And we both secured positions with the State of Alabama Attorney General at the time William J. Baxley who hired us as lawyers.  We took and passed the Alabama bar and I stayed there for two years.
Story_ID: 99867
Speaker 1: After that I decided I wanted to practice privately.  By that time Winston [her first husband, Winston Mortimer Dansford Durant] had become Deputy Director of the Legal Services Corporation of Alabama.  I know it more by its initials than the name, LSCA.  And Reagan [Reagan Winston Durant] was, by that time, one year old.  So we drifted along and I decided I wanted to go into private practice.  Which I did on May 19th of 1978.  Representing clients.  I spent sixteen years in private practice in Montgomery.  My practice was solo.  I never had a partner.  I practiced in two locations.  One downtown in the Pizitz Building on the Court Square and the other in this building where we presently are.  And I don't regret a day of my practice.  It was focused on family law in the state courts and on employment discrimination in the federal courts.  That experience grew me up.  It matured me as a lawyer.  Gained me lots of friends at the bar.  Engaged me as a civic minded person because law has a way of helping you ask the right question and helping you understand that in many instances the questions are more important than the answers.  And helping you understand that indeed in some instances there are no answers.  But one should nevertheless pursue the question.  So it was an exciting time for me.  It was a time during which my son grew up.  But it was also a time during which I experienced a divorce in April of 1979, very shortly and quite frankly, after entering private practice.  Whatever sadness and let down that I experienced as--as a result of my divorce and it was substantial, has been compensated for at least a million times by my relationship with my present husband, Thomas McPherson, Jr., whom I met in 1982 and who was a wonderful live-in father for my son, and has just engaged parts of me that I never knew existed.
Speaker 2: And your present husband is an attorney also?
Speaker 1: No.  No.  To his credit--
Speaker 2: (Laughter)
Speaker 1: --he is not an attorney.  He's a mediator.  Thomas joined the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission [EEOC] in 1966 shortly after its birth in 1965.  And remained there until he retired in March of 1995.  He was a district director in Atlanta [Georgia].  An area director in Norfolk [Virginia].  And a district director in Birmingham [Alabama] prior to his retirement.  We have in common our formal association with employment discrimination as a legal field.  And our commitment to eradicating employment discrimination as just citizens of the world.
Story_ID: 99868
Speaker 1: So after sixteen years in private practice what happens next?
Speaker 2: Quite shockingly I attended in August of 1991 a judicial conference.  Every federal district, and there are 94 of them in America, every federal district that is of the judiciary has what is called a judicial conference every year or every other year.  In 1991 I attended the judicial conference for the Middle District of Alabama at the Grove--Grove Inn [Omni Grove Park Inn], a very well-known establishment, lodging establishment in Asheville, North Carolina.  Beautiful site.  I didn't know that the Middle District was adding a United States magistrate judge's position at the time.  I learned it there and I was encouraged by a sitting magistrate judge, as well as one of the deans of civil rights law practice here, Solomon Seay [Jr.], to apply for the position.  I had loosely entertained thoughts throughout my practice of being a judge.  I'd wondered about it.  I was curious about how it was.  I knew I did not want to be a state court judge because I have some difficulty dealing with the election of judges, especially the way it's done in Alabama.  So I knew I would never run for a judgeship.  The appointment process appealed to me.  So I applied.  And on January 10th of 1992 the Chief Judge of the federal court, [HM] Myron Herbert Thompson, called me to tell me I had been selected.  And I entered the service on April 6th of 1992 and served as a United States magistrate judge until October 31st of last year, 2006.  Very different experience from private practice.  And very different experience from solo practice.
Story_ID: 99869
Speaker 1: Is there a--a case that stands out in your mind that you--
Speaker 2: Well, from practice there are several.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I suspect that the case with which I will be most associated with in practice is the class action against the Montgomery County Sheriff Department in which I represented a class of African American men and women in a promotions case.  Mac Sim Butler became the sheriff in Montgomery County in the 1950s.  If my memory serves, it was not until 1972 or thereabouts that any African American in the sheriff department was promoted to anything.  Typically the African Americans hired to work for the sheriff department were placed in the jail and left there.  I mean as employees.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And left there.  There were not allowed to patrol.  They were not allowed to serve as bailiffs in the courtrooms.  They were not allowed to serve subpoenas.  They were not allowed to be investigators.  When I took the case in, I think, 1987, there were no African American sergeants.  The only African American who held rank was one of my class members.  And he had held the rank of lieutenant for several years.  There was little if any chance of his ever being promoted to captain.  Within the sheriff department many, including the sheriff himself, used the term "nigger" to refer to African Americans, and mind you this was the mid to late '80s [1980s].  And African American women were exclusively assigned to the jail.  As a result of that class action that the opinion or decision for which was entered in November of 1990, African Americans entered the promotion track and were promoted.  And today they enjoy an almost equal standing with whites.  One of the signal moments in that lawsuit was a conversation that one of my forenamed plaintiffs had with a colleague of his, a white colleague of his who worked for the sheriff department, about the lawsuit and the jobs the blacks were after.  And his white colleague looked at him and said, "These are our jobs."  And I've never let myself forget that.  Because it's a mindset that nestles, if you will, the spirit of discrimination that permeated the sheriff's department at the time.  I also represented a class of police officers against the city of Montgomery who were, quite frankly, suing on a First Amendment basis.  At the time, the long-time mayor held against a city employee, that employee's refusal to support that mayor, particularly refusal to support him in a demonstrable fashion.  And therefore one's promotion opportunities in the police department could be determined by one's participation in the mayor's campaign or one's siding with or against proponents for the mayor.  It reached that far.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: That case was ultimately settled out of court.  I enjoyed doing that case too.  One hones real skills handling a class action because it is all-encompassing.  And it is an experience that really tests your inclination to and ability to deal with clients of all stripes.
Story_ID: 99870
Speaker 1: But in any case, after I took the bench, of course, I became an adjudicator.  It took me two years to stop advocating.  I suspect that many who join the bench have this experience.  But I advocated for the first two years, I took sides.  I decided in my own mind what the argument should be on one side or another.  And after a while I began to arbitrate or adjudicate which is what judges do.  I began to go into court with an emotional detachment to the outcome, but maintaining my academic or scholastic attachment to the outcome.  And--and--and ultimately that's what one has to do as a judge.  It isn't that one becomes a eunuch with respect to what the law is or should be, or quite frankly what the rightness or wrongness of the issue is.  But one has to develop the ability to step back and watch the fight and then make a decision, rather than involving oneself in the fight.
Speaker 2: Can you speak to something that you made a decision on that you remember that stands out in your mind I should say?
Speaker 1: Because I was a U.S. magistrate judge as opposed to a U.S. district judge I didn't have a lot of, and when I say a lot I mean quantitatively, challenging cases.  For example U.S. magistrate judges can not try felony criminal cases, constitutionally only a U.S. district judge can do that.  But we did try civil cases.  One of the things that we did was that we handled arraignments and additional appearances for felony defendants.  That was an interesting experience, though a very repetitious experience.  Because different kinds of people come to court, but you really do begin to believe that you are seeing the same people after a time.  The profiles are amazingly similar.  The incidents of premarital children just becomes a common thread that goes right through every case.  The absence of a father in the home becomes a common thread.  The low level of education, i.e. dropping out in the eighth, ninth, tenth grade, becomes a common thread.  Multiple children by multiple women becomes a common thread among the men.  Drug use is a common thread, whether the charge involves drugs or not, drug use is a common thread.  One learns to appreciate all of the things we can do as a society to prevent our prisons from filling up.  That as a composite is something memorable.  Specific cases, there were many.  Lots of civil cases.  None of them particularly monumental, but every single one of them extremely important to the people involved.  And most of them important in the development of the law because it requires you to parse information and issues and legal theories to come to a result.  Cases which challenge you to reach a decision that may be contra-distinct from a personal position you hold.  I'm always fascinated by people who wonder how hard it is to divorce yourself from an issue that you have a strong feeling about.  Interestingly enough it can be very easy once one becomes accustomed to it.  You can have a belief over at Z about something but when it's before you and two people are fighting about it, if you have to rule A which is million leagues from Z, you do it, because that's what the law requires.  It's easier to do than it is to go with Z and try to figure out how you're going make it Z because that's the way you want it.  It's easier to go with A because that's what the law requires and it's right there staring you in the face.  It's a lot--it's a lot easier than a lot of people think it might be.
Story_ID: 99871
Speaker 1: What about discrimination cases?  Was there a case with Alabama [Community] College System, discrimination case?
Speaker 2: Yes there was.  I was not involved in it.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: The--the case that the--the umbrella case involving the state universities in Alabama was handled by a judge who actually sits in Rome, Georgia.  Judge Harold Murphy presided over that case.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And--
Speaker 2: I will say something, however.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I think I want to say something about the evolution of discrimination law that manifests itself during my judgeship.  Two things stood out to me during the time that I was a judge.  One of them is that discrimination became a hue and cry for lots and lots of subgroups.  I happen to believe that at least one of the reasons that happened, was to diminish the complaints of race discrimination by African Americans.  Buttressing my point of view is the fact that when the Civil Rights Act of 1964 was being considered by Congress, a member of the House,--and I wish that I could remember who it was, I used to know, I've forgotten.  A member of the House proposed an amendment to the bill to include sex discrimination.  That proposal was not done because of a motivation to protect women, it was done because of a motivation to defeat the bill.  The proposer of the amendment believed that if you threw in sex, it would so alienate members of Congress that they wouldn't dare pass the bill.  Well as it turns out, they did.  And not only did they do that, they added national origin, color, and religion.  In many instances, efforts have been made to deter rights to other groups.  Not so much to confer rights on those groups or privileges, if you will, as much to diminish the significance of the rights or privileges that are being advanced by African Americans.  I saw that during my time on the bench.  Second thing I saw is I don't embrace wholly the notion of suing in discrimination cases for money.
Story_ID: 98672
Speaker 1: All right.  So, and you said it was until 2006 that you were--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: -- a judge [United States magistrate judge for the Middle District of Alabama].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What else would you like to talk about?
Speaker 2: I'd like to talk about some of things I've been involved in, in Montgomery.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Montgomery is both an easy and a difficult place to live in.  And I think that's just true across the board.  It may not be any different from any other city in that regard.  I've not lived in another city long enough to make that judgment.  It is both an easy and--and difficult city to live in as an African American.  And condensing, if you will, the paradigm an easy and difficult thing to live in as an African American female professional.  Involvement here is interesting.  I've participated in a number of civic activities since I've been back.  When I first came back [1975], I became involved in the Urban League.  Montgomery no longer has an Urban League.  But I became involved in Urban League.  I embraced its--its principles, its processes.  I liked the idea of systematically providing people with job skills and the esteem that grows from that rather than trying to confer esteem upon them.  A movement in our society which I detest.  I became involved with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  I was its unofficial counsel for a while.  I joined the boards of several nonprofit organizations here.  The Lighthouse Counseling Center was one of them.  It was a drug abuse, alcohol abuse, counseling center.  Became involved with the Friends of the Library.  And with the Carver Creative [and] Performing Arts Center [now Booker T. Washington Magnet High School], a magnet school located or situated in one of the public high schools here.  I've always had an abiding interest in the arts.  I enjoy it.  I enjoy that association.  I enjoy the arts, but I just enjoy being associated with people who are as well lovers of the arts.  I find them to be a lot more open-minded than people who are not.  I was on the board of the Alabama Shakespeare Festival for over ten years.  And for about two minutes I was on the board of the Montgomery Symphony [Orchestra].  I--I--I'd removed myself from that board because I wasn't feeling altogether useful.  And it was also because I had only recently begun the judgeship and I was feeling crowded.  Montgomery is still two communities, and I have one foot in one and one foot in the other.  It's not uncomfortable, but I wish it didn't have to be.  I wish we were a more unified community racially.  I think that if we were a more unified community racially, we would--would be more unified socially.  I think that all of the talk about "it's not race, it's class" is largely escapist.  I think it has some merit.  Unquestionably, there is class discrimination in America because we are a capitalist society.  You couldn't have a capitalist society without class discrimination.  But I also think that it's easier to talk about class, just as it is easier to make male/female jokes than it is to make black/white jokes.  It's easier for me to tell my friends sitting next to me two nights ago that only a man would do that, than it is to say only a white person would do that.  I wish we were more fluid in our conversation about race.  It's an immutable characteristic.  It's here.  It's before you.  You open your eyes, it's there.  I wish we could deal with it more easily.  I wish we were not quite as sensitive about it.  And when I say we, I'm speaking of the African American community as well as other communities.  I think it is an eternal frontier.  And I don't say that as a skeptic, I say it was one who has been around for three score and one who has observed the evolution of the conversation.  And it has been both slow and at times regressive.  I think we were better able to talk in the '70s [1970s] than we are now.
Story_ID: 98673
Speaker 1: Well, what are your hopes for the African American community?
Speaker 2: My hope is that at least two things will return to the African American community.  One of those is the indisputable premium that the African American community used to place on formal education.  It's no longer there.  It's not only not indisputable, I question sometimes whether it's a premium.  That's one hope I have.  The other hope I have which is related and probably an outcome of the first, of the realization of the first, is that we return to the day when a mess up deserves a cleanup by the person who messed up.  And I'll say it again.  A mess up deserves a cleanup by the person who messed up.  Which is a colloquial way of saying take responsibility for what you do.  And moreover take responsibility for what you don't do.  If we could return to those two things and have a symbiotic relationship with both principles, I think in this climate as opposed to the climate in the '60s [1960s] when those things were understood, we could secure our own freedom.
Story_ID: 98674
Speaker 1: Because this message is going to be for generations to come to hear your story--
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: What message would you like to send to the future generation?
Speaker 2: That's a real tall order.  That is one question I've never been asked.  I feel like I'm in a time capsule and I guess I am.  There are several.  The first message I'd like to send to future generations is a global one.  And we don't have time for me to elaborate on it, but merely saying it is its own message, and that is America is but one way to do it.  I say that recognizing fully well that in my opinion America is the best way to do it.  And America is my preferred way to do it.  And I think the American way of doing it, is enriching.  But I recognize that America is but one way to do it.  I think that we as a society have been too insistent on everybody doing it the way America does it.  I'll leave that, because it speaks for itself.  My second message is, that we should always remember that children are children for a reason.  To assume and heaven forbid to insist, that they be adults or if they're anything other than children in and of itself, creates a path to chaos.  One huge mistake that my generation made is refusing universally to regard children as children.  And indeed to regard ourselves as their parents.  I.e. in another whole generation, twenty or more years older than they with twenty or more years older tastes, proclivities, pastimes, values, etc.  The day we stopped letting our children be children and in fact insisting that they be children, is the day we lost control over home training, over discipline, over the normal course of maturation and in fact, the development of a quality adulthood.  I know in my own case my adulthood is so informed by those wonderful days when I had only to think about what was for dinner.  And today, and I know that, I realize, I say this fully cognizant of the fact that we cannot nor should we go back to the "good old days."  Because in the good old days computers were rooms, not little things you put in your pocket.  So I understand how technology and how the times have changed the way we live.  But it doesn't mean that at dinner your fifteen year old ought to spend ten minutes text messaging somebody down the street.  So that's my second message.  My third message is for African Americans.  The first having been global, the second having been sort of quasi-global but more parental.  The third message is for African Americans.  We are members of the family of man.  It is extremely important that the differences between us and other groups be; one recognized, and two accredited with emphasis on accreditation.  It is not that necessary that those difference said be trumpeted.  And therefore recognition and accreditation ought to be enough for us to move on.  And that's the message.
Story_ID: 98675
Speaker 1: Okay.  Since your retirement tell me what you have done daily (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Since your--
Speaker 2: Goodness.
Speaker 1: --retirement.
Speaker 2: Oh, not enough hours in the day.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: I have--well, that has to be footnoted too.  On December 19th [2006] approximately six months after my retirement I underwent surgery for a torn rotator cuff.  So I've spent a substantial amount of time in therapy.  My Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays have been consumed, at least the mornings of those days have been consumed by therapy, physical therapy.  Well, you know, once you get up and go to two or two and a half hours of therapy the day is--is fairly along and--and one then has to go back and regroup and decide "what am I going to do with the rest of the day."  They have been quiet.  I have undertaken two assignments, both of them adjudicatory.  I'm a hearing officer in some firefighter cases in Birmingham [Alabama] that involved charges of fraud in the fire lieutenant's test.  I expect to hold those hearings next month, April, and adjudicate them, write opinions and when I'm done that will be that.  I have also been asked to serve on the oversight committee in a class action that recently settled in the state of Indiana.  My role if I'm selected will be oversight to the implementation of new procedures for promotions at a--an industrial plant in Indiana.  And--and that was the--the activity that I alluded to earlier that I may be doing with Bill Lann Lee, my law school [Columbia Law School in New York City, New York] classmate who practices in California.  That I'm really looking forward to.  Because it allows me to do something I really enjoy and get paid for it.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  Okay.
Story_ID: 98676
Speaker 1: What is Roots and Wings?
Speaker 2: Roots and Wings was, and is, one of the most significant experiences in my life.  My best friend, Delores Boyd, who is an attorney here in Montgomery, who just resigned as a U.S. magistrate judge at the end of December 2006, and I established an African American bookstore in--on shall we say November 12th of 1989.  It was located very near the campus of Alabama State University [Montgomery, Alabama].  We specialized in African American books, books by and about African Americans.  Not necessarily written by African Americans, but by and about African Americans.  It was a treasure of an experience.  We ran the bookstore until December of 2000.  It closed that month.  But during that eleven year period, we had some of the most amazing experiences that you can have.  Our first author was Alex Haley.  And he ate dinner in my home, my son [Reagan Winston Durant] got a chance to talk to Alex Haley.  We got to know him.  He became a friend of ours.  Our second book signing was Alice Walker.  Throughout those 11 years we had book signings by Haley, by Walker, by [HM] John Hope Franklin twice.  John Hope Franklin became a family friend of ours as a result of that.  And anybody who has John Hope Franklin as a friend who manages to that can just die.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: Its--you've done what you can do in this life.  Toni Cade Bambara,  [HM] Sonia Sanchez.  So many people.  [HM] Marian [Wright] Edelman came twice.  Just a number of people.  Charles Johnson right after he wrote--oh, my goodness, "Middle Passage", came to the bookstore.  [HM] Nikki Giovanni came to the bookstore.  Mrs. [Rosa] Parks' came twice to sign her books.  My son is expecting a child in August and one of the first things I'm going to give that child is an autographed copy of Rosa Parks' story.  Which is a treasure.  So many people came to the bookstore.  We got to meet and talk with so many people.  It was just wonderful.  Oh, [HM] Pearl Cleage how can I forget her.  She was there as well.
Story_ID: 98677
Speaker 1: Okay.  If you look back over your life, is there something that you would change?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And this is probably going to be the most candid thing I've said during the entire interview.  I would change my relationship with my mother [Sadie Gardner Penn].  Our relationship during my adulthood, and certainly during the last fifteen years, has been one characterized by too much contention.  My mother is 87 years old, born in 1919.  By the time African Americans began to see the light at the end of the tunnel, my mother was in her late 40s, early 50s.  It's not usual to encounter African Americans in that generation who are painfully aware that they missed it.  That they were just a little too early to reap.  That had it come twenty years earlier, they could have been.  They could have seen.  They could have touched.  They could have gone.  And while I don't think my mother would ever acknowledge that, I think that that pathos has settled in on her psyche and created a subtle level of competition between her and me because I was born thirty years later.  So right at the time it all busted loose, if you will, I was right there to grab and take and go and be and do.  Not as much as my son, but for all practical purposes it's been done.  And so with probably the same level of intelligence and wherewithal, I have managed to do things that my mother could only dream of doing.  And while I'm sure she has a healthy resentment of the establishment for that, I think sometimes some of it trickles down to me.  So, if I could change anything in my life, I'd change my relationship with her.
Story_ID: 98678
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you want to do that you have not already done?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I wanna skydive, and that's not a joke.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I wanna skydive.  I wanna jump out of an airplane and fall gracefully to Earth.  I don't think it will happen, but I want to do that.  I want to develop a language program at my neighborhood public school for third, fourth, fifth, and sixth graders to make sure that when they leave elementary school they understand what an adverb is and can tell you at three o'clock in the morning.  I want them to speak standard English.  I don't mind if they speak English that is not what we call standard English, but I don't want them to honor it.  I want them to be able to go anywhere, any time and talk to anybody.  I want them to understand.  I wanna have a language development program at that school.  And I want to do it under a nonprofit umbrella.  And I want my services to be pro bono.  And I want them to call me "Judge Mac."
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: I wanna do that very much.  But even more than that I want grandchildren.  I want to be a grandmother.  I want to relate to them.  Hold them.  Talk to them.  Watch them grow up.  Nurture them when they're sick.  Spank them when they do wrong, not put them in a corner, not time-out, not talk to them, spank them when they do wrong until they understand what wrong doing is.  And until they understand that there are consequences to bad acts.  I want to continue to relate to my son [Reagan Winston Durant].  I want to watch his development.  I wanna see if he becomes the person I think he will ultimately be.  I'm extremely proud of him.  I wanna watch Nefertiti, his wife, become all that she can be.  Reagan is an internist.  He's a researcher internist at the University of Alabama at Birmingham.  Nefertiti is an adolescent pediatrician at the University of Alabama Medical School [School of Medicine] at Birmingham.  And they're two little doctors trying to find their way.  And I wanna watch them do that.  I wanna be around to evaluate.  I wanna help them decide what color to paint the baby's room.  And what college to send the grown-up baby to.
Story_ID: 98679
Speaker 1: How do you wanna be remembered?  What do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: I wanna be remembered in the spirit of the final stanza of "What I Live For."  That's how I want to be remembered.  I want to be remembered as, and I'd rather be remembered as--no, I want to be remembered for and I'd rather be remembered for what I tackled as much as what I've accomplished.  I think achievements are great.  But I think people are really defined by what they tackle.  There are so many variables that get in your way that stop you from achieving what you want to achieve.  I think it's much more important to look at what people try to do.
Story_ID: 98680
Speaker 1: Is there anything that we have not spoken about that you would like to?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I think we've covered it all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Great.
Speaker 2: I love jazz.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And within that context everybody should play some Oscar Peterson every now and then.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  All right.  Well, I wanna thank you from The HistoryMakers for taking the time to tell your story.  I'm sure along with the other interviews that this one will be just as inspirational as all the stories.
Speaker 2: You know what, if you don't mind?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: I can't let this interview end without saying something about my husband [Thomas McPherson, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I absolutely cannot.  Tom and I can talk about anything, any time.  That's to me a practiced virtue.  Very important--
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: I love him for a lot of things, but one of the things I love him for more than anything else is for allowing me to be me.  That's hard to do.  Not necessarily where I'm concerned, but that's hard for anybody to do.  Because we all have our druthers about what we want people close to us to be.  And he has this enormous capacity for building a pasture and putting you on a long leash.  And there's a significance to both those things.  And that's been a driving force in what I've been able to do.  It really has been a driving force because it's--it's a psychological cushion that's always been there to let me know when I'm going too far and simultaneously to let me know that I'll always have a place to return to.
Speaker 1: Well, I wanna thank you.
Speaker 2: Thank you.  And thank you Scott.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  My pleasure.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)
Story_ID: 98681
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Just speak,  go ahead.
Speaker 2: This photograph is of my grandfather, Monroe James Gardner, who is seated second from left along with his nine brothers.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Good.  And the next one.
Speaker 2: That is a photograph of my husband, Thomas [McPherson, Jr.] and me.  It was taken approximately six years ago.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: This photograph is of my son, Reagan Winston Durant and his now wife, Nefertiti Harmon Durant.  It was taken during their first year of medical school at Johns Hopkins [School of Medicine in Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Good.  Do me a favor rotate that one (unclear) please.  And you can begin describing at any time.
Speaker 2: The photograph is of my maternal grandparents, Monroe James Gardner and Luvenia Sanders Gardner, with whom I lived until I was ten years old.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Hold it.  Okay.  Next.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Ella Pickett Penn, my paternal grandmother who lived in Union Springs, Alabama and made delicious iced tea.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Good next.
Speaker 2: Reverend Sydney Washington Penn, my paternal grandfather, who also lived in Union Springs.  And who is the image of how my brother, Ojeda [Penn], will look when he gets that age.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Laughter)  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a whimsical photograph of my parents, Luther [Lincoln] Penn and Sadie [Gardner] Penn and my brother, Ojeda, and me in Shelby County.  I am in front of my father at age six and he is in front of mother at age ten.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Very good.
Speaker 2: And this lovely little creature is Vanzetta McPherson at age three, then Vanzetta Elaine [ph.] Penn in my grandparents' home.  Three months, I'm sorry.  Not three, three months.
