Story_ID: 214392
Speaker 1: Good afternoon, my name is Regennia Williams and I am the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer today is Matthew Hickey.  And we are in Shaker Heights, Ohio, at the home of [HistoryMaker] Mrs. Leatrice [Branch] Madison.  Mrs. Madison, I'd just like to ask you to please state your name, first, middle and last, and spell all three for us please.
Speaker 2: My first name is Leatrice, L-E-A-T-R-I-C-E, my maiden name which is I use as my middle name is Branch, B-R-A-N-C-H, and Madison is my last name, M-A-D-I-S-0-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and would you please state the address for the location.
Speaker 2: 18975 Vantage Boulevard and that's Shaker Heights, Ohio 44122.
Speaker 1: And just for the record, would you tell us today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is June 14, 2004.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.
Story_ID: 214393
Speaker 1: The next set of questions are just fun questions.  We describe them as People magazine-ish type questions--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the first thing I'd like to ask is if you could tell us your favorite food.
Speaker 2: My favorite food, I never even thought about that.  I think the thing I enjoy the most is corn pudding.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  And do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: And how about a favorite vacation spot?
Speaker 2: Oh, somewhere in the islands, somewhere in the Caribbean where it's warm.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much.
Story_ID: 214394
Speaker 1: Now in the first section of the interview I'd like to talk about your early life, your parents [Julia Bailey Branch and Hayes Branch] and your childhood, and siblings [Laurette Branch Henley and Jacqueline Branch Hall] who also grew up in the same household with you.  So would you tell us please when and where you were born?
Speaker 2: I was born in Washington, D.C. in 1922.  I was born in Freedmen's Hospital [Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.].  And I don't know if you know this, but Freedmen's Hospital and Howard University [Washington, D.C.] were established by the Freedmen's Bureau after the Civil War.  So was the high school I attended, [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], which was the first high school below the Mason-Dixon Line.  I grew up on Adams Street.  It's an interesting story about that.  And my parents  bought a house at 120 Adams Street and it had a restrictive covenant.  So they went to court and fought it and lost.  So the man across the street who was white said he was planning to move and so they moved across the street.  And we lived in that house, I guess they moved in that house in 1927, and we just sold it in 1996.
Speaker 1: Okay, now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: They were the first African Americans on the street, Adams Street in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell me now, from what I understand about the restrictive covenants, there's usually a clause in the deed to say you can't sell to people of certain racial or ethnic groups.  So did the seller not know your parents, that--
Speaker 2: The seller knew, the seller was what we called a Negro woman at that point, and she had talked to my mother and father.  My father was reluctant.  My mother was willing to take a chance and fight it.  One of the things, my mother was the fighter in the family.  My mother was the one who was willing to take a chance, and she was the one who always took us, as I said at the (unclear), if there were any government building, any public building, any open building, off we went.  And Washington was a great place, you know, to grow up and be stimulated intellectually to see things and to know things.  But I grew up right there on Adams Street all those years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And walked to school from [Lucretia Mott] Elementary School [Washington, D.C.] through college [Miner Teachers College; University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Story_ID: 214395
Speaker 1: Can you please tell me your mother's name, the fighter in the family, what was her name?
Speaker 2: Julia Bailey [Branch].
Speaker 1: Okay, so Bailey was her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And your father's name.
Speaker 2: Hayes Branch.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Everybody loved my father.  He wasn't the fighter my mother was, but he always had something to relieve the tension and he was a hard worker.  And he was the one who told me, and I think about this often, when I first learned to write, you know, the cursive writing, I had a hard time, and he said to me, "Look, if anybody else can do it, you can do it too."  My friends tell me I've never forgotten that.  I don't know if it's true.
Speaker 1: Growing up there in the nation's capital [Washington, D.C.], were your parents native Washingtonians, or some other place (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No, my mother--both of my parents were from Virginia.  My mother was from Petersburg, Virginia.  But, my father--and Petersburg is right outside of Richmond [Virginia]--but my father was from a little smaller town down near the Tennessee border, Marion, Virginia.
Story_ID: 214396
Speaker 1: And were there other children in the household when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: I grew up with two other sisters who were younger than I was.  Laurette [Branch] Henley and Jacqueline [Branch] Hall.
Speaker 1: Okay, and would you just spell their first names for me please.
Speaker 2: Laurette was L-A-U-R-E-T-T-E and Jacqueline was J-A-C-Q-U-E-L-I-N-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what years were they born in?
Speaker 2: Laurette was born 1925 and Jackie was born 1931.
Speaker 1: But everyone attended the Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] Public Schools?
Speaker 2: All of us, all three of us.  As a matter of fact, we all attended the same schools, except my sister Jackie went to [Benjamin] Banneker [High School, Washington, D.C.] because that was a new junior high school when she was ready to go.  And we lived in the area where they sent those kids to Banneker.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what you said about Washington, D.C. being intellectually stimulating, I read a lot about that too for Washington, D.C.'s middle class black neighborhoods especially.  But for that [Paul Laurence] Dunbar [High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.] school that you said you attended, can you tell me a little bit about that, because I've heard about that one and believe the other one is the M Street [High] School.
Speaker 2: M Street was the original Dunbar High School.  It was--they called it the old M Street, but then it became the Paul Laurence Dunbar High School.  And I'm sorry, I don't know exactly what year the name was changed.  One thing, I said I went to Washington D.C. schools were segregated, but I always said I went to the most fair, honest and integrated, segregated schools in the country, because I came through school with Mordecai Johnson [Jr.] whose father [Mordecai Johnson] was president of Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  And we even had youngsters who came out of the alleys, those were the poor kids who lived in the alleys.  The alleys had been set up originally as the places where the servants lived, but it was based on more, more brains than anything else.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this equal opportunity high school.  So quality education for students of all classes, but just on a segregated basis.  Okay, so integrated class-wise, if not racially.
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was desegregation ever discussed as a major issue in the black community at that point?
Speaker 2: Not when I was a child growing up.  And I guess in our house it didn't make a lot of difference.  As I recall, I don't remember any place we couldn't go.  Yes I do, I take that back.  The one place I remember we couldn't go was downtown to the theaters.  Although, I understand that some people got up and went anyway.  But around 16th Street where they had restaurants and lovely dress shops, you could go.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So these were unwritten rules or were there actually Jim Crow laws that people just--
Speaker 2: Well the schools were segregated legally, and I remember when Ralph Bunch came to town with his two twins and his children were old enough to go to school, there were no schools for Negro children in the section called Brookland [Washington, D.C.] where he lived.  And the [District of Columbia State] Board of Education told him to get his children to another school.  So he brought his two little girls into Monroe [School, Washington, D.C.], which was then the demonstration school, where all of us who went to Miner Teachers College [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] went to do our practice teaching.  And I taught Joan Bunche.
Story_ID: 214397
Speaker 1: I've skipped to the [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.], but I would like to ask also about your elementary school years, if you could tell us what those were like for you.
Speaker 2: Well, I went to [Lucretia] Mott [Elementary] School [Washington, D.C.], which has since been torn down.  I grew up at 117 Adams Street and my school as at 4th and W.  As I said to you, I came through school with people like Mordecai Johnson [Jr.] and [Samuel] Sam Bullock, whose brother-in-law [Walter Washington] became the mayor of Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA CONVERSATION)
Speaker 2: All right.  [HistoryMaker] Mrs. [Leatrice Branch] Madison, we were talking about your school days in Washington, D.C. and we talked a little bit about the high school first and then the elementary school.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: All right, so can we talk for a few minutes then about your junior high school years?  What school did you attend?
Speaker 1: I went to Shaw Junior High [School, Washington, D.C.], which is 7th and Rhode Island Avenue, and now it's been converted into a senior citizens' residence.  Those years were fun.  I guess I was kind of shy and when I got to Dunbar, but Shaw I really had a good time.  I'm not sure why (laughter).  I was trying to think of some of the things we did.  I guess by then there was a little group of us and we used to walk home together every day, and there were three of us.  And we would stop at the corner of 2nd and Rung Avenue and hold up the lamppost and then Elaine Brazier, who is now [Elaine] Pinderhughes, would go home, she lived on 1st Street and Charlotte Pigga Dodson [ph.] who has since passed on, would walk with me up 2nd Street to V and then I'd keep on up to Adams.  But we--we really had a good time during those years.  And then we went to Dunbar, and that was--the Dunbar I went to was 1st and N Street.  They have since torn that down and built a new Dunbar, which doesn't look like that at all.  As a matter of fact, this watch that I wear everyday has a picture of the building.  It really looked like a medieval castle, and we had a Cadet Corps, I don't know if anybody knows anything about the Cadet Corps anymore.  These were the male students who wore uniforms who drilled with guns.  I don't know if they really fired.  But once a year in the spring they would have this big competition over at Griffith Stadium [Washington, D.C.], which was the baseball park and where they had the football games, and the three--we were all segregated, so the three colored high schools would compete.  And Dunbar won most of the time, but it was Dunbar, Armstrong [Manual Training High School, Washington, D.C.] and [Francis L.] Cardozo [Senior High School; Cardozo Education Campus, Washington, D.C.]  Dunbar was the academic school and [Francis L.] Cardozo was business and Armstrong was technical.  And then I wanted to go away to college, and my mother [Julia Bailey Branch] decided that I was not mature enough to go away.  And so I went to Miner [Teachers College; University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.], which was a teachers college, which was really still part of the public school system.  All the teachers who were at Miner had taught in the public schools.  And then there was a demonstration school, Monroe, where those were--teachers had been pulled out of the regular public schools and they were the ones who taught us how to teach.  And my sister Jackie [Jacqueline Branch Hall] and I were sayin' because Jackie, Laurette [Branch Henley] and I all went to Miner.  And we were sayin' last night that all those teachers had taught and we had four years, when the first year we went out to observe teachers.  The second year we had something called observation and participation, which meant we went out and observed part of the time, then we ended up teaching, like there, there were many different types of reading which I have forgotten and we would have to teach a reading lesion in that type.  And arithmetic, you know, by the same way.  So that was--then the junior year, I don't remember what we did, but our senior year we did nine weeks of practice teaching, and I mean we worked those nine weeks.
Speaker 2: You said Dunbar was the academic or the college prep school.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay, were most of the young women encouraged to go into teaching, or did it--
Speaker 1: No--
Speaker 2: --just happen that the three sisters in your family chose it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: I think it just happened.  You know in a way, in the era in which I came along, there was not a lot that black women could do.  Washington was unusual in that the government hired a lot of people and we, (laughter) we always said there were a lot of black men walking around who had degrees in esoteric subjects who couldn't get jobs.  But the other thing was, there were lots of professionals in Washington.  I was surprised when we went to Cambridge [Massachusetts].  I had grown up with black doctors, but we went to Cambridge, the first one came while we were there.  And the first judge had been appointed while we were there and that was '51 (1951) and '52 (1952).
Speaker 2: And that's during the Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] years?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was when my husband [HistoryMaker Robert P. Madison] was at Harvard and my friend Elaine Brazier Pinderhughes was there.  She had married a Washington fella, Charles Pinderhughes who was a psychiatrist.  And he had--they had gone to Boston [Massachusetts] right after they were married and he became a psychiatrist at Cushing Veterans [Cushing General Hospital, Framingham, Massachusetts],  which was really kind of amazing, because, as I said, the only black internist came while we were there and that was '51 [1951], '52 [1952].
Story_ID: 214398
Speaker 1: So now what year did you graduate from high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High School; Paul Laurence Dunbar Senior High School, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-nine [1939].
Speaker 1: Okay, and then four years at the [Miner] Teachers College [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-three [1943].  And the thing about it was, even though I was at teachers college and really still part of the public school system, I did not have to rebatch and there were no questions about my admission when I applied to go to University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] to get my master's [degree].  And three of us [Madison and her sisters, Laurette Branch Henley and Jacqueline Branch Hall] who had been in school together went the first year at the same time, that was fun.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So much of your college education is taking place during the World War II [WWII] era, in the 1940s?
Speaker 2: Wait a minute, when did World War II start, 1941.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, with Pearl Harbor.
Speaker 2: Okay, yes.  That's true.  That's true as I think about it, because we did not have (laughter) many men in the teachers college.  But I can remember they were drafted and they had to leave.  And it was really kind of a shock, you know.
Speaker 1: Do you remember Pearl Harbor?  The day-
Speaker 2: I remember the day it happened, because we had the radio on.  You know, there was no television in those days.  And President [Franklin Delano] Roosevelt came on and interrupted whatever the program was to announce--and it was a Sunday, to announce that we had been attacked, and I guess, you now, we didn't--I didn't know what it meant, but I soon found out.  Because people I knew were drafted.  My husband [HistoryMaker Robert P. Madision] was drafted.  Well he wasn't drafted, he was an ASTP.  And he was able to shift out as a second lieutenant.  And he was lucky he came back.
Speaker 1: Now ASTP, what does that stand for?
Speaker 2: Army Specialized Training Program.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were certain colleges that had this program because it prepared these young men to be officers.
Story_ID: 214399
Speaker 1: And now I would ask you these questions about Mr. [HistoryMaker Robert P.] Madison, but we didn't talk at all about how the two of you met and how he became your husband in this era of World War II [WWII].
Speaker 2: Let me see, when did we meet?  I had already started teaching and I knew a fella who was a mutual acquaintance who also knew my husband, who my husband still has contact with.  Jefferson P. Rogers, where is Jeff now?  I am trying to remember because he moves around.  But Jeff introduced me to Robert.  As a matter of fact, according to Robert, Jeff told him, see my husband said that he was bored.  He was studying architecture at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  And at that point, they were all men.  And he said the girls that they met were not exactly what he had in mind.  So Jeff introduced--well Monk--Jeff told Monk to call me.  So Monk did.  And he always said the first time he came to visit he was scared to death because he had grown up in a house with four boys and I had two sisters [Laurette Branch Henley and Jacqueline Branch Hall].  He said the telephone was ringing, people were running up and down the steps, everybody's answering everybody's question.  He'd never seen so much confusion (laughter), but I guess I saw him off and on until he shipped out.  And then six years later, he came back from the war and he called me.  And so I guess in a way we kinda picked up where we left off.  And then we got married April the 16th, 1949 in Washington [D.C.] at Howard University in [Andrew] Rankin [Memorial] Chapel.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I--and I guess we should say at this point, each time you mention Monk, that's Robert P. Madison, Mr. Madison.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay so folks will know that they are one and the same.
Story_ID: 214400
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask, because I teach history, I read a lot about the 1940s and the fact that black people looked at that era as one in which a lot of opportunities were opened to them--in the [U.S.] military, different opportunities to serve as officers.  It's the era of the Tuskegee Airmen.  But when you were there, in the 1940s, did you a--did ya have a sense that all of those changes were being ushered into the black experience?
Speaker 2: I didn't necessarily have a sense.  I was aware, see everybody knows about the Tuskegee Airmen, but nobody knows about the 92nd Infantry [Division] where [HistoryMaker] Robert [P.] Madison was.  As a matter of fact, there's a book called 'Black Americans in Defense of the Nation' [sic. 'Black Americans in Defense of Our Nation,' U.S. Department of Defense].  In the first edition, they mention the 92nd and they said in essence, they were troublemakers, which is the truth.  In the edition we have here, there is nothin' about the 92nd.  So the survivors are trying to get some, some recognition.  They were at [Fort] Huachuca [Arizona] so they call themselves the Buffalo Soldiers.  But the 92nd, those guys shipped out before the Tuskegee Airman, and my brother-in-law, Stewart Henley, was a Tuskegee Airman.  And the 92nd raised so much cane overseas that Truman sent a guy to Chicago [Illinois], [HistoryMaker] Truman [K.] Gibson, oh to see what was going on.  And there was a man that was very good friends with my husband who came back, they called him Peepsite [ph.].  His name was [HistoryMaker] Parren [J.] Mitchell [III].  He came back and ended up in [U.S.] Congress as a representative of the Baltimore, Maryland area.  And is part of that Mitchell family that is so well known on the East Coast with their involvement in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 1: So is that why the men of the 92nd were labeled troublemakers, they were agitating for change positive change?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were agitating for change, and they were doing some ridiculous things to get it too.
Speaker 1: And Mr. Madison was a part of that.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Oh my.  Do you have an example of some of the things (laughter) that they did, anything in particular in mind?
Speaker 2: I think they--most of what they did was to try to make the white officers angry enough that they would leave.  Because see, in those days, it was a segregated [U.S.] Army, and the highest black officer, except the chaplain, was first lieutenant.  So they would do things like come up for mess and gather food and say they were taking it back to Maria who was in the tent.  Wasn't any Maria in the tent.  But it just kept the white officers suspicious and tryin' to check and all.  This guy they called Peepsite.  I don't remember where he went, but he came back draggin' and complainin' about he was so hungry he hadn't eaten in days and he was tired.  And you know--they sent him to, what'd they call it, it wasn't a hospital, but whatever they call the hospital, because he complains, there wasn't anything wrong with him.  But they would just, they would do those annoying kinds of things, because they weren't sure what was going to happen.  But they weren't gonna just sit there and be quiet.  'Cause, you know, the amazing thing to me is my husband was twenty-one years old over there fighting to make the world safe for democracy.  And he had two pearl-handled guns he'd taken off of a German solider, but when he got shot up and was in the hospital, he never got his guns back--
Story_ID: 214401
Speaker 1: I remember the name of a lot of the activists, especially--I am thinking of the founder of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters (simultaneous) A. Philip Randolph--
Speaker 2: Randolph--
Speaker 1: --yeah and his threatened March on Washington [Movement (MOWM)].  I'm wondering what the folks in Washington [D.C.] thought of that in 1941?
Speaker 2: Well I don't know because I remember my father [Hayes Branch] was in World War I [WWI] and those men never got their bonus until, when, sometime in the '40s [1940s].  They had marched on Washington.  They had been camped out down on the [National] Mall [Washington, D.C.] and finally sometime in the '40s [1940s] they got their bonus.  And the two officers who were there were [General Dwight David "Ike"] Eisenhower and [General Douglas] MacArthur.  And they talk about how they were treated.
Speaker 1: It's--and when I talked about your school days, we didn't talk much about the [Great] Depression.  I suppose because you describe such pleasant experiences.
Speaker 2: Well I never--we never suffered.  One thing, I had a grandmother and my grandmother knew how to save.  And like I told (unclear), I've never been hungry.  And I---we used to say, "Don't leave any cream of wheat, 'cause we know we'll have cornbread for dinner and that cream of wheat will be in the cornbread (laughter)."  She wouldn't throw out anything.  And I never felt deprived.  We had a car and we lived in a house, and we never got put out.  I can remember walkin' to school and seein' families who had been put out on the street.  You know, thinkin' how sad it was.  We never got put out.  As a matter of fact, I told ya I grew up at 117 Adams Street and my parents were never unemployed and my uncle who had been married and his wife had died, he lived with us, he had a job down at a place they called the Industrial Home for Boys at Blue Plains [Industrial Home School for Colored Children at Blue Plains; Junior Village, Washington, D.C.].  All the incorrigible boys were sent down there.  And he taught carpentry.  And he would come home on Thursday nights and every other weekend.  But he contributed some income to the family.  So we've never had any suffering--
Story_ID: 214402
Speaker 1: Now you said your grandmother played a special role in your early life.  Is that your maternal grandmother?
Speaker 2: My maternal grandmother.
Speaker 1: And what was her name please?
Speaker 2: Laura Bailey.
Speaker 1: Did she live in the home with you?
Speaker 2: She lived at home with us.  She lived with us and she died the year I graduated from college [Miner Teachers College; University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] and I had started teaching, and she died.  And she was about eighty-one as close as we can figure.  My youngest sister, Jackie [Jacqueline Branch Hall], has said to me that she is doing the research on our family.  I know that somehow our mother [Julia Bailey Branch] had told us that our family in Virginia was related to Joseph Cotton's family, you know how that goes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know anything about your paternal grandparents?  Were they involved---
Speaker 2: --they were both alive when we were little and my paternal grandmother died when I was ten years old.  Because my mother thought it was a noble thing and children should have the experience of going to camp.  So she sent me to camp to [Camp] Clarissa Scott, which was the YW [YWCA, Young Women's Christian Association] Camp down at Highland Beach [Maryland].  I guess that doesn't mean anything to you, does it?
Speaker 1: No, but it will to other people who know the Washington [D.C.] area.
Speaker 2: Oh okay.  And I hated camp.  I hated it, I don't know---I just hated it.  One thing, you had to, you know, wash off in a basin.  Well anyway, my grandmother died while I was there so I got to come home.  I was glad about that.  And then I was tryin' to remember when my grandfather had died, my paternal grandfather, because I was here in--I was married [to HistoryMaker Robert P. Madison] and here in Cleveland [Ohio] when he died.  I almost called my sister Jackie because she was home longer than I was and I couldn't remember the year.  And I never knew my maternal grandfather, he was dead I guess before my mother ever got married.
Speaker 1: But your paternal grandparents, were they also in the [Washington] D.C. area?  And what were their names please.
Speaker 2: James and Lucinda Branch.  And they lived in northeast on a little street, Acker Street, 655 Acker Street Northeast.
Story_ID: 214403
Speaker 1: Now, you've mentioned two presidents in conjunction with these school years in [Washington] D.C.  First President [Franklin Delano] Roosevelt and, you know, his announcement in 1941 about the attack on Pearl Harbor and then [President Harry S.] Truman sending folks to the European Theater of War [World War II, WWII] to see what was going on with the 92nd [Infantry] Division.  But, I'm wondering if for the policies that are associated with those two administrations, first with the [Great] Depression era relief policies.  Just wonder if in Washington D.C.'s black community, President Roosevelt was as popular with the black people there as he seemed to be with black people in other communities.
Speaker 2: He was just as popular.  President Roosevelt was just as popular with the poor people as he was with anybody else.  And I'm sitting here thinking I probably know one or two people who were very well off who probably were not very happy with his policies.  But by and large, people were very happy.  And when he died, the streets were lined with people to see that procession.
Speaker 1: We have about one minute left in this segment, but I wanted to also ask about political party affiliation during that [President Herbert Clark] Hoover to Roosevelt transition, as we hear a lot about people leaving the Republican Party in the black community and going over to the Democratic Party because of Roosevelt's popularity.  But were you aware of any of that happening around D.C.?
Speaker 2: Well first of all you have to understand that people in Washington D.C. didn't have the vote for years and I am tryin' to remember exactly when they got it.  Because, and I knew it, but it went right out of my head.  My mother [Julia Bailey Branch] was very upset because the first year she was registered to vote they challenged her.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I am tryin' to remember when they got it.
Story_ID: 214404
Speaker 1: At the end of the last segment we were talking about political party affiliation and black Americans, especially during the [President Franklin Delano] Roosevelt and [President Harry S.] Truman eras.  And then you reminded me that citizens or residents in Washington, D.C. didn't have the right to vote in all elections.  Okay, and you said that changed, and rather recently it changed.
Speaker 2: I think it was, I'm tryin' to remember.  As Roosevelt was out by the time it changed.  And I used to know.  I think it was [President] Lyndon [Baines] Johnson, but I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: In the '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a long time to go without voting.
Speaker 2: Let's see, because first of all it was a segment of [U.S.] Congress that voted against it every time it came up, the Dixiecrats.  They would fight against it.  But I, and I can't remember exactly how they got it through, because by then I had left home.
Speaker 1: All right.  I wanted to ask also about the social life in Washington, D.C.  You've described very pleasant home atmosphere for the Branch family.  But I wonder, and Branch is your maiden name right, okay.  But I wonder about some of the other organizations that the family might have been affiliated with or institutions, was the church an important institution in your life, or were there other organizations that you were active in.
Speaker 2: My family was not very involved in other institutions.  My mother [Julia Bailey Branch] had had a unpleasant experience in the church and that kinda turned her off.  Although my neighbor next door would take us to Sunday school every Sunday, and she didn't object to that.
Story_ID: 214405
Speaker 1: And then there were some clubs and I had joined a sorority when I was at college [Miner Teachers College; University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.].  I'm a Delta [Sigma Theta Sorority].
Speaker 2: Oh, good.  So am I.  (Laughter)  The sororities are interesting organizations.  But can you tell me why you chose Delta Sigma Theta?
Speaker 1: I guess because of the people I knew that we had, well Miner had a chapter of AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], Deltas, [Phi Beta] Sigmas [Fraternity], and somethin' else, there was another one.  But I think I like the people in the Deltas the best.  Although I have a very good friend who is my daughter's [Jeanne Madison], my older daughter's godmother who is an AKA, who came out an AKA family.  But see my family didn't belong to a Greek-led organizations.
Speaker 2: Was there--Delta Sigma Theta was founded in Washington, D.C.  And so I am wondering was there still that focus on public service for the sorority or was it a social organization as much-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --It was some of both.  It was some of both.  And as you said it, I was tryin' to remember to tell you what projects did we do.  That was a long time ago.  I can still remember wearin' that white blouse and that red corduroy jumper and carryin' a book.  But in terms of projects, I'm not sure what we did then.  And I have never--I think I spent more time with the Deltas when we lived in Cambridge [Massachusetts], just because it was a way to get to know people.  You know, that my husband [HistoryMaker Robert P. Madison] was in the [Harvard University] Graduate School of Design [Cambridge, Massachusetts], so I had to find somethin' to do, because I did, I worked in the library there for a semester in the city planning and landscape architecture library [Frances Loeb Library, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  That was kind of fun.
Story_ID: 214406
Speaker 1: --I guess I'm looking at this point, for the roots for all of the social activism and the community involvement and everything else that I see, is such an important part of your adult life in Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 2: I think that came from my mother [Julia Bailey Branch].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I said to you my mother was the fighter.  And we bought this house with a restrictive covenant and she knew it.  And the realtors had talked to her and persuaded her to go ahead and do it.  You see, I think there is great irony in that situation.  Because we moved right across the street.  And a white man across the street was moving out.  He came and told her she could have his house.  And there were no restrictive covenants on the odd number houses.  The restrictive covenants were on the even side.  And we lived in 120, and the white family 118 (unclear).  There was an older woman whose son lived over there and his wife.  And even when they moved out of the District [of Columbia; Washington, D.C.], right across the district line into Maryland, they would--she would come back and sit and talk to my grandmother because my grandmother had a son.  And these two little old ladies would sit there and compare notes about their wayward sons.  You know, it's so, it's all so crazy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you said your family fought the restrictive covenant.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they went to court.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you had to hire an attorney or did they--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and they lost.  And somebody said why'd they move, I said 'cause the court told them they had to get out.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well that was, when was that, wait a minute, hold on one minutes.  Laurette [Branch Henley] was born in '25 [1925], that was 1926.
Speaker 1: And you moved across the street?
Speaker 2: And lived there up until 1996.  Just sold that house.
Speaker 1: It's family property.
Speaker 2: That house that you saw in the box, the picture in the box.
Speaker 1: Hopefully we'll get a picture of that on camera before we finish up today.
Speaker 2: It was a row house, you know.  But it was a great row house.  My husband [HistoryMaker Robert P. Madison] used to come home and pace off the rooms.  And then we had a nice long backyard.  We had a grape arbor.  And my uncle, I told you, he taught carpentry.  He made us a seesaw we put under the grape arbor, and we had swings we put on the back porch.  And the back porch was all screened in.  It was nice.
Story_ID: 214407
Speaker 1: I wanted to talk a little bit about the year at Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  Both your husband's [HistoryMaker Robert P. Madison] work and yours as a librarian there.  Now that was 1951, '52 [1952]?  Okay, so the war [World War II, WWII] is over.  You finished up college and now you are in Cambridge, Massachusetts.  What was that experience like, I know it's not the South anymore and I think of Washington, D.C. as being part of the South.
Speaker 2: No, they say Washington is part of the South 'cause everybody from Virginia is in Washington.  But, I well, I think black people had better opportunities in D.C. then they had in Boston [Massachusetts].  Matter of fact, I was really surprised when I saw the condition of black people in Boston.  I walked around talkin' about the Cradle of Liberty.  And this lady was telling me about her rootage.  And finally I had had it and I said, "Can you spend it?"  She looked at me.  I mean, you know, they didn't have the jobs that black people had in D.C.  And they did not have the professionals there.  So, it really was kind of amazing.  One thing, Robert got admitted to Harvard to study with Walter Gropius, who took in only eight guys, eight students a semester.  And in Monk's [Robert P. Madison] class, there was one guy who was admitted who couldn't make it.  He was in one of the eastern countries.  They wouldn't let him out.  So, but they all traveled as a group.  We traveled as a family.  Anytime anybody went to dinner, everybody went.  We all went into another little town to see these contemporary houses.  It was a whole community contemporary houses.  And every year Gropius would have a party for his boys.  As a matter of fact, we were back in Cambridge last year because they had a reunion for Gropius' boys, '51 [1951], '52 [1952], '53 [1953].  And his house is now a museum.  It's open to the public.  And it really is amazing when you walk through because it's not a big house, but the space and the way it is used is really sort of, it is a very nice house (unclear).  And Monk's class gave him an apple tree to plant in his yard for, I think, it was his fiftieth birthday.  And you know, he had come in here from Germany.  He had escaped from Germany and come in here.  And he had started a school of architecture called the Doll House.  And I worked in the library [Frances Loeb Design Library, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  With architecture I was comfortable.  With city plannin' I was comfortable.  Landscape architecture, I had a stock line, "Have you consulted the catalog?"  'Cause I did not know things about plants.  (Laughter)  You couldn't find a catalog, you had to ask the other librarian, the main librarian.
Speaker 1: All right so--
Speaker 2: And it was great 'cause the library was right in the front of Hunt Hall.  And everybody who came in came by the library.  So I got to know most of the people in the building.  And then all the staff would take a break around four o'clock and we'd go upstairs someplace to a coffee break.  That you could have coffee or tea, and some kind of cookies.  And we all put in a quarter a month.  And it was interesting, you know, really it was almost like the place emptied.
Speaker 1: Now that is through 1952?
Speaker 2: Yeah, '51 [1951], '52 [1952].
Speaker 1: Okay, that you're at Harvard.
Speaker 2: He entered in '51 [1951].  He was part of the class that went in in February of '51 [1951].  And so he was through in February '52 [1952].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 214408
Speaker 1: And how soon after that did you come to Ohio?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  Let's see, when he [HistoryMaker Robert P. Madison] finished he went to Washington [D.C.] and taught at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  And Jeanne [Madison] was born in Freedmen's Hospital [Howard University Hospital, Washington, D.C.], just like I was.
Speaker 1: And that is your oldest daughter?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he taught there, see he finished in February of '52 [1952].  So he taught about '52 [1952] to June of '52 [1952].  He came back--he went back to Cambridge [Massachusetts] and got his degree and his Fulbright Award.  And then we sailed for Paris [France] September the 30th, 1952 with a two-month old baby.  And sometimes I think I should have my head examined.  I did it and I'm glad I did it.  It wasn't the easiest thing.  Well we went on the (unclear) and that's a great way to travel, and there was somebody to take care of the baby, you know, when you went to meals and that kind of thing.  And there was activity on the ship.  So that was great.  And I think Robert made a lot of good friends.  When we lived in Paris, there were other guys who had traveled in fellowships and they would always come and stay with us with their wives, and we still keep in touch with some of them.
Speaker 1: While you were in Paris, did you, did you run across any of the American artists who seemed to love to visit Paris so much?
Speaker 2: We saw [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham.  We saw Katherine Dunham's troupe perform at the Palais de Chaillot.  I don't know if we saw any other American artists.  I'm tryin' to remember, but I remember we saw her.  And we went to the Folies Bergere.  That was funny because they sang 'Sunny Boy' with a tune that you've never heard before.  And can you imagine 'Sunny Boy' in Paris?  It was, it was strange.
Speaker 1: I'm thinking of Josephine Baker, (simultaneous) (unclear)--was she still in 19--
Speaker 2: This was 1952.
Speaker 1: Fifty-two [1952].
Speaker 2: She wasn't in Paris then.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: I don't know if, I should have known because I saw the play at the playhouse, Hunter.
Speaker 1: Oh Alberta Hunter.
Speaker 2: Alberta Hunter.  I don't know if she was there.  We didn't see her.  There was a group--I'll tell you who was there.  If I said Dr. E. Franklin Frazier--
Speaker 1: Yes, the sociologist.
Speaker 2: Franklin Frazier and his wife [Marie Brown Frazier] were there.  As a matter of fact, they were godsends.  Because I said we had to live on the French market.  The French do not have any baby food, they did not have any in those days.  You cooked the stuff and then you put it in the (unclear) you stood up, you grind it, you grounded it, you grated it.  And so if I would give her money, she would get baby food for us at the commissary because they told we couldn't use the commissary, we had to live on the French market.  So that was great.  And we used to go down to her house sometimes to play bridge.  And then [HistoryMaker] Mercer Cook was there.  And it happens that Mercer Cook's father [Will Mercer Cook] had taught French at Howard.  And when Monk [Robert P. Madison] first went to Dakar [Senegal], [Will] Mercer Cook was the ambassador.  And he went back and forth over a period of about ten years.  And by the time he went the last time, Rudy Aggrey was the ambassador.  And [Orison Rudolph] Rudy Aggrey's brother, [James Emman] Kwegyir [Aggrey], lived right here in Cleveland [Ohio].  As a matter of fact, he lived on one of these streets not too far from here and was the state director of welfare.  And the Aggrey brothers had been at Howard sometime while Robert was there.  And his father was African, and his mother and father had gone south and established a college in North Carolina.  So, and Rudy is in Washington now.
Story_ID: 214409
Speaker 1: Sounds like that French speaking world was one that attracted a lot of people for various reasons.  But, I know you mentioned E. Franklin Frazier in 1952, and it's just as the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] is starting to build its case for what would eventually be decided as the Brown [v. Board of Education of Topeka] case in '54 [1954].  But were folks talking about that in Paris [France]?
Speaker 2: Not in Paris.  But it was interesting because everybody in Paris knew about segregation in Wash--in the [United] States.  As a matter of fact, since I told you we had no refrigerator and I had to shop every day, and you had to go to a store to get an egg, the creamery, I think you get milk there too, but you had to go to the boucherie to get meat, beef and lamb.  You had to go to the charcuterie to get pork, you know, and you had to go someplace else to get vegetables.  But we also had an old man market that came--we lived (unclear) and the market set up every Tuesday, Thursday, and Sunday in the middle of the street.  And you'd run out there and buy--and you had to by stuff in, in season.  Would you believe there was a season when you couldn't get onions?  I mean that was a real rude awakening. (Laughter)  You ate stuff in season.  I tell ya, gay Paris (laughter).  And they still put out the lights at night.  Mrs. Frazier [Marie Brown Frazier] used to walk around gay Paris (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, you're coming back home then in 1953 or?
Speaker 2: Fifty-three [1953].
Speaker 1: Fifty-three [1953], and with a one-year-old daughter [Jeanne Madison].
Speaker 2: She was a year old on the boat comin' home.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: --and we had left Paris and gone to London [England].  Got refused service in a restaurant in London.
Speaker 1: Because of race?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh, yeah.  But we went back with a white couple who were visitin', and we just sat down.  And you could hear the forks hit the plate (laughter).
Speaker 1: But that didn't happen in Paris?
Speaker 2: Oh no, no the French they don't do anything like that.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause, you know, I think Americans had been going to Paris for a long time.  See one of the things the British were dealing with the fact a lot of people were comin' in from their colonies.  And I wish I had cut out one of those ads or had saved one somehow.  Because the ads in the paper were stated so if, you know, for jobs or for rental.  So if you came out of one of the colonies you should not apply.  It was worded and I've been tryin' to remember exactly how it was worded.  The British were strange, they were strange.  And we had no problems in Italy.  'Cause we rented a car and took oh three weeks, we went southern France, Italy down to Venice [Italy].  And oh we went through--around Lake Geneva.  As a matter of fact, I got a picture there of me and Jeanne sitting in a restaurant in Lake Geneva in Switzerland.  So it was, you know, it was somethin' I'm glad I did.  It wasn't the easiest thing.
Story_ID: 214410
Speaker 1: And so, when you came home in '53 [1953] where did you settle?
Speaker 2: Well, we went back to Washington [D.C.] and he [Madison's husband, HistoryMaker Robert P. Madision] taught a year and announced he was coming back here [Cleveland, Ohio] to open his office.  So I said well since we like to eat, I got up and got a job teachin'.  So I taught a semester before we came back here, and we came back here in '54 [1954] and he opened his office, you see.  When I came here in '49 [1949] I had my master's [degree] and I went down--people told me, "Oh Cleveland board won't hire you, they don't hire colored teachers."  What it is, they would only hire colored teachers and put up in an area where there were colored teachers and colored kids.  It happens, thank goodness, I wrote to the state first and got my certificate for elementary schools and for guidance counseling, and went down and talked to Dr. Levinson [ph.].  And Miles Standish [Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio] at that point was in transition.  And so he said I'm--we didn't even have a car, so he said I'm gonna appoint you to Miles Standish--no I'm gonna appoint you to a school on a streetcar line.  So every day I rode the bus and then I had to walk that long two blocks from 105th street to Miles Standish until we got a car.  And so I taught there a year and a half.  But while I was down at the board of education, I went to find out about guidance counseling.  So I went to information, they said to go to the second floor.  I went to the second floor and they said, oh no go to the sixth floor, this was 1949.  And I went to the sixth floor, they said go to the second floor.  I said, I just left the second floor and we just stood and looked at each other.  Slowly it dawned on me I was getting the run around, and I don't have good sense.  We came back in '54 [1954] and I went through the same thing again (laughter).
Speaker 1: But you got hired?
Speaker 2: Well I got hired to teach, but I got a degree to do some counseling, I think I could do some counseling as well as some of these other people.
Speaker 1: Did you ever get a position counseling?
Speaker 2: No, 'cause I came home, eventually.
Story_ID: 214411
Speaker 1: Now where was your second daughter [Juliette Madison] born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Cleveland [Ohio] at Mount Sinai [Hospital; Mount Sinai Healthcare Foundation].
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, and what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-seven [1957].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your other daughter [Jeanne Madison] is in school by then?
Speaker 2: Yes, she--my kids are five years apart.
Speaker 1: And you said you came home after the a--
Speaker 2: Well, see, I said to [HistoryMaker] Robert [P.] Madison, "I'm not havin' another child until we get settled somewhere."  So I thought we were settled.  So Julia was born in Mount Sinai in '57 (1957).  And then he came home one day and said, "Whoops the recession's got me."  So I said well, I'll go back to work.  So they sent me to some school, you know, I cannot remember where it was and I didn't like it.  I asked to go back to Miles Standish [Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio] and they sent me.
Speaker 1: May I ask a very contemporary question?  I'm just curious about working moms in the 1950s.  You had--did you have an easy time finding childcare when your children--
Speaker 2: When we first came back she was in nursery school at Karamu.  And then we had a girl, Velma, who loved Jeanne.  I'm not sure she wasn't a birdbrain, but she loved Jeanne and nothin' happened to Jeanne.
Speaker 1: So she came to your home?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: And in those days, we lived at one of those nice old apartments on East Boulevard, it was a walk-up, a third floor walk-up, but it had a front porch and a back porch.  You'd go out and look over the park.
Speaker 1: It's interesting that Karamu name gets mentioned a lot in our interviews.  The interview prior to this one was with an artist.  And so he talked about the Karamu [House, Cleveland, Ohio] artist, including Mr. Sallee, Mr. Charles [L.] Sallee [Jr.].
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: And now you're mentioning Karamu's childcare program.
Speaker 2: Well I taught in 1957, and how'd I do this.  Let's see, Jeanne, yeah '57 [1957] I think it was to '60 [1960], I taught at George Washington Carver [Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio] with Hazel Mountain Walker, who was very big in Karamu.
Speaker 1: In the theater program?  Which is usually what Karamu is known for, and then we hear about all the other services too.
Speaker 2: And it is interesting because through the years Jeanne has seen kids in school who were at Karamu in the nursery school with her.
Speaker 1: And Karamu is an interesting place, and I think a lot of the folks outside of Cleveland viewing this interview recognize that.
Speaker 2: Well, [HistoryMaker] June [Sallee] Antoine, who is Charles Sallee's sister, and I were among a group of people that they tried to get together to form some sort of group of black women to be involved with Karamu.  'Cause Karamu was started by white people and run by white people.
Speaker 1: But became famous for black theater.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, and where we lived on North Park, I got an album around here with pictures of our house on North Park (unclear).  Across the street was a ravine and we could look over and see the Jelliffes' house across on Fairhill.
Speaker 1: The white couple that founded Karamu.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, Russell [Jelliffe] and Rowena [Woodham Jelliffe].
Speaker 1: So whatever became of that black women's support group for Karamu?
Speaker 2: Well eventually they integrated the board so that was all that was necessary.
Speaker 1: Oh, so black and white women worked together on the women's council.  Okay.  Do you remember when that was?
Speaker 2: In the '60s [1960s], in early '60s [1960s], because we moved to Cleveland Heights [Ohio], moved in that house October 27, 1960.  I remember that.
Story_ID: 214412
Speaker 1: Now Cleveland Heights [Ohio] is a rather exclusive suburb at that point in history isn't it?
Speaker 2: I guess it was.  Guess it was.
Speaker 1: Was that a positive experience then integrating the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well we had some good neighbors.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We got threatened before we ever moved.  See one thing that happened, the Sun Press had an article, a very inflammatory article because some people had moved--(unclear) those areas.  And the Sun Press, you know, in essence, the Negroes are comin'.  And we got threatened.  Somebody called my husband [HistoryMaker Robert P. Madison] and, you know, asked him why was he movin' and our house was just about complete.  As a matter of fact, we were gonna move in the next weekend, the next week, we'd move on the weekend.  And he told Monk [Robert P. Madison] he would buy his house, buy our house if we would meet.  And Monk said okay I'll meet you at my office and he never showed up.  But during that period, and I don't know why, [J.] Newton Hill came as director of Karamu [House, Cleveland, Ohio] and they bombed his house.  And then he was gonna buy a house from a family named Garrd, no I got it backwards.  The Garrd family, G-A-R-R-D, they said they would sell to Newton Hill, they bombed it.  So when they sold to Newton Hill they bombed it again.  So I heard both of those.  And one of, this is the irony you deal with, and one of those occasions, Robert Madison had left home to get the model of the American Embassy to take to the [U.S.] State Department the next day.  And I'm sittin' here with two little kids [Jeanne Madison and Juliette Madison] and the house is shakin'.  And, you know, he is getting this kind of recognition and this is what's happening.  And then one Mother's Day we heard, it was night, we had been out to dinner and come in, we heard a bomb and they bombed Rodger Saffold's house at one point.  So I don't know.  We never did find out.  And I got a copy of the letter we used to get religiously in that box, the hangman's noose and the letter.  And we called the Cleveland Heights police and I called the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation].  I never heard that they found anybody or that they knew who it was.  But it ceased after a while.  And we had some good neighbors who looked out for us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you built the home in Cleveland Heights, is that one that Mr. Madison designed?
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, there are two Madison design houses side-by-side.  We moved, we were supposed to move the same time, we were a week apart.  How it all got started, a guy who was a psychiatrist, who has since died, Charles DeLeon, came and said to Monk, "I have two adolescent daughters and I'm livin' in an apartment, I wanna build a house."  So his wife, Sydney [ph.], and I, we'd go out and look at land, and we had looked in Bratenahl [Ohio], we'd lookin' out in Mayfield Village [Ohio], we're lookin'.  And Robert came home one day and said, "Ya know, I was drivin' down North Park Boulevard and I saw two lots."  So we got a white lawyer who bought those two lots for us and gave us a quick claim deed.  And then Robert designed the houses, and the City of Cleveland Heights said okay if you go in straight up, you know, with no deception, it's okay.  So (unclear) the contractor said the same thing.  And so we moved in our house first, October the 27th, 1960.  And I will never forget the first night we were there, all of a sudden I see all these people running out in the street, across the street to the ravine.  I thought oh my God what has happened now.  I didn't hear anything.  But nothin' happened.  And then one night somebody came up into our circular driveway and the light came down our drape, and Monk ran outside to see what it was and I was pleading with him, "Don't go out, don't go out, stay in here."  We had some harrowing times, but we survived.
Story_ID: 214413
Speaker 1: All right, we were talking about life in Cleveland Heights [Ohio] beginning in 1960.  Okay and you have two little children [Jeanne Madison and Juliette Madison] at that point.  And it's a neighborhood sort of in transition but--
Speaker 2: No our neighborhood was not in transition.
Speaker 1: Oh we couldn't call it transition yet--
Speaker 2: You know, no, no.  We had two people coming in, that's not transition.  As a matter of fact, I'm tryin' to remember, there was only, the only black family I can think of that was in Cleveland Heights stood at two I think.  I know that the Spences [ph.] were in Cleveland Heights, he was a doctor, and the Evanses [ph.].  And all four of them were Phi Beta Kappa.  But there was no transition with two families.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's interesting then Cleveland Heights has that history, because now it seems to be so very different in that open housing is something that is really advocated by a lot of folks in Cleveland Heights.
Speaker 2: We fought for it.  And did you see where I was a member of the Heights Citizens for Human Rights?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay, we fought for that and we fought and out of that grew the Community Congress, Heights Community Congress.  And they're the ones who have been consistently watching and being sure that the housing patterns are maintained.
Story_ID: 214414
Speaker 1: Now when did those organizations [Heights Citizens for Human Rights and Heights Community Congress] then come into being, if you're moving there [Cleveland Heights, Ohio] in 1960 and experiencing some problems?  When do we start to see sort of--
Speaker 2: I think in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Okay, so a decade later.  Okay you start to see some progress.
Speaker 2: I think people were interested, but it took about a decade to get organized and to get enough people and to find out who was interested.  Because when we moved there, there were a lot of people on the faculty at Case Western Reserve [University, Cleveland, Ohio], it was then Western Reserve in the medical school.  And a lot of Cleveland Clinic [Cleveland, Ohio] doctors were there.  As a matter of fact, the Criles lived in Cleveland Heights [Ohio], and you know his father founded the clinic.  And I don't know if Monk [HistoryMaker Robert P. Madison] told ya, he worked for Robert A. Little at one point.  As a matter of fact, Robert A. Little was the only one who had, who taught him, would hire him when he graduated.  And that happened because he went to Bob and said, "Look, I'll work for you for two weeks for free.  If you don't want me, then just tell me to go."  You know, he and Bob Little are still friends and Bob Little is very complementary to Robert.  But I brought that up because Bob is married to a Halle, the Halle [Brothers Co.] department store.  And one of her sisters was married to one of the Criles, and they lived back off of Cedar, back up in, what's that, Norfolk, up in there, sections you can't even see.  But I guess, I was also involved with Girl Scouts.  So I think I have been in every nook and cranny in Cleveland Heights.  I was not a leader.  I would not go out and sleep in the woods.  But I was what they called the neighborhood chairman, which meant that I called the meetings of all the leaders and they had to come report.  Then I could go from meeting to meeting if I wanted to.
Story_ID: 214415
Speaker 1: But we moved to Cleveland Heights [Ohio]. There was a family across the street that came and welcomed us, the Rotroughs [ph.], and Peggy [ph.] and Guido [ph.].  And they had two little children, Amy and Becky, and my Julie [Juliette Madison] was between Amy and Becky.  And it ended up they all went to nursery school together.  And then they moved to Massachusetts.  And Guido has since died.  Peggy wrote me, I guess he died last year.  And, at one point, we were travelin' in the east, we stayed with the Rotroughs.  That was funny 'cause she told me, she said, "Now Leatrice, I'm gonna have a party and I'm inviting my neighbors and you keep your mouth shut, 'cause I live next door to a real conservative."  I was tryin' to remember the name of the group, and she said, "I have to live here after you leave."  (Laughter) And so we went, it was fun.  And then, right across the street was [J.] Byers Hays, who was an architect, who, an outstanding architect.  He'd done some of the work, some of the modern buildings, the modern addition to St. Paul's [Episcopal] Church [Cleveland Heights, Ohio] and an addition to the art museum [Cleveland Museum of Art, Cleveland, Ohio], and he knew [HistoryMaker] Robert [P. Madison].  And he called Robert one day and said, "I understand a black architect is movin' across the street from me, and I thought if anybody would know, you would know."  Monk said, "I do," and Byers said, "well who is it?"  Monk said, "It's me."  Byers said, "Why didn't you tell me?"  He said, "Why should I?"  So he stayed there until he died.  Then his wife went south to live.  But, and then there were the houses down the street, we had, John, Eddie, Jimmy, Susan and Chris, five kids.  So it was already somebody down there to babysit or somebody to help you.  And then there were the Klauses [ph.] across the street.  He was very involved in discovering the kind of medicine that would cure or help prevent polio.  And they had what, three girls and a boy.  And so, you know, and they were the kind of people you could call on if you needed 'em and ask for help.  And then [Charles] Charlie DeLeon had come here on the backup to the medical school.  When they invited him to come here, they did not realize he was black.  They thought with a name DeLeon he was Puerto Rican.  But after he got here, they kept him and we knew that we might have some hostilities.  So the plan was for the two families to move at the same time.  It didn't work, we moved first, and then Charlie moved in a week later.  But we were there Halloween.  And I said to Monk [Robert P. Madison], "There're kids in Charlie's house."  And Monk went over, he didn't see 'em.  And they said Charlie came--no Cindy [ph.] came up, 'cause the house was still under construction.  And she said you know somebody came in our house and turned the hose on in the heating ducts.  When they went through our house and wrote nasty words all on the wall.  And we know who did it.  And they moved, so.  But, we got a superintendent who was very progressive, Frank Gerhardt, who has since died.  And I guess one of my neighbors started to Dorothy Shipp [ph.] whose husband was a psychiatrist called me and said let's do something.  And I said okay and we talked and we decided that we would try to integrate the summer school.  And we went and talked to Frank Gerhardt and he finally said yes, but check with [Paul W.] Briggs.  We never got to Briggs.
Speaker 2: And that's the superintendent of the Cleveland schools?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was superintendent of the Cleveland schools.  He wouldn't see us.  But we did it anyway.  And, oh Brown, what was Brown's name, I just had it and lost it.  She was at Charles [W.] Eliot [School, Cleveland, Ohio].  She would get us about 100 kids a semester, a summer, herself.  And then one year they said they wanted to use a telephone in the third grade as a resource.  So they asked me if I would ask Joe Morris for some money, a contribution, so they could get the phone.  Joe Morris' father had started Lincoln Electric [Cleveland, Ohio].  And she lived right there on Fairmont.  So I went and asked Joe and she said okay, and gave me a check for one thousand dollars just like that.  So they had this phone, and the elementary summer school was in Fairfax [Elementary School, Cleveland Heights, Ohio].  And one year we got enough money, we rented a bus that would go through Cleveland in certain places, because all the kids were supposed to be on a bus line and we picked up the kids and brought them up to Fairfax.  We did that for about six years, '63 [1963] to '69 [1969].
Speaker 2: Now is this an organization in the community or just (simultaneous) --
Speaker 1: No, it was four women.  (Unclear) Joan Downing [ph.], Patterson, Clyde [Alexander] Patterson [Jr.]'s wife, Ruth [Ellen Lindsey], no not Ruth, and me.  Three white women and me.
Speaker 2: And you're all teachers?
Speaker 1: No, I don't know when I was teachin'.  I don't think Dorothy had ever--Dorothy was a nurse.  I don't know what Joan did.  But Dorothy and Joan's husbands were psychiatrists.  And Joan's husband was a child psychiatrist.  No, we just went out and did it.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh. And you said you did that for six years?
Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963] to '69 [1969].
Story_ID: 214416
Speaker 1: So when did you start working with the organizations?
Speaker 2: Well you know it's interesting, and I was hoping I was going to see somebody before I saw you.  When we moved in, a woman who lived on Harcourt [Drive, Cleveland Heights, Ohio], Marian Britain [ph.], called me.  I don't know her, I didn't know her from a hill of beans.  Called me and asked me did I want to be Jeanne's [Madison's daughter, Jeanne Madison] room mother.  And she didn't know me.  And I thanked her very much and said I would like to have some time to get my feet wet and find out what, you know, school situation was.  But I often think about her, because she took a real chance and I think it says somethin' so good about her.  Her husband was a doctor.  And they left town, and I don't know where they are, but I know somebody I think knows where she is.  'Cause I said I would like to know where she is at this point.  But we went to PTA [parent teacher association].  There was a black family that had moved--one thing you see, Cleveland Heights [Ohio] always prided itself that it allowed the children of their black custodians to go to their public schools.  So this man came and fell asleep every meeting, and eventually they left the system.  I think it was just too much for them.
Speaker 1: Was it one of the custodians that left?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a custodian.  He had three kids.
Speaker 1: So that's one of your first organizations in the PTA, working with the schools? Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh yeah I got in the PTA.  I was the first black president of Roxboro Junior High [Roxboro Middle School; Cleveland Heights, Ohio].
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  And that is a public school in Cleveland Heights?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Roxboro, okay.
Speaker 2: Roxboro Elementary [School, Cleveland Heights, Ohio], Roxboro Junior High, and then [Cleveland] Heights [High School, University Heights, Ohio].  And the principal of Roxboro Elementary would say, "This is the closest thing to a private school that you can find."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But see, I went up there one day and she called me by somebody else's name.  I looked at her, and I said, "I'm not Mrs. So and So."  "Oh, Mrs. So and So's son is a wonderful athlete."  I said, "Mrs. Adams [ph.], I'm not sending my child here to be a athlete, a comedian, nor a musician.  I'm sendin' her here to get something in her head."  We were best of friends after that.
Speaker 1: So this is in the 1960s is it?
Speaker 2: Yeah because Jeanne was in third grade.  Jeanne had been Major Works [Program] in Cleveland [Ohio] in the second grade, then we moved here, she was in the third grade, and she was crestfallen because they did not put her in accelerated group.  And I was ready to go up there and fight.  And my husband [HistoryMaker Robert P. Madison] said, "Now [HistoryMaker] Leatrice [Branch Madison], let's just wait.  Let's give her a chance to get acclimated."  And in retrospect, I'm sorry I didn't do it.  I'm really sorry I didn't do it, because all her friends went into that group and she could have kept up with it.  But you know, there was only one other black child in the school for five hundred kids.  And she had started in kindergarten.  And that's when Mrs. Adams told me if she had gotten her in kindergarten it would have been a different story.  And I told Ms. Adams she had nothin' to do with that child's genes.  That's the kind of conversations we had.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)  I wonder though with the kind of courage (laughter) and I'm detecting it just in some of the statements that you telling me that you made in that era.  Were you popular (laughter) at the schools or do you find that there was a sentiment among other parents, you know this is the kind of thing you need to do?
Speaker 2: One of the things about Roxboro, they had some very liberal parents.  And if those were opposed to me they didn't say anything and I didn't care.  You know, I thought I was doin' what was right.  So I really didn't care.  And as long as you didn't hurt my child, it didn't matter.  Now there was some kid that followed her home every day callin' her a black nigger, go back to Africa where you belong.  So I went up and told that principal this was supposed to be the closest thing to a private school you could find, and I did not expect that in this area.  What are you gonna do about it?  She stopped it.
Speaker 1: So this is in the decade following Brown [v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954], you know, after this landmark.
Speaker 2: Well Brown was '54 [1954].  This was 1960.
Speaker 1: Yes, in the next decade.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it was only six years later.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, okay so--but integration is supposed to be the law of the land?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it took schools a long time to get to that and if you haven't gotten anybody to integrate, how you gonna integrate?
Speaker 1: True.
Speaker 2: I mean, you don't have any people who are not like you, who are different, how you gonna integrate?
Story_ID: 214417
Speaker 1: When do you start to see changes in the racial composition of the student body in Cleveland Heights [Ohio], so that integration can be given a chance to work?
Speaker 2: Maybe by the '70s [1970s].  You know what they say, Negroes follow Jews, and that was another thing Jeanne [Madison] ran into when she got to [Cleveland] Heights High [School, University Heights, Ohio].  All around Heights High, back up in those streets there were Jews.  You know, 'cause that's like, and I'm not tryin' to be derogatory about any of this, but I have even gotten lost up in there because there was so much, you know, the ghetto was designed so that you would get lost and you couldn't get found, and it was a protection.  And so, the blacks settled all up in there first.  So when she came out of Heights High, she's walkin' down Lee Road to Euclid Heights to catch the bus home instead of just walkin' out the front door, getting on the bus and comin' home.  Because kids were mad 'cause we lived where we lived.  You know, so it was rough.
Speaker 1: But in the 1970s you start to see a change?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess.
Speaker 1: Now at that point, are your daughters in high school then?  You said one was born in--
Speaker 2: Now wait a minute, wait--
Speaker 1: Fifty-seven [1957]?
Speaker 2: Wait a minute.  Julia [Juliette Madison] had finished college I think in '79 [1979], and Jeanne finished college in '75 [1975], I think that's right.  Jeanne was in third grade in 1960.  And let's figure out.  Third grade is '60 [1960], '61 [1961], '62 [1962], '63 [1963], '64 [1964], '65 [1965], '66 [1966], I've forgotten when she finished.  I think it was '70 [1970].
Speaker 1: So just as you're starting to see a change, a major change in the racial composition of the--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And it's interesting because I guess this area where we lived held the longest time, most of which you saw was up around Taylor [Road], back up in there.  Kids coming in from East Cleveland [Ohio].
Story_ID: 214418
Speaker 1: You know, I'm wondering when you really started to focus on, you know, using some of those skills that you'd acquire in the training for education and experience as a librarian, when you were able to use those skills in the voluntary associations which you were working with in your adult life.  Was that while your daughters [Jeanne Madison and Juliette Madison] were still in school or after they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, while my daughters were still in school.  Oh, you don't have my reader in here.  I'm tryin' to remember what I was doin' while they were still in school.  Because I remember I was on the Bingham Day Nursery board (laughter), and I'm laughin' about that because I came up with the recommendation I didn't get reappointed.  I was goin' to meetings and I was absolutely appalled at what the kids were not getting.  You know, these kids came from schools, areas down around 30th [street], back over in there and--
Speaker 1: So the inner city of Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And, you know, all the inner city of Cleveland is not the same.  And this is really the poor section.  And I had the nerve to write a letter and suggest that they use some other techniques to teach the children.  Needless to say, I didn't get reappointed.  I suggested they use some Montessori techniques.  Because one of the things I had learned in education, [Maria] Montessori was a physician and she developed these techniques to help educate the poor children in Italy.  And so those techniques ought to be used for the kids in the ghetto.  They didn't think that was very nice, so they didn't reappoint me.
Story_ID: 214419
Speaker 1: But you obviously found other organizations to work with.
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, were they also related to educational programs in those years?
Speaker 2: Some were and some weren't.  I guess I've done so many things I need to look at my curriculum vitae to figure out where I was in 1960.  I know that I was involved with something called PATH, Program of Action through Housing.  And I guess the thing that I spent the most time with that was especially gratifying, I spent six years on what was the Welfare Federation.  And then it became the Federation of [sic, for] Community Planning [Center for Community Solutions].  And I spent six more years and I had to go off a year and I came back and spent six more years.  I spent eighteen years totally.  And chaired a lot of committees, got very involved with adoption, and out of that, I guess grew--I chaired a couple adoption committees, and I guess out of that group, my interest had enabled me to work with HARAMBEE: [Services to Black Families; HARAMBEE: Services to Children and Families].
Speaker 1: And can you tell us what that is please?
Speaker 2: HARAMBEE?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: A group of us got together and decided we were going to establish an agency that could find permanent adoptive homes for black youth.  And so off we went, Miss Campbell [ph.] and me.  We went down state to talk to the legislators.  I won't tell you what I used to call 'em.  Talk to the legislators.  And I talked to George [l.] Forbes and got two block grants for this agency we were tryin' to get started.
Speaker 1: Now Mr. Forbes, the attorney, was he then president of [Cleveland] City Council?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I begged money from like Mrs. Troyhoff [ph.].  Who else did I get money from, BP America gave us some money.  And we opened an agency.  And the guy who was in here, Hough [ph.] Norwood, had a building [Hough-Norwood Family Health Care Center] off 55th Street, and he let us have a space in there to start this agency.  And we were placin' kids, and we did that.  When did they go out of business.  We started in the '60s [1960s], and they went out of business just recently.  I could've cried.  And somebody said, why don't you go down there and get those people straight.  I said at this point in my life I don't have the strength.  But we--there are people in town who could tell ya, "Well I adopted my baby through HARAMBEE."  Oh, we got a grant from the welfare, department of welfare, and we were movin' right along.  My term was up, and I guess the person who was president didn't do right.
Speaker 1: I remember a few years back there was some controversy about programs like HARAMBEE because they sought black families, black adopted families for black children--
Speaker 2: HARAMBEE didn't limit.
Speaker 1: Oh you did not, oh I stand corrected.  But you're placing black children with families.
Speaker 2: We were placing black children, you know why?  Because that's the largest number of kids in the welfare system.  And there're kids who stay in the welfare system for years.  And so that is why we were doin' it.  And it worked.
Speaker 1: So, do you know if most of the children were placed with black families or--
Speaker 2: I think most of the children were placed with black families.  And we used to have a yearly program, Black Child Sunday.  We used to have that and we brought in people from other places.  And they were in business for a good long time.  I have to look at my plaque and see when we started.  'Cause I think I was involved with them for about ten years, from the beginning and begging the money and getting it started, and then staying on the board.
Speaker 1: I'm thinking now about some of those other programs and I had assumed incorrectly now that HARAMBEE was one of those that sought only African American families for the African American children.  But --
Speaker 2: We sought good families.  We decided we weren't gonna get hung up in that.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, so stable homes for the children, and these were permanent adoptions.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, un-huh.
Speaker 1: And they have gone out of business?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yep I heard it I could've cried.  They were in business for about ten years, maybe more.
Speaker 1: Now with the Black Child Sunday, is that--there is another program I'm thinking of too that was based in the churches.  I think it was One Child--One Church, One Child.  Was that a project of HARAMBEE too?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know anything about that.
Speaker 1: Oh this is something different, okay.
Speaker 2: Unless they started doing it after I left.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 214420
Speaker 1: Did you focus mostly on community programs that benefited children or--
Speaker 2: Me?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Did you read what University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] said?
Speaker 1: Well sure, I read all of it, but some questions I have to ask (laughter), even if I think I know the answer.
Speaker 2: I guess I focused on a lot of programs that benefited children.  But some of them were cultural, some were things I just liked to do.
Speaker 1: Well I do remember reading something about your involvement with Cleveland Opera [Cleveland, Ohio], and I wanted to ask about your love for music.  Now I know Mr. [HistoryMaker Robert P.] Madison shares that as well.
Speaker 2: Well yeah, and you know he's the one music moves him more than it moves me.  And that's really his thing.  But I've been involved with the Cleveland Orchestra [Cleveland, Ohio] with the Women's Committee of the Cleveland Orchestra.  As a matter of fact, what are we doin' now, I don't know what we're doin', if there is anything special.  Tryin' to think if there's anything special.  We got a new director.  I was just thinkin' about what are we going to do.  One thing, we raised money so that we can have the programs, educational programs where they bring the kids to Severance Hall [Cleveland, Ohio], and we provide the (unclear) to Severance Hall.  I know we do those two things.  I'm thinkin' what else do we do.  We meet, and we have a program for ourselves called Meet the Artist, which means that people who come in or people who are in the symphony have a chance to come, have lunch and then talk.  It's usually set up with this kind of thing.  The guest artist and the inquisitor (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, but are you working then with any other arts organizations besides the opera and the --
Speaker 2: I'm not workin' at the opera, that's Robert.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: I'm workin' with the Cleveland Orch--symphony, what they call it, the Women's Committee of Cleveland Orchestra, that's what it's called.  The Women's Committee, WCCO, Women's Committee of Cleveland Orchestra.  Yeah, I'm doin' that.
Speaker 1: So you retain that volunteer activity?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  But the other thing I'm doin' and it's, I don't know if it's on this list 'cause I haven't been doing it very long.  I was asked to be a member of the music and performing arts committee at Trinity Cathedral [Cleveland, Ohio].  And so we brought in some students from Argentina and they put on two one-act operas down at the cathedral.  And, they asked me to do it so I could help 'em raise money to pay for that.  They had a lot, it was a lot of work involved and they had problems because, with the visas, you know had no money for that.  But we came out ahead.  So we were glad for that.  And I also, like a dummy, volunteered to work on the medieval feast.
Speaker 1: Is that Trinity Cathedral?
Speaker 2: At Trinity Cathedral.  They are very ecumenical.  So if you know anybody who would like to help or likes music, let me know.  But my friends get so tired lookin' at me comin', they don't want to see me.
Speaker 1: So this is the Episcopal Church, --(simultaneous) this is the headquarters.
Speaker 2: Ecumenical.
Speaker 1: But ecumenical in the performing arts department?
Speaker 2: You don't know how ecumenical.  They'll take anybody who works.
Story_ID: 214421
Speaker 1: You know, when I look at your resume, it looks like you've had a full-time career as a volunteer--
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: --for about forty years.
Speaker 2: How many?
Speaker 1: About forty?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).  Do you find that it's still a popular thing for women to do?  I'm thinking about some of the activities associated with Mary [McLeod] Bethune's group and then [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Height after her.  But, black women, especially in clubs across the nation were able to do a lot at the grassroots level.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Mary Bethune and Dorothy Height, I don't know, they don't do much.  There isn't much happening in their name in Cleveland [Ohio].  In Washington [D.C.] it was.  And you know, I'm old enough to remember when [President Franklin Delano] Roosevelt entertained Mary McCloud Bethune in the White House [Washington, D.C.].  And it happens, that my husband [HistoryMaker Robert P. Madison] has done some work down in the area of Florida where she was.  And this guy, Jeff Rogers [ph.], is down there.  But, I guess people, the black women who are Greek letter people know about them.
Speaker 1: But outside of those groups, not so much in Cleveland, so it's not primarily the Black Women's Club movement then that you were involved in here?
Speaker 2: Not primarily.  I was involved with the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], and my children [Jeanne Madison and Juliette Madison] were Jack and Jill [of America, Inc.].  Oh and I'm a Link [The Links, Incorporated].
Speaker 1: Okay, now can you tell me about those two organizations, Jack and Jill first.
Speaker 2: Well Jack and Jill was a group where the goal was to find or to provide youngsters with enriching experiences.  Things that were supposed to be valuable and educational, but also enjoyable.  You know, they would take kids to concerts.  They would take 'em to games or we might just have an egg rollin' afternoon.  And you got to meet the friends, the kids of your friends, and it helped 'em establish friendships within their community among their peers.  That was, I guess, basically what it was.
Speaker 1: So that's Jack and Jill?
Speaker 2: Now how about The Links?  What kind of organization is that?
Speaker 1: The Links are a great organization of women who do all kinds of cultural, educational things.  As a matter of fact, one of the things that I have done that I had written on my little piece of paper that I've found very satisfying was something called Project Discovery.  Where we got a grant from the Labor Bureau of the--the Women's Bureau of the Labor Department [U.S. Department of Labor].
Story_ID: 214422
Speaker 1: We were just starting to talk about The Links [Incorporated], and you said it was a wonderful organization of women involved in a number of culturally--enriching programs in the community.  Was there more that you wanted to say about them?
Speaker 2: Well I was gonna say one of the things that I did that was very satisfying was I worked on something called Project Discovery.  And that was a program where there were eight chapters scattered around the country that got grants from the Women's Bureau, which was part of the [U.S.] Department of Labor.  And what we did then was to try to help women who were underemployed or unemployed, and we found people who could come in and speak and help them realize what skills they had, helped them realize how to develop skills.  And it was a very good program.  And we did it down in CHU [ph.] on Saturday mornings.  And as I said, we had to work with someone who came in from the government to evaluate what we did to be sure we were spending our money correctly.  Because we got a grant for that.  And we had over 100 women.  And I guess, you know, through the years you wonder what has happened.  But we got a very good evaluation for that, so we were glad about that.  Another thing I was thinkin' about was I was involved with United Way Services [United Way Worldwide].  Because originally the Welfare Federation [Center for Community Solutions] had raised the money, made the studies to decide where the money was going and they allocated the money.  So they changed it, that the Federation of Community Planning would do all the studies.  That the United Way would raise the money and allocate it.  And so I served on that and I was chairman of the campaign, I think that was 1974, because I was the first black woman to do that.  They'd had one black man before me.  And then if you--in Cleveland Heights [Ohio] if you served on PTA [parent teacher association] as a president you became part of what they call the PTA Council.  And plus we kinda looked at all the other PTAs, how people, they had problems and that kinda thing.  But you didn't--I don't remember how long you served on that, but it wasn't very long.  I know what, I guess you served two years.  Because the longest a president could serve was two years, and when the time was up, they moved to council, so then you moved off so it was a revolving thing.
Story_ID: 214423
Speaker 1: Now, I know that United Way [Worldwide] and the Federation for Community Planning [Center for Community Solutions], they're community-wide organizations, so, serving both African American citizens and white citizens and others in greater Cleveland [Ohio].  Before The Links [Incorporated] and Jack and Jill [of America, Inc.], it's my understanding that they were all black organizations.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So by definition there is some self-segregation involved in keeping those organizations going.  What do you say to folks who, who argue that integration should be a goal--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --in our society and maybe the time for those kind of initiatives has past?
Speaker 2: Well I don't know if they're all black.  As a matter of fact, I have seen some white women in some of those groups at some national meetings.
Speaker 1: In the Links?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And at the, what was the other one you mentioned?
Speaker 1: Jack and Jill.
Speaker 2: At Jack and Jill.  I don't guess we really restricted.  With Jack and Jill you gotta' have children, and these children are supposed to be African American children.  So, I think that says somethin'.  And it was set up to try to enrich their lives, and to be sure they had certain cultural experiences and to meet friends.  You know, it's almost like the kids who come along and then they have the debutants party.  You know, and they end up marryin' old friends, marryin' each other.  Well I'm not sure it works that way, but I'm sure that there is some of that thought behind it.  The Links have never segregated.  I do feel--I personally feel that I think it's nice to have somethin' for black women.  Now I have to say the [Association of]  Junior League[s International, Inc. (AJLI)] has now opened up.  But for years, you know, the Junior League was segregated.  And I don't know what the foundin' members thought about the Links because it was started in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: So historically both organizations have been for African Americans, but you see it changing slightly?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, well you know in the days when it was started that's what it was, it was segregation every place.  And every age group had its own little club, whatever.
Speaker 1: Do you think the need for those kinds of organizations will continue for the foreseeable future?
Speaker 2: I certainly do.  I have a lot of concerns about the foreseeable future.  I feel very uncomfortable though, there's a lot of things I read about and see.
Speaker 1: Related to race relations in America?
Speaker 2: Related to life in this country.
Story_ID: 214424
Speaker 1: What are some of the things that concern you most here at the beginning of the 21st century about life in America?
Speaker 2: You gonna put this all on tape, I might tell you some of this in private.  I lived through the [Joseph] McCarthy years, and I have a lot of concern about the government and how it functions.
Speaker 1: What are some of those concerns?  I know there're a lot of people expressing concerns about the loss of privacy in violations of civil liberties by the government.  So are those the things that concern you or are there other things?
Speaker 2: Well I think there's things we need to be mindful of and watchful about.  That's my, you know, I have some concerns about that.  I'm not sure how much I'm gonna put on tape I'll tell ya right now.
Speaker 1: Well as (laughter) as the social activist for more than forty years now--
Speaker 2: I'm too old to go to jail (laughter).
Speaker 1: I was gonna ask you what can we do?  The citizens (laughter) or the people who have these concerns, what can they do?
Speaker 2: I think one of the things that probably concerns me most is, I don't think kids today get the kind of education we got.  I don't think they know how the government is supposed to function.  You know, nobody teaches civics anymore.  And even if you didn't have civics, 'cause I never took a course in civics, but we learned how the government was supposed to function.  And I'm not sure if kids know now.
Speaker 1: So education is gonna be key?
Speaker 2: I think education is a big key and it tickles me to death these people are tryin' to die because they gonna have had large classes.  Those of us who came along when I came along, I said shoot, I came through school with forty-some kids in the class.  When I started teaching, when I got to forty-three kids I went to the principal and said, "Look, if you send me another child I'd have to hang him from the light fixture."  And I had forty-three kids.  But you know, we used to divide kids into groups based on ability.  They tell me they don't do that anymore.  As a matter of fact, when my daughter was in school, about the new math, the teacher told me we teach them all as one group.  I said well do you pull 'em out, anybody out who is havin' a problem.  These kids are all smart, she said.  I said you can't tell me all kids learn long division at the same time.  You know, and Jeanne [Madison] was havin' a hard time getting started.  And her position was, she'll get it eventually.  And my position was with math, arithmetic, whatever, you had to have the foundation.  If you don't get a good start, you don't make it.  So don't tell me that.  So, I mean, you know, I get very concerned about what people don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So education reform, that's still on your action agenda.
Speaker 2: Yes it is.  As a matter of fact, Barbara Byrd-Bennett had [HistoryMaker] Robert [P.] Madison's firm remodel the old school in Brandon Hall [ph.] as a demonstration center.  And I said to him, I would love to go over there and see what happens.
Speaker 1: Barbara Byrd-Bennett, our CEO of schools in Cleveland [Ohio], okay?
Speaker 2: We will see.
Speaker 1: All right.  Anything else that concerns you, besides the schools?  For someone who's worked so much, you know, where else do you see yourself (simultaneously) being active?
Speaker 2: But I think that's the biggest problem.  Because education is sort of the basis for everything.  And, you know, that determines how you vote.  It determines everything you do, your thoughts.  So I guess that's the biggest thing that concerns me.  The other thing I found myself thinkin' about was, this, oh what kind of cells of those they gonna take?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA COMMENT)
Speaker 2: Stem cells, thank you, couldn't think.  I get concerned about stem cells.  And the fact that already in England they have these children that had been born from some unusual process of putting egg and sperm together.  I won't say that I'm deeply religious, but I do believe in a natural order of things.  And sometimes I think there're things we can improve on.  And I get very concerned about whether with the stem cells and the knowledge, we will start creating a special kind of person.  I'm not losin' any sleep over it, but those thoughts do float through my head every once in a while.
Story_ID: 214425
Speaker 1: I'm wondering though, in reading your resume, there's a statement about you're having been active with eighty-five different committees and more than thirty organizations, and I wonder, I think if I did the math right, you are about eighty-two years old.  I wonder if you see yourself retiring or--
Speaker 2: I'm not eighty-two yet.
Speaker 1: Not yet, okay.  You have a birthday coming up soon?
Speaker 2: September the 5th.
Speaker 1: September 5th, okay well happy birthday if I don't see you between now and September 5th.
Speaker 2: No, I have to have something to do.  I'm not doin' as much as I used to do.  But I have to have somethin' to do.  I find it mentally stimulating and even though I'm getting to a point where I'm forgetting and can't remember everything I used to remember, I still have some good ideas.  Like the guy asked me, I said I volunteered to work on a medieval feast.  They thought that was great 'cause I can still raise money and I still can recommend people.  Those are two things I can do.  I can't just sit still.
Speaker 1: Well that raising money is an important thing to do in this society, especially for worthy causes.  But I know some people tell me that it's degrading to beg for money.
Speaker 2: Well, I called the managing partner of a very big firm around town [Cleveland, Ohio], and he started laughin'.  I was tryin' to get a contribution from him.  And I said why you laughin'?  'Cause he'd already told me no.  He said because you are very persistent.
Speaker 1: Did you get the contribution?  Oh good.
Speaker 2: Got my money.
Speaker 1: So that keeps you going, when they say yes?
Speaker 2: Wouldn't that just keep you going (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, sometimes--(simultaneously)--
Speaker 2: Success?
Speaker 1: Sometimes I'm encouraged yeah when I succeed. (Laughter)
Speaker 2: That's what keeps you goin'.
Story_ID: 214426
Speaker 1: Well and, you know, I have three grandchildren and the older boy--who Thomas Butler [ph.] told me was a genius--has now found himself.  But the young one is going to Case Western Reserve [University, Cleveland, Ohio].  'Cause my older daughter [Jeanne Madison] is workin' in development at Case Western Reserve.  So he can go tuition free.  My granddaughter is my heart though, they say she is just like me.
Speaker 2: Will you be upset if I correct you on something?  The name of that university?
Speaker 1: Which one?
Speaker 2: Case Western Reserve?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It's Case now.
Speaker 1: Well that's--(simultaneous) what they called it.
Speaker 2: Remember--
Speaker 1: When you used the short term.  But those of us in this house don't use the short term.  As a matter of fact, my husband [HistoryMaker Robert P. Madison] does not mind telling people he graduated from Western Reserve.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And well, that's another conversation we can have off tape.
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm an alum and I knew you had strong feelings about that--
Speaker 1: I didn't know that--
Speaker 2: I just wanted to get that on record (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  I was not a member there, but I did work on a lot of visiting committees and the [Case Western Reserve University] Board of Overseers.  So, but my granddaughter is a special little girl.  She's in [Washington] D.C.  And she's been admitted to some special program in [Benjamin] Banneker [Academic High School, Washington, D.C.] where she's in school.  So we will see.
Story_ID: 214427
Speaker 1: I wanted to say, certainly before we close, and we're gonna look at some pictures too and get you to narrate those, but again this is your life story and you've made a lot of history and you've raised a lot of money.  I wonder if you had any idea how much money you've raised over the years for the various causes that you work with, not that you could measure the good that you do--in dollars.
Speaker 2: Well you know, I don't know, I don't.  I never thought about trying to add it up.  No, that's interesting.
Speaker 1: But what's the measure of your success then?
Speaker 2: What satisfies me?  When I feel satisfied.  And somewhere in one of those things, I don't know whether it was the Golden Age Centers at University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], they said I'm persistent.  And I do a good job.  If I'm gonna do it, it's gonna be done right.  That you can count on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You said success is one thing that motivates you to continue in the work that you do and satisfaction in knowing that it's something that makes you feel good about making a difference in the society.  But, I know that your work has not gone unrecognized, and you mentioned the award from the Golden Age Centers.  And can you tell us a little bit about that program?
Speaker 2: There it is right there.  It's a strange piece of glass.
Speaker 1: It's a beautiful piece of glass, although it's off camera (laughter).
Speaker 2: I know, but you know, I'm scared about the way it's mounted, because it doesn't adhere to anything.  Mine is the round one.  [HistoryMaker] Robert [P. Madison] got one, see his rectangle perched down there, that's the one he got.  But it's not stuck to anything.  And I'm scared to death somebody is gonna come in here and break it.
Speaker 1: Oh no won't break it.  But that's one of your most recent public recognitions for your work, and that came in 2004?
Speaker 2: Well, if you have a portable camera, I can show my wall, because Robert said all his stuff is up in his office and my stuff was not.  And so he put it all up in the library.  Except, I got two more resolutions with this, I think it's two more.
Speaker 1: Well congratulations.
Speaker 2: Well thank you.  It's been a good ride.
Speaker 1: Sounds like it.
Story_ID: 214428
Speaker 1: Well this is your story, are there any parting remarks you'd like to share with the viewers of this oral history interview?
Speaker 2: With this oral history.
Speaker 1: Any words of encouragement?
Speaker 2: Well I don't know, you know, I have said to my husband [HistoryMaker Robert P. Madison], we dared to take a chance.  I think we took a chance when he went to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  We took a chance taking a two month old baby [Jeanne Madison] to Paris [France].  But one thing I do well is plan.  And before we went to Paris, we got to Fulbright [Program].  I called Fulbright Commission, no I wrote to Fulbright Commission and said look, I got two month old baby, how am I gonna make it in essence.  And they wrote back and said with a little ingenuity you shouldn't have any problems (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well that sounds like good advice for anyone.
Speaker 2: But they didn't tell me what kind of ingenuity you needed.  But we made it and she was a year old on the boat comin' home.  And I had my master's [degree from University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] when we got married and so I knew Robert wanted his.  So I encouraged him to go ahead and apply, and so off we went and it was good.  And interestingly enough, I served a term on the Cleveland Heights-University Heights [Public] Library Board.  That's a seven-year term, and they have a real system.  You come on and then you become secretary, vice president, president, and then you're out.  There is one seven-year term.  But I think the fact that I had worked in the library, you know, kinda made life a little easier, made me anxious to do it.  And [Cleveland] Heights [Ohio] has a good library system, Cleveland Heights-University Heights [Ohio].  Now the best thing I can say is, be prepared, take a chance and do a good job.
Story_ID: 214429
Speaker 1: All right, this is the class of 1943 from Miner Teachers College [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.].  Miner was a special place.  They only took in 100 students a year from each of the high schools.  And let's see, you probably noticed an absence of men, except for one because this was during the war [World War II, WWII] years, and some of the men who would've normally been here have been drafted.  And they were already into service.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA COMMENTS)
Speaker 1: That is not me.  (Laughter)  This is me right here (unclear).  That is, see how serious I look right there.  That's me.  That's Teresa Braxton Posey [ph.].  What's Verna's [ph.] last name, I've forgotten Verna's last name.  But Teresa and I were good friends (unclear).  Yeah.  From my (unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA COMMENTS)
Speaker 1: There I am.  That's interesting.  When the film is developed (unclear).  That is [HistoryMaker] Leatrice [Branch] Madison, I'm not sure how old I am there, but I am walkin', so I know I must be over a year old, and I want you to notice I have white kid leggings and a low white ermine collar on my coat.
Speaker 2: That's me with my sister Laurette [Branch Henley] who died in January 2003.  If you will note, this was when the man would come through the neighborhood with a pony and the kids would come out and he would take a picture.  Notice the sandals, I'm not sure they make those anymore.  I guess we were about, maybe I guess she was about five, that means I was about eight.  I think that's about right.  And that's in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: You ready, all right.  This picture was taken in 1971.  This was the fiftieth anniversary of my parents [Julia Bailey Branch and Hayes Branch].  It you look at the first row, that little boy, that's Glen Hall, then that's Leatrice Madison, Gary Hall, momma dear and daddy, and my daughter Julie [Juliette Madison], and then my sister Jackie [Jacqueline Branch Hall], and right behind her is her husband who retired as a general in the [U.S.] Air Force, David Hall.  My sister Laurette, Stewart Henley, Laura Henley, their child, my husband [HistoryMaker] Robert [P.] Madison and my older daughter Jeanne Madison.  The Henleys are a very interesting family because all of them, except one, was involved in the Cleveland Public Schools [Cleveland Metropolitan School District] and all of them ended up as principals.  And his brother, Ben Henley, was asked to be superintendent at one point, but he said he wouldn't take the job.  And his sister, Rosa, was the one they said who controlled children with love.  No one had ever heard her raise her voice.  But most people in Washington know the Henleys.
Speaker 2: And what was the occasion?
Speaker 1: This was my mother and father's fiftieth wedding anniversary.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of four generations.  This was taken in 117 Adams Street.  I think you see me and then you see my mother and my daughter Jeanne holding her son Ward, and my other daughter Julie.  It was the first time we had four generations and so we figured we better take that picture quickly.  Maybe you notice that my mother is getting kind of fragile and kinda aged, and she had glaucoma and she died before--I mean she was blind before she died.  But it didn't seem to deter her in anyway.  I just had to stop and think, did I use my drops this morning.
Speaker 2: Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: This is my grandmother who was sort of the power behind the throne.  She was Laura Bailey.  She is my mother's mother.  She was then one who really knew how to save, knew how to make things over, knew how to make do.  As a matter of fact, she is the one who used to take the collars off the shirts and turn them.  And when I did, I did that when we first got married and I think I stopped when I took the shirt someplace and the people told me they didn't have any new shirt collars, they don't even do that anymore.
Speaker 2: All right, ready.
Speaker 1: Okay, that picture is a picture of my mother, Julia Bailey Branch.  It was taken in their home in Petersburg, Virginia, and that is her hat lying on the side.  It's very interesting because my mother's hair was dead straight and it had been cut and my grandmother had tried to get some curl in it.  She had rolled it up on toilet paper to make it curl.  So (laughter) I'm not sure it's curled, but they tried.  I don't know how old she is in that picture.  Is there anything on the back?
Speaker 2: Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me that was taken at Sparrow's Beach [Maryland], which was a public beach.  And there we had gone out on a boat for a boat ride.  And I guess I, now I think I should have taken my hands and pushed the wind out (laughter) from under my dress.  I don't know, I guess maybe I was about ten years old right there.
Speaker 2: That's 117 Adams Street.  My family moved into that house in 1927 and we just sold it in 1996.  I think all three of us grew up in that house and we had a backyard with a Gray Barber and a seesaw with swings on the back porch, and it was a row house.  But we never had any complaints about the noise because the walls were very thick and we had good neighbors on each side.
Speaker 1: Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: That picture was taken at a house on 5th Street which has since been torn down.  That was my first Easter.  So I was born in September, I'm walkin' there.  I'm tryin' to remember if I were a year old, but I was still very young and I obviously didn't have much hair.  But there I am with my Easter basket.
Speaker 1: Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's a picture of me holding Jeanne [Madison] and she is a new baby.  That was taken in the backyard of 117 Adams Street.  I think that she, well she's a brand new baby, I don't--I'm not even sure she is a month old in that picture.
Speaker 1: That picture was taken at a house we lived in on Willowmere [Avenue] in Cleveland [Ohio].  We lived there when Julia was born at Mt. Sinai Hospital [Mount Sinai Healthcare Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio].  And there she, she's about two in that picture.  Then there I am and then there's Jeanne.  And Jeanne had already started school.  Jeanne was five when Julia was born.  And they had had designed that wall and that bench or that sofa, and we took that to our first house on North Park Boulevard too.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, that picture was taken in the '60s [1960s)], I think about 1963.  Jeanne was a Brownie in the Brownie Troop of the Roxboro Junior High [Roxboro Middle School] in Cleveland Heights.  And I was neighborhood chairman.  And we both put on our uniforms and had our pictures taken.  That's in the hallway at North Park Boulevard.  We are standing in the hall lookin' through, there were about five panels of glass where we could look out into the yard. Floor to ceiling glass on North Park.
Speaker 2: Okay, we're ready.
Speaker 1: That picture was taken in the home of Laurette and Stewart Henley on South Dakota Avenue in Washington D.C.  My sister, Jackie, that's my sister Jackie's wedding.  She married David Hall that day and the reception was at Laurette's.  If you look, there's Laura and Jeanne, that's Laura Henley and Jeanne Madison in the front.  They are the flower girls.  Then there is Leatrice Madison.  I'm not sure who the next, that's Laurette Henley and the bride Jackie and Doris Hagen [ph.].  Yeah, I'm not sure I know all the men, so I'm gonna skip over to the man with the uniform, that's David Hall.
Speaker 2: Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) This was a great occasion.  We had just left the concert of The Three Tenors down in the [FirstEnergy] Stadium [Cleveland, Ohio].  And this is at the residence of Sam and Maria Miller.  That's Robert Madison, that's [Luciano] Pavarotti, and Leatrice Madison at the reception and dinner afterwards.
Speaker 2: Okay, this was an occasion when Ron Brown came to Cleveland to speak and there he is with Lee Fisher and me, Ron Brown and Lee's wife Peggy and Robert Madison.  One of the interesting things about Ron Brown is I went to school with his mother Gloria Osborne.  And when she got married she was still in college and she would go around, Gloria Osborne Brown.
Speaker 1: Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: Okay, this was a birthday party, I think it was grandfather's birthday part in Canterbury and those are the three grandchildren.  On my left is, I think that's Ward Anderson [ph.], and then that's Adai ([h.] Little, and then there is Hayes Anderson [ph.].  I think I just got 'em backwards.
Speaker 1: This affair was just held March, in March.  My chapter has been in existence for fifty-four years.  And for this occasion, they decided to honor the alumni.  A couple of the alumni ladies are absent, but these four, there's Leatrice Madison, (unclear) Vance, Fran King, and Chris Branch.  That means, we've all worked and now we are retired.
Speaker 2: With [HistoryMaker] Guion Bluford who was supposed to be the first astronaut and I don't remember who the other person is.  And I'm not really sure I remember exactly where it was taken.  Does it say so on the back?
Speaker 1: Guion Bluford and Dave Allen [ph.]
Speaker 2: It was taken at Kent [State University, Kent, Ohio].  This was an occasion when Robert Madison got an honorary degree and Guion Bluford was on it.  And Guion Bluford's wife [Barbara Crest Lawrence] is in--(unclear)
Speaker 1: Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: This is also taken on the occasion of The Three Tenors at the Millers' residence.
