Story_ID: 665531
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Sure, Andrea Nelson Meigs [HistoryMaker Andrea Meigs].  And that's A-N-D-R-E-A, Nelson, N-E-L-S-O-N, and Meigs is M-E-I-G-S.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: October 30, 1968, Bellflower, California.
Speaker 1: And what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a motion picture agent [at ICM Partners], talent agent.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what's today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is November 18, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In Los Angeles, California.
Story_ID: 665532
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask that only require a short answer.  The first one is: do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I do.  Sushi.
Speaker 1: All right.  A favorite color?
Speaker 2: I do.  It's black.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Springtime.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Bora Bora.  Oh--yeah, Bora Bora.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I have two.  One I'll save for later, for the work philosophy.  But my favorite phrase would be, if given a lemon, turn it into lemonade.
Story_ID: 665533
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [David Nelson, Jr.] side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But separately, then we'll put them together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Sure.  It's Dorothy Clay, that's her maiden name; D-O-R-O-T-H-Y, Clay, C-L-A-Y, and married name is Nelson, N-E-L-S-O-N [Dorothy Clay Nelson].
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: July 23, 1937.  And she was born in Arcola, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: That's A-R-C-O-L-A?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?  Can you trace them all the way back to slavery or Reconstruction?  And what were they doing?
Speaker 2: About as far back would be really the early 1900s, to my grandmother [Ruth Clay].  And--born in Mississippi.  My mother's father [David Adams, Jr.] had a farm in Mississippi, and I know that my grandmother didn't want to stay living on a farm, so they moved to St. Louis [Missouri] to have more of a city life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  There's no stories about your family prior to your grandmother, about what your grandmother's mother was doing?  Or--
Speaker 2: Her mother died when she was very young, so she was raised by her sisters.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So they moved to St. Louis.  Now this is near the time your mother was born?
Speaker 2: Yes, she was pretty young when they moved to St. Louis.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, so she was born in '37 [1937].  So about 1935 or so, would you say?
Speaker 2: Well, she was born in '37 [1937], and they moved after she was born.  So probably--
Speaker 1: Oh, after?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  So probably I guess--yeah, so probably, you know, '39 [1939] I'd say, something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So what did your grandparents do in St. Louis?
Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother was a single mom, and she was a nurse practitioner.  She worked at General Hospital in St. Louis.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your grandfather didn't move?  He stayed on the farm?
Speaker 2: No, she parted ways (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she did not want that type of lifestyle. She didn't want to raise my mother on a farm.  She did not want a lifestyle where she was at home raising a bunch of children.  She was a little more ambitious, and wanted to have a, have more of a different lifestyle.  So, she moved to the city, St. Louis being a bigger city.
Speaker 1: Now, did she already have relatives in St. Louis?
Speaker 2: No.  Her brothers were also in St. Louis, but I don't--they probably were there before--they probably were there before.  So, she may have moved to be closer to them.  But then again, I guess that was the migration northern.  So, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, was it just the farm life that, you know, took her away from Mississippi?  Or--
Speaker 2: Primarily.  I mean she wasn't married to my grandfather.  And I think she also really was one of these women that she kind of took life, you know, by the--you know, by the--what's the term?  She just really wanted to embrace life, and didn't want to wait to be defined by whether she got married or what that life would be.  She was very much--she knew what she wanted, and she knew that that wasn't what she wanted, and decided to pursue a better life for her daughter.
Story_ID: 665534
Speaker 1: Reason why I asked is because she didn't move to Jackson, Mississippi.  She moved to St. Louis [Missouri].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, she wasn't--you know, do you think she was trying to get out of Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  She didn't--I think being out of, being out of the South as well as the whole farm kind of lifestyle, and being a, you know, a stay at home wife and having, you know, a number of children.  So, she didn't have any more children after my mom [Dorothy Clay Nelson].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay, so are there any--so, so your grandmother [Ruth Clay] was a single mother in St. Louis?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: She was a nurse.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So did she go to nursing school in St. Louis?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it was either St. Louis or Chicago [Illinois].  Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  I know they had Homer G. Phillips Hospital in St. Louis (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, yes.
Speaker 1: Was that where she--?
Speaker 2: I think so.  She worked at a couple of hospitals, but that definitely sounds familiar.  I definitely remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mentioning that one.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, so your mother grew up in St. Louis.  Did she have any stories about growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, she--you know, she was very, very close to her mom--with her mom--and she being, you know, the immediate family.  And her mom worked a lot to help put her through school.  She, my mom, you know, eventually went on to graduate from high school [Vashon High School, St. Louis, Missouri] and was the first to go to college.  And you know, my grandmother worked to help provide that kind of lifestyle.  One of the stories that they would often kind of laugh about was that my grandmother was really attractive, and she had a lot of suitors.  But she didn't want to compromise providing any kind of better life for my mom, and so she never really--I think until my mom was in college--remarried again.  So, but she--they always joked, she had a lot of boyfriends and a lot of people taking care of her.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 665535
Speaker 1: You know what h- high school your mother [Dorothy Clay Nelson] graduated from in St. Louis [Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Vashon [Vashon High School].
Speaker 1: Vashon, that's right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: George B. Vashon?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was she interested in career wise?
Speaker 2: My mom?  She, she was interested actually in medicine, and ended up pursuing that as a career.  She played in the high school band.  She played the flute and she played the piano.  But she, she did have an interest in medicine and ended up becoming a professor of medical records.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where did she go to college?
Speaker 2: She went to Washington University [Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri], transferred to Saint Louis U [Saint Louis University, St. Louis, Missouri], and graduated from there.
Speaker 1: Okay, right there in, both right there in St. Louis?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She later did graduate work when she came to California, at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was a professor of medical records.  Now, what kind of--what do you major in to--I just don't know.  A sociology degree?  Or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think it's a bachelor of science.  I don't know.  I don't know if there was anything more specific or any concentration.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, did she have a master's degree?  Or--
Speaker 2: She, has a master's.  She has a master's--I want to say--what's the master's in?  I'll have to look that up.  I forgot to tell my mother-in-law [Connie Meigs] that she needs to pick up my daughter.
Speaker 1: Do you need to do that?
Speaker 2: I'd better tell her. (Unclear).
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Okay, so your mother got a master's in hospital administration, or something related to that?
Speaker 1: Right.  I think it was medical re- medical administration.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, okay.  Now, let's see.  So, all right, did your mother have any mentors along the way that helped her?
Speaker 1: Really just her mom.  You know, she was very--they were very, very close.  So maybe my grandmother [Ruth Clay] being a nurse also kind of helped to instill a love of medicine, and working in a hospital, working in the hospital setting, helping other people.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 665536
Speaker 1: Now, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Sure.  David Nelson, Jr., and that's D-A-V-I-D, Nelson, N-E-L-S-O-N, Jr.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: It's April 13th, and that would be 1938.
Speaker 1: Now what, what are the stories about your father's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Well, I was able to--my uncle provided me with the census report that dates back to 1850.  So, I was able to get information about my grandfather's parents.
Speaker 1: Where were they living?
Speaker 2: Everybody was living in St. Louis [Missouri], but my grandfather's mother was born in Kentucky.  And then my grandfather's father was born in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, the family has roots in Kentucky and in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: As well as St. Louis?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so are there any stories about what they were doing in history?
Speaker 2: Well, my grandfather [David Nelson, Sr.] worked on the, he was a railway worker.  And apparently there wasn't a lot of talk about my dad's dad's side of the family, so I felt really lucky to get this information.  And I didn't know that he had, I think he had like six other brothers and sisters.  And my dad's a junior, so that was--you know, finding out about his namesake was interesting.  But other than that, I really don't know.  I do know that we had a cousin on his side that also worked on the railway, and who apparently, you know, got drunk one night, you know, and got hit and lost his leg.  So, I vividly remember that story.  He was lucky to keep his life.  But I remember being young and seeing him just literally with the nubs.  And I--you know, when you're young, you don't--you think, well that's strange, but you're accepting that he doesn't have any legs.  And so I remember hearing that story.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, I wish I had something deeper and more meaningful (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, so they worked in the railroad yard, but- basically?  Or did they, did your grandfather have a job as a porter or a brake man or something?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't know the specific title.  I just know he worked like literally on the, on the railway.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --yeah.  I don't--it was probably more physical than as a, as a, you know as a porter, as a call person.
Story_ID: 665537
Speaker 1: What did your father [David Nelson, Jr.] say about growing up?
Speaker 2: Just in terms of how he was raised?
Speaker 1: Right, right, stories about growing up in St. Louis [Missouri].  I know there was a vibrant black community there.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --it should have been really jumping--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --when he was growing up.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, you know, he, my dad was--you know, he moved away from St. Louis because it was--it was vibrant and lively.  But it also presented a lifestyle that he knew if he were to continue to pursue, he would not have the career and the life and the family that he has.  And he always talked about every--from Friday night, pretty much sundown to, you know, Sunday night and Monday morning, that there was parties and everybody was drunk all the time (laughter).  And he just said--you know, and my dad didn't drink at all.  So as a result he just said, you know, there was--you know, wherever you went there was a--you know, whether it was a party--inevitably somebody got drunk and somebody got in a fight and, you know, and the party was, you know, shut down.  But it would continue over the course of the weekend until Monday morning.  So, my dad was a pretty serious minded individual, and literally and figuratively a sober minded individual because of that.  And, you know, really wanted more out of life than, than that.
Story_ID: 665538
Speaker 1: Now, to what--to whom or what did your father [David Nelson, Jr.] owe, you know, his being counterculture of what was going on in popular culture in St. Louis [Missouri], with people drinking and partying and all that?  You know, I've heard that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --before.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think my dad just innately was a very ambitious individual.  And the person I would say that instilled in him--his parents, both his mom [Nina Carroll Nelson] and his dad [David Nelson, Sr.], really influenced him.  His dad, I remember him just always saying that he worked really, really hard.  But I particularly remember him signaling or pointing out that his mother really worked hard.  She dropped out of school at the third grade because she had to start providing for her family, and you know, working--you know, taking care of her brothers and sisters, and helping to try to make money for the family.  So, she never graduated from elementary school.  And I know that she--you know, so as a result, without much education, she went on to become a domestic and she cleaned houses.  And I just remember my dad always saying that he wanted more out of life and wanted, you know, he wanted to really show his appreciation for how hard his mother worked to be able to provide for his brothers and sisters.  And you know, he used to always use the term that she cleaned, you know, white folk's toilets.  So, he did not want that for his family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: So now, so I take it he graduated from high school in St. Louis?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Vashon [Vashon High School] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Vashon as well?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he went on college?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So where did he go?
Speaker 2: He, after going into the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps] and being stationed in California, he was at Camp Pendleton [Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton, San Diego County, California] and then to Long Beach [California].  And then he was introduced to Long Beach State, where he graduated from.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he went to Long Beach State [Long Beach State College; California State University, Long Beach, Long Beach, California] on the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944], I take it?  And--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he finished.  He was, he finished serving.  So I don't know--the G.I. Bill.  But I know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's how--
Speaker 2: Is that how--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The government--you serve, and the government pays--
Speaker 2: Pays for you?
Speaker 1: --for your college--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well--
Speaker 1: --if you want to go.
Speaker 2: He worked through college.  He, he worked at the Hughes Aircraft [Hughes Aircraft Company].  He worked on the playground for L.A. Unified as a playground director.  So, he had, I know he had those two jobs while he was also in school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he worked on the playground, playgrounds too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a playground director.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So, now your father became a schoolteacher, right?
Speaker 2: He eventually became a schoolteacher and then--with a teaching credential--and then went on to become an administrator for the Los Angeles Unified School District.  And he eventually became a vice principal, and then the principal, and then an administrator downtown with LAUSD.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he, he also went to graduate school at USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], got his master's in education there.
Story_ID: 665539
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' personalities, their sense of humor, how they walk, how they talk, what they think of as important, you know, their talents--who, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My dad [David Nelson, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, why (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. We're, we're just so much alike, you know, the way we look at life, the way we approach life.  We're both fairly serious minded people, very goal oriented people, very ambitious.  And we both find ourselves, you know, always striving for more, with not much reflection on the accomplishments that we've achieved.  And my mom [Dorothy Clay Nelson], one of the stories they always joke about was when my mom finished at Saint Louis U [Saint Louis University, St. Louis, Missouri], she was--she was working in Ann Arbor, Michigan and my dad was out here in Los Angeles [California] with the Marines [U.S. Marine Corps].  And he was, you know, after the Marines, as I mentioned, he went to school [at Long Beach State College; California State University, Long Beach, Long Beach, California], and he went back to ask for my mother's hand in marriage.  And she, of course, immediately said, "Of course, yes."  They'd known each other since elementary school [in St. Louis, Missouri], so my dad had been eyeing her for quite some time.  And when he asked her, she immediately wanted to just uproot and come get married and be his wife and start a family, and he said not until she finished school.  So the kind of running joke was, you know, had my mom got her way, she probably wouldn't have finished, but my dad insisted that she finish.  She was, I think she had a few more credits that she needed to finish.  So I don't know--at Ann Arbor--if that was after Saint Louis U.  But she had a few more credits she needed to finish, and he said, "No, you stay and you finish, and then we'll get married."
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So they were married in about, what?
Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965], '66 [1966], something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But we, we just--our personalities are the same, we kind of have the same sense of humor.  We, you know, we both like sports.  We both like the outdoors.  We both love real estate.  We both like the morning, early mornings.  My mom likes to sleep in and my brother [Byron Nelson] likes to sleep in.  And they both have the same sense of humor, very, you know, dry, corny, kind of sense of humor.  My dad and I are a little bit more, you know, as I said, serious.
Speaker 1: Can you name your siblings for us?
Speaker 2: Sure.  I have one brother, Byron Nelson; B-Y-R-O-N, Nelson, N-E-L-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And he's younger than you?
Speaker 2: He's my older brother.
Speaker 1: Oh, older brother (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he's--how much older is he?
Speaker 2: Three years.
Speaker 1: Three years, okay.  So he was born in '65 [1965]?  Is that right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you came in '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 665540
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't remember where I was, but I do remember being very young and holding on to my mom's legs.  And my mom [Dorothy Clay Nelson] was 5'3", so she's not very tall.  But at that time, she seemed like a giant.  And I remember holding her legs thinking that I was holding on to a big tree trunk.  Like, I couldn't even get my arms all the way around.  (Laughter) And it felt like an oak tree, you know, a tree trunk.  And I remember just holding on to her, and ironically looking over at my dad [David Nelson, Jr.] saying, "Who is that man?  He's always here.  Like, why is he always around?"  And I, you know, I didn't really understand at a young age, you know, my mom and dad.  I just knew she was my mom and this man was always around (laughter).  And he was always around.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 665541
Speaker 1: What neighborhood no- did you live in?  Now, you were born in Bellflower [California], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: But were you raised there too?
Speaker 2: Well, Bellflower borders Compton.  So when I was born we lived in Compton, California.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were raised in Compton?
Speaker 2: For, up until I was about ten years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we lived--we had two homes.  Our first home was on Santa Fe [Avenue].  And then our second home was in a nice little cul de sac, Halo Drive.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And that was in?
Speaker 2: That was also in Compton.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 665542
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  What were--can you describe where you grew up?  And what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, you know what?  There is a specific connotation of Compton, California as being inner city and kind of gang ridden and dangerous.  But when we lived there, it was really, really nice.  And we lived in a beautiful cul de sac.  We had a beautiful home.  We had a big pool.  And my dad [David Nelson, Jr.] used to love to barbeque.  And we would have the long--you know, the reclining chairs, the pool chairs out on the patio.  And my brother [Byron Nelson] and I would have sleep outs looking out at the pool and under the stars.  And we had lots of swim parties and barbeques.  And I remember often going to the pool supply store, because that meant we got a new pool toy, some kind of floaty, some kind of pool raft or something.  But the smell is the charcoal from the barbeque pit, and, and the cooking the barbeque and making the sauce, and music playing.  My parents, my dad particularly, loved listening to Barry White and [HistoryMaker] Nancy Wilson and Al Green and Chaka Khan, and Earth, Wind and Fire.  So, I always remember barbeques with that kind of feeling.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 665543
Speaker 1: Where did you start school?
Speaker 2: I started at Brethren elementary [Brethren Church School], or Brethren, they had a preschool.  And Brethren was in Paramount, California, but the preschool was at their, they had a second location in Long Beach [California].  So, we drove to Long Beach for preschool until I was able to go to the elementary school in Paramount, California.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I went to preschool for two years, I started a little early.  And then I started preschool at Long Beach Brethren, and then started kindergarten at Paramount Brethren elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: It was a private Christian school.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, why not public school?  Now your father's a public school administrator [in the Los Angeles Unified School District].
Speaker 2: Well, Compton [California]--you know, while we had a nice home, the schools were not so great.  And education, with both of my parents [Dorothy Clay Nelson and David Nelson, Jr.] being educators, it was really, really important.  So they wanted to give us the best education, and the public schools did not provide for that in the, where we were living, which led to us moving and going to public schools.
Story_ID: 665544
Speaker 1: When you grew up, your household consisted of you and your brother [Byron Nelson] and your mother [Dorothy Clay Nelson] and father [David Nelson, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Any rela- other relatives live there?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  My dad, you know, came from a family of, there were a total of six children.  And to this day, I don't know how we did it, or he did it.  But I can now reflect back and see what a big heart, you know, that both of my parents have had.  Because we had always a cousin living with us at some given point.  At one point, both of my uncles came to live with us at different times.  My dad's younger brother--well, both of them are younger. Uncle Steve [Steve Nelson] came for a little while.  Uncle Michael [Michael Nelson] came and lived with us for a little while in our first home.  In the second home I had a cousin, Skip [ph.], that lived with us and Cousin Terry [ph.].  We always had a cousin living with us, because my dad wanted to provide a better way of life to get them out of St. Louis [Missouri], to get them--a couple of them were living in Chicago [Illinois], and he thought that he could help them.  And really--even--one of my first cousins, Kirk [ph.], he even helped get him into school at Pitzer College [Claremont, California], and it--was trying to encourage each of them to go on to college.
Story_ID: 665545
Speaker 1: Was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: It was.  Not as big as in some families, but my mom was actually very involved in the church growing up.  And I think, you know, she even--when she was in like high school [Vashon High School, St. Louis, Missouri] or college, you know, she kind of was referred to and looked at as a church lady a little bit.  She, you know, I think they called her Sister Clay [Dorothy Clay Nelson].  She was very religious, and I think, I think at one point she may have even thought about being a nun, at one point.  And she was really involved, and sang in the choir, and led her life by her pastor's, you know, direction.  And I think that that was a little bit--and I don't know exactly, but there was a little bit of a rub when she started to date my dad [David Nelson, Jr.], because that wasn't considered, you know, something that was consistent with how she was--the path that she was going on with the church.  So she, it was difficult for her, but she ultimately followed her heart and-- But yes, growing up, as I mentioned, I went to a Christian school.  My dad was Catholic.  We practiced Christianity, but my dad, we would pray before meals.  We would go to church occasionally together as a family.  When I was in elementary school [Brethren Church School, Paramount, California], I enjoyed going to Sunday school, so I actually went by myself, which is something we couldn't do today.  But I would walk to church by myself and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How far was it?
Speaker 2: It was a good little distance.  I mean I lived, like I said, I lived in this cul de sac [in Compton, California].  So I had to walk up to the main street and walk down a block, up maybe three blocks, and down another three or four.  So, at, you know, at seven or eight years old, that's pretty young to be (laughter).  But it was safe, and it was okay to do that.  And of course, you know, I thought I was going to church, so--. And I did that by myself for a little while.  And as I've gotten older, I particularly--once I went to law school [Duke University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina] and, you know, went through a difficult period, just personally, and started going back to church--I now go a lot more regularly.  And I go with my mom.  I take her, because she likes to go.  And my dad wasn't always a willing partner in that.  (Laughter) He enjoyed staying home on Sundays.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  I just wanted-- Now--
Speaker 2: My husband [John Meigs, Jr.] is Catholic, and we made a pact when we got married that we would, once we had children we would make a decision with, with, with one, with one religion or the other, so that we can practice that with the family.  But we didn't quite do that, so we alternate churches.  We go to his church, then we go to my church, we go to his church.
Story_ID: 665546
Speaker 1: Now, you got involved in television and modeling and that sort of thing as a, as little kid (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, right.
Speaker 1: --right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: As a, as a, as a child?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So how old were you when you first got involved in acting (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I was probably maybe seven years old, something like that, yeah.
Speaker 1: How did it come about?
Speaker 2: Well, it came about just watching television, and I would start mimicking the commercials.  I would hear one of, I would hear a youngster read their lines, and I would think to myself, oh, I can do that so much better.  And so I would recite them back, and I'd use expression and hand motions and various gestures.  And so I was pretty dramatic, you know, and I would put on performances.  And we had a, a stone fireplace with a step up, which was very large.  So I would--that was my stage.  And so my dad [David Nelson, Jr.] used to always have these microphones with recorders.  So I would take the microphone or a brush, whichever was closest, and I would perform.  I would sing, I would do monologues, and I would--I had a really good memory so I would just recite things that I remembered.  I was, I loved poetry, and so I competed in poetry competitions when I was starting kindergarten.  And so, I would recite poetry.  And one day we had some cousins that were over, and my cousin was in the music business, and his girlfriend had a daughter who was doing commercials.  And she was very fair and she had green eyes, and she was saying how she didn't get to audition very much because people really didn't know what she was.  They didn't know if she was, you know, black, or if she was Latino or--you know, they didn't know what she was.  And so my mom [Dorothy Clay Nelson] said, "Andrea [HistoryMaker Andrea Meigs] would like to do that.  She would be interested in it."  She said "Oh, well, here's the number to our agent.  You should call her, because she'll probably get more work than my daughter does."  And sure enough, I think I booked my first commercial on my second audition.  So, I booked right away.  And--
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  During the time period of '68 [1968], it was important to have an obvious looking black person.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In a position.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: If they're going to be the first one or the only one--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --make sure everybody knows that it's a black person.
Speaker 2: Exactly, yes.
Speaker 1: Where before (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Or even now.
Speaker 1: --it wasn't like that.  The lighter you were, it was--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know the more you looked like white people--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --the more chance you had.
Speaker 2: Right.  And it's actually kind of come full circle, because now I find in representing the actors, a lot of casting people are saying we're looking for a--what is the term they use?  Gosh, the term that's like a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Multiracial?  Or--
Speaker 2: Well, they'll say multinational, but they'll say racially non-determinant.  Like they actually are looking for people that, you don't know what they are.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: They say, well, they might, in fact there's a movie that's casting right now, and they're like, well, they want the person to be of some ethnicity.  They can be Asian maybe, you know, with some Indian or Native American or Latin or--yeah, non--I'll remember the term.  But yeah, it's called racially nondescript, or something like that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's something we have to discuss about later.
Story_ID: 665547
Speaker 1: I guess you would guess--I mean I'm just thinking now that the majority of the people are going to be white, and they're asking for non-whites to be racially nondescript.
Speaker 2: Right (laughter).
Speaker 1: Then where does that leave black people?
Speaker 2: Right.  Well--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Few and far jobs in between.
Speaker 1: So, so you were obviously black enough to (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right.  So I started going out for commercials for television and print work.  I did a J.C. Penney's [J.C. Penney Company] print ad right around the time that 'The Wiz' came out.  I did a 'Wiz' themed print, advertisement.  I've done a Kellogg's Sugar Smacks commercial, and Wonder Bread commercial and Burger King commercial.  And I was in 'The White Shadow,' which was a really popular show.  I had a recurring role on that as Thomas Carter's little cousin.  And yeah, so I had a lot of fun doing it.
Story_ID: 665548
Speaker 1: So you were watching TV at first?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: On this side of the screen?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then you get a chance to get on the other side of the screen.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What was that like at first, for you as a kid to see what was going on, on the other side of the screen?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was exciting.  I, you know, I kind of--this is one of things I was talking about earlier in terms of my personality.  I--it was exciting, but not surprising.  I, I enjoyed it, but I wasn't really surprised that I was being selected.  And people said, "Oh my gosh, you got, you booked your first job.  This is like, usually it takes people hundreds of auditions before they book."  And when I booked my second audition, I said, oh, okay.  It didn't really faze me much, and you know.  And being on the set was kind of, I felt very comfortable, I wasn't nervous.  I was very--you know, I've never--I don't know if it's, again, my personality or the background that I've had.  Because as I mentioned, I was doing poetry competitions from kindergarten.  So, I was always used to being in front of a bunch of people, and speaking and having to express myself.  I would say that's one of my strengths, and something that I feel comes very natural and easy to me.  So, I didn't--you know, I think some people can kind of lose themselves with that kind of success early, and maybe get a little big headed about it.  But I, I just took it as work and having fun.  And my parents [Dorothy Clay Nelson and David Nelson, Jr.] didn't push me.  They said, "If you want to do it, we'll support you.  And when you're ready to finish or to stop, then we'll move on to something else."  You know, I did not have the stereotypical mom-agers or dad-agers, whatever they call them, where they're pushing their daughters to live out their dreams.  They were really were just there to support me.  And I did it as long as I cared to do it.  I got to a point where I started transforming.  And I got a little chunky, and had to get braces, you know, and my face was breaking out.  And I decided that I--you know, going out on auditions--and I changed representatives, and my agent told me that I needed to lose weight.  And I think I was maybe ten years old, and I thought, this is--you know, and to be honest with you, the main reason why I wanted to stop was because I was going out for the same role, no matter--you know, whenever it was for television or film, it was the same role.  I used to have, I call it a uniform in the back of my mom's car, raggedy jeans, holey tennis shoes, and a faded tee shirt.  It was a pale yellow tee shirt, I'll never forget, and holey jeans.  Because inevitably, I was always going to be a poor kid.  And I said to my mom, "Why, why is it every time my audition, I'm reading the script and I have to say y'all, and ain't?"  I said, "I don't, I don't speak like that.  We don't speak like that."  And it was really, it was really uncomfortable.  And you know, my mom would actually practice with me how to say those words.  And I finally realized, you know, at a young age, in addition to my transformation, that being in front of the camera was not for me, that I wanted to be behind the camera, I wanted to be influential behind the camera.  And my goal was to hopefully be in a position where I can influence change with perceptions of how young girls, and particularly young girls of color and African American girls, are perceived.  That was my goal at eight or nine.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, while you were, you know--so this starts at seven and lasts about three years--
Speaker 2: About three years.
Speaker 1: --I guess. Okay.  How were your grades during this time?  Did you have, did they--
Speaker 2: Good.
Speaker 1: They were okay?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Yeah, I enjoyed--I loved, you know, I enjoyed going to school.  And I enjoyed working with the--what are they called?  You have a teacher on the set, so I enjoyed working with the teacher.  But, you know, I took it very seriously.  You had a certain amount of hours on the set in front of the camera.  And then you have your, your school hours.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know shooting a commercial can be a long process sometimes.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I mean, did they have restrictions on how long you could stay on a set?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.
Speaker 1: And work?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I don't remember what they were at the time, but I do remember that I had to be in school with my on set teacher, and I would have assignments that were given to me in advance by my teachers in my regular school.  So I had, I knew what I needed to accomplish.  I knew what tasks I needed to complete, and you know, and I finished them accordingly.  So that when I was done working and I went back to school, I was still at the same place and the same pace, you know, as the other students in the class.
Story_ID: 665549
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So about 1978, you have t- you really focused on school then, I guess, because there's nothing--
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) there were no distractions?
Speaker 2: No, no.  But my--as I've mentioned, my dad [David Nelson, Jr.] really encouraged my brother [Byron Nelson] and I to be active in sports.  So by this time, you know, I had been taking dance class.  I took ballet, I took modern dance.  I was, I did a school play at Compton Community College [Compton, California], I enjoyed doing that.  My brother was playing basketball.  My dad was introducing me to tennis.  So probably like around, yeah, around ten or so is when I started taking tennis lessons, you know, and I continued playing tennis through high school [Palos Verdes High School, Palos Verdes Estates, California] and college.
Speaker 1: Did you play on a tennis team in high school?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: My claim to fame is Pete Sampras.  We had the same coach in high school.  And his sister, Stella [Stella Sampras], who's a coach at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] right now, we played on the team together.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now you went to--you started off at--what's the name of the school?
Speaker 2: Brethren (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Brethren.
Speaker 2: --elementary [Brethren Church School, Paramount, California].
Speaker 1: Where did you go next?
Speaker 2: Well, by the fourth grade, the neighborhood was changing, and my dad started noticing certain elements.  He said the element was moving in to the neighborhood, and he feared that the neighborhood was not as safe for us.  And there had been a break in, and he was really concerned about my mom's [Dorothy Clay Nelson] safety and our family.  So, we moved to Long Beach [California].  My parents owned a duplex in Naples, California, which is on the coast of Marina in Long Beach, and we lived in our duplex until--while looking for a house in Palos Verdes [Palos Verdes Estates, California].  So, I went to Naples Elementary [Naples Elementary School, Long Beach, California] for fifth grade and part of sixth grade.  And after sixth grade, we moved to--or during sixth grade, we moved to Palos Verdes, and then I enrolled in the local elementary school--middle school then--because it started in sixth grade there.
Speaker 1: So you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was called Malaga Cove.
Speaker 1: Malaga--?
Speaker 2: Malaga, M-A-L-G-A [sic.], Malaga Cove, C-O-V-E--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Intermediate School [Malaga Cove Intermediate School, Palos Verdes Estates, California].
Story_ID: 665550
Speaker 1: Through this process through middle school [Malaga Cove Intermediate School, Palos Verdes Estates, California], were there important teachers or mentors for you?
Speaker 2: In middle school?  No.  Really, to be honest I don't really remember any teachers until high school [Palos Verdes High School, Palos Verdes Estates, California].  I mean I do remember one elementary school teacher when I was at Paramount Brethren [Brethren Church School, Paramount, California], Mrs. Keyes [ph.], she was my second grade teacher.  And I think that was probably the first time that I really kind of, you know, realized I was African American.  Because there were three African American girls in the class.  Everybody else was white, and I think there was one Asian.  And she called us her three black pearls.  And I felt special, but I never thought of myself as being different before that.  But I always remember that she really just always made us feel like we were jewels.  And that was my second grade teacher.  Third grade, I don't remember much.  Fourth grade, I don't remember.  Fifth grade, I don't.  Sixth and seventh, I don't.  I think it was ninth grade when I got to high school I start remembering some of my teachers.
Story_ID: 665551
Speaker 1: Did you have an interest or--I mean a career goal in mind when you were in middle school [Malaga Cove Intermediate School, Palos Verdes Estates, California]?
Speaker 2: When I was in middle school, my aspirations changed quite a bit.  I wanted to be at one point a dentist.  And then when I got braces, I wanted to be an orthodontist.  And then a little after that, I thought I would become an eye doctor; I wanted to be an ophthalmologist.  My parents [Dorothy Clay Nelson and David Nelson, Jr.] being both in education at the time, I guess my dad was--I don't know if he was still teaching, or maybe just moving into being an assistant principal [in the Los Angeles Unified School District].  He would always bring educational materials home.  And I remember him bringing a model, a 3D [three dimensional] model of an eye.  And so I was able to take apart--it was like a puzzle--take apart and look at the cornea and look at the retina and look at the muscles.  And I just thought it was fascinating.  And so, I thought I would be an ophthalmologist at one point.  And that was probably in intermediate school.  And in high school [Palos Verdes High School, Palos Verdes Estates, California], I think I had changed again--my ambitions.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So what did it change to in high school?
Speaker 2: In high school, I was very involved in the student government.  I was student body--I was part of the assembly and I was the student body--vice president of the school.  By my junior year, I thought I was interested in politics.  I thought maybe I might become a politician.  And I, you know, that's kind of where I thought I would go.  And when I--but then you know what?  But then I was, at that time I was always watching my weight.  And I was running track, and I was a little heavier than some of the other girls, and I became very concerned about nutrition.  And around this time people were starting to talk about colleges, and I went to a college fair and I heard about Tufts [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts].  And I researched Tufts, and I saw that they had, they were one of the top ranked nutrition schools.  So I thought, maybe I'll go to the nutrition school at Tufts, as I was, you know, practicing as a vegetarian or a semi-vegetarian at the time.  And I also heard that they had a great veterinarian school.  And I have a love of horses, and so I thought, well, maybe between the two.  I'll either become a veterinarian or go to the nutrition school and become a nutritionist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So this is--now, what kind of counseling did you get in high school?
Speaker 2: Nothing really specific, to be honest with you.  These are all just ideas that I kind of came up with.  So, I don't, you know,  I don't remember there being any career guidance counseling in high school that was directing me towards a particular career, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.  So, by the time you reach your senior year--so Tufts is a long way away from Southern California.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: This is about as far as you can go without going into the ocean.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 665552
Speaker 1: Did you, was there a reason why you went to (laughter)--?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.  My brother [Byron Nelson], I thought, was lucky enough to be able to go to boarding school.  I know there's a stigma attached to going to boarding school.  It's usually kids that are a problem child.  At the time, I didn't know that.  I thought, wow, he's so lucky, he gets to go to boarding school.  And it was just because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did he go to a military school?  Or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: What was it?
Speaker 2: No, he went to Thomas Jefferson [Thomas Jefferson School], right outside of St. Louis, Missouri.  We were, we spent our summers in St. Louis visiting cousins and grandparents.  And we were on the tennis court and ran into a young man, a young African American, who had graduated from Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island].  And my dad [David Nelson, Jr.], as always, got to talking and, you know, he would always make friends with people.  And he was impressed by this young man and asked him where he went to school, where he was educated.  He told my dad that he'd gone to this boarding school called Thomas Jefferson, and thought that it was a great preparatory school for college.  And immediately my dad, you know, looked into it, and we went to go visit the campus.  And it was beautiful.  It was on, you know, huge acres, and it looked like a college.  And my brother wanted to go, and he, you know, he applied and got in.  And so, I think it was his--maybe ninth grade.  So, I was probably sixth grade, sixth or seventh grade [at Malaga Cove Intermediate School, Palos Verdes Estates, California].  And my brother got a chance to go, and he went for maybe two or three years.  And I just thought, wow, this is--I was just so envious of this opportunity to be able to go and live in a dorm.  And, you know, he would on the weekends come home to my grandparents' house.  And my grandmother [Nina Carroll Nelson] stocked all of his favorite foods in the pantry, because my parents were very health conscious.  So we didn't get a chance to eat sugar and cereals.  So he had Captain Crunch, you know, and sugar Corn Pops and sugar flakes- sugar Corn Flakes.  And I thought, wow, wait until I get a chance to go to boarding school.  I'm going to go, and I'm going to have the time of my life.  So at the time that I was ready to go, which I guess was tenth grade [at Palos Verdes High School, Palos Verdes Estates, California], I told my dad I was ready.  And he said, "Oh, you can't go."  And I said, "Well, what do you mean?"  He goes, "Well, you're a girl."  And I was like, "What does that have to do with anything?"  He was, "You're my baby.  You got to stay here."  And I'm like, "That's not fair."  And he said, "Well, I'm sorry."  So I was like, "Okay, all right.  Well, then you need to prepare yourself.  Because come college, I'm going to be going far away."  And I did it, not out of spite, but I just felt like I had been deprived of this opportunity to go and study, you know, study away, and experience four seasons, and living on the East Coast or living in the Midwest.  And so I pretty much only applied to schools on the East Coast.  So, I was definitely--knowing that I was probably going to come back to Los Angeles [California] to live and be with my family.  So I wanted to really get, you know, really maximize my college experience.  And so that's why I went to Tufts [Tufts University, Medford Massachusetts], or one of the reasons why I went to Tufts (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 665553
Speaker 1: --Spanish.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, Spanish is a big part of your--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --academic life.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You took, you took a lot of Spanish in high school [Palos Verdes High School, Palos Verdes Estates, California].
Speaker 2: My, my first--when we were young, very young, we had a few Spanish speaking babysitters.  And my mom [Dorothy Clay Nelson] and dad [David Nelson, Jr.] used to always try to, you know, say a few words here and there.  And they were always carrying a little dictionary, trying to, you know, communicate with the babysitters.  And I think at a young age I was able to train my ear.  Again, I was doing a lot of mimicking, so I was able to train my ear.  So, I had a pretty good accent.  And then in seventh grade, one of the required courses was introduction to foreign languages, and we were introduced to Spanish, French, and German.  And I enjoyed German.  Spanish came to me fairly easily, and French was a disaster.  My teacher said, "Do not pursue French."  I didn't have the ear.  It was, I not picking up on it.  So it was, it was--I made the choice between German and Spanish.  My [paternal] grandfather [David Nelson, Sr.]--oh, that's actually a story that's kind of interesting.  He fought in the war, well I guess it was World War II [WWII], and lived overseas in Germany and spoke seven languages.  So, I've always aspired to speak multiple languages.  So I pursued Spanish, I took Spanish through high school.  I double majored in Spanish in college [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts].  I studied in Spain while I was in college on the exchange program.
Speaker 1: That's something (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did a summer in Mexico, in Cuernavaca.  And it is extremely important--one, I love the language; I love how it sounds.  I love being, you know, being bilingual.  I speak it at home.  My children speak Spanish, they're bilingual.  And my oldest daughter [Avery Meigs] is working on her third language now.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, so (unclear)--
Speaker 2: That's always been a dream of mine, that my children would be bilingual, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 665554
Speaker 1: So when you went to Tufts [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts], were you a--you majored in English and Spanish, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) English and Spanish, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you said you had travel experiences in Spain?
Speaker 2: Yes, exchange, the foreign--I lived in Madrid [Spain].  I lived with a family that spoke no English, so I was forced to, you know, to speak Spanish to survive.  And I lived with this family for a semester.  And I attended--we had an exchange.  Tufts had a formal exchange program, so my credits were able to transfer easily.  And I would, you know, go to class during the day and participate in the traditional extracurricular activities in Madrid.  I took flamenco dancing.  I, you know, played--you know, I tried to play tennis while I was there.  But I tried to do as much as I could, with really just absorbing the culture and the language (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  So just for the record, you graduated from high school [Palos Verdes High School, Palos Verdes Estates, California] in '86 [1986]?
Speaker 2: Eighty-six [1986].
Speaker 1: And you started at Tufts in '86 [1986]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right, in Medford, Massachusetts?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So your trip to Madrid took place in?
Speaker 2: In '88 [1988].
Speaker 1: In '88 [1988], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So I went--you know what?  My trip to, my trip to Spain was in '89 [1989], the spring of '89 [1989].  I did an exchange program in the fall of '88 [1988] at Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia].  So I split my junior year in the fall at Spelman, and Spain in the spring.  And the experience in Cuernavaca [Mexico] had to have been--you know, I think that was--yeah, that was after I came back.  So that may have been--it had to have been after I graduated.  It may have been after I graduated, yeah, maybe '90 [1990].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, you turned a four year experience at Tufts into maybe a two year experience, with (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, with all the--
Speaker 1: All the--
Speaker 2: It was three.  But, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, did you like Tufts?
Speaker 2: I loved it.  It took me a minute to get adjusted.  It's far away from home.  I'm very close to my family, so I was a little bit homesick.  The weather obviously was a huge change, being a California girl.  And with our winters pretty much ending in December and the weather warming back up in January, I thought oh, well, you know, it's really, really cold right now, but if I can just make it through December I'll go home for winter break, and when I get back in January, I'm home free.  And little did I know that the winter continues.  (Laughter) And that year it snowed until April.  I couldn't believe it.  I'd never experienced so much cold weather and gray skies, day after day after day.  I kept thinking, you know, like in California it's cloudy in the morning, but the clouds always burn off.  So by the afternoon, you just take a sweater with you and you wrap it around your waist by the afternoon, because it's going to be warm out.  And I kept waiting for that to happen.  And I have friends who tease me, because I used to wear these little espadrille shoes, which I don't know if you know, but they're kind of just, you know, a step up from a sandal.  And I would wear socks with them, thinking that that was okay.  And I quickly had to obtain a new wardrobe.  Coats and sweaters and scarves and gloves.  I went out there totally ill prepared (laughter) for all of that.
Story_ID: 665555
Speaker 1: So, Tufts University [Medford, Massachusetts].  Were there any special teachers or mentors at Tufts, or in any of these other--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) venues that, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --were available when you were in college?
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, you know, there was a professor at Tufts that I distinctly remember.  Her name was Professor Elizabeth Ammons, A-M-M-O-N-S, I believe.  And I--she was one of the--in the English department.  I believe I had creative writing with her, or a version of a writing course.  And I remember that she asked me to stay after class one day, and I thought, oh, now what?  You know, like, I was like, what did I do wrong?  Or, am I having a problem with a particular area?  I just immediately thought something negative.  And she said to me, "What are you, what are you interested in doing, you know?  What are your kind of ambitions and your career goals?"  And I said, "Well, you know, I was thinking about--."  By this time I was thinking about becoming a lawyer, because people were saying to me that I was very persuasive in my speaking, and somewhat argumentative.  And they thought that those were two good skills that would really make for a good lawyer.  And so I knew that at that time when I was thinking--prior to coming to Tufts that medicine--either a veterinarian or a nutritionist--I needed to major in biology in order to pursue a career in medicine, and I experienced the worst grade of my life in biology.  I got a D, and that was startling for me.  I'd never received a D in my life.  And as much as I enjoyed the class, I realized very quickly that I needed to move out medicine as my future and think more of liberal arts concentration.  So, I was thinking about psychology, thinking about political science.  And my dad [David Nelson, Jr.] quickly told me that I could not major in psychology because he thought it was a dead end, and would not lead me to anywhere.  So, I was looking at political science as a major.  And I was taking a lot of courses in language, and that's where I ended up English and Spanish.  But to get back to the point of Professor Ammons, I said, "Yeah, I'm thinking about maybe majoring in political science and going on to law school."  And she said, "Why?"  And I said, "Well," and I gave her reasons why.  And she said, "You know, I see you doing something much, much more creative.  I'm looking at your writing here, and the detail and the description and the imagination in your writing suggests to me that you, you need to go in, in an area where you'll be able to use those creative skills that you have.  I think that going into law would not be the best use of your skillset and your strengths."  And I always remembered that.  So, even though I ended up going on to apply for law school, her voice was in the back of my head and I was remembering that.  And so, when I was given this opportunity to look into a more traditional career in entertainment, I, I really kind of have to give a little credit to her for, for planting that seed.
Story_ID: 665556
Speaker 1: Any other teachers at Tufts [Tufts University, Medford Massachusetts] that, that you remember that really--?
Speaker 2: There was Professor Gerald Gill, who was a very senior professor in the history department.  He was an African American professor there, and he kind of looked a little bit like my dad [David Nelson, Jr.], and was a little bit of a dad figure for a lot of us that were so far away from home.  And he, you know, wasn't one that gave career advice, but just--you know, that nod, "You're doing okay.  Keep up the good work.  I expect you to do well," that kind of subtle reassurance, being so far away from home.  And then there was also one other woman who was in charge of the African American house [Capen House] where we would often hang out.  And her name was Lisa--I'm forgetting her last name.  Lisa--I forget her last name, but she was head of the house there.  And there was a lot of different activities that took place there, whether it was putting on a production for Black History Month, whether it was bringing in speakers to come and speak, or whether it was inviting dance troupes to come and perform.  And she was just really--I remember she was the first person that I remember really emphasizing that we're not girls anymore, we're women.  And, you know, in speaking with some of my friends who had said, you know, "The girls this, and the girls that," she goes, "You guys aren't girls.  You're women."  And I was like, wow, okay.  So, I remember she was teaching us that.  And I also remember at that time, you know, rap was real popular.  Run-DMC was the big hit.  And one of my friends who, by the way was from Ohio, she was from Columbus, Ohio, was just obsessed with it.  I wasn't much into rap music, but she came up with lyrics and rhymes.  And she wrote this rap, and it was called 'The Ladies of the Eighties' [ph.] and she engaged me, and of course I like performing, so we did a duo.  We did a duo, we actually performed it in front of the entire African American society, and it was really popular.  And I remember Lisa Webb--that's her last name, Lisa Webb--she allowed us to do it, but she asked us to change one part of it, because she said that she really wanted us to focus on positivity and projecting positive images as young women, and to not be too critical of the men, because there was a couple of lines that were putting the guys down.  Yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I always remember that.
Speaker 1: All right, all right.  So, she was a guardian of the male sensitivity (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She wanted to keep the equal balance, yes.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.  So, this was Lisa Webb at the African American house?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 665557
Speaker 1: Okay.  So on the verge of graduation [from Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts] you, you, you had applied to law school apparently, right, at this point (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Or did you?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: I had created the Pre-Law Society at Tufts [Tufts Pre-Law Society].  I was focused on becoming, you know, going on to law school.  And so I started this program and organized, you know, got in touch with the different reviews: the Princeton Review, the LSAT, the Stanley Kaplan [Kaplan, Inc.], all the different reviews, and provided literature and material for people that were interested in going to law school, and we'd have meetings and so forth and so on.  And I applied, and I believe everybody within the Pre-Law Society--I think everyone got in except for me.  So, it was a little devastating my first year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--now how did you choose Duke [Duke University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: A woman that pledged me--I'm a member of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority--was, she had graduated from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and we had a citywide chapter.  And she went on law school and she was at Duke, and I got in touch with her.  I applied there as well as Georgetown [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.] and a number of schools--Stanford [Stanford Law School, Stanford, California] and places all over, and I got into Duke.  I was, the first go around I was waitlisted at Georgetown, and that was my first choice.  I really, really wanted to go there.  And the second go around--applying--I took the LSAT again, which everybody told me not to do, because at the time--and I think they still do--they average your score.  So, if for whatever reason your score should drop, your average would drop.  And they said that most times studies show that you would only increase your score by taking it again if it increased maybe one or two points, so it really wasn't worth it.  But I believed that I could do better, much better.  And in fact when I took it again I scored significantly better, and that improved my chances and I got into Duke.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was one of the top ten law schools at the time, and so I wanted to go to the best law school I could.
Speaker 1: So this is 1994?
Speaker 2: I graduated in '94 [1994], so I went to law school in--I took off in '91 [1991].  So, '91 [1991].  I went in '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what did you do in the year?
Speaker 2: I went, I went back home.  Well, actually I, I went to Washington, D.C. for the summer and I took a course at Georgetown called the Charles Hamilton Houston program [Charles Hamilton Houston Pre-Law Institute], and it was a program that was to prepare students for law school.  I was also told that if I took the course and I did well, there might be a chance that I might get off of the wait list at Georgetown.  So, that was the other reason that I took it.  And we were exposed to a number of visiting professors including professor Ogletree [HistoryMaker Charles Ogletree], who I believe you've also interviewed, at Harvard.  And I think he taught us constitutional law, I believe.  Or no, it was criminal law.
Story_ID: 665558
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now is the Houston program [Charles Hamilton Houston Pre-Law Institute] at the Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], or at Georgetown [Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C.] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was at Georgetown.  It was Georgetown.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and so I took that for the summer.  And at the conclusion of it, which was extremely helpful and enlightening, I was not lifted off the waitlist; I was not taken off the waitlist at Georgetown.  And so I stayed, trying to find a job on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.], and also considering reapplying to the school.  And about, I don't know, September-ish, I got a phone call from my dad [David Nelson, Jr.] who said that the money was not going to be coming in the mail for my rent.  And without a job and without being in school, there was one thing left for me to do, and that was to come back home.   And I was shocked, because I was like, "What do you mean, you're not going to send money?"  Like, I had no concept of what that meant.  Like, "You're not going to send money?  Well, how am I going to live?"  And of course, that was his point, exactly.  And he did not send a check.  So, (laughter) I had to pack up and come home.  And so what I did is, I applied for a job when I got home to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and I got a job working at Channel 13, which was KCOP [KCOP-TV, Los Angeles, California] at the time.  And I, my job was working as a production assistant for two programs.  One was, I think it 'L.A. Now.'  No, it was called 'Children Now.'  It was a children's advocacy program that was nominated for an Emmy [Emmy Award], and it was in conjunction with L.A. Unified [Los Angeles Unified School District].  So it was kind of, actually to be honest it was the perfect job for me because it was entertainment, and yet educational.  It was, we would have a different school come to the set every week.  So, there would be anywhere from, you know, forty to fifty kids bused to the set; they would fill the audience.  And I was in charge of coming up with guest speakers and presentations for them.  So, we would have somebody come from the zoo and talk about, you know, caring for animals.  Or we might have somebody come from a museum to talk about being a curator.  And it was, it was a lot of fun.  I'd have to keep the audience going and keep the kids engaged and excited, and interview the hosts.  And there was another program that I worked on called 'L.A. Today,' I believe it was called something like that.  And that was just a current events show about what was going on in Los Angeles.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I did that for a year.  And when I was at KCOP I quickly looked around and realized that everybody that seemed to be really influential and really making--being in a position of influence and decision making--they were  people who had either gone to law school or they were people who had gone to business school.  And at that time I realized I, I need to go back to school.  It's time for me to go back to school.  So I reapplied, and that's when I got into Duke [Duke University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina].
Story_ID: 665559
Speaker 1: I have a note here that you worked for [HistoryMaker] Maxine Waters at one point.
Speaker 2: I did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is that after you got into Duke?
Speaker 2: After my first year of law school.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, Duke University [Duke University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina] with the beautiful entry with the tree lined--
Speaker 2: Oh, it's gorgeous.
Speaker 1: --chapel [Duke University Chapel, Durham, North Carolina] and all.
Speaker 2: It's beautiful.
Speaker 1: So how did you like Duke?
Speaker 2: I loved it, I loved it.  It was a nice contrast to going to school in Boston [Massachusetts].  We were, I was finally experiencing a Division 1 sports athletic program.  I'm a huge basketball fan, so the fact that--I think two out of the three years we were there, we were in the NCAA tournament [NCAA Division I Men's Basketball Tournament].  And one year I think we might have won the championship.
Speaker 1: I think so.  Duke had some great teams.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So I'm not--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --sure who was playing when--
Speaker 2: Well, Grant Hill was playing.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Christian Laettner was playing.  Bobby Hurley was playing.  Oh, it was so much fun.  I also enjoyed Duke because, although it's in Durham, North Carolina, a lot of Broadway productions will start there just to workshop them.  So there was a lot of culture, dance troupes, theater troupes.  You know, we had a lot of political influence there.  I remember Janet Reno, she was the attorney general at the time.  She came and spoke.  And I just, it was really enlightening.  It was a great educational program, and I enjoyed it.  I got a chance to really participate a little bit on the undergraduate level and experience that, but yet be a graduate student, which was very challenging.  It was hard, it was hard (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was, was law school tough?
Speaker 2: Law school was hard.  It was, you know what?  I look at it as like a pyramid.  You know, in high school [Palos Verdes High School, Palos Verdes Estates, California] I did very well.  And you apply to, you know, top colleges and you get in.  And then you're now with a--you know, you're now moving up the pyramid.  So you're now with the cream of--you know, all these people who did really well in high school.  And now you have to try to exceed within this group of people who have excelled.  And then when you go into law school and you go into a top ten law school in the country, now you're closer to that top of the pyramid, and all of those people have done really well, you know, in top colleges.  And I was really challenged.  It was very difficult for me.  It was very difficult.  I, I, I was so glad when I graduated.  I said, I'm never going to go back to school again (laughter).
Speaker 1: I've heard the first year is the hardest year of law school.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is that true?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, it was hard.  It was, for me, I--you know, I'm much more of a--you know, as I've said--a creative person.  And I knew going into law school that I wasn't going to practice for a long period of time.  I wanted to have a legal background.  I knew that I would probably practice maybe about five years, probably not more than five years.  And, but I wanted to have a law degree.  And so it was difficult also because I'm very competitive.  And everybody was applying for a journal and moot court.  And, you know, really if you're going to apply for a journal, those are people that are going to go on and do clerkships with judges.  And I knew that--you know, and those are going to be people who are going to end up going on to practice in corporate law, and I knew that wasn't what I wanted to do.  So, it was very difficult for me to pull myself back and not force myself to jump in that, in that, in that competitive circle, you know, knowing that that's not what I ultimately wanted to do.  I did do moot court and that was great, because of the oral advocacy.  And I enjoyed that, and I was really good at that, and that was a nice honor to be a part of.  But, yeah, I really wasn't interested in corporate law other than firms that had an entertainment division.  Because I, at this point I knew that I wanted to go into entertainment law.  I had taken a class.  It was copyright contracts and a sports entertainment course with Professor Lane [ph.] at Duke.  I believe he's still there.  And I knew that's what I wanted to do.  So, I tried to take as much as I could--contracts.  And I loved securities regulations, but I knew that that wasn't ultimately what I was going to do.  I loved, I did pro bono work.  I was a guardian ad litem when I was there, so I represented a couple of families that were going through custody issues, and provided memorandums to the court on their behalf.  So, I really enjoyed.  So ultimately when I had left law school and I clerked, my first year I worked for Congresswoman Waters.  My second year I worked at the district attorney's office [Los Angeles County District Attorney's Office], and I found myself really gravitating--even though I wanted to do entertainment law--more towards the public sector (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This the district attorney's office where?  In--?
Speaker 2: Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: Los Angeles, okay.
Speaker 2: I was at the Compton [California] branch under Steve Kay [Stephen Kay].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then after graduating, I was accepted--I g- I was--received a job offer downtown at the DA's office (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 665560
Speaker 1: Is there anything special about graduation that we need to talk about?  Or, just?
Speaker 2: Well, looking back now--and I included it in one of the pictures--it was clearly the proudest moment I think of my parents' [Dorothy Clay Nelson and David Nelson, Jr.] life.  With education being so important, they really, you know, their dream was really for me to finish college.  And the fact that I was getting a doctorate, a juris doctorate, you know, from Duke [Duke University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina]--it was, I can just see how proud they were.  And both of my grandmothers [Nina Carroll Nelson and Ruth Clay] were alive at that time, and they were both there.  And my mom's uncle came, and he was much older.  He was kind of like a father figure for her.  So it was really, really a big deal.  It was a big deal.  And I was proud to be able to have my parents there to see that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  I'm, I'm glad I asked that question then (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 665561
Speaker 1: I guess I should ask you something about working for [HistoryMakers] Maxine Waters.  So, what it was like working for Maxine Waters?  And did you know her before?
Speaker 2: It was amazing.  I think she's amazing.  She's one of my mentors.  She's very close to our family.  She went to Vashon High School [St. Louis, Missouri] with my parents [Dorothy Clay Nelson and David Nelson, Jr.], so I've known her for a long time.  And I, I credit her with a lot of what I've accomplished in my career, particularly with law school [Duke University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina].  I was at Tufts [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts], and she was speaking at the Kennedy School [John F. Kennedy School of Government, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I went to hear her speak.  And she pulled me aside afterwards and says, "What's going on?  What are you doing?  What are you working on?  Where're you, what's next?"  And I said I was about to graduate and that I, you know, was hoping to go to law school.  And she said, "What do you mean, you're hoping to go?"  And I said, "Well, you know, I'm hoping that I can get into law school.  I'm," you know, "I would like to go."  She goes, "Then just go."  And I said, "Well, you know, I have to apply and I have to get accepted."  And she goes, "But just go.  What do you, what is there to think about?  What is the hope for?  Just do it."  And I always remembered that, and I thought, wow, okay.  Yeah, that's the attitude I should have.  And I always had that in the back of my mind through the process of applying to law school, and not getting in the first time and reapplying.  And you know, I, you know, got into law school.  And then looking for a job after that first year is kind of tough finding, you know, finding your first gig.  And she, I applied for a clerkship with her office and I was able to get a clerkship with two or three other people.  And I smile, because one of the other guys, I just did a major deal with him over at FOX, because he ended up going on to law school as well.  But I worked there, and it was truly one of the most exciting jobs I've had.  It was right after the Rodney King beating; that's her district.  And the phones were crazy.  Every morning, you know, the phones were ringing, and everyone was calling.  She was being, you know, really--you know, there was a lot of pressure being put on her which is--you know, she thrives in that kind of environment.  And you know, she was speaking at--it was my first real introduction to politics, and what working in politics is all about.  And I remember, you know, she asked me to draft a speech, and just take a, you know, a stab at it.  She was speaking at a Planned Parenthood [Planned Parenthood Federation of America] event, and I thought, wow, you know, my words might actually get used.  And I just thought, wow, this is so exciting, about something I thought was really, really important.  It was also the year of the Democratic Convention in New York [1992 Democratic National Convention, New York, New York].  I'd never been to a convention.  I had never been to New York [New York].  She brought us all, all of the interns with her.  And really, you know, some people kind of used their interns and their clerks as, you know, as gofers.  And she didn't--if I was working, I didn't realize I was working, because I felt like I was just absorbing all of this and experiencing all of it.  And she took us to dinners, and she took us to, you know, on the floor.  And she--we went places that we weren't supposed to go because we didn't have credentials.  And you know, people would say, "Sorry, you know, Congresswoman, Maxine--Miss Waters, Miss Waters, they don't have--."  She goes, "Come on, they're with me."  And we were--I went to my first like five thousand dollar, you know, ticket event.  And I just thought, oh, this is amazing.  And I just really--I met [HistoryMaker] Alexis Herman, and she was advancing for, I want to say--who was it at the time?  It wasn't Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton].  Was it Clinton?
Speaker 1: Well, Clinton was president then, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, she was advancing for him then.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: So, and I was impressed with her.  And she was a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], and she was just--
Speaker 1: She was secretary of transportation [sic.], I think it was.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  So it was just really, really exciting, and I really enjoyed that experience.  And it was really motivating and uplifting and eye opening.
Speaker 1: Commerce [sic.], I'm sorry.  Was it commerce?  Well, anyway, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  And I just--empowering.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your parents, were they close to [HistoryMaker] Mervyn Dymally too?  I know he was the congressman for Compton [California].
Speaker 2: Not so much, not so much.
Speaker 1: Not so much, okay.  Yeah, but that Vashon High School connection--did they know her?
Speaker 2: What's that?
Speaker 1: Did they know Maxine Waters--
Speaker 2: My parents?
Speaker 1: --in high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, they went to school together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were in the same class.  Yeah, so they, they've known each other since, you know, elementary or junior high school as well.
Speaker 1: That's something.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 665562
Speaker 1: When you get back, you go to the L.A. district attorney's office [Los Angeles County District Attorney's Office] in 1994, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And if I'm correct, now this is when the L.A. district attorney's office was known all over the United States because of the O.J. trial [People of the State of California v. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995], right?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Is this true?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this was actually going on?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: O.J. [O.J. Simpson] was on trial.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And Marcia Clark and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Chris Darden [Christopher Darden]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --were engaged in--.  Did you, I mean what was going on when you got there?
Speaker 2: Well, when I got there, when I got there it was, it was--there was a little bit of a circuitous path, because I clerked after my second year in the DA's office when I was at the Compton [California] branch under Steve Kay [Stephen Kay].  I applied for a job after I graduated, and they were having a hiring freeze.  So, I applied to the district attorney's office because of my experience--I knew that I had an advantage--to Brooklyn [New York], Dade County [Miami-Dade County, Florida] and a couple of different places, and I got jobs at all of them.  And I was going to the Brooklyn DA's office [Brooklyn District Attorney's Office], and I had my apartment.  And I was dating a guy who was just graduating from Fuqua [Duke University Fuqua School of Business, Durham, North Carolina], the business school, and he was going to work for Morgan Stanley [Morgan Stanley Wealth Management].  And I thought, okay, this is it.  We both can be in New York [New York], and I'm the attorney and he's the businessman.  And I got one of those speeches that, "If you want to come to New York, you know, I'd love you to be there.  But, you know, I just want to be clear, you know.  Please don't come for me.  And if we, you know, if we work out, then, you know, then maybe our paths will cross another time.  But I just--."  You know, so that's all I needed to hear.  So I was like, okay, I'm going to be going home on that note.  Because I was thinking, working in the DA's office is not going to afford me nearly the type of salary for the type of, you know, way of life that I'm used to and that I would like to have.  And if, you know, marriage was not in the near future, then I thought I don't need to go to New York.  So, I went back to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] without a job at that point.  And as luck would have it, the freeze lifted at the DA's office and I got a job.  And I was then working downtown, as opposed to the Compton branch.  I was working downtown at the L.A. DA's office and--oh, my goodness, I'm forgetting his name right now.
Speaker 1: Oh, in L.A.?
Speaker 2: Yes, it'll come to me.  Anyway, yeah--anyway--Garcetti [Gil Garcetti].  I was working under Garcetti at the time.  And by coincidence, his daughter Dana [Dana Garcetti] went to Duke, and now Eric [Eric Garcetti] is there in Los Angeles.  So I was working at the DA's office, and I was immediately put in SID, which is the special investigations division.  And that was high profile, very high profile, because it was all the criminal activity by government officials.  So, obviously that's nothing that is advertised or discussed or made public.  And everyone kept asking me, "How did you get into SID?  That's like, you know, that's like the be all and do all."  And I thought, I have no idea.  But I liked it.  It was interesting, and I was looking forward to it.  And in the first few weeks I was there, I was being introduced to a lot of people.  They took me to meet Chris Darden, and took me to meet Marcia Clark and a couple of other people.  And by this time I was, I reached out to a woman I went to law school with at Duke [Duke University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina] who was working at an agency.  She was working at CAA at the time, and I told her that--
Speaker 1: This is Creative Artists (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Creative Artists Agency.
Speaker 1: --Agency, right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  And I said to her that, "I'm here at the DA's office and, you know, and I'm going to do this with the goal of getting some great courtroom experience." Because you're pretty much thrown into the courtroom doing preliminary hearings right away, even before you take the bar and, and pass the bar.  So, you're getting courtroom experience versus working at a private law firm and not seeing a courtroom for eight years because of all the muckety muck the senior attorneys are doing at trials, and the young attorneys are just doing all of the prep work for it.  So I thought, well, let me get some courtroom experience, and I'll segue to going to an entertainment boutique firm, and maybe I'll go in house at a studio, at an entertainment--.  So, I was really calling her to get some advice.  And she said, "Well, you know, if you're interested in entertainment, why don't you just apply to the agency?"  And I thought, "Well, I guess I could, but I mean I just graduated from law school, and I wanted to at least practice for a little bit."  And she said, "Well, you know, you can, but, you know, if you're really interested in the agency business, you don't need to have practiced.  And you might as well try it."  So I said, okay.  So I put in an application and I get called in for an interview.  And over a battery of seven interviews, I ended up getting accepted to the agent training program.  Meanwhile, I'm being introduced to Marcia Clark and Chris Darden, and I, I was really, really torn.  Because I was like, I just got here.  I mean, I've only been here for like, you know--
Story_ID: 665563
Speaker 1: (Audio disturbance) Now this is--and I'm somewhat p- puzzled.  Now because I read in your bio--they said that you went to the mailroom.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: You went right to the mailroom, not a management program.  So--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so, what, what happened?  What--What's the truth of the matter?
Speaker 2: Well, you know what?  I, I--here's the truth of the matter.  It's I was at the DA's office [Los Angeles County District Attorney's Office], and I knew that I didn't want to stay there very long.  I got this opportunity to become part of the training program [at Creative Artists Agency], and I also knew that it was a very prestigious program to be accepted into, and it probably wouldn't be offered to me again.  So I spoke with my supervisor at the DA's office, and they sat down and told me, "Look, we really like you. We'd really like you to stay.  However, we understand this is a great opportunity.  So if you, if you decide that you want to go, know that you always have a home here.  And we will accept you back and welcome you back."  And I thought, well, I guess I got to go, because I know either way I've got a job.  So I thought, well, let me go and try this, and if I don't like it, I'll come back.  So I left, and I started in the mailroom.  It was a very humbling, a very, very humbling experience (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, the training program does start you in the mailroom?
Speaker 2: It starts in the mailroom.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.
Speaker 2: It starts in the mailroom.  So I've got my, you know, my fancy suits from, you know, from what I thought was going to be my career in law, and I'm wearing them in the mailroom.  And I'm pushing mail carts and I'm going to pick up groceries in the morning, at five o'clock in the morning.  And I have to get enough for five kitchens, and so I'm pushing two carts of groceries at five o'clock in the morning at the Pavilions on Santa Monica [Boulevard], which are full of cream cheese and orange juice and bagels and fruit and, you know, being yelled at by agents that the fruit wasn't ripe enough or it was too ripe, and having to pick up dry cleaning, and having to take cars to, you know, to the shop, and picking up dogs at airports, and all of those miscellaneous random tasks that you're asked as an assistant in the mailroom.  I drove around packages from as far south as almost the airport [Los Angeles International Airport, Los Angeles, California], to as far north as Broad Beach in Malibu [California], to as far east as Dodgers Stadium [Dodger Stadium, Los Angeles, California].  And my car caught on fire one time driving packages, and all I could think about is I've got to get these packages out of my car, because they're going to big clients, and I've got to make sure that I get it to them safely.  And you know, it was a lot of grind.  It was a lot of grind and it was very humbling.  Because I'm thinking to myself, well, I'm going to go to the mailroom but I'm probably going to be out in like six months.  I know it takes most people at least a year, but I'll probably be out--I'm thinking I'm more educated than most people in the mailroom.  I've got more work experience than most people in the mailroom.  I'm female, and most people in the mailroom are male.  I'm African American, and there's nobody there that's African American, and I'm a hard worker.  So, I'll be, probably be out in about six months.  Cut to about a year and a half later, I finally got promoted out of the mailroom.
Story_ID: 665564
Speaker 1: Now let me go back to something before.  Now, we've got you in this, this work drama.  But I want you to explain what CAA is, and what they're--what are you serving with all these growing activities?  I mean what kind of organization is this, and what is its status, and what is it doing?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Creative Artists Agency is arguably the most powerful talent agency in Hollywood, in the world.  While there, we represented all of the biggest movie stars, from Tom Cruise, to Will Smith, to Oprah Winfrey, to, at the time Halle Berry, Jamie Foxx, Sidney Poitier, you know, Demi Moore, Jennifer Aniston.  And we negotiated, you know, their talent deals for their movies for television.  And I was accepted into this training program to represent these stars and to negotiate their deals on their behalf.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, now that puts this into context of why this is important to do all this, you know.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: So, you're, a year and a half later, you're still doing the same--?
Speaker 2: Right, and really the analogy is it's almost like graduate school.  Most people go to the mailroom right out of college, you don't need a graduate degree.  And so as much as I thought that I had all of these advantages working on my behalf--you know, having a law degree and having more work experience--in this business it really doesn't matter, you know.  Being in the mailroom is like a graduate program.  You start off at the bottom and you work your way up.  And it's really, it's really a weeding out system, because they really want to see whether you are determined, whether you are persistent and aggressive, and whether or not you have the stamina to withstand these menial tasks and these, you know, very trivial work--you know, tasks.  So, it really is a weed out system for people, because they're so many people that want to do it.  There are so many people that are trying to get in.  So it's, it's a way to, you know, to see who's going to really stand out and who's going to survive.
Story_ID: 665565
Speaker 1: Let me ask this.  So is--is it--I mean, as an agent dealing with a star, a big star, does the agent--is the agent responsible for making sure that these tasks are done?  I mean, even if they can't find somebody in the mailroom to do it?  I mean, so what I'm saying, is this all part of the cultural knowledge or knowledge base and resource base of somebody who's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --going to be an agent?
Speaker 2: Yes, to a certain extent.  I'll give you two examples.  You know, as a messenger [for Creative Artists Agency], you know, while I'm driving these packages to and fro all around town, one might think, oh, my god, all I'm doing is putting miles on my car.  And I'm driving around, at that time with a pager waiting for, you know, somebody to say, beep, beep, beep, beep.  This client is about to leave for the airport, you've got to get there.  One might look at that as being, you know, mindless work.  But what it really taught me is, I learned who the clients were.  I learned who the executives were.  I learned which executive was at which studio.  This executive is at Fox.  This executive is at Warner Brothers.  This executive is at Universal [Universal Pictures].  I learned which producers have been producing deals at which studios, because I was going to the same places every day.  And in fact, on some of my runs I actually met the clients.  And so, you know, that was an exciting day, because you got a chance to actually meet the person you were delivering the package to and develop a relationship.  And some of them actually remember you when you get promoted.  And if you're lucky, then maybe you'll get a chance to join their team and actually represent them.  So, that's one example.  The other is, we're in the service business, you know, representing actors and directors and producers and writers.  You're servicing them, so if they have a desire to create a movie about adoption or about something--maybe some historical piece--what, what you're learning to do is to be able to attend to their needs and service them.  So while it may seem like a simple task to have to go to, you know, the library and at the time pick up X number of books because of the project they were researching, you start to understand and appreciate that it may be a menial task again, but that's what you do to service your client.  You service your client, you know, a serviced client is a happy client, and is a working client.  So, some of those tasks, you know, seem, you know, trivial and menial.  But I learned very early on that, you know, you want your clients to rely on you, to trust you, to believe in you, and to feel that you believe in them.  And sometimes it's those little things that make a difference.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's what I was getting at in terms of--so it's not just hazing.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: It's, you're being--you're being soaked in this culture of this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's a mentality.
Speaker 1: --you're being soaked in this culture of who's who and what's what, and what you have to do.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 665566
Speaker 1: So, a year and a half and you're still doing it.  And so--so what was the breakthrough?
Speaker 2: Well, well the breakthrough is, you know, there were--I don't know, eleven or twelve people ahead of me, and every, each of them either needed to get promoted or quit before I could go up the ladder.  I did not pass the bar, the California bar, the first two times.  And even though I wasn't at the DA's office [Los Angeles County District Attorney's Office], I felt like I needed closure with that, in the event that I decided not to pursue this career.  And I wanted to always have gone to law school to have passed the bar.  So, I took a leave of absence, and when I came back from my leave of absence thinking that I would just start where I left off, I went back down to the bottom and I had to work my way back up again.  So, that happened, that happened to me twice.  And so, that was part of the reason for the prolonged mailroom experience.  But basically by the time I worked my way back up, and everybody had else had either quit or been promoted, there was a desk, a couple of desks that were open.  The agent was looking for a new assistant.  They wanted somebody who was in the training program, because there's a vested interest that this is the future of the company [Creative Artists Agency], and you know the company in and out, having worked there for the length of time that you have.  And they also know, because you desire to become an agent, that they probably could, you know, get away with a little bit more with a trainee than, you know, somebody else who was just here for a few months.  And so I applied for a couple of desks, and I was promoted to a very senior agent's desk, talent agent's desk.  And that was my first, first desk experience.
Story_ID: 665567
Speaker 1: Now, what you said earlier, too, is profound, if you were the--you said that you're the only woman and the only black person?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, did--did that typify the demographics of the talent industry in those days, and maybe now?
Speaker 2: A hundred percent.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Very few women and very few black people?
Speaker 2: Right, especially at that agency, yeah.  And to be honest with you, a lot of people say to me, "Andrea [HistoryMaker Andrea Meigs], I don't know how you did it.  I don't know how you stuck in there.  I don't know how you were able to, you know, just bite your tongue when people were rude and condescending, and (pause) really belittling when you were older than them and more educated than them and, you know.  And, you know, and yet you're delivering coffee to them."  And I said, "You know what?"  It was like a pledge process.  And I had pledged--like I said, I'm a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority].  So I, you know, was able to kind of let that roll off my back a little bit.  But really what I always remembered when I was in the mailroom, and what always inspired me to keep going--in addition to my parents [Dorothy Clay Nelson and David Nelson, Jr.] and, you know, as I said, you know, the congresswoman [HistoryMaker Maxine Waters]--is at the time, before everything was, you know, electronic and there were these, you know, fan mail companies, we would get a lot of fan mail that would come in to the clients and the stars.  And it was like a mailroom.  Everybody had a little cubbyhole, and we would, what you call shuck the mail into the cubbyhole.  And we had bins, mail bins upon mail bins of fan mail.  And so all of the clients, their names were listed, you know, on the wall at the ceiling there, just at the ceiling.  And so I would look up at this wall and I would see all the clients' names.  And I would see Will Smith, and I would see Oprah Winfrey, and I saw Halle Berry's name, I saw Jamie Foxx, I saw Sidney Poitier, and I saw, you know, all of these actors, you know.  And I thought, there's not one African American female agent here, and there're all these stars that are making all this money for this company [Creative Artists Agency].  And that really inspired me to say, "I'm going to be that agent one day.  I'm going to be that agent one day; and I will be able to, hopefully, engage with these actors and help them to realize their dreams."
Story_ID: 665568
Speaker 1: What terms do- does an agent work under?  Do they get a commission on, on certain transactions?  Or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is it, is it--?
Speaker 1: --how does that work?
Speaker 2: Well, as an agent trainee you just get a flat salary.  You're working at minimum wage.  So, you know, I mean I went from law school [Duke University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina] with all these loans to working in the public sector [at the Los Angeles County District Attorney's Office].  I wasn't making much money, but at least there was a loan forgiveness program, because I was working in the public sector.  And they would forgive part of my loans for the length of time that I worked in the public sector to working in the mailroom [at Creative Artists Agency] and making minimum wage.  So I was living at home, you know, whereas most of my friends were like buying houses at this point.  You made no money.  As agent, and that's something that I was really looking forward to.  Because you do--your agents make 10 percent of what their clients make.  And then agents also usually earn--it's changed a little bit in more recent years, but usually you get a bonus at the end of the year, depending upon your performance.
Speaker 1: From the company?
Speaker 2: From the company, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where you can make a substantial amount of money.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So--
Speaker 2: So I eventually started making more money, and I was able to pay off all my loans.
Story_ID: 665569
Speaker 1: Yeah, so somebody who's really good at being--well, well you're an assistant now?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: For, for--and who did you assist? Can you (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My first desk was Fred Specktor, who was a very senior agent at the time.  He was representing Robert De Niro, and Glenn Close, and Jack Lemmon, and he had just signed Geoffrey Rush, who won an Oscar [Academy Award] for 'Shine,' the Australian actor.  You know, and that was a great, great, experience.  He was a very aggressive agent.  He was a temperamental agent, and very passionate about what he, about what he was doing.  So, I would say I took some qualities from him.  I was later promoted to working in what they call the project group, which is kind of like in house producing.  And that was a smaller division within the company [Creative Artists Agency] where, you know, again, if the client was interested in a particular topic, we would research articles and get articles to them, or we would look for scripts with that topic.  And so, it was like producing, but you were producing in house as opposed for a particular client.  I was not enjoying that as much.  I felt like I was here to be a talent agent, and to interface with talent.  I thought that was my strength, especially being a former actress, if you will.  And there was a man who was very much a mentor for me at the time by the name of Ray Kurtzman, and he was one of the gentlemen that I interviewed with in the training program.  And he told me when I interviewed, you know, "I welcome you, and if you ever, ever, have any problems here, you let me know."  And once I realized that that division that I was working in at that time--the project group was not what I wanted to do, and I was very unhappy--I still wanted to stay with the company, but I knew that if I continued in that division, I would not be happy and I would want to leave.  He said, "Sit tight, we'll take care of this."  And within a day, I was moved out of there and I was promoted to working, for the time--for Patrick Whitesell.  And Patrick Whitesell was a great boss, and a completely different style than Fred Specktor, very low key, very laid back.  You know, he was considered to be one of the hot, you know, young agents at the time and represented Matt Damon and Ben Affleck, you know, coming off of 'Good Will Hunting,' and Hugh Jackman, you know, who nobody knew him at the time.  He'd just done, you know, 'Oklahoma!' in Australia, and we did his deal to put him in 'X-Men,' which was when everybody knew who he was.  He represented Drew Barrymore and people like that.  So, yeah, and so I was promoted off his desk.
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There was one other person I worked for and I'd forgotten, and he was actually really important.  Right after Fred's desk--I worked for Fred for nine months.  Fred was a talent agent.  I left his desk and worked for Joe Rosenberg.  And Fred and I had such a, you know, tenuous relationship.  Every day I walked into that job I thought either he was going to fire me, or I'm going to quit.  Because it was just, it was very difficult.  And he kind of, at that time had that reputation; I think he's mellowed a bit over the years.
Story_ID: 665570
Speaker 1: I worked for Joe Rosenberg, and Joe Rosenberg's a literary agent, a motion picture literary agent, so he represented more writers and directors--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and producers.  And at the time I was like, this is not exactly what I want to do, but I really appreciated it for a couple of reasons.  One is, it's important to know how to put a movie together.  And when you represent the writer, you see the beginning to the end.  You see it from the idea, to the concept, to the treatment, to the outline, to the first draft, to the multiple drafts after that, to actually putting on the director, to getting the project set up at a studio, or finding the financing for it, to casting it, to shooting it.  And so, you see the full process.  I really appreciated working with him, and he represented the best directors--Ridley Scott, Tony Scott, Michael Bay, Brian De Palma, David Fincher, all of these guys, you know.  And so looking back now I realize, wow, that was--he was in his prime when I was working for him, and being able to kind of shadow him and listen in on the conversations really taught me a lot very early on.  The second reason why Joe was a very influential person in my career is he was the first person, other than Ray Kurtzman, to empower me as an agent.  I'll never forget this experience.  We read a lot of scripts, you know, in our business, and particularly as assistants.  And I read a script one, one weekend, and I came in on Monday morning and I said, "I read this great script."  And I told him what it was about, and he said, "Wow, that sounds great.  Who do you think that would be good for?"  And I said, "You know, I think it could be good for either--it probably could be good for David Fincher, who I really see for it, but it could be good for Ridley Scott."  And I mentioned a couple of other directors, and he said, "Okay."  He goes, "You know, that sounds good.  That sounds exactly like something they may be looking for.  I'll bring it up in the morning meeting."  In the morning meetings, the Monday morning meetings, all the agents sit around the big boardroom table, and the assistant trainees sit along the perimeter against the wall.  And I was just sitting there and everybody was talking about what they read over the weekend and what scripts had come in at the different studios.  And my boss, Joe Rosenberg said that he had come across a script that was--and he stopped and he said, "You know what?  Actually my assistant read it, Dre [HistoryMaker Andrea Meigs]."  And he looks over at me says, "Why don't you just pitch it?"  And I like, I froze.  Because this was the--like, assistants don't talk in those meetings.  You just sit there and absorb and take notes.  And he, first of all he called me Dre, which, you know, is his nickname for me.  And literally, I like started sweating.  And it was like fifty eyes, pairs of eyes, that went (makes sound) (gesture)--and they all were looking at me.  And I felt like there was this big headlight, you know, just staring at me, and the room was silent.  And I wasn't prepared to pitch, but you know, it clicked; it kicked in and I pitched it in two minutes.  I said, you know, it reminds me of this.  It's, you know, telling that.  You know, this is the main character.  This is what it's about.  It wraps up in this way.  It can be a great vehicle for these five vehicles.  I enjoyed it, and I guess I was articulate and persuasive.  And everyone was like, "Oh, I got to get that script.  I got to read that script."  And it was like boom, boom, you know, everybody was wanting to read the script and get a copy of it.  And I, when it was done (laughter) I was perspiring, and I breathed a sigh of relief.  And I was like, you know what?  I can do this, I can do this. And it was him empowering me in that moment and validating me in front of a boardroom of agents [at Creative Artists Agency].  That I'll never forget.  Most people will just take the credit for the script and say, "I read this, and this is what it's about."  But he gave me a voice in that room and empowered me--whereby every agent in that room had to listen to me, look at me, and pay attention to what I had to say.  And it gave me the confidence to know that this is something I can do, and I enjoyed doing it.
Speaker 2: This raises a lot of questions.  Well, the first thing I want to know is, like did--what was it?  And did it, was it produced and directed?
Speaker 1: I don't even remember.  (Laughter) I don't even remember what it was, to be honest with you.
Story_ID: 665571
Speaker 1: And then the other thing is, the other thing is--you mentioned like Ridley Scott, Tony Scott, David Fincher, you know.  Did you have to--or were you already steeped in, you know, directorial styles and, you know, just watching Siskel and Ebert [Gene Siskel and Roger Ebert]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in Chicago [Illinois] gave you a sense of Ridley Scott, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And some of the others, you know.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: You know, the atmospheric stuff he does and, you know.  I mean, so, or what a Michael Mann does, you know. So who--how did, did you, were you already kind of up to speed on that?  Or did you have to like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, as a trainee [at Creative Artists Agency], you know, it's incumbent upon you to learn.  And so one of the things--we would have training speakers, like I think every other Friday or every Friday.  People would come in and they would speak to us.  They would, a lot of them would be clients, production companies, and some directors.  I remember the Farrelly brothers [Peter Farrelly and Bobby Farrelly] coming one time.  I remember Jim Carrey coming and speaking one time.  I remember, you know, Overbrook [Overbrook Entertainment], Will Smith's company coming in.  But what I would do--because I remember things when I write them down and when I catalog them.  I'm a big organizer, I like doing lists and checking out lists.  I would--every time I read something, I had a grid.  And I kept a grid of every script that I read, what the genre was, who wrote it, and what I thought about it.  Similarly when I watched movies, the same thing.  Who directed it, what it was about.  And so, I started to really learn.  And then working for Joe Rosenberg, and he represented these great directors, I just made sure that I watched all of their films and made sure that I knew, you know, what their best, you know, work was.  And in and of itself was an education process of learning writers and learning directors and producers, which I believe helped me become a better talent agent, which is, you know, what I ended up becoming.
Speaker 1: I would guess so that you'd be able to put the pieces together, that this writer can write better for this director--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --or vice versa, and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now these are all things that are not taught in college, I guess?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: You have to learn this on the job, right?
Speaker 2: Right. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you're, you're, you're getting steeped in this, and--
Story_ID: 665572
Speaker 1: What's your next move [at Creative Artists Agency]?  Now, you get, you get a chance to speak to all the other agents, and (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.  I worked for Joe [Joe Rosenberg] for just under, just about two years.  And--I was a little bit out of order.  I worked for Fred [Fred Specktor]--for Joe--I worked for Fred for nine months, and I worked for Joe for just under two years.  And then that's when I went to the project group, and that's when I knew this is not what I want to do.  And I was thinking, I've been an assistant now for the better of three years.  Maybe this is it, you know.  Maybe this is the end of my, you know, career here in the agency business.  And when Ray Kurtzman helped transition me out of the project group and they put me back on Patrick Whitesell's desk, I worked for Patrick for maybe six or nine months.  And he said, "Look, Dre [HistoryMaker Andrea Meigs]," everybody calls me Dre, he said, "look, I know you're a veteran.  You've been an assistant for a while."  He said, "I just ordered some new furniture, and by the time my furniture comes, you'll be out of here.  You'll be an agent, I promise you that."  And he pretty much kept his word on that.  I was promoted off of his desk, and it was in I guess 2000 or something like that.  And, and I was made an agent.  And, you know, I kept thinking that then there was going to be some kind of formal, like formal training, you know, once you become an agent, and I was going to get the magic handbook, you know, that was going to tell you how to make the secret deals and how you, you know, negotiate these nuances and fine details of the contracts.  And there was none of that.  You pretty much were just thrown in.  You're an agent now.  You are--you know, people ask you to join teams, and so that's how you get clients.  Or, you have relationships with potential clients that you bring in, and you develop the business and you teach yourself how to do deals.  And you--it's trial and error, and hopefully you don't mess up because that's how you get fired.
Story_ID: 665573
Speaker 1: I read that your first client was [HistoryMaker] Cedric The Entertainer.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And how, how did this come about, and what did you do for Cedric?
Speaker 2: Well, I did a lot for Cedric.  He was a client at the agency [Creative Artists Agency] at the time, and he was on 'The Steve Harvey Show,' so he was basically Steve's [Steve Harvey] kind of sidekick.  And he wanted to have a career in the movie business, and his agent at that time came up to me and said, "Now that you're an agent, I need help.  I need somebody that's going to help me find him movies and look out for projects.  Can you do that?"  I said, "Of course, I'd be happy to."  I mean I had no clients (laughter).  So, I jumped in.  And of course by coincidence he's from St. Louis [Missouri], and my family's from St. Louis, so there was that little, you know, bond that we had.  I met him, he was a nice guy, and within a few months I got him his first job, 'Kingdom Come,' with LL Cool J and Vivica Fox [Vivica A. Fox] and Jada [Jada Pinkett Smith].  And he was playing a reverend, which he plays very well.  And then we just starting building.  We just started building, you know.  I put him in that, and then I got him the role in 'Barbershop,' and 'Barbershop' was a huge success for MGM [Metro Goldwyn Mayer Studios Inc.].  You know, he had that very controversial line with, "Rosa Parks ain't bleep."  And that was--the next thing I know, I remember waking up and hearing on NPR [National Public Radio] that people--you know, it was a big deal that he was potentially criticizing this historical major figure in our U.S. history.  And it wasn't that at all.  Obviously, that was just a line in a script, and it wasn't his belief, but it was being touted as such.  But I believe, you know, that that controversy, you know, really spurred curiosity for the movie for the mainstream audience.  People were like, "What is this all about?  I've got to go see it."  So, I think within the urban audience it was successful, but then it became a huge crossover success, to the extent that we made a deal for a sequel movie.  When we did 'Barbershop 2' ['Barbershop 2: Back in Business'], I was able to negotiate a first look deal for him with MGM, whereby he became a producer.  He, you know, created a company called Bird and a Bear [A Bird and A Bear Entertainment] with his manager and producing partner, Eric Rhone.  And they had office space, they had a first look deal, they had money to hire a development executive.  We were setting up projects under that deal.  We did several deals for him: 'The Honeymooners' at Paramount [Paramount Pictures Corporation], another movie at New Line [New Line Cinema], and we were doing very well.  And I had gotten him up well into the seven figures and, you know, he was making--we were making a lot of money.
Story_ID: 665574
Speaker 1: I also read it makes you feel really good--it makes you feel really good to know you've boosted someone's career and made a--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --made a difference in their lives.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I would say that's probably one of the most fulfilling aspects of being an agent, is helping your clients to realize their dreams.  And, you know, I'm a goal oriented person; I love setting goals.  I set goals, you know, for myself every year; sometimes immediate one year goals to, you know, three, five, and ten year goals.  And I do that with my clients.  And so with these clients to be able to realize their dreams, whether it's starting a company, a production company, or transferring into another part of the entertainment segment than they're currently in, is really, really satisfying.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Some of the other clients I guess, if I understand these folks correctly, were Ellen Burstyn--
Speaker 2: Ellen--
Speaker 1: --Jon Voight--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know, most of them are African Americans, but you do have like people like Christina Applegate, Ellen Burstyn and Jon Voight.  What were able to do for Jon Voight, say?
Speaker 2: Well, Jon Voight, we, you know, I put him in several pictures, one namely the Mitch Albom book.  And it was five days--
Speaker 1: 'The Five People You Meet in Heaven' (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'The Five People You Meet in Heaven,' exactly.  Thank you.  So, that was a Hallmark film [Hallmark Entertainment; Sonar Entertainment] that we did for him, as well as--I'm forgetting--one of the Disney movies.  What was it?  It wasn't, it wasn't Pirates ['Pirates of the Caribbean'], but it was one of the big Disney franchise movies that we did.  So, I did several deals for Jon.  With Ellen Burstyn, she also was in the Mitch Albom movie was well.  So I did that deal for her, and a couple of other smaller independent films.  And Christina Applegate, when I was working with her she had just done 'Sweet Charity' on Broadway.  So, you know, I helped negotiate that, and also I put her in 'Anchorman' ['Anchorman: The Legend of Ron Burgundy'].  And it's by coincidence that 'Anchorman 2' ['Anchorman 2: The Legend Continues'] will be coming out shortly.  So--
Speaker 1: Is she in that one too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  And, you know, a small coincidence there was that she and I had the same manager when I was younger.  And she, she had the same manager up until, I don't know, maybe six years ago or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: Idris Elba.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, now he was in 'The Wire,' I think (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: I represented Idris.  He was actually an ICM [ICM Partners] client.  And his, he left and came to CAA [Creative Artists Agency] with an agent who left ICM to go to CAA.  And this agent said, "You know, I can use some help, you know.  I really, you know, if you, you know, happen to come across some projects that might be good for him, if you could let me know.  You know, I really could use some help on the feature side with him."  And I said, "Sure, I'll be happy to."  My husband [John Meigs, Jr.] was a huge, you know, advocate--I mean he was a huge fan of 'The Wire.'  And he told me, "Yeah, this guy, he's going to be the next Denzel [Denzel Washington]."  And I remember watching and saying, yeah, he's really talented, a really good looking guy.  And so I met him in the office and we started working together.  And we quickly started--you know, we did--I want to say--was it 'This Christmas' at the time?  Oh, no, it was 'Daddy's Little Girl.'  We did 'Daddy's Little Girl.'  And then it was around that time, right around that time that I ended up leaving CAA and coming to ICM.  So, it was a real big transition in my career.  And I, it's not really something that's done often or easily.  You know, at CAA, I'd been there for what, eleven years?  I was the only African American talent agent.
Story_ID: 665575
Speaker 1: Before we go there, it seems like an odd time to break this flow up.  But--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --did you represent Beyonce [Beyonce Knowles Carter] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --Halle Berry at CAA [Creative Artists Agency]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That one, I think we should talk--talk about first before we--
Speaker 2: Okay, sure.
Speaker 1: --move on.
Speaker 2: Sure, sure, sure.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --those were the two biggest stars in the African American community.
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah, well, at the time--again, I--Halle was a client, and I was asked to be part of her team.  I didn't sign her, but I was asked to be part of her team.  I was involved with--when she got Monster's, the--
Speaker 1: 'Monster's Ball.'
Speaker 2: 'Monster's Ball,' for which she went on to win an Academy Award [Oscar].  I remember that process very distinctly.  And I remember, you know, the feedback when she was auditioning really for it.  And clearly the feedback was there was no way she could play this role.  She's much, much, too pretty and attractive and, you know, we're looking for somebody that, you know, can really, you know, play it raw and gritty and beat up, you know, average, which she is not.  And she really, you know, would accept nothing but, "You've got the job."  And they'd gone out to a few people who passed, and ultimately she got the job and it carried her to the Oscars.  And I remember that night, you know, so many of my friends on the East Coast calling me and saying, "Congratulations!  This is amazing.  This is so--."  And I remember calling home and my parents [Dorothy Clay Nelson and David Nelson, Jr.] said, "Oh, how was your day?"  I said, "Fine."  And they said, "Oh, so what did you do today?"  I was like, "You know today is the Oscars right?"  And they said, "Oh, is that today?  Is that today?"  I'm like, "My client was nominated and won an Academy Award."  And they said, "Oh, that's wonderful, that's wonderful.  Now, who is she again?"  You know, like my parents, you know, are very simple people, very humble people.  They were not caught up in the, you know, celebrity--star struck--of it all.  You know, they may have known who Robert De Niro was, or is, but yeah, they did not know.  But that was really, really exciting, being part of that.  And you know, at the time also, you know, Destiny's Child was coming up, and they were a hot group.  And you know, they were kind of just at the heels of Aaliyah, you know, the artist who ended up passing away.  And I remember very distinctly meeting with my colleagues who were representing them on the music side.  And they said, "Look, you know, at some point they're going to be interested in acting.  Are you interested in handling them on the acting side?"  I said, "Of course, sure."  And I, I started, I sat down with them at the time with their manager, Mathew Knowles.  And the plan was after Destiny's Child kind of finished that- their final, you know, their final album and they were going to embark upon solo careers, we were going to start with--we were going to--Michelle [Michelle Williams] was going to work on her gospel album and Kelly was going to--Kelly was going to start working on her acting, and Beyonce was going to work on her solo album as more of a, you know, R and B pop artist.  And so, Kelly was the first one up for acting.  As it turns out, you remember that song, 'Dilemma,' that she did with Nelly.  It got leaked and it hit the airways, and it was the hottest thing.  And so, it immediately propelled her.  It's like, "Okay, well, you're going to be the first one that's out with your solo album."  So, she ended up being the first out on the solo album.  And so we kind of shifted gears and then we said, "Okay, well, Beyonce, we'll work on her, you know, right now for her acting."  So, she ended up being the first one that we started working with on the acting side.  And we got her the MTV movie, 'Carmen: A Hip Hopera,' which she did with Mos Def, and that was the first acting gig.  I did her deal on her first major studio movie, 'Austin Powers Goldmember' ['Austin Powers in Goldmember'] for New Line [New Line Cinema].  And then, you know, we just kept building from there, you know.  I put Kelly in, Kelly Rowland in a New Line movie, 'Freddy vs. Jason' which did extremely well.  And then once Michelle's gospel album was underway, she started acting and we put her into theater.  So she did 'Aida' on Broadway, and then went on to do 'The Color Purple,' and has gone on to several other productions, 'Chicago,' and 'Fela!' ['Fela!: A New Musical,' Bill T. Jones and Jim Lewis] and so forth.  But, yeah, with Beyonce we went on to do--after 'Austin Powers' we got a big deal to do a movie for Paramount [Paramount Pictures Corporation], 'The Fighting Temptations' which she did with Cuba Gooding [Cuba Gooding, Jr.].  And then 'Dreamgirls' came about, and that was, that was a highlight, definitely, that was definitely a highlight.  She got nominated for a Golden Globe [Golden Globe Award] for both the song and for acting.  And there was--you know, it was something that she was extremely proud of, and really, really dedicated herself to giving her best performance.  She's such a committed and hardworking individual and, you know, all up to this point she had been focused on her music career, both as in the group and then, you know, subsequently with a solo career.  And that was the first movie that she really carved out a significant amount of time and, you know, recorded the music and worked with the acting coach, and, and, and really dedicated herself to working on the movie.
Story_ID: 665576
Speaker 1: This takes us to--now I just want to make sure we got all that before (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --we moved you.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: This is--now, you make the move in 2007, right, to ICM [ICM Partners]?
Speaker 2: Yes, was it 2007?  Well, it was like, it was like December of '06 [2006].  So, basically 2007.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So what happened?  Why, why did you move?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a mutual decision.  You know, I'm always upfront and honest about that.  I'll be honest with you.  It was, you know, right around this time of the year, it was bonus time.  And I was not nearly compensated the way that I thought I should have been for the amount of business that I was bringing in.  I had, you know, several clients making over five million [dollars] a movie.  I had another client that was in television making over a million.  I had, you know, other clients collectively.  So I was, you know, booking, I don't know, somewhere around $18 million, or $17 million.  And you know, I took a little poll with some of the guys of different levels at the agency [Creative Artists Agency].  And I said, "Do you know, the people I represent, what they make?  Based on, you know, what you know from either what you make or what other people make here--what do you think I should be making?"  And I asked five different people, and each of those five individuals told me that I should be making an amount that was significantly higher than I was making.  And so I took that in a couple of ways.  I knew that they were probably being conservative, and I probably should be making even more.  Because of course nobody's going to want to, you know, set an expectation--set an expectation that may or may not be cheap.  So, I'm sure they were conservative with what they were saying I probably should make as an average, and I was nowhere near that.  And when I asked one of the guys who was promoted at the same time that I was, I said, "You don't have to tell me how much you make, but I'm just curious.  Based on the people that I represent and what I'm bringing in, how much do you think I should make?"  He, too, gave me a number that was significantly higher.  And I thought, there's something wrong with this picture.  I'm not asking for a handout.  I'm not asking for--I'm not a charity case.  I do the work and I provide--you know, I've got the goods to show that I'm a good agent, I'm effective, and I'm good at what I do.  So, it should be reflected with how I'm compensated.  And when I met with the partners to discuss this, I had my little notes in front of me, and I gave my, my, my pitch.  It was met with: "Well, maybe this is a good time for you to go."
Story_ID: 665577
Speaker 1: So, how did, how did that make you feel?  I mean, how, how did you feel about that?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I thought it was a joke.  I--I thought they were joking, so I kind of paused and I was waiting for the laughter, and there was no laughter.  And I said, "Well, you know, not only do I feel like I'm not being compensated, but I also feel like I am really looking for a mentor here."  Because the gentleman who had been my mentor had passed away.  The two agents that I worked for were no longer at the agency [Creative Artists Agency], and Fred Specktor, who was still there, had been, had kind of scaled back his business and was not, you know, as senior or influential, I should say.  There had been a new configuration of leadership at the company, so I didn't feel like I had the mentor that I had when I first started, when Ray Kurtzman had said, "If you have a problem come to me," and it was fixed.  So, I said to them in this conference, I said, "Not only do I feel like I'm not being compensated, but I also feel like I need a little mentoring.  I need to kind of have a wagon to hitch onto, you know."  And I gave a couple examples, and I said, "You know, for example, you know, this person who worked for you, you guys share a lot of clients together.  You know, you being, you know, a senior agent, pass down a lot of your clients to this person.  I don't have that person."  You know, I gave several examples of that, you know, without naming names.  I was being passed down to people that were more challenging to get jobs for, like Marlo Thomas and Sinbad at the time, who had had a peaked career, but was having trouble getting jobs.  And, you know, my colleague was getting passed down to Robert Downey, Jr., and Matthew McConaughey, and Woody Harrelson, and people like that.  And I thought, there's not an equal playing field here, and I'm just looking for a little bit of, you know, a little bit of guidance as well as better compensation.  And like I said, that was met with silence, and a response of, "Maybe this is a good time for you to start looking elsewhere."  And so, when that was not met with the response that I thought, I went home and I was pretty shocked.  And I thought, well, surely they'll call me tomorrow and tell me that they thought about it and have reevaluated it.  Now mind you, you have to remember, this is, 'Dreamgirls' had just come out.  I've got Beyonce Knowles [Beyonce Knowles Carter] who's nominated for a Golden Globe [Golden Globe Award], which falls in the month of February, which is Black History Month.  I'm the only African American agent at this agency, which is considered to be the biggest in the business.  They've had one other in the history of the agency, me being the second.  And I thought, even if my work didn't speak for itself, and even from just a standpoint of perception, surely we can come up with something--than, you know, "Find the door."  And it was not, it was not.  It was, I got a phone call the next day from one of the senior agents who said, "Have you thought about what you'd like to do?  Is there a call I can make on your behalf?"  And I thought, wow, okay.  Okay, this is real.  And I said, "No, thank you.  You know, I've been here eleven, almost twelve years.  And it's probably going to take me more than eleven or twelve hours to figure out what I want to do, but I'll let you know."  And so I went home and thought about it, and I talked to my husband [John Meigs, Jr.]; I was married at this point.  And I talked to my family and a couple of other people, who I respected their opinion.  And I talked to a couple of agents that I was friends with, and they said, "You know, Andrea [HistoryMaker Andrea Meigs], you're really good at what you do.  And you shouldn't let this determine, you know, your career or the end of your career or--you know, you should look and see what else is out there.  You should look at some of the other agencies."  And I was like, "No, no, no.  You know, I've always said that if I was going to be an agent that I was going to be an agent here.  And the other agencies are just so big, and I'm not sure I want to go."  They said, "You know what?  Just do it.  Take a look.  Take a couple of informational meetings.  Just do it just to get information.  It may confirm that you don't want to go anywhere else.  And you may want to maybe go back to law, or maybe do something else; maybe work at a studio as a producer.  Maybe you want to become a manager."  They said, "But just take the information, and it may be eye opening."  And so I did, and within twenty-four hours I had two offers and--both here at ICM [ICM Partners] and at William Morris [William Morris Agency; William Morris Endeavor].  And I decided to come here.
Story_ID: 665578
Speaker 1: When you left, were, were there any other women agents (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were, there were a handful--at the agency?
Speaker 1: Yeah, at--
Speaker 2: There were a handful of others.
Speaker 1: --CAA [Creative Artists Agency], yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, a couple.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They're not there anymore.  There's probably maybe two others in the talent department.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is all--I mean, one is tempted to think--I mean you got two ceilings to--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --burst through.  You've got the women's ceiling and you've got the African American ceiling to burst through.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did you feel that that was the reason why--those are the reasons why you weren't, why you couldn't get a mentor and you couldn't get--you know, and you had such a hard time trying to--it seems like a real disconnect between you and the other--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know.
Speaker 2: You know what?  I am, you know, my upbringing is such that that wasn't the first place that my mind went.  I didn't think that.  I didn't say, oh, it's a race thing, or it's a gender thing.  I didn't.  I just thought it was an unfortunate situation, and I thought it was a shortsighted one on their, on their part.  I've since heard that there was a meeting called after I left, an impromptu meeting that was called, that said that was a huge mistake, and how could that have happened without it being a collective decision, because it impacted several facets of the agency, not just one area.  And so, that was nice to hear after I left.  But in retrospect I look back, and I've had a lot of conversations with people.  And it's been told to me that that is in fact a big issue, you know, in the business overall, across the board, almost at every company.  I think this is probably one of the better companies as it relates to women in the business and people of color.  But particularly at that place, there--you know, there are very few--you know, there are very few female agents.  And like I said, I was the second in the history of that company, and that's a pretty--you know, it's been around for a long time; it's a very powerful agency.  So, yeah, I think that plays into it.  But I, you now, I never like look at those as obstacles.  I just figure out--let me figure out a way around that.
Story_ID: 665579
Speaker 1: So I- ICM [ICM Partners], now what di- were the conditions going to be better or were you going to make more money here (mumbles)?
Speaker 2: Well, I, you know, I had a threshold of what I wanted to make, and they met it.  William Morris [William Morris Agency; William Morris Endeavor] didn't.  And I thought, well, gosh, why would I leave here at CAA [Creative Artists Agency] and go work somewhere else and make less?  That didn't make any sense.  So, but I also liked the president at the time, Chris Silbermann, and he was great and extremely supportive, and gave me that, that elevation within the agency that I needed at that time.  You know, I was perceived as a senior agent coming in, and I did something that is kind of unheard of in this business; I took 85 percent of my clients with me, or I should say they came with me.  In this business most people don't leave CAA, so I feel like that was a testament to the type of agent that I am and the success that I've had with them, and the level of belief that my clients have in me.  A lot of people say, "Why do you think that they left CAA, you know?  You know, what happened at CAA?"  And I said, "You know, I think a couple of things.  I think one is, I think that there was internally a perception that I was just on the team, and I wasn't the one doing the work.  And I think that there was also a bit of an ego issue, where they felt like, well, she'll leave, but of course they'll stay."  And like I said, you know, Beyonce [Beyonce Knowles Carter] came with me.  Mary J. Blige came.  Chris Brown, prior to the incident--and he was very, very hot at the time--he came with me.  I had a handful of the Akils.  Mara Brock Akil came with me.  Aunjanue Ellis, who is a fantastic actress, came with me.  So I had a lot of, you know, I had a lot of support.  Disappointedly, the only client that I thought would have come that didn't was Cedric [HistoryMaker Cedric The Entertainer].
Speaker 1: The first one, too (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know.  And I, I miss him dearly, but, you know, I think where his career is right now it speaks for the work that I did.
Story_ID: 665580
Speaker 1: What, what new clients did you pick up at ICM [ICM Partners]?
Speaker 2: I've signed a lot of new clients over the years.  You know, I started working with, with Drake when he was here.  He's not here now.  But I started working with Drake here.  I started working with a Mexican actress, Ana de la Reguera, who was coming out in this big Jack Black movie, 'Nacho Libre.'  Also, Cristina Saralegui came with me.  She left CAA [Creative Artists Agency] and came with me here.  She's described as the Latino Oprah [Oprah Winfrey].  She has had her show, 'Cristina' ['El Show de Cristina'], for, you know, over twenty years, and broadcast all across the country.  And I'm in the process of doing a deal for her right now that I'm real excited about.  I started working with--gosh, who else did I start working with here?
Speaker 1: I think--well, Jeffrey Wright is one, isn't he?
Speaker 2: I worked with Jeffrey at CAA.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I worked with Jeffrey--
Speaker 1: Oh, he didn't come over.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he did not come with me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was, I'd just started working with him a little bit just when I left.  So, he was actually somebody I did not expect, and nor did I try to, you know, really press him to come.  Because I was literally just starting to work with him, and he'd been with this agent for a long time.
Speaker 1: What about Tracee Ellis Ross?  Was she--
Speaker 2: Tracee Ellis Ross was a client here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I started working with her once I came over.  She had been wanting us to work together for a while at CAA, and it wasn't possible.  Here I was able to work with Tracee, and I put her on a TV show, 'Reed Between the Lines' with [HistoryMaker] Malcolm-Jamal Warner at BET [Black Entertainment Television].  And that was a great deal for her.  She was a producer on the show as well.  I started working with her younger brother, Evan Ross, and I put him, I actually signed him while I was here.  I put him in a couple of movies, actually one that's going to be coming out soon called 'Squatters.'  And he did a movie called 'Mooz-lum' that he was the lead of, an independent film with Nia Long and [HistoryMaker] Danny Glover.  I signed Jurnee Smollett [Jurnee Smollett Bell], who's, you know, a fantastic young actress.  Everybody knows her from when she first started off in 'Eve's Bayou,' you know, the Kasi Lemmons movie with Sam Jackson [Samuel L. Jackson], and I've been working with her for a while.  She's done a lot of television lately, from 'True Blood' to 'Friday Night Lights,' to 'Parenthood.'  I put her in the movie, Tyler Perry's movie, 'Temptation,' which she was the female lead and it was the first role where she was playing a leading woman, not a young girl or a high school.  So, that was a major kind of break for her.  And she is shooting movie right now called 'Hands of Stone,' where she plays Juanita Leonard [Juanita Wilkinson Leonard], Sugar Ray Leonard's wife in the--I'm forgetting the boxer.
Speaker 1: Roberto Duran?
Speaker 2: Exactly, it's his story.  So she's shooting that right now in Panama.  Let's see.  I've--I'm trying to think of others.
Story_ID: 665581
Speaker 1: You want me to bring you all the way up to the current clients I'm working with, or?
Speaker 2: You don't have to do all of them.  I'm just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --I'm just getting examples of some of the highlights of what, of your--of your (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, you know, I was really, really proud and excited to bring the Akils over: Mara Brock Akil and Salim Akil.  They had just started, they had just come to CAA [Creative Artists Agency] right before I left.  And they were at ICM [ICM Partners], they were clients here.  There was a transition here at ICM, and their agent was let go.  So, they are people I've admired for a long time.  They're also my neighbors.  And I said, "Listen, I understand you may be in a transition.  If you're looking for a new agent, I'd love to be your agent.  I'd love to put a team together for you.  I don't live and breathe television every day, but I am a very good agent, and I can be a good quarterback for the team, and put a team together for you that can do what you need to do to take you guys to the next level."  They trusted me, they signed at CAA, and I put a great team together for them.  Shortly thereafter was leaving, and I said, "You're not going to believe this, but I'm actually leaving.  I'm going to go to ICM, and I'd like for you to come with me."  And it was a tough conversation because they had just left, but they came.  And I said, "I want to put a great team together for you here, and I want to make sure, you know, make sure that you know that we will--everything I promised you before, I will make sure that we do."  And we've accomplished it all, and I'm super, super, proud of it.  They said that they wanted to have an overall deal somewhere where they could have a home, where they could be as prolific as they wanted to be with creating content.  So, we had a first look for them at BET [Black Entertainment Television].  They are, you know, they were able to successfully--with the help of Loretha Jones at BET, we were able to revive 'The Game,' which had been at The CW [The CW Television Network], that had an unceremonious, you know, finale without any--you know, without any closure.  And we were able to bring it over to BET, because BET was interested in going into original programming as opposed to the reality television and the syndicated.  And it aired to 7 million viewers.  And I remember bringing it up in a meeting, and people saying, "Oh, that's, that must be a mistake.  That's unfathomable.  That can't be possible on BET to do 7 million on a premiere."  So 'The Game' was what we thought was going to be their first entree for BET into original programming.  We thought it would be one season.  We're now into the third season.  And--
Speaker 2: It's a very popular show.
Speaker 1: A very popular show, you know.  We also are launching in January another show, 'Being Mary Jane,' that's going to star Gabrielle Union, which aired as a, just as a tester this summer.  They did it was MOW [movie of the week], as a movie, and aired it this summer just to kind of test the waters for it.  It aired, it launched to 4 million viewers, which again are amazing numbers.  You know, when you think of some of the most popular shows like, you know, Walking, 'Walking Dead' ['The Walking Dead'] and some of these other kind of like--'Homeland,' you know, those movies, you know, where they're like at 2 million, you know.  So it gives you kind of a, a little bit of a barometer, where some of these prime time shows, even some of the major networks, are not doing nearly the numbers that they're doing on BET.  But anyway, one of our goals was to get a first look deal.  We accomplished that.  So, Salim said that he wanted to transition into feature films.  I got him in the movie, 'Jumping the Broom,' which he directed, a beautiful job, and was able to land--cast--like Angela Bassett and Paula Patton and Laz Alonso.  And he had a great cast--Mike Epps.  And that was a successful movie for the studio.  That was followed up by 'Sparkle,' and we've also just sold another project for him at Paramount [Paramount Pictures Corporation].  That was the second goal.  And the third goal that we set was that we wanted to secure and solidify the core audience, which is the African American audience, and also branch out into the mainstream at one of the major networks.  And it was just announced a couple of weeks ago that we sold, sold a project for Salim to write, produce, and direct at HBO [Home Box Office].  So, I feel like, you know--
Story_ID: 665582
Speaker 1: ICM [ICM Partners] has offices in New York [New York] and London [England].  Do, do you have clients in those places?
Speaker 2: I do.  In fact, that was one of my personal goals coming to ICM in,  I would say the last, particularly the last couple of years, I really, I've been really successful in working with the clients I've been working with over the past few years, predominantly African American.  But I really thought, you know what?  This is a great opportunity.  With the media becoming so global and, you know, with online and new media and opportunities where there's so much on demand, I should really be touching other areas, you know, around the world, and particularly with my interests.  So, I made a personal effort this year to really kind of diversify my clients, and I represent a young lady by the name of Anna Popplewell, she's a British client.  She is currently on The CW show called 'Reign' that just got picked up for its back order.  Most people know her as Susan from the Narnia franchise ['The Chronicles of Narnia'].  She's a lovely young actress who was part of that franchise, and decided to go back to school and got her degree at a little school called Oxford [University of Oxford, Oxford, England], and then decided to re-engage in her acting career.
Speaker 1: Was that the youngest girl in the--
Speaker 2: She was the, she was the second.
Speaker 1: Second, okay.
Speaker 2: She was the older sister with the long black hair and bright blue eyes.  She's a lovely, lovely actress.  I recently just signed a young lady by the name of Nathalie Emmanuel.  She's an Afro-Brit of mixed ethnicity, and she is on the popular show, HBO's 'Game of Thrones.'  And, you know, I saw her and thought she was super beautiful and super talented, and a new face.  And as Hollywood is often, you know, known for--they're always looking for the next.  Who's the next, who's the best?  And we just put her in a huge franchise for Universal [Universal Pictures] as the next hot girl in 'The Fast and Furious' franchise ['The Fast and the Furious'] opposite Vin Diesel.  In fact, I'm leaving tomorrow to go visit her on the set; they're shooting in Atlanta [Georgia].  So she, she got that, and beat out, you know, hundreds of women all over the world.  That was one of those projects where they were looking for an ethnically nondescript actress for that.
Speaker 1: She plays the translator [Missandei] in 'Game of Thrones,' right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, exactly.
Speaker 1: To khaleesi [Daenerys Targaryen], or whatever.
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly, exactly.  And she's up for another huge movie, which we can't talk about right now.  But she's a hot number.  I represent Tim Pocock, who's a young actor out of Australia.  He was just on the NBC show that aired this summer called 'Camp' and, you know, really, I feel he can have a really big career.  And I'm really looking at a couple of other clients coming out of down under, the New Zealand area that I think will have some really promising careers.  So, you know, I've traveled to London.  I haven't gone to Australia yet; I'll probably go this year.  But, yeah, having clients all over.  And Ana de la Reguera, as I mentioned, is from Mexico, and she's a very prominent actress in Mexico, does a lot of philanthropic work there, and is a, you know, in demand actress here.
Story_ID: 665583
Speaker 1: Do you spend--what percentage of your time do you think that you spend--or do you spend a lot of time developing--I mean identifying talent to develop?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Right.  Well, you always have to--you always have to be looking for talent, always.  There's never a time when you stop.  So everything that I do, if it's reading an article and it's mentioning a new actress or a new director, I look them up immediately and find out if they're represented.  If I'm watching television, if I go to the movies, if I go to a show, you know, a musical show and there's somebody that's opening in the opening act, whether they're doing comedy or whether they're doing spoken word, you are always--my mind is always looking at talent.  So, you never really shut it down.
Speaker 1: So, I know the old story is that, you know, the agent goes into a drugstore in Hollywood and meets somebody at the counter (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you never know where you're going to meet--you never know where you're going to meet somebody.  I have not gone as far as walking down the street and say, "You've got a good look. Here's my card."  I haven't done that.  But, but yeah, that, it happens that way sometimes.
Story_ID: 665584
Speaker 1: What advi- I mean with the state of the industry today, are there any other African American agents in, in, in Hollywood today?
Speaker 2: There are.  I mean I think that the numbers are better, and certainly at our agency.  I say that honestly, not as a marketing ploy.  But at our agency, I would say that we have the most.  Lorrie Bartlett is actually the head of our department.  She's the co-head of our department.  She's an African American woman.  Dana Sims, who--both of these people came to ICM [ICM Partners] after me.  Lorrie came from a smaller agency, Gersh [Gersh Agency], and Dana Sims came from William Morris [William Morris Agency; William Morris Endeavor], and she's an agent here.  April King is an agent here, and she also came from William Morris.  And there're two guys in music that were with me at CAA [Creative Artists Agency], they're also here--Dennis Ashley and Robert Gibbs.  Let's see.  And I know at the other agencies--you know, I'm friendly with Charles King, who I was a mentor for when he was coming out of law school at Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.].  And he's an agent at William Morris in Denver [Colorado] now.  And I believe there may be one or two at CAA.  I think the distinguishing factor, one of the things that I'm, I guess that makes me a little bit, a little bit of a candidate for this conversation--is in the agency business, talent agents--talent agents are seen as kind of, you know, the cream of the crop, you know, because you're dealing with the talent, you're dealing with the stars.  And I would say at least at CAA, I know that that was one of the most sought after positions and desired positions.  And so that's why I feel, you know, that it was a bit historic in a way, that in, you know, in the history of the company that I was the second one and the longest lasting one.  I was there, like I said, eleven years and they have not hired one since.  I believe there's a gentleman that's there now, but I don't--I think he was more of a crossover agent as opposed to a full fledged motion picture agent.  You know, I've now worked at two of the biggest agencies in the business, both at CAA and ICM.  ICM is one of the top, you know, top four.  And that's, you know, one of the distinguishing characteristics that I have, as having had the opportunity and the fortune to work at two of the biggest agencies in the business, and still I'm here.  I was at a conference in Santa Barbara [California] a month ago, and one of the attendees, a friend of mine, she's a producer, she said, "You're a pillar.  You know, you can't go anywhere, you know.  I look around and I see people, they come and go at studios.  They come and go at publicity firms.  They come and go as managers.  But you are one of the pillars in our business, and we need you.  We look to you because you've been here.  You've sustained--you've been here and withstood the test of time.  And, you know, you are, you know, what gives us inspiration."  And I thought, wow, really?  I didn't really think about it like that.  But--
Speaker 1: Well, do you think you'll be around a lot longer?
Speaker 2: I hope so.  I like what I do.  I'm good at what I do.  But the business is changing.  It is definitely evolving, and so there are challenges that sometimes make me wonder, gosh, I wonder how long I can do this.  I'm also--you know, you know so I evaluate that.  I, you know, I keep all of that in perspective, you know.
Story_ID: 665585
Speaker 1: Has there been an attempt to organize African Americans that are in the business in any type of way?
Speaker 2: Well, there's certainly support, you know.  Like I said, we, regardless of where we work or who we work for, you know, there's definitely an unspoken respect and support for--I know the challenges, and I know the struggle at the different places with the--you know, I remember this.  You know, again, I try to look at everything as a positive.  You know, whether it's negative or not, I always try to look for the positive.  And I remember when I was in the mailroom, and it was a female agent who said, "You know what?  I may not get invited to cigar night with the male agents.  I may not get invited out to the golf outings, you know.  I may not get invited out to the club outings with the boys.  But I'm at home and I'm reading scripts.  And so Monday morning when we're all on the phone with that client, I have a point of view, I have a script, I have something to pitch, and I have value added to bring."  And she said, "You can't really look at it as a disadvantage.  You look to find out where your advantages are, and that's my advantage."  And so, I always remembered that, and I think about that.  And I try not to look at life as, you know, oh, I've got this challenge or I've got this obstacle.  I just try to figure out a way, you know, that I can make an influence, you know.  My dad [David Nelson, Jr.] always taught me, as I said, the quote at the beginning, if you're given a lemon, you try to find, you know, you make lemonade out of it.  You find the good in it, and you make the best.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just wondered if there's an organized effort or if there's a way to bring younger people into the talent business, younger African Americans?
Speaker 2: In terms of recruiting?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, in terms of--
Speaker 2: There's been a number of efforts at the various agencies.  I know that, I know that there was a committee when I was at CAA [Creative Artists Agency] that did a lot of talking about recruiting.  And I think there was actually--I was sent to speak to students at like Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] and some of the HBUs--HB colleges [historically black colleges and universities].  And I don't know how effective that is.  I don't know how sustained it is.  What I found is that, in this business if you know somebody or know somebody who knows somebody, you can get in.  You know, you have to have a college degree, you have to know how to type, and you have to want to work hard and be able to present yourself well.  That's pretty much the entry level--the requirements for getting in the mailroom and becoming an assistant in any of these places.  The challenge is being able to stay.  The challenge is being able to position yourself and have longevity.  And that's, that's where there's the gap, because I don't think there's enough systematic mentoring to be able to keep people in these positions.  It seems as though once people get to a certain level, then somehow or another they get kicked out.  They're not either promoted.  They're not seen as being part of the culture.  They're not, you know, in some cases maybe they're making too much money; and they're not valued to the extent as others are, and so it's a cost cutting effort, you know.  That, to me, is what I would like to see changed, and something I'm thinking about how I can be helpful in that way.  You know, there's, you know, there're support groups.  There are groups and organizations that meet, you know, but it becomes more of a cocktail hour, you know, as opposed to something that really--how do we really, you know, roll up our sleeves and really make sure that this person who's here is going to be here five years from now, or ten years from now.  That needs to, that needs to be instituted.  That needs to be, I think, established.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So I guess at this point, though many would consider you young, you're the pillar, in this--?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, right.
Story_ID: 665586
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well for--in general, or as it relates to this business, or in general (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, both I guess.  Well, as it relates to business too?
Speaker 2: In general, one of my concerns is I love where we are from the standpoint of it's 2013 and, you know, Barack Obama, [HistoryMaker] President Barack Obama is in office, second term, and he's our leader.  And we have a lot of history making.  I was at an event the other night, the BAFTA [British Academy of Film and Television Arts], Britannia Awards.  And I sat there and took a picture of Idris Elba, who is a contender for 'Long Walk to Freedom' ['Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom'], the Mandela [Nelson Mandela] movie, and Chiwetel Ejiofor who's a contender for '12 Years a Slave,' and David Oyelowo who's a contender for 'The Butler.'  Forest Whitaker wasn't there, but he's also being talked about.  And this is a historical year for African American in the film business, and so I'm really, really proud of that.  By the same token, I have young daughters, and we were having a conversation at home and my husband [John Meigs, Jr.] asked my eight year old [Avery Meigs] if she knew what nigger meant.  And she said, "Nope."  And that really, really concerned him.  Because he said, "If she doesn't know, how can she protect herself?  How can she guard herself?  How can she, how can she be equipped to enter this world and be able to defend herself and be able to have that strength to be able to take, have what it takes to succeed in a society where there will be obstacles inevitably, overt and, and, and, you know, otherwise?"  But I looked at it differently.  I was actually comforted by that, because I thought, well, you know what?  If she doesn't know what that word means, and she doesn't really see race--we have her in a private school, and one of these schools is touted as one, as being one of the most diverse schools in Los Angeles [California].  And yet her friends are a Chinese girl, and a Persian girl, and a Jewish girl.  And I think she might, she may have one African American.  And it's like a whole melting pot.  And so I was, I was kind of comforted by her not knowing race and being identified as such, and not knowing what the significance of the historical connotation was.  Because I thought, well if she doesn't know, then that means it's not going to affect her; it's not going to bother her.  It'll just roll off her back, like, that doesn't apply to me.  That doesn't identify me.  That's not who I am.  And it has no bearing on her, whatsoever.  And I felt that almost having that ignorance of not knowing makes her strong in and of herself.  And so it's that dichotomy that makes me a little bit worried.  I love the fact that we're in a world where, you know, we can have an African American president and race is not the single- the singular identifying factor in who we are and where we're going.  But I also worry about, does that mean that she's not without the skills to survive and without the background that will help her to navigate when those times, on occasion, become tough.  That's something that concerns me.  And as it relates to this business it's cyclical, it's cyclical.  I was reading this article in Entertainment Weekly last week with Spike Lee.  He's got this movie coming out--oh, boy--a remake of, I think it's a Korean film.  And he was, they were asking him about the number of Oscar [Academy Awards] contenders who were African American.  He was like, "Oh, it's all the same, it's all the same."  He said, "You know, ten years ago, you know, you had your Spikes, your John Singletons, your Antoine Fuquas from 'Training Day.'  You had like, you know, a number of--and George Tillman [George Tillman, Jr.]," who I used to represent "--all these directors.  And then there's a lull, and then you go another nine years and you don't see anybody.  And then you'll have a peak and then there'll be another, you know, nine or so years without seeing--without the physical presence."  And I worry, I worry about that.  I want there to be--you know, my goal and my hope is that when I'm on the phone, when I'm pitching clients, when I'm trying to get a job for my client, it's not because of the way they look, but what they bring, and that they're being thought of as, you know, the best actress for the role.  And I'm starting to see that a little bit, you know.  I'm starting to see that a little bit, where you'll see somebody come in and it'll be every walk of life coming in for that role, but they don't book it.  I like to see when they book the role--that's what I like to see.  That's what I hope that I can impart and impact in my career.
Story_ID: 665587
Speaker 1: Now, when, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there anything ma- major that you would change if you could go back and change it?
Speaker 2: What would I change?  Well, one thing I would change, one thing I probably would--yeah, two things.  One thing that I would change is something that I touched on a little bit earlier, and that's about having a mentor.  I was talking with a high school friend of mine the other day who used to be an investment banker.  And she started her own company now, and I was just talking to her about, you know, what my future looks like, and how much longer I'll do this, and what other things I might think about, and just kind of--you know, I'm always thinking ahead.  I'm always, you know, thinking about options and alternatives.  And so one thing she said is, like, "Okay, well you had that mentor and he's passed away, you need to find another one, or two."  And I realized that I've--I've taken the, I've taken the attitude that, you know, my work speaks for itself, and that I work hard and I've got great results, and that should be enough.  And it's not, it's not enough.  You have to have somebody who will be your spokesperson, you have to do that.  And I feel I probably should have acted upon my own advice earlier on, and instituted a few other people earlier, and that's something that I'm working on right now.  And I'm actually meeting with a couple of people to do that, because I think it's important that no matter what phase of your career, you have that.  And the second thing is, and maybe this is a different way of saying the same thing, is I've always been the type of person that I don't like to brag about myself.  I don't like to, you know, stick out my chest and brush my shoulders off.  I just like to get the work done.  I like to book the job, I like to make the best deal.  I like to, you know, make (makes sound)--you know, cross off the goal that has been set, and be able to check it off the list.  And I thought that in this business that's all that you would need to do; you know, your work speaks for itself.  And again, it's not.  I've come to learn that in this business you have to, you know, you have to, as Tom Cruise did on the Oprah show ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'], jump on the couch and, you know, and yell and scream what you believe in, and what you will fight for, and what you have accomplished.  And that's what people listen to.  People listen to that.  You have to promote yourself, and that's something that I haven't done in the past that I'm starting to do more of.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Have you seen people that jump on the couch that weren't really producing as much?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Who got--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --you know, got credit (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Got recognized, sure.
Speaker 1: --and recognized, yeah?
Speaker 2: Oh, of course, all the time.  That's how I've learned that it's really important, that's really important.  But I used to think, why are they talking about this?  Like, you know; now I'm like, oh, that's why.  Okay.
Story_ID: 665588
Speaker 1: Likewise, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your, I guess, legacy as an agent?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, as I said, I really, really hope that--well, first of all I don't think I--I don't think I've really--what is it?  I don't think that I have really--I haven't accomplished everything that I want.  And so when I think about a legacy, I always think about that final point, that this is what I'm leaving.  I have not reached that.  What I would like to do is to be at a point when I've finished being an agent, or when I leave this business, people will look back and say, "Wow, she made a difference in this industry.  It used to be one way, and it's now another way.  It used to be that people looked at actors for what they looked like.  And she made such an impact with her career, with the clients that she represents, and with the deals that she did, that people don't look at actors that way anymore.  They look at what they bring to the table, and being the best actor for the project, for the film, for the television show."  That's what I hope, that I will be able to leave that message.  I obviously, you know, want to be remembered as somebody who is hardworking and fair and aggressive and passionate.  I was honored by my alma mater, Tufts [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts], a couple of years ago.  I was given the P.T. Barnum excellence in Hollywood award--excellence in entertainment award [P.T. Barnum Award for Excellence in Entertainment], and they did a video of my accomplishments by interviewing a number of my clients.  And it was really, really interesting to watch that, because you know how you always have that feeling, like I wonder the day I die what will people say about me?  And the one thing, the one word that came up over and over in each of the different interviews by my clients, was passion.  They said, "She's passionate.  She passionately represents me.  She passionately believes in me.  She's passionate."  And that's, I was really proud to hear that.  So, I also hope that I'll be remembered for being a passionate, aggressive negotiator.
Story_ID: 665589
Speaker 1: Tell us about your family.  Now, how did you meet your husband [John Meigs, Jr.]?  And do you have children; and can you describe them for us?
Speaker 2: Sure.  I just celebrated twelve years of marriage.  By coincidence, my father [David Nelson, Jr.] knew my husband's father [John Meigs, Sr.], so when we first started dating--and we met just haphazardly shopping, Christmas shopping.  He was with a woman that I knew, and I was talking to her in the store and she introduced us, and we, you know, caught each other's eye.  But I thought they were dating, so I didn't, you know, I didn't think anything further.  And then I saw him three months later at a party and I said, "Oh, I remember meeting you."  And, you know, she walked up, and I said, "Oh, that's right, I remember meeting you guys together."  And I said, "How long have you guys been dating?"  And they both like yelled, "We're not dating."  And I thought, okay, it's obviously a sensitive chord; I was just making conversation.  And it turns out that they had dated, but they weren't any longer.  We got to talking that evening, and I found out that he was a lawyer.  I said, "Oh, I'm a former lawyer."  And he said, "What kind?"  I said, "Well, I work in entertainment."  He says, "Well, I'm an entertainment lawyer."  And we exchanged numbers and said we should, you know, maybe do lunch, more of a business lunch.  And a couple months went by and I didn't hear from him, and I was actually in a breakup relationship myself of four years, and so I wasn't really ready to date.  Two months later I saw him driving down the street and I called him, and I asked him if he wanted to go out.  So, I invited him out, and he told me he was really busy, and didn't have time.  (Laughter) And I was mortified, because I wasn't used to somebody turning me down like that.  But I later learned that my husband is a, he is a man of his word, he speaks what's on his mind.  And he was in the middle of a trial, he was a trial entertainment litigator.  And luckily, two days later the trial was postponed.  And so he actually--his time was freed up, and so he called me and said, "You know, I would like to go out."  And we went on our first date, and that was it.  And we went out Friday night, Saturday night, Sunday night, Monday night, and the rest is history.  We knew within a couple of months that it was going to be a long relationship, and we got engaged a year and a half later, and got married.  And when we started dating, as I said, we brought the families together, and come to find out my dad knew his dad, and knew his uncle, because my dad's a Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] and my husband is a Kappa, and his uncle had pledged my dad and my dad had pledged his dad.  And so, it was more of a reunion for them when we got together.  We were kind of sitting there going, "Well, I'm glad you guys are happy," you know.  So, it's been a really, really close knit family ever since.  We, like I said, have been married twelve years.  We have four daughters.  My oldest daughter is eight, Avery [Avery Meigs].  My middle daughter passed away when she was two and a half months old, and that's Alexandra [Alexandra Meigs].  And that was very, obviously devastating to lose a child.  And we found out that we were carriers of a genetic disease that we'd never heard of, so we were reluctant to try and have more children.  And we found a procedure where we could test for the disease before I actually got pregnant, and I reluctantly went into it.  And we, after a couple of trials, were successful and were able to have healthy twins.  And so I have two more girls, Isabella [Isabella Meigs] and Calla [Calla Meigs], as in the flower, calla lily, C-A-L-L-A.  So, I've got three girls at home and one in heaven.  And the twins are three.  And we have a great, you know, family.  My husband and I are very close.  I think over the years we've been challenged, one, with the loss of our daughter, and just other family incidences that have brought us really close.  And it's very fortunate, because in this business there's a lot of divorce, a lot.  And, so I'm really fortunate that we've been able to stay strong and still be together and enjoy each other's company.  And he's my best friend.
Story_ID: 665590
Speaker 1: I imagine in this business the hours are very long, and intrude upon your personal time?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  It's, it's challenging, and that's--that kind of impacts life too, because I'm, you know, a wife and a mother, and a mother of multiple children [Avery Meigs, Isabella Meigs and Calla Meigs].  And, you know, being an agent, as I was told when I first interviewed for the job, it's not a job, it's a lifestyle.  So, you have to go into it as a lifestyle.  It's almost like when you think about an athlete.  You can't say, "Oh, I want to be a professional ballplayer, but I just don't want to travel."  You can't go into medicine and say, "Oh, you know, I really want to help people and find cures, but I just, you know, being on call at night, I just don't think I can work those hours."  You know, when you're in the medical profession you're on call, and that's part of the profession.  In the agency business, it's twenty-four hours, you know.  I get called, you know, early, early, in the morning and late at night, and on the weekends, you know.  You know, I was doing deals when I was in labor (laughter).  I was, you know, I was--I've been doing deals in hospital rooms.  So, it's a twenty-four hour, you know, job.  I've been able to now kind of set a few boundaries, you know.  I leave my BlackBerry downstairs at night as opposed to on my nightstand, because I would literally be emailing throughout the night.  And I at least know that when I go to bed, whether it's at, you know, eleven, twelve, or one [o'clock], it's there until I come downstairs in the morning, you know.  So, at least I try to have those boundaries and respect my family, so that when I'm home, I'm mom and I'm wife.  And when I'm at work, I'm the agent.
Story_ID: 665591
Speaker 1: Is there anything you think we haven't covered we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: You know, I would just--the only thing that we haven't touched on that I did just want to mention is, you know, in college [Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts], one other really--one other really, I think, influential experience that I had on my career and my stamina, you know, in this business, is having pledged.  I remember when I was in college and I was pledging, and I got home upset one night and I called my dad [David Nelson, Jr.].  And I said, "I don't know what I just got myself into.  I don't know what this is."  And he just said, "Just stick with it, just stick with it.  You know, you'll look back on this, and this will be one of the, you know, best experiences in your life."  And I'm like, I can't even imagine.  This is, you know, crazy, and I'm tired and exhausted, and my grades are dropping.  And I have to say looking back that it truly was one of the best experiences, and has given me so much strength over the years to be able to really persevere.  And not having any sisters, it really gave me an appreciation of sisterhood and really an appreciation of other strong women.  And I really, really draw on them.  There were fourteen of us, and twelve of us are in constant communication twenty-five years later.  You know, we're at each other's weddings, we're at each other's showers.  A number of us have recently lost our fathers, and each of us have been in touch with each other.  And it is just a source of strength that I rely on, day in and day out, in my family and in my professional life.  That, I didn't get a chance to highlight.  I wanted to mention that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you attend the 100th anniversary of Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] last year?
Speaker 2: I had every intention to do so.  And my brother-in-law got married and I had a family obligation, because my daughter [Avery Meigs] was the flower girl. (Laughter) As she would say, she's waited her (air quotes) whole life to be a flower girl, all eight years (laughter).  So I did not get a chance to go.
Speaker 1: Her whole life?
Speaker 2: Her whole life.  She said, "I've been waiting for this my entire life," so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well--
Speaker 2: She did a great job (laughter).
Story_ID: 665592
Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: The way--well, the way I'd like to be remembered is, is very much as I was describing, as a very passionate, aggressive, hardworking, determined yet fair advocate for my clients, on behalf of my clients.  I think that describes me as a person, and that's how I would hope to be remembered.
Speaker 1: All right, well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 665593
Speaker 1: This first picture is my mother's family. Dorothy Nelson [Dorothy Clay Nelson], she's the young lady on the lower right hand side, and she's, she's sitting next to her mother, who I described to you is the single mom that raised her, who left Mississippi and moved to St. Louis [Missouri].  And those are my grandmother's other brothers and sisters.
Speaker 2: Okay.  About what year is this?
Speaker 1: Oh, let's see.  My mom looks like she's probably about eight there.  So, it's probably sixty-eight years ago.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mom and dad.  The first picture is when they got married, and that's almost over fifty years ago.  And the second picture there is when we were in Hawaii a year ago, with my mom and dad.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: What are your mom and dad's names?
Speaker 2: David [David Nelson, Jr.] and Dorothy Nelson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (Pause) All right, this one.  Go ahead and tell us about it.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's a picture, a family picture that we took when I was about seven years old.  And that's my mom and dad and my big brother Byron [Byron Nelson]; David and Dorothy Nelson and myself.  And this on the top left corner there is also a family picture that I took probably when I was in high school [Palos Verdes High School, Palos Verdes Estates, California].  And that's just a family picture, David and Dorothy Nelson, Byron, and myself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my mom holding me when I was first born forty-five years ago.
Speaker 1: In 1968?
Speaker 2: In 1968, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's me and--probably in college with my uncle Steve, Steve Nelson, which shows my love of horses.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me graduating from Duke law school [Duke University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina] in 1994.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture, it's not a very good picture.  But that's the one with my two grandmothers and my--Nina Nelson [Nina Carroll Nelson], and Ruth Clay, and Eddie Clay.
Speaker 2: From the left across?
Speaker 1: From the left across is my mom Dorothy Nelson, my paternal grandmother, Nina Nelson, myself, my maternal grandmother Ruth Clay, and her brother, Eddie Clay.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is at the law school graduation in 1994 with a classmate and her mother.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is just--I don't know if you want to take those together.  But that was when I was promoted to agent at CAA [Creative Artists Agency].  And that was in 2000.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This was my engagement picture with my husband.  This is 1999, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: And this is my wedding day, October 20, 2001.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is my husband John Meigs, Jr. and myself on our wedding day, October 20, 2001.  And this next section starts post wedding.
Story_ID: 665594
Speaker 1: The family--this is our first Christmas card with my daughter Avery.  And that was 2006.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This was in 2007 with Andrea [HistoryMaker Andrea Meigs], myself; my daughter Alexandra [Alexandra Meigs], Avery, and my husband, John Meigs, Jr.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That was in 2009, my daughter Avery Meigs, and Alexandra in the background.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a family trip after Alexandra passed.  And so we have my dad on the lower right, lower left hand corner; David Nelson, Jr., my mom, Dorothy Nelson [Dorothy Clay Nelson].  Moving all the way across to my husband's grandfather, Walter Avery [ph.], who my daughter is named after, and his wife Anne.  And on the back row is my brother-in-law, Darryl Meigs, myself, my husband, John Meigs, his father, John Meigs, Sr., the Honorable John Meigs, Sr., his wife Connie Meigs, and her sister Yolanda Brown [ph.].
Speaker 2: And the kids?
Speaker 1: The kids?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Sorry, sure.  To my left is my daughter Avery and her first cousin Jasmine [ph.]; my nephew Kameron David Nelson, and Jasmine's brother Justin [ph.].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is in 2010, October 13, when Isabella and Calla were born.
Speaker 2: Those are your twin daughters?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is the same day, October 13, 2010 with John's grandparents, Walter Avery and Anne Avery [ph.] with Isabella and Calla in arms.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is their birth announcement with Calla Alexis Meigs, and Isabella.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Here they are a little bit bigger, more identifiable, Isabella Meigs, Avery in the back, and Calla Meigs.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is a family holiday picture.  Isabella Meigs, John Avery Meigs, myself, and Calla Meigs.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a year ago.  Myself, President Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], my husband John, my nephew Kameron David Nelson, and my daughter Avery.
Speaker 2: What's the occasion?
Speaker 1: It was a campaign breakfast, fundraiser.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: And this was summer vacation a year ago.  My nephew Kameron David Nelson, myself, Calla Meigs, my husband, Isabella, my dad, David Nelson, Jr., Avery, my daughter, and my mom Dorothy Nelson, and a native Hawaiian.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And this is the last section of my career, of the photo section.  I think I wrote the year on the back.
Speaker 1: Two thousand [2000].
Speaker 2: Two thousand [2000].  This is one of my highlights of my career, taking the movie 'Men of Honor' to the White House to view.  This is President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] at the time, and my client Aunjanue Ellis, and the director, George Tillman [George Tillman, Jr.], both my clients at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This was, I don't know what year that was.  It was 2002, with my client Beyonce Knowles [Beyonce Knowles Carter] and her mother Tina Knowles just before the premier of 'Austin Powers Goldmember' ['Austin Powers in Goldmember'].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This was, let's see here on the back of that.  Two thousand three [2003].  That's at the premiere of 'The Fighting Temptations' with then head of the studio, Sherry Lansing and David Gill, head of MTV Films at the time.
Speaker 1: This is 2003 as well.
Speaker 2: Okay, this was at the reception when I was on the cover of Black Enterprise magazine with my client Kelly Rowland.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is my identification card at the Oscars [Academy Awards] in 2007, where Beyonce performed.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is also in 2007 after the Oscars when we were at the Vanity Fair party with her husband, Jay-Z Carter and myself.  As you can see, I'm pregnant there.  Everyone thought she was, but I was the one pregnant.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This was at a fundraiser with my client Jurnee Smollett [Jurnee Smollett Bell] with the Jenesse Center [Jenesse Center, Inc., Los Angeles, California].  I don't know what year that was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is also the same luncheon with Jurnee Smollett.  And in the background you can see Halle Berry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is in 2005 at a fundraiser for then Senator Barack Obama with my client Solange Knowles, and Tracee Ellis Ross, and my husband John Meigs.  And I'm pregnant there as well with Alexandra.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is my Oscar pass in 2009.  Oh, actually she performed at that one, not the other one.  The other one, she was nominated for 'Dreamgirls.'  This one she performed with Hugh Jackman.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is the Oscars in 2009 with my colleagues Doug MacLaren and a couple of others that are no longer agents.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And this is the Oscars this past year, 2013, with my young client, Quvenzhane Wallis.  I forgot to mention her, who made history as the youngest actress nominated for the Academy Award.
Speaker 1: Oh, for 'Beast of the Southern Wild' [sic. 'Beasts of the Southern Wild']?
Speaker 2: 'Beast of the Southern Wild,' yes.
Speaker 1: I didn't know that was your client.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that is my colleague, Meredith Wechter, when we were at the Oscars waiting for her, Quvenzhane, to arrive.
Speaker 1: And here she is arriving.
Speaker 2: And she's arriving, and speaking with Jessica Chastain.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: I forgot to start off with that one.  That's my dad's mother, Nina Nelson [Nina Carroll Nelson].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is where I was featured in a book, 'Daughters of Men' ['Daughters of Men: Portraits of African American Women and Their Fathers,' Rachel Vassel].
Speaker 1: 'Daughters of Men,' everybody--well--okay.
Speaker 2: Well, the goal was for it to be women who had been successful and the father's who've influenced their careers.
Speaker 1: Well, most women are daughters of men, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes.  David Nelson, Jr. and myself.  But some dads are absent.  They may be, they may be men, but they're not present.  So, that's the--I think the point.  So I think that's everything, right?
Speaker 1: That's it, yeah.
