Story_ID: 509490
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Naomi, N-A-O-M-I.  I was born with a middle name Cornelia, C-O-R-N-E-L-I-A, but I don't use that anymore.  I use my maiden name as a middle name, which is Long, L-O-N-G.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my last name is Madgett, M-A-D-G-E-T-T [HistoryMaker Naomi Long Madgett].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, is there a story behind where the name Madgett comes from in terms of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have no idea.
Speaker 1: Okay--what kind of name it is.  Okay, and ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: July 5th, 1923, in Norfolk, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, and ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I have taught, but right now I concentrate on running Lotus Press [Broadside Lotus Press, Detroit, Michigan], which has been in existence for, since 1972.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you are also a poet, right?
Speaker 2: All my life (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).  And a, and a professor of, a teacher of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm a professor emeritus from Eastern Michigan University [Ypsilanti, Michigan].
Speaker 1: All right, now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: March 5th, 19--2007 (laughter).
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: At (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You don't have to give the address, but--
Speaker 2: At my home.
Speaker 1: In?
Speaker 2: In Detroit [Michigan].
Story_ID: 509491
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that management compels me to ask that only require a short answer.  And the first one is, do you have a favorite food, and what is it?
Speaker 2: A favorite food?  Anything chocolate (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --spring and summer.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I think I've been every place I ever wanted to go, so not really anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.
Story_ID: 509492
Speaker 1: Well, I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Clarence Long, Sr.] side, but we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Maude, M-A-U-D-E, Selena, S-E-L-E-N-A, and her maiden name was Hilton--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --H-I-L-T-O-N, Long [Maude Hilton Long].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I have that written down.  I can't remember.  Yes, I can, August 2nd, 1886.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: Nor- Richmond, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  What, I mean what do you know about the ancestors on that side?  How far back can you--?
Speaker 2: I can't go back very far.  Her father's name was Sidney Ham Hilton [Sidney Hilton], but I don't know anything about him, about his background.  He died when I was quite young.  And her mother was Mary Adelaide, maiden name Saunders, Hilton [Mary Saunders Hilton].  And I remember her too, but she died when I was about six.  All I know about her, and I didn't find this out until late in life, that her father was white, and this was in Richmond, Virginia.  I assume she was born in Richmond, but I don't know for sure.  And I might have met her father because he stayed in touch with her and visited her.  We, we spent summers in Richmond, and I might have seen him and not known who he was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was there a relationship between her and her father, I mean did they have--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  W- was he married to her mother?  I mean was he--
Speaker 2: I, I have no idea.
Speaker 1: You don't know, okay.
Speaker 2: Maybe her mother was a slave.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause that--
Speaker 2: May--
Speaker 1: --would take us back into the 1860s probably.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right.  So are, are there any stories from slavery that are passed down on that side of the family at all?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know for sure of any slavery on my mother's side.  On my father's side, his grandmother was a slave.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, let's, we'll, we'll (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But--
Speaker 1: Well, we won't get to that part--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --until we get to him.  But, but on your mother's side there are no stories about that time that come down or--
Speaker 2: I don't know anything.  I don't know--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --if either one of them was a slave.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any stories about Reconstruction or that whole period there--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --that seems to be a--
Speaker 2: I know very little about--I knew them better than I knew my father's family, but I don't know much about their backgrounds.
Speaker 1: What did they do for a living?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: My grandfather was a roof tinner, self-employed, and my grandmother was a practical nurse.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, she was a nurse.  Wow, that, well, it would seem like there'd be--so she didn't have any--did she--I'm thinking, if she was--well, she didn't have to be involved in Reconstruction I guess as a nurse.  But there was a lot of nursing going on in the Richmond area in those day, you know, the days right after the Civil--you know, during the Civil War and right afterwards, 'cause a lot of people were hurt and--
Speaker 2: Well, I believe she was born before the Civil War, but as an adult, I don't know what her educational background was.  She was not a registered nurse but a practical nurse.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she work in a hospital close by (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 509493
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Maude Hilton Long] talk about growing up in Richmond [Virginia] and what it was like?
Speaker 2: Not really.  She had a few anecdotes about things that happened, such as my grandfather [Sidney Hilton] was very dark-skinned, and my grandmother [Mary Saunders Hilton] was light-skinned, and there were six children who were all in between color.  And my mother said when, when streetcars were drawn by horses I think, my mother got on the front with two or three of the children and went and sat.  And the, the conductor would reach down and help white ladies up, and thinking she was white, he reached and helped her up.  And then when she went to the back of the streetcar with these brown children, he turned around and his face turned red (laughter).  But other than that--she did tell me about Reverend John Jasper, who was famous.  I don't know; I think she told me that her grandmother or mother had taken her to hear him preach his famous sermon, 'De Sun Do Move, and the Earth Am Square' [sic. 'De Sun Do Move and De Earth Am Flat'].  But--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) 'The Sun Do Move--
Speaker 2: 'And the Earth Am Square.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he could use--he knew the Bible thoroughly and took everything literally, and he could prove from scripture that this was true.  And he was so convincing that I have a biography of him written by a white minister of his, of his time.  And he said, "When I heard him preach that, and he finished his sermon by saying, 'Now how many of you believe that was true?'"   My hand shot up in a minute."  And he said, "I wasn't being hemp- hypocritical, but he had proved the point from the Bible."  So, I--she did tell me about him.  And she told me about going to church with her grandmother, and people were getting out in the aisle and getting--shouting and you know, doing whatever they did when they got happy.  And my, my aunt was a little girl, and my grand- her grandmother just got up and just shook herself a little bit.  And my aunt said, "Sit down, grandma, you're not doing it right."  And she said, "Leave me alone; I'll say--serve my God the way I please."
Story_ID: 509494
Speaker 1: But other than that, you know, and my mother's [Maude Hilton Long] talking about going to Virginia State [Virginia Normal and Industrial Institute; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia].  It's probable that Richmond [Virginia] didn't have any high schools for black students, so she went to normal school at thirteen.
Speaker 2: Okay, did she go to Virginia State, the--
Speaker 1: What was--what is now Virginia State.  It was a normal school then.
Speaker 2: And that, is that in Petersburg [Virginia] or--?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Right, okay.
Speaker 1: And graduating at, at sixteen.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: And she told me a lot about that and about some of the teachers and some of their practices.
Speaker 2: Do you remember any good stories?
Speaker 1: All of, all the girls had to wear long underwear, and when they went into the dining hall, one of the teachers would stand by and, and feel to make sure they had their long underwear on.  And so they, they started cutting out the sleeve (laughter) so, so that they would feel the sleeve and think they had the long underwear on.
Speaker 2: So they, they made them wear year-round, I take it.
Speaker 1: Well, not, not in the--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --not in cold weather.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But she was considered under par because she was so young, and she didn't have the privileges that some of the older students had.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Is there a story about why she was able to attend school at such a young age?
Speaker 1: Well, as I said, they probably didn't have high schools for black students in, in Richmond at that time.  I'm just assuming that, because if she had, she would have gone to high school at thirteen rather to a normal school.
Speaker 2: Okay.  A normal school is a teachers college (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 2: --basically.
Speaker 1: And you know, and no, it hasn't been too many years ago before--since a, a teacher could get a teaching certificate with a normal school education.  They didn't have to have a degree.
Speaker 2: Okay, so it'd be at the equivalent of an associate's degree, sort of, or--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --kind of like that.
Speaker 1: It really, really wasn't a degree--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --you know.  But Eastern Michigan [Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, Michigan] was a normal school at one time.  And you know, it, it hasn't been too many generations ago that that's all a teacher needed for a teaching certificate.
Speaker 2: Okay, right.  So, so when your mother graduated from normal school, or, or left normal school, or finished normal school--
Speaker 1: She, she comp--
Speaker 2: --finished.
Speaker 1: --completed the course.
Speaker 2: Okay.  What, what, what did she do?
Speaker 1: She taught in one room country schoolhouses for a few years and stayed with families in the community. And then after--she met my father [Clarence Long, Sr.] when he was at Virginia Union University [Richmond, Virginia], and after they got married and, and moved from Richmond, and after the family started coming, she never taught again or worked outside the home.
Story_ID: 509495
Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side of the family now.  And can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Clarence, C-L-A-R-E-N-C-E--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Marcellus, M-A-R-C-E-L-L-U-S, Long, Sr. [Clarence Long, Sr.]
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born in Victoria, Texas on August 25th, 1888.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what, what do you know about your father's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: I can trace it back.  His father was Frank Cornelius Long [Frank Long], who was born in 1857 in New Orleans [Louisiana].  He was free and obviously of mixed blood, and he's written up on 'Who's Who of the Colored Race' [ed. Frank Lincoln Mather] which was published in 1915.  He was the first male graduate of Leland University, which was then in New Orleans and is now closed, and he met my grandmother [Sallie Mumphord Long] there.  And the following year, he was the first black full-time instructor at Bishop College in Marshall, Texas.  And he went on from there and earned a degree in theology, but he never pastored a church.  He was, he worked as an educator.  I know that in 1900 he was listed as the principal of a high school in Guthrie, Oklahoma but was only there a year, and several years later, he left the family in Guthrie and became the principal of a high school in Hot Springs, Arkansas, and served there for a number of years, very erudite man who was very particular about proper grammar and behavior.  And I learned a lot about him through family letters that my father had saved but also about the information I got from 'Who's Who of the Colored Race.'  And he listed his parents as Alexander Dumas Long and his mother, Anna Mae Hawkins Long.
Speaker 1: Now that's significant.  Alexander Dumas Long, he had--someone I suppose had some idea that Alexander Dumas was black, a black author?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And, but that is a very common name in New Orleans because I knew that he had French blood, and a lot of French black people came through Haiti.  So I don't know how he got to New Orleans, but it's a very common name there.
Speaker 1: Is, is his last name Long have any association with the, the white Longs of Louisiana, the famous Huey Long at--
Speaker 2: Not that I know of.  I've researched that, but I, I have no evidence of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, seemed to be quite a person.  So, now when was 'Who's Who in the Colored Race'?  That was 1912, you said?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifteen [1915].
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifteen [1915], okay, 1915, okay.  And who published that, can you--do you remember?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  It was supposed to have had later volumes, but it was only--I have a copy of it here someplace, but I'm not sure where.  It was supposed to go into a second volume but never did.  And then, Gale reissued it in the six--'60s [sic. 1976], but they don't--the, the copies are extremely hard to find.
Speaker 1: That's Thomson Gale Research [Gale Research; Gale Cengage], yeah, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Gale Research here in--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: --Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they don't have any copies, but a friend of mine who collects books was able to find a copy and bought it for me.  But I first saw it at the Amistad Research Center in New Orleans when I spent a week there researching him.
Story_ID: 509496
Speaker 1: Anything else about him [Long Madgett's paternal grandfather, Frank Long]?
Speaker 2: One--when I went there to the, the archives of the library [Amistad Research Center, New Orleans, Louisiana], I found a, a ledger, hardcover ledger that gave the dates of--names and dates of students when they entered--when they be--it was a Baptist school, when they were baptized and by whom.  And--
Speaker 1: This is that Bishop College [Marshall, Texas]?  Where was it--?
Speaker 2: No, this was Leland University [New Orleans, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: At Leland, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And I, I found his name on the first page of that.  And then in the other box, I found a printed program of the annual program of the Leland University Ciceronian Society [Ciceronian Literary Society], and that was a month before he graduated.  And he sang a tenor solo, 'The Ivy Green.'  And my grandmother [Sallie Mumphord Long] gave the closing address, and they married the month after that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now that, those yearbooks are interest from that, that period of time for some reason.  I mean, people produce a lot of yearbooks of black (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a--
Speaker 1: --achievement.
Speaker 2: --it wasn't a yearbook.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: 'Who's Who of the Colored Race' [ed. Frank Lincoln Mather] wasn't--is a reference book.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I, I never saw a yearbook.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: The ledger that I found at the library just listed students and information about them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I remember some--
Speaker 2: And I do have his transcript, but I--he, he had a near four point average, and the coursework was extremely difficult, years of, of Greek, Latin, French, mathematics.  You know, students don't take difficult courses like that anymore, but he had a near four point average.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there any, any stories about why he moved around so much?  He's in Guthrie [Oklahoma]; then he's Hot Springs [Arkansas] and these--
Speaker 2: That--he dragged the family all over the Southwest, and he didn't seem to be satisfied anywhere.  And Guthrie, when they got to Guthrie in 1900, I think, because the children, they were born in different places, it all in--all but one of them Texas.  The youngest was born in Arkansas.  But they lived in Arkansas, Missouri, Texas, Oklahoma, and I can just imagine my grandmother saying: "I don't know why you can't be satisfied, but the girls and I can teach here and get some stability.  So if you want to go on, go ahead, but we're staying."  Now that's conjecture.  But he, he stayed in Hot Springs for quite a number of years, and then he seemed to want, want to move on from there.  And by that time my grandmother had died, and he remarried a woman who worked in the black--one of the white bathhouses in Hot Springs.  And he left her there and went to Memphis [Tennessee] to teach and didn't come back to Hot Springs until he had the first of several strokes, and he lived there with her, and she took excellent care of him.  And my, my moth- my father [Clarence Long, Sr.] was extremely fond of her because of the good care he took of, of his father.  And I remember letters that he started on the typewriter and always addressed her: "Dear faithful and true."  She evidently was quite a bit younger than he because she didn't die until 1960--sometime in the '60s [1960s].  And I eventually found his grave and her grave, and the, the broke--the stone was broken, and all it said was "F.C. Long, husband of Sarah."  And her stone said, "Sarah Long [ph.], wife of Fra- Frank."  And I didn't think that was sufficient, so I ordered another headstone and had them ship the original one back here so that it--if anyone was gonna do research on them, they wouldn't find that stone and think that was where he was buried.  And the stone that I had it re- had put there instead gave his full name, and his birth and death dates, and underneath it, pioneer educator.
Story_ID: 509497
Speaker 1: What were your father's [Clarence Long, Sr.] reflections of growing up, you know, in so many places and, and with his great father [Frank Long] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He didn't talk about--he considered Guthrie [Oklahoma] his home.  He was about twelve years old when they got there, and that was the most permanent home they had had.  And he, he was very proud of his father's accomplishments, but it was his mother [Sallie Mumphord Long] that he praised highest.  And I don't think his father--he, he kept in touch with the children, and wrote letters, and was concerned about them.  But I don't think he was a very good father.  I don't, I don't know whether he helped support them or not, but it was Octavia [Octavia Long] that she--that he had the greatest hopes for in terms completing her education.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is your father--
Speaker 2: My father's--
Speaker 1: --father's sister.
Speaker 2: --father.  Yeah, right, right.
Speaker 1: Oct- Octavia is your father's sister.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about Octavia.  You've written a book of poems ['Octavia: Guthrie and Beyond,' Naomi Long Madgett] dedicated to her, so.
Speaker 2: Yes, I was interested mostly in her because she died three years before I was born, but I was said to have looked like her.  And she was only thirty-four years old when she died, and because of the resemblance and because I was a skinny little kid, my father was always talking to me about her and saying, "If you don't take better care of yourself, you're gonna go the way that Octavia went."  And I heard so much about Octavia that I felt as if I was re- Octavia reincarnated.  So when I found the, all these family letters, it was she that I concentrated on.  And I could--when I put the letters in chronological order, they told a story.  We've lost the art of letter writing, but the letters that they wrote to each other said--told so much about their personalities through what they said to and about each other.  And so when I, when I started putting these letters together, and they read like a story, I really didn't intend to do anything until the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas], where she had gotten her degree in 1909, asked me to submit something for a special issue of their literary magazine.  And I said, "Oh, I can write a poem about Octavia, because she graduated from there."  Well, I never sent the poem because it kept growing and ended up being a book.  But I did have occasion to go there much later and from the book after it was completed.  But she was the one I concentrated on.  But there was a lot of other family history in the book as well, but she is the main subject.  And a documentary film built--based on the book was, was done some years later by Vander Films.  It's called 'The Poet's Voice' [sic. 'A Poet's Voice: Octavia and Other Poems'].
Story_ID: 509498
Speaker 1: Kind of explain more about Octavia [Long Madgett's paternal aunt, Octavia Long].  What made her so interesting?
Speaker 2: Well because I had this sense of identification with her.  As I said, I felt as if I were Octavia reincarnated, and because I looked like her as a child, and reminded--.  My, my father [Clarence Long, Sr.] wanted me to--wanted to name me Octavia, but my mother [Maude Hilton Long] thought that it was too soon after her death, and it would be too constant a reminder, but I did get her middle name.  And I, I eventually outgrew that sense of identification, but then as I started doing research on her, it came back.  And in the process of reading the letters, I could tell that she and her sister--she was the eldest of four children, and her sister was next.  And they were very close emotionally but very, very different.  In fact, one of the letters that I based the poem on in the book ['Octavia: Guthrie and Beyond,' Naomi Long Madgett] was from my grandmother [Sallie Mumphord Long], after my father had left for Virginia Union University [Richmond, Virginia], and Ethel [Ethel Long Johnson], the second daughter, had married and moved to Brooklyn [New York].  And my grandmother's letter said something like: "We shall all miss Ethel, I more than anyone, because she has been my friend through all my tribulations, never giving me harsh words to get--to grieve me, always sweet and kind."  And then she talked about other things, and at the end, she said, "Write to Octavia often; caution her--advise her to go to Sunday school and church, and caution her about her harsh and unkind words, but don't let on I told you anything."  So they were very, very different, and Octavia was pretty much a free spirit for that time.  She would ride in open carriages without a chaperone, and of course that wasn't done then, and Aunt Ethel was, was very proper, and Octavia did her own thing.  And I think--I, I referred in, in the book to the harsh words that she used sometimes, and I think sometimes I reminded him, my father, of, of Octavia.
Story_ID: 509499
Speaker 1: But in the process of doing the research, I went to Guthrie [Oklahoma], and I, I knew that she had taught fifth grade.  And I was writing a poem describing her going to school and describing the weather in the street, and I said I can't do that; I've never been there.  So I had a grant to finish the book ['Octavia: Guthrie and Beyond,' Naomi Long Madgett], and I took some of that money and went to Guthrie for a week.  And I first looked for--letters had come from four different houses, so I went looking for those houses, and two of them had been town down, but I found--and this was the greatest find of all--the, the little four room shack that they had lived in, in 1900, from 1900 until 1910, all boarded up and between Cottonwood Creek and the railroad tracks.  And I don't know where there was room for four people to sleep there, but they had the family piano that they had bought in 1895.  I just, I had it until recently.  I just shipped it to my daughter [Jill Witherspoon Boyer] in California; she wanted it.  And I don't know where they found room for that piano and for anybody--all those people to sleep, because there were only four rooms, and I know in 1900 there was not an indoor bathroom.  But that was the greatest find of all.  And then my, my [paternal] grandmother [Sallie Mumphord Long] had enough Indian [Native American] blood that she and the children got government land.  And she sold her farm and bought a, a different house in 1910.
Speaker 2: Now she would have, have had to have been able to prove she was an Indian--
Speaker 1: She--
Speaker 2: --basically, to get that.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she had sufficient Indian blood, and, and the children did, and all of them got government land.  So she sold her, her farm in Hugoton, Kansas, and my brother seems to remember that oil was found on Octavia's [Long Madgett's paternal aunt, Octavia Long] land, which, if true, provided her enough money to go to high school in Lawrence, Kansas, because Guthrie didn't have a high school for black students, and she got her degree at the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas].  So--I don't know what I was saying now.
Speaker 2: We were talking about Octavia and--
Speaker 1: Oh, I, I, I went there and, and I didn't expect to find anybody who knew the family because they weren't originally from there, and every--and there was nobody there left and hadn't been for many years.  But when I found this old house by the creek, I couldn't believe it, that I had found it, and that it was still standing even though it was boarded up.
Story_ID: 509500
Speaker 1: So I saw a man coming out of the only occupied house in the area [in Guthrie, Oklahoma] and told him what I wanted, why I was there.  And he said, "Well, you need to follow me up the street."  I had rented a car, so I followed him.  And there was a little old lady in a housedress sitting on the porch.  And I told her what I wanted, and she said, "Well, I can't help you, but maybe my husband can."  And while we were waiting for him to come out, I said, "My grandparents were named Frank [Frank Long] and Sarah Long [Sallie Mumphord Long], and they had four children, Octavia [Octavia Long]--."  She said, "Octavia was my high school linguist teacher."  I thought she was mistaken because dad had never mentioned that she had taught high school, but then he had left after the first high school was built for blacks.  And then across the street was another one of Octavia's form- former students.  And around the corner was a ninety-five year old lady, sharp as a tack, with nails painted bright red, smoking a, a long, brown cigarette, and the people told me she wore the highest heels in town.  And she said, "I knew the whole Long family.  Marcellus [Clarence Long, Sr.] tried to go with me, but I was too young for him."  And I said, "Marcellus was my father."  She said, "I ought to cook you a chicken dinner."  And she was still doing--serving as a seamstress for some, some clients, and the next year when I went back to read from the book, she had died.  But then around--on another street--all of them lived in the same area--there were several other women who had been taught by Octavia, and they were all in their eighties at that time.  So I got pictures of them, and then I went to the Oklahoma Territorial Museum [Guthrie, Oklahoma], and I had taken pictures, some pictures with me, and the curator said, "We don't have any early information on--I mean any information on early black families."  And he wanted to take the pictures that I had, which included my grandmother's first grade, grade class, taken about 1900, and, and my grandmother on the end.  And he, he said I don't think we have any information, but let's go in this room and, and find out.  So, there was an Indian [Native American] woman working in there, and they pulled down a large, dusty ledger and went the--went by street address, and here was "F.C. Long, colored, principal, Lincoln School [Guthrie, Oklahoma], 1900," and information about other members of the family.  And one of the, one of the women had been taught by my grandmother in first grade and by Octavia in high school, and she had one of the same pictures that I had.  And someone had a copy of the last yearbook that was taken of Faver High School [Guthrie, Oklahoma] the last year that Octavia was able to teach before she got sick, and I made a copy of that.  And I, I just couldn't believe that I found out all that I did during that week that I was there.  And I called my sister-in-law in Washington [D.C.], and I said, "Laverne [Laverne Sansbury Long (ph.)], you won't believe what I found the first day."  She said, "Well, I thought you were going on a wild goose chase."  I really didn't expect to find all that information but didn't expect to find anybody.
Story_ID: 509501
Speaker 1: And I could not have imagined the landscape if I hadn't been there, but that was what I really went to see, what the, what the town was like.
Speaker 2: What was it like?  What, what, what was the landscape like?
Speaker 1: It's--the population is still only about twelve thousand people.  Some of the streets in, within the city limits were dirt roads.  One of the women lived across the street from grazing cows.  Most--a lot of the people lived in the same houses that they had been born in.  I found the family church from one of the--the daughter of one of the women that my father [Clarence Long, Sr.] corresponded with until her death told me where the family church was, so I went there.  And--
Speaker 2: What, what was it?  Remember?
Speaker 1: I forgot the name of the church now.  It's, it's in the book, but I forgot the name of it.  It was a Baptist church.  And I took pictures outside, and several people inside remembered Octavia [Long Madgett's paternal aunt, Octavia Long] because she had taught some of their children.  And when I was outside, a couple that I didn't know asked me if they wanted me--if I wanted them to show, show them around town--if they wanted to show me around town, and I said yes.  Now, when Faver High School [Guthrie, Oklahoma] was first built, Octavia had gone to Washington [D.C.] for a short time and taught there and got married.  But when the first high school was built in 1912, she came back to Guthrie [Oklahoma] and one of its--was one of its first teachers.  But there was an explosion at the high school, and Faver High School was built in another location.  But--
Speaker 2: An explosion?  Is there, is there an explanation as to what happened?
Speaker 1: I, I don't, I don't know that.  But I, I--one of the letters that she wrote came from a Grant Street address, and I realized later--I found out later that it was across the street from the original high school, and she was living with a family there.  And her mother [Sallie Mumphord Long] was living someplace else, and everybody else in the family had left Guthrie, all the other children.
Story_ID: 509502
Speaker 1: As I looked--as I was talking to this couple outside the church, I happened to look down at the cornerstone, and it said Reverend S.S. Jones [Solomon Sir Jones].  Now, he was the man who had baptized my father [Clarence Long, Sr.] earlier in another part of Oklahoma, and he was a better father to my father than his own father [Frank Long] was, and they stayed in touch.  And I, I have a poem in one of my recent books of poem, poems about the vision of this man who went to Europe in 1924 with a movie camera and--
Speaker 2: Now this is--
Speaker 1: Reverend S.S. Jones--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --my father's childhood minister.  And he had the vision to realize that black family--black life in Oklahoma, in the all-black towns and elsewhere, was important to record.  So he took movies of that, and then the next year he came to New Jersey to see us and took movies of us.  So I've got pictures of myself now at three years old waving bye-bye.  And when he died, his wife evidently send all--sent all of his film to my father, and then my brother ended up with it.  So, my sister-in-law found somebody to work with this old film and put some of it on video.  And a woman here who was going to do a short documentary film on the all-black towns told me about it.  And I said, "Well, I've got something you need to see."  So she saw what I had on video, and she, she said, "This is excellent."  She said, "Send and get the original film, all of it,: and I did, and she got a grant to clean it up.  And I've got now about eight hours of viewing of early Oklahoma life.
Speaker 2: The work of S.S. Long, Reverend.
Speaker 1: F.--S.S.--
Speaker 2: S.S.--I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: --Jones.
Speaker 2: S.S. Jones.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: S.S. Jones, Reverend S.S. Jones.
Speaker 1: I don't think anything like it exists anywhere else.  And she used some of it in, in her documentary.  And she knew somebody on 'The Oprah Winfrey Show.'  And they wanted to use a few seconds of it on their show when they were doing a discussion of Toni Morrison's 'Sula,' and it wasn't the same state, but who's got moving pictures of little black boys in the 1920s?  And then a documentary film on Ralph Ellison ['Ralph Ellison: An American Journey'] used some seconds of it, and they paid by the second.
Speaker 2: It was interesting.  I wonder if they, in the retrospectives on the 1921 Tulsa [Oklahoma] disaster, have they used any of the--?
Speaker 1: No, he didn't--
Speaker 2: No?
Speaker 1: --concentrate on Tulsa.  He lived in, in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, but I'm saying these other--there have been documentaries about Tulsa that could have--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --used that footage I guess.
Speaker 1: But I, I, I doubt, I, I doubt if they've got moving pictures of it; they might.
Speaker 2: I just wonder if they used some of his--if his footage would match--
Speaker 1: I, I don't--
Speaker 2: --you know, since it's--
Speaker 1: It's possible.
Speaker 2: --Oklahoma, you know.  It's--
Speaker 1: It's possible.
Speaker 2: They're both--
Speaker 1: But it really belongs in the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Okay, now, you said S.S. Jones went to Europe with a, a movie camera?
Speaker 1: In 1924.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I've got a letter that he wrote my father from the Holy Land and a placard of the church, the--a farewell reception for him before he left.  And then, of course, I've got all the film.
Speaker 2: Wow, that is, that's quite a story.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 509503
Speaker 1: Any other stories about your father's [Clarence Long, Sr.] growing up that--did, did he get a chance to go to, well, college himself at the--
Speaker 2: Oh yes, he, he, he got his degree in theology in, at, at Virginia Union University [Richmond, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he pastored a church in, in Hampton [Virginia], and then went to Charlottesville [Virginia] where my brothers [Clarence Long, Jr. and Wilbur Long] were born, and then to Norfolk [Virginia] where I was born.
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how your parents met?  Did they have a story about how they got together?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Maude Hilton Long] was from Richmond, and they--he played baseball, semi-pro or whatever that is.  And my grandmother [Mary Saunders Hilton] took my mother and her, one of her sisters to this baseball game, and my father was light-skinned, and you know, with the dust and everything, they laughed at him.  And my grandmother supposedly said to my mother, "You'd better stop laughing at that man.  You might end up marrying him."  And it was sometime later that he met her somewhere and got her address and came to the house, and of course, they didn't have electric lights.  And she came to the door, and he said he wanted to see Ms. Hilton.  And she said, "Which one?"  And he said, "You, I guess."  So they, they got together there, and they, they married soon after he graduated.  And, and then he left Norfolk when I was about eighteen months old to take a church in New Jersey, in East Orange, New Jersey, because he wanted to continue his education.  And he pastored Calvary Baptist Church in East Orange.  And--
Speaker 1: And who was the--I mean where did he go to school when he was there?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--okay.
Speaker 2: --he, he was the first black graduate of Upsala College in East Orange, which is now closed.  And he had a wife and three children at home and was pasturing full time, and he was the highest ranking student in his class.  And the president called him in and said, "We're not gonna let you make the valedictory address, and you--if you insist, we will never admit another Negro."  So he said he didn't care about making the address, but he did want recognition on the program of his achievement.  So they did list it, but he was not allowed to make the address.  And then he got his master's [degree] at Drew University in Madison, Madison or Paterson, New Jersey [sic. Madison, New Jersey].  I don't remember that.
Speaker 1: Now, yeah, that--okay, now this is, this is back in, this would have been when?  When, when, when was he in school in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He got the, his bachelor's from Upsala in 1928 and his master's in 1929, and the same year he got an honorary doctorate at Virginia Union University.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And he started work on his Ph.D., but the doctor told him it was too much.
Speaker 1: So he, he was sick at that time?
Speaker 2: He was not sick for a long time, but he was just overdoing.  He just, just had too much to do.  But this was during the Depression [Great Depression].  The church was much smaller than Bank Street Baptist Church in Norfolk, and he had to reduce his own salary because most of the members of the church, if they were fortunate enough to work at all, they were domestics.  There were very few professional people in the church, and he reduced his own meager salary because they couldn't afford to pay him.  And I don't know how he got back on--got by on what he made, but we managed somehow because we were better off than most of the black people that we knew.
Story_ID: 509504
Speaker 1: But East Orange [New Jersey] was an extremely racist city.  The school system did not have any black employees, by design, not even janitors.  And the school I went to, each grade was divided into an A, B, and C division.  The A division of each grade might have had one or no black students; the B division might have had six or seven; and all the Italians and black kids were in the C division.
Speaker 2: So Italians and blacks, huh?  So--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --I guess that says something about that's the social--the bottom rung was occupied by Italians and blacks.
Speaker 1: Right.  So my brother was in the C--first brother [Clarence Long, Jr.] was in the C division; my second brother [Wilbur Long] was in the B division; and I made it to the A.  I don't know on what basis they made those decisions, but I was the only black student in my class through the eighth grade.  And the racism I experienced you wouldn't believe.  Teachers would permit racial jokes.  When they talked about slavery, I, I wanted to go through the floor.  And then when my brothers went to high school, and they came home and reported that the swimming classes were segregated, and there was only one high school in town, my father [Clarence Long, Sr.] and a couple of other influential men went and protested.  And they closed the pool, and they never reopened it.
Speaker 2: So they'd rather close it down (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They closed--
Speaker 2: --than to--
Speaker 1: --the pool rather than to integrate the classes.  And one of my brother's best friends, who spent more time at our house after school than he did at home, was a very, very talented student that everybody liked.  He was a, had good voice, singing voice; he was a good artist, and he taught me a great deal about poetry.  And the kids wanted to run him for student council.  They wouldn't let them offer his name.  They would not even put his name on the ballot.
Speaker 2: What, what, what, what was his name?
Speaker 1: Irving Washington.  And then there was only one theater in East Orange.  And it was against the law, but if you went there, they would usher black kids upstairs to the balcony.  And there was an ice cream parlor next door, and if, you were--you could buy ice cream in the box and take it out, but you couldn't sit at the table and eat it.  And my teachers--when I was in the fifth grade, all fifth-graders participated in a contest reciting poetry, and my mother [Maude Hilton Long] drilled me and drilled me and drilled me to recite this poem I had selected for expression, and as I listened to the other students, I knew I was better than they were.  I didn't get first, second, third, or fourth prize.  And my teacher said "Everybody knows Naomi [HistoryMaker Naomi Long Madgett] won that."  So, some of the teachers would tell my mother I didn't try hard enough, but something in me said, what's the point?  You know, because I can't get, I, I can't get what I earned.  So I graduated from Ashland Grammar School [East Orange, New Jersey], and then--
Speaker 2: Let me go back a little bit.  We, we kind of got ahead of what we usually do.  But--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --I wanted to ask you some other questions--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --before we, we, we, we get there.
Story_ID: 509505
Speaker 1: When you described the--when you think about the personalities of your parents [Maude Hilton Long and Clarence Long, Sr.], who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My father.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: I just have a lot of his personality.  And I admired him the most.  I always wanted to be like him because he was in, you know, in the public eye.  He was the greatest influence, single influence in my life.  I learned a lot about language from listening to his sermons.  I thought he was one of the best preachers I had ever heard.  And he spent a lot of time with me because my brothers [Clarence Long, Jr. and Wilbur Long] ganged up on me or didn't want to be bothered.  So he spent a lot of time with me and taught me a lot of things, like, well, his typewriter was usually open on the desk.  And when he wasn't there, I would imitate him and type with, with two fingers.  And he had a church secretary in East Orange [New Jersey], but he would have--she made so many mistakes, he would have me do her letters over, type them over.  And then I got so good that he would tell me who to write the letter to, how to address it, and what to say.  And I would compose the letter myself and have him sign it, and he taught me how to write checks.  And he, he gave me books to read, and I wore number seventeen of, of the Harvard Classics ['Harvard Universal Classics, Vol. 17 Folklore and Fable: Aesop, Grimm, Andersen,' ed. Charles W. Eliot] out practically because the Aesop's fables and other myths were there.
Story_ID: 509506
Speaker 1: We were talking about your relationship with your father [Clarence Long, Sr.].  And off camera we were talking about the poem you wrote for your wrote for your mother [Maude Hilton Long].  You want to tell us about that?
Speaker 2: I always wanted to be like my father.  I admired him so much, and I learned a great deal about language from his sermons.  I thought he was one of the best preachers I ever heard.  And my mother stayed home and did the drudgery, without the convenience of, of a washing machine and dryer and things like that, so I didn't really admire her.  And it took me seventy years to really appreciate the sacrifices that she made and how supportive she was, and so I have a poem called 'Reluctant Light' [Naomi Long Madgett that starts out: "Mother, I didn't mean to slight you but / it wasn't you that I adored."  And then as the poem progresses, you see the change that I go through and, and how I realized how much I appreciated her.
Story_ID: 509507
Speaker 1: What were--can you give us an idea of what your community was like, and what were some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up?  Now this is in East--
Speaker 2: East Orange [New Jersey] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Orange, right.
Speaker 2: It was a much smaller city than it is now.  It was predominantly white.  It's changed completely now. If--
Speaker 1: What was the ethnic group that--did they have a--was there a particular ethnic group, the Irish or the Germans, or who were they?
Speaker 2: I don't really, I don't really know.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I know you mentioned the, the Italians at the bottom of the scale with the blacks.  What other ethnic group do you think was--
Speaker 2: There were more Jews in my class than I realized, and I, you know, I didn't really know, but some of the changed their names.  Some of the students' parents changed their names while I was there, and there was one Jewish girl who, whose family moved to East Orange, and they had a store.  And they were from Eastern Europe, and the parents had a thick accent.  And Leah [ph.] and I became friends because I, I think because we were both different; she, she was obviously a Jew.  The, the neighborhood I lived in was mixed.  The boy next door and my brother were inseparable, but after they moved away, after his family moved away, he would pass our house as a teenager and not even speak, look the other way.  But they were inseparable growing up.  And there were other whites who lived in our neighborhood, but then, on the other side of the school, there were totally black communities.  And there were, across town, there were some other streets that were predominantly black, but our street was not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't, I, I don't know.  I knew every, every--the sidewalk was like slate, and I knew where every--roll, roller skating, I knew where tree roots buckled every piece of sidewalk, and I knew how to avoid those.  We had--our backyard was long.  And around the corner--we didn't have alleys--around the corner, there was a street, a house whose backyard extended all the way down just past our house, and all the boys played there, white and black together, and I was a tomboy; I learned how to do all the things that they did.  And if they weren't Barrett's [ph.] yard, they were in our yard playing baseball and climbing trees and whatnot.  And my father's [Clarence Long, Sr.] study was on the back of the house, and when he heard them down there throwing horseshoes or playing baseball, he couldn't resist going down there and playing with them, to get with them.  But other than that, you know, as I said, it had only one theater in town.  And East--you could, you could walk from Orange [New Jersey], through East Orange, to Newark [New Jersey].  And you could stand with one foot in Newark and one in East Orange, as you could with one foot in Orange and one in East Orange.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was a continuous kind of community, yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Story_ID: 509508
Speaker 1: What was the name of the, your grade school?
Speaker 2: Ashland Grammar School [East Orange, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Ashland Grammar School.
Speaker 2: They didn't get their first black teacher until 1944, after we had left.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you went there through eighth grade?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And it was a horrible experience in terms of racism and--
Speaker 2: I, I made friends with some of the girls, and, and some of the boys too, but I, I was always--I always felt different.  I grew up in other people's hand-me-down clothes, and some of the, some of the students were quite well off.  I remember one girl who, if she was late, the chauffeur would drive her to school.  One of the boys went with his family to Florida every winter, and I guess he was tutored there.  But I was always different because I didn't have the clothes that the other kids had, and my mother [Maude Hilton Long] made me wear long underwear, and the clothes sometimes didn't fit very well because they were, you know, other people's clothes.  I seldom got new clothes, and if I did, they were for church not for school.  And I used to wear my brothers' [Clarence Long, Jr. and Wilbur Long] outgrown coats, and I think I was in the seventh grade before I got a school coat of my own.  So I always felt different.
Speaker 1: Now this is the Depression, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Great Depression.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  You said, but your father [Clarence Long, Sr.] as a minister, you said he did better than a lot of people (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He had a job--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you know, and we didn't have to pay rent because we lived in the parsonage, and we got a lot of free chicken dinners at members' homes.  He got an allowance for gas for visiting the sick.  But I don't know how we got through those days, but we did somehow.
Story_ID: 509509
Speaker 1: I take it church was a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what, what, what was the name of your father's church?
Speaker 2: Calvary Baptist [Calvary Baptist Church, East Orange, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you, did you spend like a--I guess you spent a lot of time on Sundays (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --with all the different--
Speaker 2: And we, we were--Sunday school was before church, and kids went to Sunday school, and we could, we could walk there after we got old enough.  And then my parents [Maude Hilton Long and Clarence Long, Sr.] would come for, for the eleven o'clock service, and then the first Sunday we had communion at about three o'clock.  And we had a standing invitation to an elderly couple's home for dinner every first Sunday.  And in, in my autobiography ['Pilgrim Journey,' Naomi Long Madgett] I described the communion service and how it affected me, and, and then sometimes there was BYPU [Baptist Young People's Union of America] in the afternoon, and then we had night services too.  So we practically lived in the church.
Speaker 1: How did the communion affect you?  You mentioned that, but what--yeah.
Speaker 2: It started off with people gathering slowly.  And there was an informal part of the service where people would strike up a tune, and everybody would join in, and sometimes the hymns were lined, which went back to the South where people--churches didn't have hymn books, and a lot of the people wouldn't have been able to read them anyhow.  So some of the hymns were lined, and then people would testify and talk about--
Speaker 1: When you, you say lined, what, what--I've (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They, they would--
Speaker 1: --I've never heard that.
Speaker 2: --say one line of the poem, and then they, the rest of the congregation would sing it--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --if they didn't know the words, you know.
Speaker 1: So it was like a call and response sort of thing, or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, somebody would say the words, and then they'd sing the words of one line, and then the next line they would do the same thing until they got all through it.  And then people would testify and talk about their problems or their small victories, and I remember people saying, "I love everybody," and we knew that wasn't true (laughter), 'cause my parents discussed everything openly in front of us.  And we knew that some of the people who said I loved everybody weren't getting along.  But it was--and, and then the formal part of the service would take place, and I guess my father gave a short sermon, and then the communion was passed.  And they had a small loaf of bread with no crust; it looked like angel food cake, and of course, I couldn't take communion until after I was baptized.  And I didn't like bread, but I just imagined that this bread tasted like angel food cake, and when I finally was able to take it, I was, was surprised, you know, and didn't--missed the significance of the whole thing.
Story_ID: 509510
Speaker 1: But there was one--we called them jackleg ministers--who had no degree or--but he would sit on the pulpit with dad [Clarence Long, Sr.], and sometimes he would be called on to pray.  And he used the word unctions.  It's blessings, but we didn't know the word.  So we thought it was funny, and we would just giggle, ad my mother [Maude Hilton Long] would nudge us.  And then there was a deacon who always got down on his knees and prayed.  And we knew at what point he was going to say certain words, and we, we said them before he did.  And then--under our breath--and then when he got to them, we'd fall out.  And he would always close with, "Now Lord, reach down with thy lily white hand."  And I, I still don't like to sing hymns that talk about watch me--wash me whiter than snow.  But I could un- later understood what conditioning caused him to worship a Caucasian god.  But you know, we giggled in church, and my mother was always nudging us to keep us quiet.  And, and we would change the words to hymns.  "It was there by faith I received my sight, and now I'm happy all the day" ['Alas! And Did My Savoir Bleed (At the Cross)'].  We changed it to: "It was there by chance that I tore my Sunday pants, and now I wear my old ones every day," (laughter).  And again, my mother would nudge us to keep quiet (laughter).  But we had, we had an excellent choir, and we went every May 30th, black Baptist churches in New Jersey would have a picnic at Bordentown School [Manual Training and Industrial School for Colored Youth, Bordentown, New Jersey], which was a black military school for teenagers.  And they had a choir contest; all the choirs had to sing the same song.  And our choir won it so many times that they stopped having it.  But that, that was a--oh, I wanted to go to Bordentown School so badly.  One of my first poems was about Bordentown School.
Speaker 2: But it was--was it a male-only, or--
Speaker 1: No, it was girls and boys, but they wore uniforms.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: And one of the adult members of the church [Calvary Baptist Church, East Orange, New Jersey] said that the, the people who went there either didn't have anybody at home to take care of them, or they had been in some kind of trouble.  And he said that's not the place for you.  And my parents didn't have money to send me there anyhow.  But I thought I would die if I didn't go to Bordentown School.  Of course, I never did (laughter).
Speaker 2: And you're here (laughter), so.
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.  Well, was music a big part of growing up?
Speaker 1: Well, we all took piano and violin lessons, and the teachers came to our house.  But I was--my, my elder brother [Clarence Long, Jr.] was more musical than the rest of us.  He could play by note and by ear, and he played the violin well enough to be in an orchestra when he was in high school.  And I can play at the piano, but neither my younger brother [Wilbur Long] and I were as talented as, as he was.  And I had the nerve to join the, the grammar school orchestra [at Ashland Grammar School, East Orange, New Jersey]  playing violin.  And I'm--will always be grateful to the director that he never put me out (laughter), because I was so bad, and I finally realized I was over my head myself, and I got out.
Story_ID: 509511
Speaker 1: Where did you go, go to high school?
Speaker 2: St. Louis, Missouri, Sumner High School [Charles H. Sumner High School]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --historic Sumner High School.
Speaker 1: All right, now we have to tell the story now how your family moves from East Orange [New Jersey] to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, first of all--
Speaker 1: --St. Louis.
Speaker 2: I, I don't know if you want to get into this or not--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but there was a church fight in East Orange.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, let's, let's--
Speaker 2: One of, one of the women in the church [Calvary Baptist Church, East Orange, New Jersey] was from Norfolk [Virginia].  And all his life, my father [Clarence Long, Sr.] took the weekly, black weekly, the Norfolk Journal and Guide [New Journal and Guide], and he read, after we got to New Jersey, he read an article about this woman whose family he had known in, in Norfolk killing her husband.  And it was not too long after that--evidently she didn't serve any time.  It was not too long after that that she came to East Orange and joined our church and sang in the choir.  And she was very fond of me, and the first time--the first night I spent away from home, it was at her apartment, over a weekend.  And she would bring me a lot of expensive toys, and we went--we used to go to Long Branch [New Jersey] for a few days every summer.  And there were no hotels for blacks, so we stayed in a rooming house that was owned by a black church.  And one, one summer, at least, we took her with us, and we had to get--she and I slept in the same bed, and my parent--we had, had to go through my parents' room to get to the bathroom.  And on one occasion, she went through their room and dropped a twenty dollar bill on the floor beside my father's--where he was sleeping.  And when my father got up and saw it, he said, "Maude [Long Madgett's mother, Maude Hilton Long], you need to be more careful with your money."  She said, "Where would I get twenty dollars?"  So then he knew that she had dropped it, and he said, "Sister--I won't call her name--you need to be more careful with your money.  These are hard times."  Well, somewhere along the line she turned on him.  I, and I found out later that she was after his attentions, and---but he was straight as an arrow.  I never heard any suggestion at all that, that, you know, he was ever interested in anybody else but my mother.  So she turned on him and started writing anonymous letters to us.  And my mother, when, when this was in the process of happening, she would give me these expensive toys.  And my mother would let me play with them under supervision, but then she would put them away.  And eventually, when she saw what was happening, she packed up these toys and sent them back to her, and so it was open warfare.  And they were very good people, the salt of the earth, but there were just a few of them--a deacon, who called her his honeydew went blind, and dad had asked the church to pay him a little something to take care of our furnace before my brothers [Clarence Long, Jr. and Wilbur Long] were able to do it.  And he would, dad would, go out of his way to pick him up and take him to church.  Well, he turned too.  And, and then there were a couple of--and, and then the church clerk, my father caught his hand in the till, and so he was an enemy too.  So we started getting anonymous letters, and our lives were threatened, and we were not allowed to eat anything away from home. Now this lady had--was convicted of killing her husband.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, whether she was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But didn't do any--
Speaker 1: --whether--
Speaker 2: --any time.
Speaker 1: --whether she was justified or not, I don't know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And my father never made that knowledge known, but he knew it.
Story_ID: 509512
Speaker 1: And so she threatened us and told us we had to be out of town by a certain date or else.  And one time this deacon, he lived in a rooming house on our street a few blocks down, and on a Saturday night, the landlady heard him and this clerk talking about my father [Clarence Long, Sr.], and she called him up and said, "You need to get down here."  So dad went and listened through the door, and then when they started talking about my mother [Maude Hilton Long], he knocked on the door.  He said, "You can say anything you want to say about me, but minute you mentioned my wife's name, I'll sue you."  So, anyhow, it got to the point that either she was going to be put out of the church [Calvary Baptist Church, East Orange, New Jersey] or my father was.  And there--in the middle of the Depression [Great Depression] dad paid a handwriting expert fifty dollars to compare the anonymous letters with the ones she had signed when she was on friendly terms, and this church meeting was called, and there were police cars there.  We were left with an adult; we didn't go.  And the people were not very well-versed in parliamentary procedure, so dad had to tell them what to do in advance.  And he said, "As soon as this happens, you stand up and move so and so."  And then he would tell somebody else: "When he does this, you second the motion."  And he walked them through it.  So she was put out of the church, and she didn't come back until after we left.  And then she remarried and lived to be a 101 years old.  And to--and someone sent me obituary.  I, I saw her again as an adult when I went back there as a speaker, women's day speaker.  And she reminded me then that the first night I spent away from home was at her apartment.  She acted as if nothing had ever happened, and I guess maybe she thought I didn't know about it or had forgotten it or what.  But anyhow, I did correspond with her, and she was very happy to hear from me.  But when she died, she was a mother of the church.  They didn't mention her first married name or the fact that she had sung in the choir, but she was supposed to be this saintly person.  So, I don't, I don't reveal her real name in the book ['Pilgrim Journey,' Naomi Long Madgett].  But dad wanted to--things to quiet down before he left.
Story_ID: 509513
Speaker 1: And he [Long Madgett's father, Clarence Long, Sr.] got calls to several other churches, but several years after that he got called to Central Baptist Church [St. Louis, Missouri], which is also one of the oldest black churches.  It's a few years older I think than Second Baptist [Second Baptist church] here [Detroit, Michigan].  And that was a much different church, full (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That, that's in--
Speaker 1: St. Louis [Missouri].
Speaker 2: --in St. Louis, okay.
Speaker 1: --full of professionals.  And when we were getting ready to go, I started East Orange High [East Orange High School; East Orange Campus High School, East Orange, New Jersey] but only attended for a few months.
Speaker 2: This is about 1938, I guess, or--
Speaker 1: We, we moved in December 1937.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I started high school in September, and we moved in December.  And dad started telling me about this all-black high school I would attending and how--what an excellent school it was and how many famous people had graduated from there.  And my brothers [Clarence Long, Jr. and Wilbur Long] started college at Stowe Teachers College [Harris-Stowe State University, St. Louis, Missouri] and then after two years transferred to Lincoln [Lincoln University] in Missouri [Jefferson City, Missouri].
Speaker 2: Okay, now who were some of the famous black people that had come out of Sumner [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri] in those days?
Speaker 1: Robert McFerrin [Robert McFerrin, Sr.], who just died in--Sr.--who just died last November.  And I stayed in touch with him all my life.
Speaker 2: Now is that the father of Bobby McFerrin, the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The father.  He was the first black person to get a contract with the Metropolitan Opera.  The first--we went to--I, I started Sumner right after the Christmas holidays of 1938.  And the first week I was there, I saw an honor society induction ceremony.  It was the most beautiful and solemn thing I had ever seen, and the kids were so well behaved, so quiet.  Teachers didn't have to stand in the aisles to keep them quiet.  And the girls came in in identical dresses in the school colors, and the boys were dressed in the same way, with maroon and white.  And they went through their paces, and you could hear a pin drop.  And they went through their speeches, and I think it was the same assembly when this ordinary looking boy, sixteen years old, got up on the stage and sang.  And I had never heard a voice like that in my life.  And so when the second semester started, I joined the a cappe- a cappella choir, which he was in, and we got to be very good friends.  In fact, he was my first date.  But I wasn't allowed to go out, but he would come to my house, and we'd sit on the floor and play pickup sticks.  Or if he came at night, we'd sit at the kitchen table, and I'd say, "Robert, sing," and I would call off all my favorite songs.  And I could listen to him forever, and he loved to sing.  And then I discovered he didn't have a middle name, and he said, "Well, why don't you give me one?"  And I said, "Okay, Keith."  And he legalized it, and during the war [World War II, WWII], I went back and he was on furlough, and he showed me the papers.  Now Bobby did not know how he got his middle name until fairly recently, when his wife [Debbie Green] gave him my phone number, and I told him the story and sent him a part of a journal I wrote about my visit back to De- to St. Louis when he was on furlough.
Story_ID: 509514
Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about Robert McFerrin [Robert McFerrin, Sr.] and, at, and some of your classmates at Sumner [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri], 'cause there a lot of--so he was there and who, who--
Speaker 2: Well, they were not all there at the same time.
Speaker 1: Right, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But--
Speaker 1: But Robert McFerrin certainly--
Speaker 2: Robert McFerrin was there, and we stayed in touch until, until he la--he died.  He had Alzheimer's.  But his second wife [Athena Bush McFerrin] visited me here, and she was a much younger woman.  And, and she, she would call me and let me talk to him.  And sometimes he didn't know who I was, but on one occasion she said, "I think he knew it was you.  He kissed the telephone."  But he was--Grace Bumbry was there at a different time; [HistoryMaker] Margaret Bush Wilson.  I, I just can't remember them all now, but it was a very historic school.  They added on to it some years later and wanted to tear down the old building, which was built in 1876 I think.
Speaker 1: Yeah, named after Charles Sumner I guess (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the senator.
Speaker 2: And the local alumni protested, so they took two years to renovate it.  And when I went back for my fifty year reunion, they had finished the work, but they hadn't had the grand opening yet.  So the assistant principal let us go--they hadn't put all the furniture back in place.  The assistant let us go in with our video cams.  We went wild.  You know, there, there'd been a lot of changes.  And I said, "Where was the old--?"  We were in the, the library.  I said, "Where was the old auditorium?"  He said, "You're standing in it."  But it was that day that I heard Robert saying that I said, "Here's a place you can be anything you're good enough to be," and I took off running.  That was the turning point of my life.  Now, Sumner was--insisted on academic excellence.  And to get into the National Honor Society, you had to really do a lot of things.  You had to show leadership; had to be an officer in some organizations; you had to provide service without being paid.  I worked in the office several semesters on my off hours, good character, and of course, good grades.  And when I made National Honor Society, I was so happy, and then my next goal was to be--to graduate with a grade point average of above ninety, which I managed to do.
Story_ID: 509515
Speaker 1: But there, there are some people who assume that because it was a black school it was Afrocentric.  There were no courses--I, I didn't learn anything about any black writers or any black history at Sumner [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri].  The curriculum was identical to, to that in New Jersey.
Speaker 2: So, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But everybody was college bound, because if you graduated in the upper third of your class, you could go to Stowe Teachers College [Harris-Stowe State University, St. Louis, Missouri] free and didn't even have to buy your books, because it was a part of the school system.  And when St. Louis [Missouri] integrated, Stowe Teachers College was, was a black college, and then there was Harris Teachers College [Harris-Stowe State University, St. Louis, Missouri] for white.  When, when integration came--and they didn't have to be forced to integrate--the people who held top positions in administration at, at Stowe, were integrated into the combined school so that they did not get lower jobs.  They kept the same jobs they held.  But there was such loyalty to Sumner that I went to my forty-fifth reunion and my fiftieth.  And until about eight years ago, when people started getting sick and dying, that class, my one class, stayed together and met every month, and gave scholarships, and went on trips together.  And when I was there on one occasion, one of my classmates picked me up and took me to the church where they were meeting, and there were fifteen of my classmates there at the meeting, at the monthly meeting.  And now I'm a life member of the alumni be--
Speaker 2: Okay, so, so were your teachers black as well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Everybody, everybody--
Speaker 2: --in the school?  Okay.
Speaker 1: Everybody was black.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Everybody was black--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: --black principal, and they were very well prepared.  And Stowe Teachers College was, even though it was small, it was very well--the, the teachers were, there were a lot of Ph.D.'s there.
Story_ID: 509516
Speaker 1: Who was the principal at Sumner [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri] when you were there?
Speaker 2: Charles Brantley.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, every, everybody was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And did you have a favorite teacher at Sumner?
Speaker 2: I had several favorite--well, the one who made the greatest impression on me was Mr. Fox, Tom Fox [ph.].  I was no good in, in math.  And my first card marking in Algebra I got three A's and a D, or, it might have been a D minus.  And my mother [Maude Hilton Long] went to--he was very soft-spoken, very low-key.  And he gave my mother his home phone number and said if I was having trouble with homework, I should feel free to call him.  And I didn't abuse the privilege, but I did call him on two occasions, and he walked me through the problem, and he was such a good teacher that I began to understand.  And the second card marking I got a C plus; third card marking, B; and the fourth marking I was outdoing the smartest girl in the class, and we both got A's.  And I really understood it.  I've forgotten it now, but, but he, he made me understand that, and I thought that was, that was remarkable, that somebody could make me understand math, because I couldn't understand long division in grammar school [Ashland Grammar School, East Orange, New Jersey].  But all of the--and then the first week, I--it was close to the end--we didn't have semesters in East Orange [New Jersey], but it was close to the end of the first semester when, when I enrolled.  And the English teacher asked me if I had read 'The Iliad' [Homer] and 'The Odyssey' [Homer], and I lied and said yes.  Well, we had read 'The Iliad' in New Jersey, but I hadn't read 'The Odyssey.'  They were getting ready to read it when I left.  So he said, "Well, I'll give you an oral exam tomorrow."  So I had my father's [Clarence Long, Sr.] 'Bulfinch's Mythology' [Thomas Bulfinch], which summarized it.  And so I read that very carefully, and I passed that.  And I had already studied some Shakespeare, and they were memorizing speeches that I learned as my brothers [Clarence Long, Jr. and Wilbur Long] learned them in high school.  So he went to the principal, and the two secretaries were members of our church, so I got a lot of information on the sly.  But he went to the principal and asked him, she said--he said, "She's, she's doing excellent work, but she just got here.  I don't know what mark to give her."  He said, "Give her what she deserves."  So I got an A, and I got two Bs, and the only, the only marks that counted were the end, the final marks.  That excluded gym; it was academic subjects.  And every card marking, if you got all A's, whether you took four or five academic classes, you made honor roll, and the principal sent a letter home to your parents.  And also they had a special assembly, and those students' names were called.  And if you made honorable mention, which was what one--all A's but one B, that was honorable mention, and those students' names were called, and they stood up at their seats.  So there was so much encouragement for academic excellence that, that--you know, it, it was just a life changing experience being there.
Story_ID: 509517
Speaker 1: So I take it you liked Missouri a lot--I mean St. Louis [Missouri] a lot better than--
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: --New Jersey.
Speaker 2: I did.  You know, and I don't think anybody else in my family liked it as much as I did, be- because I was at that age, you know, in my teens, a very impressionable age.  And my, my brothers [Clarence Long, Jr. and Wilbur Long] didn't spend as much time there because they, they went to Lincoln [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri].  And then my brother left Lincoln--my one, my second brother left Lincoln at the end of his third year because he had--he was interested in being a pilot.  And while we were living there, we used to go across the river to East St. Louis, Illinois, where he was taking private pilot's lessons.  And then at Lincoln they had a program too, and he was the first student to solo at Lincoln.  So he left there after his third year and went to Chicago [Illinois] to attend a black flight school.  And then he went from there into the Air Corps [U.S. Army Air Corps; U.S. Air Force], where he was a fighter pilot and spent a lot of this time over there in prison camp when his pot- his plane was shot down.
Speaker 1: Was he shot down in Korea or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --Viet--
Speaker 2: It, in, over Hungary.  He was stationed--
Speaker 1: Hungary, okay.
Speaker 2: --in Italy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he was--his plane was shot down over Hungary.
Speaker 1: Was he with the Tuskegee Airmen?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All of them, you know, all of those pilots trained at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Army Airfield; Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And he's written up in, in 'The Tuskegee Airmen' ['The Tuskegee Airmen: The Men Who Changed a Nation,' Charles E. Francis] the, the book.
Speaker 1: What, what's his name?
Speaker 2: Wilbur Long.
Speaker 1: Wilbur Long, okay.
Story_ID: 509518
Speaker 1: You graduated from Sumner [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri] in?
Speaker 2: Nineteen forty-five [1945].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were you valedictorian or something, or?
Speaker 2: No, I was fifth ranking in my class--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --'cause I had to overcome a C in history that I got the first semester there was, you know, that first part of semester that I was there.  And I got a B here and there.  But I, I did make the welcome address.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you say there was no black history taught, or you didn't, they didn't talk about Dunbar [Paul Laurence Dunbar] or Frederick Douglass (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no.
Speaker 1: --or anybody like that in school?
Speaker 2: No.  But I, but I knew all of that from, from home, because dad [Clarence Long, Sr.] was very conscious of, of racial achievement.  I still have, on the bookcase in the back, a bust--a plaster of Paris [France], copy of a bust of Dunbar that was always on his, one of his bookcases.  He had a copy of 'Negro Poets and Their Poems' [Robert T. Kerlin], which came out in 1923, the year I was born.  So I read about black poets in that book, which I still have.
Speaker 1: Who were the ones that you were reading in those days besides Dunbar?  I know Dunbar was well known, but who else?
Speaker 2: Lang- Lang- a youthful Langston Hughes, a lot of black poets that you don't hear anything about now.  But Countee Cullen was not there because he didn't fir- publi- publish his first book ['Color'] until 1925; Joseph Cotter, Sr. [Joseph Seamon Cotter, Sr.] and Jr. [Joseph Seamon Cotter, Jr.]; Georgia Douglas Johnson; Bertram Johnson [Charles Bertram Johnson].  I can't remember who all of them were--James Weldon Johnson; Kelly Miller, who was not known as a poet, but he did write some poetry.  And that was my first introduction to him.  W.E.B. Du Bois, he wrote a few poems, so I had that book.  And then when my father was going to Drew University [Madison, New Jersey], he brought a black minister from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to East Orange [New Jersey] to speak, and he brought him by our house first.  And he said this is the man who wrote, and he called off all of these familiar hymns that we sang in church.  He was the author and composer of about 150 hymns.  His name was Charles A. Tindley [Charles Albert Tindley], T-I-N-D-L-E-Y, and I was so impressed because I was already interested in poetry.  And years later, I couldn't remember his facial features, but he was tall and very straight and old.  And he died a few years after that.
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: --I was--some years later I went to Philadelphia and stopped at the church that's named after him, Tindley Temple [Tindley Temple United Methodist Church], on Broad Street.  It was a Saturday morning, and the organist was there rehearsing for a wedding, and he showed me the picture of Tindley hanging on the wall.  And he gave me a copy of a book of his hymns, which I realized I had already had, and I have a book of his sermons that he signed for my father.  And, and not enough people know about him.  He was not--he was before gospel.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he wrote a lot of the hymns to, to illustrate his sermons.  And so I knew about him.
Story_ID: 509519
Speaker 1: When we went to St. Louis [Missouri] I met Langston Hughes for the first time.  I was about fifteen.
Speaker 2: Now, tell us about that.  Now you, you, you were, you were a sophomore in high school [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri] I guess, or, or--
Speaker 1: Something like that.
Speaker 2: And, and you met Langston.  How did you meet Langston Hughes (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, he was, he was touring.  And this was about--I'm trying to think of the copyright date on the book he gave me--about '39 [1939] or '40 [1940] I think.  He was speaking at a women's, black women's literary meeting, and my mother [Maude Hilton Long] took me there, and I told him I was writing poetry.  And he talked to me and said, "Don't ever pay to have your poems published," and he gave me a signed copy of 'A New Song' [Langston Hughes].  And then the next time I saw him I was at Virginia State [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], and he was going to do a reading there, and I met with him with a small literary group that I belonged to in the afternoon of the reading.  And I had a notebook, loose leaf notebook, with typed poems of mine, and I asked him if he had time would he look at some of them and tell me what he thought.  So he said, "Yes, I'll give it back to you after the reading tonight."  So in the middle of his reading, he read some of my poems and said that I had authored them, and my head got this big.  He praised me.  And when I get to get the notebook back, people had joined him on the stage.  And I stood off to the side, but he saw me there, and he, he brought the book to me, and he had gone through all of the poems and written penciled notes, which I immediately covered with scotch tape and so it wouldn't get erased.  And then when I heard that he and Arna Bontemps were doing a, an anthology of black poetry--'Negro'--'The Poetry of the Negro: 19--1746 to 1949' ['The Poetry of the Negro: 1746 to 1949,' eds. Arna Bontemps and Langston Hughes], I sent him several of the poems, and he included one ["Refugee," Naomi Long Witherspoon] of them in there.  And I stayed in touch with him until his death.  Every time he was in Detroit [Michigan], somebody had a party for him, and I was always there.  But he was the most wonderful person in the world, just down to earth, very helpful, encouraging to other poets, younger poets.  And a number of black women poets could tell the same story.  Mari Evans knew him much better than I did, but she and Margaret Walker and I were at least three of the black poets that he had, had encouraged.
Speaker 2: That's something.
Story_ID: 509520
Speaker 1: Now, I want to go back a little bit.  We, we skipped over, like, a real important event, and that was the publication of your book, your first book of poetry.  And this was--did meeting Langston Hughes when you were fifteen inspire you to write a book of poetry ['Songs to a Phantom Nightingale,' Naomi Long]?
Speaker 2: No, I had been writing since I was about six, seven--no, my first published poem was in the Orange Daily Courier when I was thirteen.  But I had written--I used to count the poems that I wrote.  And when I got to a hundred I was about twelve, and I stopped counting then.
Speaker 1: So how--was the Orange Daily Courier, that was the, the regular--
Speaker 2: Daily paper.
Speaker 1: Day, daily paper.
Speaker 2: But they, they had a poets corner or something like that.  And my, my brother was in high school, and he knew the editor, student editor of the poets corner.  So he gave them several of my poems.  And--
Speaker 1: So this is at age thirteen.  This is just before, I guess a year before the family moved to St. Louis [Missouri].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you had a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And so--
Speaker 1: --hundred poems--
Speaker 2: --I kept writing poems.  I was very prolific.  And in St. Louis I, I wrote a lot of poems.  And my father [Clarence Long, Sr.] felt that they should be published, and so he contacted this small publishing company which was called Pegasus [Pegasus Publishing Co.].  And he had to guarantee a certain num- the sale of a certain number, number of books, but there was no problem with that because it's a little hardcover book that only cost a dollar.  And my father knew ministers all over the country, so he knew he would have no problem selling the required number.
Speaker 1: Now, now what did you write about at, though, at that age?
Speaker 2: Love (laughter).  I was very melancholy.  I, I--you would, you would have thought I was much older.  These were certainly not children's poems.  You would have thought I had the world on my shoulders.
Speaker 1: Well, did you really feel that way then?  Did feel really--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yep.  And so the poems that I--in the book--but in the meantime, they signed the contract.  But in the meantime, the ownership changed hands, and it was now Fortuny's Incorporated [Fortuny's Publishers, Inc.].  So, the poems were actually, even though the, the book was published in 1941, most of the poems had been written before, about two years earlier.  I think there were only maybe one or two of the later poems included.  So the poems were really written mostly by the time I was fifteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But the book, the book came out when you were seventeen, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: So this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) a few days after I graduated from high school [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri].
Speaker 1: --this is 1941?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Story_ID: 509521
Speaker 1: How was the--well, well, did the publication [of 'Songs to a Phantom Nightingale,' Naomi Long] make you an instant star in--?
Speaker 2: No.  I don't think the, the--there were that many of them printed.  But they did have--my father [Clarence Long, Sr.] would send minister friends that he knew a copy and say if they were interested in keeping it, to send them the dollar.  So a lot of them--I guess they probably sold out.  And a book collector here [Detroit, Michigan], who collects black literature, he found a copy in Ohio and didn't even recognize that, that it was me because it was written under my maiden name, and so I was really surprised that, that anybody would find a copy of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's--did you--were you ever called up on to read poems for a ladies groups or, or--
Speaker 2: Yes.  St. Louis [Missouri] was very--the black people in St. Louis were very encouraging of young people who were trying to do something.  Robert [Robert McFerrin, Sr.] was always being asked to sing somewhere.  I was always being asked to read someplace, and I read on the radio when I was fifteen.  And then I entered some contests and usually won, and one of the contests I won was judged by a cousin of Sara Teasdale, who was also a poet, not well known.  And I remember that she came by the house and talked to me, and she was responsible for one of my poems being published in the Missouri School Journal.  And then there was a long period when there were no anthologies of black poetry being published.  And when they were, Langston Hughes and Arna Bontemps anthology ['The Poetry of the Negro: 1746 to 1949'] was probably the first for a long time.  And I've got something in that ["Refuge," Naomi Long Witherspoon].  And I've been included in about 185 anthologies, including textbooks, and in, in a lot of different journals.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so when, when you were a senior, was, was, was your book out when you were graduating from high school [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri], at the time when you--
Speaker 2: It came out a few days later, but the--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at graduation, the principal [Charles Brantley] announced that it would soon be out.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 509522
Speaker 1: When you grad- when you were graduating, did you have an idea of where exactly you were going to college at that point?
Speaker 2: That's interesting; I didn't.  My brothers [Clarence Long, Jr. and Wilbur Long] were at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri], and I didn't want to go where they were (laughter).  And my, my aunt, my Aunt Ethel [Ethel Long Johnson], lived on the campus at Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio], because her husband [William Johnson (ph.)] worked there, and my cousins grew up there, but I didn't want to go there because I would have been expected to stay on campus with her, and I wanted to live in a dormitory.  And dad [Clarence Long, Sr.] tried to encourage me to go to Stowe [Stowe Teachers College; Harris-Stowe State University, St. Louis, Missouri], but I didn't want to be a teacher, and I wanted to go away from home, but I didn't know where I wanted to go.  But one of the officers of my father's church [Central Baptist Church] in St. Louis [Missouri] was a cousin of Dr. John Gandy [John M. Gandy], who was the president of Virginia State College [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia].  And he visited St. Louis, and the church member brought him by to see us, and I was so impressed with him.  I said, that's where I want to go.  He had such dignity.  And it, it didn't matter that my mother [Maude Hilton Long] had gone to normal school there or that, that I had--one of my cousins was already there.  But it was close to Richmond [Virginia], where my mother's family lived and, but that was just a convenience.  I would have gone wherever he was.
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is--
Speaker 2: John Gandy.
Speaker 1: John Gandy, okay.
Story_ID: 509523
Speaker 1: We didn't discuss my father's mother's [Sallie Mumphord Long] family.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, what, what do you know about that side?
Speaker 1: I mentioned that she and my grandfather [Frank Long] met at--in, in college, Leland University [New Orleans, Louisiana], and they'd gotten married the month after he graduated.  She also taught some courses at--no, that was Octavia [Octavia Long].  Her--she was part Indian [Native American].  She had enough Indian blood that the children and she were given government land, and I don't know if I mentioned that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we, we mentioned that.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay--
Speaker 2: --now I, I just--
Speaker 1: Now her, her mother, she was born in Victoria, Texas.  And when she died, she was taken back there to--and buried next to her mother, who I understand was a slave.  I have tried to find some information beyond that.  And I did find--I don't, don't remember them offhand--that her, her parents were listed as mulatto, which could mean black-white or black-Indian or any of those combinations, and that they were from--one, one source said Virginia, and one said Indian territory.  So I am assuming that the Indian blood came from that father, but I'm not sure.  I still would like to do more research on that, since I do have their names now.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they do have--they did have more children than I knew of.
Speaker 2: Can, can you give their family name again, so we, for tape?
Speaker 1: Mumphord, M-U-M--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --P-H-O-R-D.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And there are a lot of Mumphords in, in Victoria.
Story_ID: 509524
Speaker 1: So let's pick up with Virginia State [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] again.  So you were so impressed by the president [John M. Gandy]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that you would have--what, what was so impressive about him?
Speaker 2: He had such dignity, and I, I, I just thought he was just so wonderful.  And he invited my father [Clarence Long, Sr.] to preach the baccalaureate sermon at the end of my freshman year.  That was, that was very nice.
Speaker 1: Okay, that should have been, yeah, that should have been a wonderful experience I guess, having your father come to campus and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother [Maude Hilton Long]--
Speaker 1: --preach.
Speaker 2: --they were guests at his home.
Speaker 1: And you were saying off camera you were very used to going to Richmond [Virginia] over, over the summer.  And there're a lot of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, when we lived in New Jersey [East Orange, New Jersey], we went there every summer and once or twice in the winter.  And so I would--I, I knew a lot of my, my--the cousin of mine who was closest to my age, we spent a lot of time together.
Speaker 1: Now, okay, so you were very familiar with Richmond.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I, I knew a lot of her friends.  And in a sense, Richmond feels more like home than, than any of the other places because it was a constant in my life, and the other places, once I had left, I, I was gone.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Although I have gone back, any number of times.  I have, I have a compulsion to go back to houses where I've lived.
Speaker 1: I understand that.  I do the same thing, but--
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, when I was in college at Virginia State, there was a young man, that I'm still in touch with from Portsmouth [Virginia], and we were friends, but he was romantically inclined, and I wasn't.  And he invited me on a holiday to come and spend the holiday at his parents' home, and I was about to say no until I found out that it was right across the river [Elizabeth River] from Norfolk [Virginia].  So I accepted, and the first thing I wanted to do was to go to Norfolk.  And at that time, the house I was born in was still standing, and we went there, and the people there remembered my father.  And the lady took me up to the master bedroom, and she said, "This is probably the room you were born in."  And then we went to Bank Street Baptist Church [Norfolk, Virginia], which at its original location is torn down now and moved to another area, but the minister there knew my father.  So I was see, seeing Bank Street Baptist Church for the first time.  And he, he took me through there, and I said, "Well, that's where my father stood to announce that Naomi Cornelia [HistoryMaker Naomi Long Madgett] had arrived," (laughter).  And I'm so glad I had that opportunity because both of them, you know, all that whole area is torn down now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 509525
Speaker 1: Now, how did the, the onset of World War II [WWII] affect you at school [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia]?  'Cause you, you, you were there I think when the, when the war started, right, in December?
Speaker 2: (Nods head) When I went for my fifty year reunion, the archivist said in a luncheon that we were the only class in the university's history that had gone through the whole four years during a major war.  We got there in September.  Pearl Harbor--a busload of freshmen girls were on our way December 7th to Camp Lee [Fort Lee, Virginia] to entertain black soldiers.  And when we got to the gate, there was a brief conversation with the officer at the gate, and we turned around and went back to campus.  Well, most of us didn't have radios, and we were sort of very isolated, and most of us didn't take daily newspaper.  But it was not until later that evening that we found out that Pearl Har- Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii] had been attacked.
Speaker 1: That very same day, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: December 7th.
Speaker 2: So the next day in, in history class we took up the whole period asking the professor how we would be affected by war.  And he told us what he knew about it or what he surmised would happen.  And at first we didn't see much happening, but gradually the young men got drafted.  And eventually--there were three women's dormitories at one end of the main street and three men's at the oth- the other end, and it got to the point that there were so few male students that women took over two of the men's dormitories.  Women and graduate students and some faculty members or staff members took over everything, Langston Hall [Petersburg, Virginia], which was named after Langston Hughes' great uncle, who was a congressman.
Speaker 1: Yeah, John Mercer Langston?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then, you couldn't get--I talk about that in my autobiography ['Pilgrim Journey,' Naomi Long Madgett].  Nylons were just coming out, and pantyhose hadn't been, been invented yet.  You couldn't get--silk stockings were what we had been wearing.  You couldn't get them anymore, and so we had to resort to rayon stockings, which were awful.  They didn't have any fit, and they wrinkled up on your legs, but my roommate from North Carolina had learned the trick of putting them on and then putting Vaseline on over them to keep them in place.  And then you couldn't get elastic for panties, so they had drawstrings, and I got the--I don't know why I couldn't cope with them better than others, but some of my friends in the, the dor- dormitory called me droopy drawers.  And then you couldn't--you had to have rationed coupons to buy shoes, but I didn't have any money to buy shoes anyhow.  And, and this history teacher had the reputation for wearing the same thing over and over, so my roommate talked him out of, a later roommate talked him out of the, his, his coupons for shoes.  And my mother [Maude Hilton Long] wrote about buying sugar, as much sugar as she could get coupons for, and she hoarded it in the basement, and by the time the war was over, it had turned hard, and she had enough sugar to sweeten the Atlantic Ocean (laughter).  But, what else couldn't you get coupons for--was rationed?  It was hard to get cigarettes, but soldiers at Camp Lee could get almost anything, and every now and then they could get us a pair of silk stockings, but those awful rayon stockings were the worst.
Story_ID: 509526
Speaker 1: During that time, we did get movies on campus.  We got Negro newsreels, and I would see--at first this was--I don't think Will [Long Madgett's brother, Wilbur Long] had gone overseas yet, but anyhow, there was a high school.  He was not in my class, Wendell Pruitt [Wendell O. Pruitt], was doing--he was a fighter pilot, and he was doing so much over there, every week I expected to hear that he had been killed.  But he made it through the war [World War II, WWII] and was really quite a hero.  And then, after he got back to the states, he was doing some stunt, stunts in the air and got killed that way.  But after, my cousins, my Richmond [Virginia] cousin who was closest to me, she came to Virginia State [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] for her master's degree, and I remember her boyfriend came to campus before he went overseas, and he was a fighter pilot.  And I remember spending a lot of time with him 'cause I had known him from summers in Richmond before, and he got killed overseas a short time before my brother was missing in action.  Now, when my parents [Maude Hilton Long and Clarence Long, Sr.] got the telegram, they--one of my--the faculty members that I was closest to, I used to babysit for her little girl, and I was free enough to go to her apartment and raid the refrigerator.  And so she, she was from Rhode Island, and the, the director of the choir in New Rochelle [New York] knew her from Rhode Island.  So my mother got this teacher's address or phone number or something and called her, and she called me to her apartment to tell me that my brother was missing in action.  And he was still considered missing in action for several months before he--we found out he was in prison camp.
Speaker 2: So he was in, in Europe in--
Speaker 1: They were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Where was he in--
Speaker 1: --they were stationed in Italy--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the fighter pi--
Speaker 2: He was flying out of Ramitrella, Italy [sic. Ramitelli Airfield, Italy], or, or that place?
Speaker 1: I don't know what part of Italy--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --it was.  But I thought I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And he, he was with the 99th [99th Pursuit Squadron]--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was with the 332nd [332nd Fighter Group; 332nd Expeditionary Operations Group] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 332nd.
Speaker 1: He was not one of the first group.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 509527
Speaker 1: And in the process when we--sometimes dad [Clarence Long, Sr.] thought he was dead, and sometimes he, he thought he was living, and dad used to have some eerie dreams, and he dreamed he saw him falling.  And he saw him get, get out of the plane with blood streaming down his face.  And I, I had two cousins, Wilberforce [Ohio] cousins, who were career officers, and they were not stationed together, but they were both in Italy.
Speaker 2: Who, what are their names?
Speaker 1: Harold Johnson [ph.] and Kenneth Johnson [ph.].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they were not stationed together, but they met on the same ship going over, but not knowing Will [Long Madgett's brother, Wilbur Long] was missing, one, Kenneth went to the camp and found out that he was missing in action, and because he was an officer, his letters were not censored.  So he wrote back and said that the--whoever was flying on Will's wings saw the plane go down.  And I, I don't, I don't remember how it was now, but it, it gave some hope that he was still alive.  And then the other cousin, not knowing that his brother had been there, did the same thing.  So dad's dream was, was really very accurate when we found out what happened.  His plane had been shot down, and he crashed landed, and his instrument, he fell against the instrument and cut his nose, and so he was running from the plane with blood dripping down his face, and civilians got to him and, and attacked him.  And he said they had been told to throw away their guns if they were caught, which he did.  But then soldiers rescued him, and he was taken to a hospital, and they sewed up his nose but told him he would have to have it taken care of later.  And he never got any of our mail; he was allowed to write mail back every few weeks.  And one, one time he would write to my mother [Maude Hilton Long], and she would read it and send it to me, and then I'd send it to his girlfriend.  Or whoever got the mail would circulate it, card or a penciled letter, and some things were blacked out.  But, and, and my mother was allowed to send packages periodically that specified exactly what could be included in them.  He never got any of those.  And Dick Macon says that's because they moved around so much from one prison camp to another.  But he was--I, I don't know if you know who Dick Macon is.
Speaker 2: No, who was he?
Speaker 1: Well, he, he's a, he's here.  When you see Tuskegee Airmen, you see Richard Macon [Richard D. Macon] and Alex Jefferson [HistoryMaker Alexander Jefferson], and all of them were in the same prison camp but not in the same barracks.  And Dick was in Will's class.
Story_ID: 509528
Speaker 1: But dur- before we found out that he was in prison camp, I wrote--and after Clem [Clemenceau Givings] had gotten killed, my cousin's boyfriend, I wrote a poem called 'White Cross,' and in my mind, Clem and Will [Long Madgett's brother, Wilbur Long] were fused.  But when he was liberated, he had lice; he was in the same clothes he was captured in after nine months.  He said they found out that it was so cold in the barracks, they, he said they saved their rations and made ice cream for Thanksgiving.  I said, "How did you freeze it?"  He said, "Put it in the window."  And they found that the floor had underfloor, so they pulled up boards and started burning some of the underboards to stay warm.  And, but anyhow, he came back safely, leaner, and you know, he--they never got a lot of the Red Cross [American Red Cross] packages they were supposed to get.  I guess the Germans took what they wanted first.  And so what I--the day I graduated [from Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], we, the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] sang around the sundial on the front campus; we sang our hymn.  And one of my classmates was showing, was showing off the watch her parents had given her for graduation, and we never gave family gifts like that.  And she said, "Oh, look at the watch; look at my watch my parents gave me.  What did you get?"  I said, "I got my brother home."  He came back the same day.  He was in the states.  My, when my parents [Maude Hilton Long and Clarence Long, Sr.] came to my graduation, they left word with someone how to get in touch with them because they knew he had been liberated.  And the phone down the hall ran, and they said he was on his way home, and then the second phone call came and said he was back in the states.  So that was the happiest present I could have gotten.  But he never did take care of having anything done to that nose.  And later in life, he was having headaches that wouldn't stop.  And when he went to the hospital, those bones had just mangled.  And they had to drill a hole through them, and then the headaches stopped.
Speaker 2: Okay, it called sinus, I guess, problems, I guess you could--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: That's something.  That's, so the day you graduated he was released.
Speaker 1: The day I graduated he came back to the states.  And I stayed after graduation and worked during the summer, but I did come home to see him when--
Speaker 2: So you graduated in forty--
Speaker 1: Forty-five [1945] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) five.  Nineteen forty-five [1945], okay.
Story_ID: 509529
Speaker 1: Who were some of the teachers did you, did--that you remember at, and experiences that you remember at--
Speaker 2: Virginia State [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Virginia State.
Speaker 2: I have a picture of one of them in my autobiography ['Pilgrim Journey,' Naomi Long Madgett], Felicia D. Anderson.  We just called her Felicia D. behind her back, and she taught drama and English literature.  And when I was in her English lit class, it was as if nobody else existed, just the two of us.  And I asked her once, and I talked to her after class a lot of times, and I think she was very fond of me.  And I said, "Ms. Anderson, don't you get discouraged?  You have such a wealth of, of knowledge and appreciation for literature, and so few of the students are really excited about it."  She said, "No, no, if in one college generation, one person catches the vision, that's enough."  And I thought at the time, one person?  How discouraging.  But do you know, I remembered those words; they took me through my college--through my teaching.  I said if I just reach one person, it'll be worth it.  And of course, the truth is you never know who you've reached.  They may not know it at the time, but I run into--I taught at Northwestern High School [Detroit, Michigan] before I went to Eastern Michigan [Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, Michigan], and I'm always running into former high school students.  And very, most, many of them, almost all of them remember me by name after all these years.  And sometimes they'll tell me, you know, you did so and so and so, or you said so and so and so, and it changed me, changed my way of thinking.  And there was, there was one boy I taught a course that was called essay, very difficult course for graduating seniors.  They had to read so many pages of a certain kind of essay every week, turn in their bibliography, and write an essay of the same kind.  And some of them missed some of the assignments, and toward the end of the semester I said even though they're not--they're going to marked down, every one of those essays must be turned in or you're going to fail.  And a couple of people didn't turn them in.  So I--they were supposed to graduate.  They'd ordered their graduation pictures and everything.  And the big brother of one of the students, whom I had also taught, came and pleaded with me.  I said, "Your brother knew exactly what the deal was, and he chose to ignore it.  I had no choice.  I mean what I say, and they should know it by now."  So, that was the year that I moved into this house, 1960, and taught summer school because the woman wouldn't get out when she was supposed to, and he graduated from summer school, and I clapped louder than anybody else.  And afterwards he came up and kissed me on the cheek, and he said, "You know, I've been getting away with stuff like that all my life.  If you hadn't stopped me, I would have continued it."  So you don't really know who you reach.  And the, the woman who was the head of the scholarship committee at Northwestern High tried to suit available scholarships to the students, and she called in one student and said--offered her this scholarship to--I don't know what college it was.  She said, "I don't know about that, but where did Ms. Madgett [HistoryMaker Naomi Long Madgett] go?"  Which was very significant.  In other words, whatever college produced me, that's where she wanted to go.  And then one of the students, fourteen years after she graduated she wrote me a long letter saying that she had gone back to school and was getting ready to graduate from Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] as an English teacher and that I was the person who influenced her to be an English teacher.  So, you never, you never real- really know who you're reaching.
Story_ID: 509530
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But she [Felicia D. Anderson] was one of my favorite teachers [at Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia].  And the, the, the one who broke the news to me about my brother [Wilbur Long], she taught French, and everybody called her Madame.  She was my favorite teacher, and Bernardin Dabney [Bernardin Francis Dabney] was my, he was my counselor and also my--he taught me composition on several occasions.  And we had to write something about a myth I think.  And it could be either in poetry or prose, and I chose to write it in poetry.  And I had shown him a lot of my poems.  And it was 'Pyramus and Thisbe.'  He marked it down to a B because ventured was not the right word.  And instead of complaining, I realized that he knew I could do better.  If it had been anybody else, he probably would have given them an A, but he knew that I knew the difference between words, and I, I should have used a better word.
Story_ID: 509531
Speaker 1: We were talking off camera about Luther Porter Jackson, Sr., historian (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --at Virginia State [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia].
Speaker 2: He was a history, history professor, but he was the foremost authority on the free Negro in Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he taught a course in, in Negro history, and we also had the advantage of a course in, in Negro literature, which I took.  I was not able to take his course in history, but I took his course in American history, which integrated the black history.  And he would tell us about where slave marts were in Petersburg [Virginia], and he told us about, a lot about surrounding history that involved slavery and, and black people.  And he went around the class in, at the beginning of the semester in American history and asked the students their last names and where they were from, and he knew more about their family history than they did.  There were two cousins who looked like white girls.  He knew their family history, and he said--he would--he was a fanatic about Negro History Week [Black History Month], paying your poll tax and vote, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 1: There was a poll tax you had to pay?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, to try to keep black people from voting.  But he insisted that we pay our poll tax, and I managed to do it even though I only had four dollars a month spending change.  But he would, when you turned twenty-one, he'd march you off to the polls and make sure you voted.  But asking students their names, he would say, "Oh yes, yes, yes, your great-grandfather had so many and so many carriages, had finest ca- carriages in the county, and he owned so many and so many slaves."  And that was the first time I had heard of black people owning slaves or realizing that not all black people in, in this country had ever had a history of slavery, and I worked part time for him going through Reconstruction congressional records.  And I had to un- do was underline the names of the, the black congressman, but naturally I read what they had to say too.  And I realized for myself from reading what they had said that they were not the ignoramuses that history books would have you believe.
Story_ID: 509532
Speaker 1: Had you at this point, like, seen--I know the popular culture, you know, always depicted blacks as pretty subservient and you know, that the South was kind of lionized as the Lost Cause.  You know, you got movies like 'Gone with the Wind' and other such a things.  So at that juncture, did it really radically change your idea about what black history was like to come across him?
Speaker 2: The only thing I didn't know was the location of certain local things.  I knew about segregation in the South because I had been there visiting, but I learned more about it then.  But then I realized that, that in a sense, somebody said--I didn't think of this myself: "In the South, white people don't care how close you get, as long as you don't get too high.  And in the North, they don't care how high you get, as long as you don't get too close."  And I realized that a lot of black and white families in the South lived next door to each other.  And James Weldon Johns--Johnson [James Weldon Johnson] had, had a white mammy who nursed him.  And you know, a lot of them were very good friends, as long as they observed the rules that you did not call a black man mister.  White people called them by their first names, and you had to call the white people by the last name.  And as long as, as that was the case, there were many friends among white and black people.
Speaker 1: So, okay, did you have a sense of the significance of Petersburg [Virginia] as a last battle of the Civil War, basically (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --the siege there and the black--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --soldiers that--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did they, did, did--
Speaker 2: And we went to a battlefield.  We took off one afternoon, and somebody had a car, and we went to a, what had once been a battlefield.  But he [Luther Porter Jackson, Sr.] filled us in on all that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The black soldiers' participation in the war and, and did they--did he talk about that much?
Speaker 2: I don't remember now.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause that's a big, you know, that black soldiers were real--
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I knew, I, I knew that.  I knew that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, the man in New Jersey who, who, with his wife, had us to dinner every first Sunday, he had been a slave, and he had fought in the Civil War, so I knew that.  So I, I was well aware that a lot of black people had, had fought in the Civil War.
Story_ID: 509533
Speaker 1: Did you major in English at, at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, of course (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (laughter).  So when you graduated with your, your--where did you--what, what were your prospects?
Speaker 2: You know, my father [Clarence Long, Sr.] was so disgusted with me, because I was so dead set against teaching that we had two laboratory schools on campus, an elementary school and a high school.  And all--just about everybody met--whatever their major was, liberal arts major, they did their student teaching, and took the required number of education courses, and got a certificate to teach in Virginia whether they intended to teach or not; not I.  I think there were only two of us in, in my class who did not take any education courses and didn't do the student teaching, 'cause I was not going to teach; I was gonna dig ditches first.  And when my father found out that I had graduated without any preparation to do anything, he was really disgusted with me.  I'd majored in English, took a lot of elect- I took every English course available except the Bible as literature, which I couldn't fit into my schedule.  And of course, I didn't take business English, which was for being a, a business majors, but I took every English course available, but I had noth- there was nothing I could do with it.  And there was, you know, it was almost impossible, if not impossible, to get a job as an editor if you were black, and there was nothing you could do but teach, so I had no idea what I was going to do.  And I, I didn't intend to, but I graduated in three and a half years.  One of my English teachers admired my writing.  She said she could write a perfect composition, but it didn't have the imagination in it that, that mine did, and she looked up my record, and she said, "You know, you only have three more hours to take to graduate in, in February."  And she said, "If you can--three hour--," she said, "it would be a pity for you not to take a, an extra course and just have to stay here for that one course."  So I went to the dean, and he said, "No, that's not possible."  So he looked up my record and called me back in.  And he said, "You think you can handle it?"  And I said yes.  So I took an extra course, you know, doubled up so that I graduated in three and a half years, but Virginia State [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] did not have a, a middle of the year graduation.  So I stayed there and did take two graduate courses in education because I thought they'd be easy.  And I, I worked part time so that I was able to earn my tuition.  And at that point, instead of four dollars a month I--my father send me twelve dollars a month.  But I made it on that because there wasn't that much to spend, to spend money on.  You know, most of it went to the frill for hamburgers, and, and a movie costs twenty-five cents, the one movie in town that black people could go to.  So, what was I saying?
Speaker 1: Oh, we're talking about at the end of, of going to grad school, take, taking these (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --education courses.
Speaker 2: So I, I did, I did stay there so that I would be there for June grad- May graduation.
Story_ID: 509534
Speaker 1: Then I still didn't know what I was gonna do, so I started graduate school at NYU [New York University, New York, New York] to--working on a master's [degree] in English; still didn't know after I got the master's what I would do with it.
Speaker 2: So how did you manage to choose to go to NYU, or was that an--
Speaker 1: Well, we were living in New Rochelle [New York].
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  Oh, you got married and moved to--
Speaker 1: I, I, no, I hadn't got married [to Julian Witherspoon].
Speaker 2: You, you hadn't, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When I--my parents [Maude Hilton Long and Clarence Long, Sr.] moved to New Rochelle--
Speaker 2: Oh, your parents moved, okay.
Speaker 1: --when I was in my freshman year at Virginia State [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia].
Speaker 2: Okay, I didn't know that, okay.
Speaker 1: So, so we lived in, in St. Louis [Missouri] only the four years.  And so I went to NYU and did one semester, but then I got married and came here.  And when, when the first marriage broke up, my daughter [Jill Witherspoon Boyer] was a year and a half old, and I had to get a job somewhere.  I had worked before she was born at the Michigan Chronicle as a staff writer for part of a year, but then when I got pregnant I stopped.
Speaker 2: Now, now did you, did your first husband have a job here in Detroit [Michigan]?  Is that how you wound up in Detroit, right?
Speaker 1: You know, I, I met him at Sumner [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri].  He was getting ready to graduate when I got there, and then he introduced himself in the hall.  And then he graduated in January, and I got there at the beginning of January.  And I didn't see him again until he and my brother were roommates at Lincoln [Lincoln University, Jefferson City, Missouri], and our choir toured the state, and we, we sang at Lincoln, and I saw him going across campus and spoke to him.  And then I didn't see him again until the war [World War II, WWII] started, and he was stationed at camp, Camp Lee [Fort Lee, Virginia], and somebody told him that Long's sister was there.  So he looked me up, and we started seeing each other, but he wasn't there very long 'til he was shipped to El Paso, Texas.  And most of our courting went on by letter, and then he went to Hawaii for the rest of the war.  And I, I realize now I really didn't know him well enough.  That was one of the problems, but there were a lot of problems.  But, so I, I had to get a job.
Story_ID: 509535
Speaker 1: And a neighbor told me that there was--Detroit [Michigan] had an all-black public office for Michigan Bell Telephone Company on Gratiot [Avenue] and Russell [Street].  There was a manager, Raymond Scruggs, and five girls, and we conducted ever, any business that any customer wanted taken care of, including paying bills, but solving other problems as well.  We were service representatives.  So one of the g- girls was leaving on maternity leave, and my neighbor told me there would a, soon be an opening there.  But she said, "Don't let them know that you have a small child, because they won't hire you.  They, they will think that, that you're gonna be absent all the time, and don't let them know that you have finished college [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] because they will think you'd be looking for a better job."  Well, the problem with that was that, when we moved into our first house just before Jill [Jill Witherspoon Boyer] was born, the ma- it was almost imposs- there was a delay in getting telephone service at that, in that area.  And my husband went to that office and complained, and he had known Raymond Scruggs because he had come to Detroit before the war [World War II, WWII] and lived at the Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)], and he liked Detroit and wanted to settle here permanently.  So he went there and said he had to have telephone service, because I was pregnant and had complications, which was not true.  So Mr. Scruggs came to the house to make sure that I was pregnant, and it was obvious I was, so we got telephone service right away.  Now a year and a half later, I go to him for an interview, hoping that he would not remember me, and he gave no indication that he did.  I introduced myself as Ms. Long [HistoryMaker Naomi Long Madgett] and said that I had two years of college, because you could get more money up to two years, but nothing above that.  So he approved me and sent me to the main office for doing the paperwork, and then they scheduled me for a physical examination on a Monday, and I said, "Oh, my gosh, if they examined me and they see these stretch marks, they'll know I have a child."  And then I said, "No, the medical department is not interested in my morals.  I'll pass it off."  So sure enough, this white nurse said, "Have you had a pregnancy?"  And I said, "Yeah," as casually as I could.  "About how, how long ago?"  I said, "Oh, maybe a couple of years," as if I didn't have the child.  So I guess that satisfied her.  So I was hired, and I had no way of, no way of having Jill taken care of.  I had to board her out during the week.  I didn't have a car; I lived on the far east side, and there were no childcare centers, and so I had to board her out with a family.  And in the end, she was boarded out to four different families, but I was very fortunate in having very good families take care of her.  And eventually, after I had established--and, and if she got sick, I didn't go near her.  If she had childhood disease, I didn't go near her because I had never had them.  So I wouldn't bring her home that weekend 'cause I couldn't afford to catch it.  I--they would pay you for a day if you got sick and had to leave, but if you--the first full day you would not get paid until you had been there a year.  And I was making thirty-seven dollars a week, and I could not afford to, to be out.  So eventually, after I had established a record of excellent attendance, I told my best friend there to let it leak out.  So while--not a minute too soon because they hadn't changed my nameplate on my desk yet.  And a man who knew Julian [Julian Witherspoon] came in and said, "Ms. Long?  I thought her name was Witherspoon," (laughter).  But by that time, I had, you know, I had--Raymond--you know, everybody knew it, and they knew I had a child.  So I, I asked--said something to Mr. Scruggs.  She said--he said I knew who you were.  All I cared about was how you would do your work, and that--he was a most wonderful person to work for.
Story_ID: 509536
Speaker 1: How long did you work for the phone company [Michigan Bell Telephone Company]?
Speaker 2: Six years, until he [Raymond Scruggs] got a job with AT&T [American Telephone and Telegraph Company; AT&T Inc.], and the only other black man in that department they sent in his place, and he was as different from the first one as chalk and cheese, and I was so unhappy then there with him.  And there were other complaints about him.  And I had gotten married for the second time, and I was under such pressure, and I was so tense that my then husband [William Harold Madgett] said, "Why don't you just quit and go back to school and get your master's [degree] and teaching certificate?"  By that time, I had taken some core courses toward a master's in education, but I could not foresee the time that I could stop working and complete the master's.  So when I got married I was able to do that, and I got--took the undergraduate education courses that I need and graduate courses and did my student teaching all in that one year.  And I had, then, three children at home and a husband, and I was gone morning, noon, and night.  I'd, I'd fix breakfast and then go to student teaching, then come home and wash the dishes, go to Wayne [Wayne University; Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan], come back, go back to--and one of the men in the neighborhood who was running the numbers told my father-in-law who's--was--lived upstairs over us: "Tell your daughter I don't care what kind of deal she's got; I'll offer her something better."  He thought I was doing numbers, too (laughter).
Speaker 1: You're too busy to busy (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He said, "That girl's going to school."  So I started teaching with a master's degree.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is in?  What, what year is this?  This is when you start teaching (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Fifty- '54 [1954] is when I started Wayne, and I started teaching in '55 [1955].
Story_ID: 509537
Speaker 1: Now did you teach at Northwestern [Northwestern High School, Detroit, Michigan] the same, the whole time?
Speaker 2: No, I, I did part of my student teaching at Northern High School [Detroit, Michigan], and I liked it so much.  One of my eleventh grade students was a man who would later marry my daughter (laughter).  But I liked it so much, I told the department head who was my critic teacher, I said, "Is there any chance I could get placed here?"  I don't know if he exerted his influence or not, but I was placed there and had a wonderful class in English lit the first semester, and then the second semester the enrollment dropped.  And I was not the low man on the totem pole, but in the English department I was, but I will always believe that they sent me to a junior high school to integrate the faculty.  And if I had had to stay at that junior high school, I would have quit teaching; it was that bad.  It was a predominantly white school, but it--I just hate--I don't like junior high school; I don't like middle school.  I never went--we didn't have junior high schools in East Orange [New Jersey], and, and we didn't in St. Louis [Missouri] either.  So I think that K through eight [kindergarten to eighth grade] and then nine through twelve is the, is the best deal, because you, you isolate the students at that very difficult age, and they reinforce each other's behavior.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There's a lot of difference between a ninth grader in junior high school and a ninth grader in senior high school.  Their behavior is completely different because they have, in high school, they have someone to look up to.  So if I had had to stay there, I would have quit teaching.  So I, I called my supervisor, and I said, "Get me out of here.  Send me to any senior high school."  And so they sent me to Northwestern, and I was very happy there for twelve years, but when the riot came in 1967, it changed everything.
Speaker 1: Now, let's not race too far ahead here.  But I want to go back and--now, so, so you were at Northern High School first.  Then--
Speaker 2: Fir- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) then--
Speaker 2: --Burroughs Junior High [Burroughs Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay, Burroughs Junior High.
Speaker 2: Both of them for just a semester.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, a semester each, okay.  And then North--
Speaker 2: Then Northwestern.
Speaker 1: --Northwestern High School for twelve years.
Speaker 2: Well, I took one year off.  I won the, first a statewide Mott Fellowship in English, and I spent '65 [1965], '66 [1966] at Oakland University [Rochester, Michigan] as a research associate.
Speaker 1: It is the Mott Foundation [Charles Stewart Mott Foundation, Flint, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Mott Fellowship in English.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Mott Fellowship was '65 [1965] and '66 [1966]?
Speaker 2: That school year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I went back to Northwestern.
Story_ID: 509538
Speaker 1: Now were you, were you writing poe- did you continue to write the whole time that you were in graduate school [Wayne University; Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan] and--
Speaker 2: Oh, I've always wrote.
Speaker 1: --working at the phone company [Michigan Bell Telephone Company] and--
Speaker 2: Always.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Always.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you hear people always say, "Oh, you know, I'd like to write, but I can't find the time," and that sort thing.  But--
Speaker 2: Oh, well, unless--
Speaker 1: --but writers usually write.
Speaker 2: --unless a poem demands to be written, it shouldn't be written.  It's, it's not a matter of time.  When something comes to you, you have to get it down then, at least the beginning of it.  And it may come at the most inconvenient time, and sometimes, you know, I go to bed, and before I go to sleep a line comes to me.  I turn on the lamp and write that down; turn off the lamp; something else comes to me; and that's how the poem works itself out.  Or sometimes I can have my hands in dishwater, and a poem--it just has to be written.  So it's not a matter of time.  You don't--I can't, I can't say I'm gonna sit down and write a poem now; it just doesn't happen.
Speaker 1: So, but the inspiration wells up, and then you do it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, when, when, when it comes, you have to stop what you're doing and do it then.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, this is as good a time as any I guess to talk about some of the themes of your poetry.  What, is, is there a certain thematic element that runs through your poetry?
Speaker 2: No, there's a great deal of variety in my, in my poems.  'Octavia' ['Octavia: Guthrie and Beyond,' Naomi Long Madgett] is the most unified book of poetry and really my favorite.  But I write about, you know, a number of, of different subjects.  Some of them are racial, and the majority of them are not.  'Exits and Entrances' [Naomi Long Madgett] was the most racial book.  But I write about family; I write about growing older; I write about things that I've just imagined.  Sometimes I, I get an idea from a character in a movie or something that somebody says, and I interpret maybe that statement in a different way, but it, it's a line that comes out in a--for instance, one of the, the poem that Langston Hughes used in, in--one of his anthologies ['The Poetry of the Negro: 1746 to 1949,' eds. Arna Bontemps and Langston Hughes] is called "Refugee" [Naomi Long Witherspoon].  And I think I was walking to school [Charles H. Sumner High School] in St. Louis [Missouri], and there were two men standing on the street.  And one of them said, "Hey, man, you got a cigarette?"  And the other one said, "Yeah, man, that's all I got."  I didn't hear the rest of the conversation.  Those are the first two lines of a poem.  And I imagined this man saying that he had had to leave the South because he was accused of something that he hadn't done.  He had to leave his family there.  He said, "I only got--I--ain't got no fine, some kind of hat.  I only got one cigarette; you might as well take that."  And you know, I, I just get ideas from, from various things, sometimes a newspaper article.  There's, there was an article in the Free Press [Detroit Free Press] about the woman retiring who was, worked at the humane society [Michigan Humane Society].  And she was the one who euthanized animals, dogs and cats.  And she said something about, you know, it's, it's the only way.  And that struck me as odd, because I used to feed homeless cats.  And they, they were wild, and they lived in the, in the garage, but sometimes they would have litter.  Then they wouldn't let you come near them, but we, we would put food out for them.  Sometimes we'd feed as many as fifteen cats and kittens when they had had litters near the same time, and dogs would come along and kill them.  But I, I, I said, "No, that's not the only way; there is a better way than that."  And so I wrote this poem about the cat lady.
Story_ID: 509539
Speaker 1: We were talking about your inspiration for your poetry and how the themes of, of your poems.  Now, did--you said very few of them have racial themes or themes as such.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because, you know, some people are consumed with race.  And there are so many other things I am, not just a black person, but I'm a woman; I am a mother; I'm a grandmother; I have been a wife. I have family, other f- had other family.  There are just so many other things to write about, and I'm, I'm not consumed by race as, as some people are.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did the, did the Civil Rights Movement affect your, your, your poetry at all, I mean from--I mean 'cause you came along I guess as a poet in the midst of this Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 2: I have two civil rights poems.  One of them is the best-known of all my poems.  It's called 'Midway' [Naomi Long Madgett], and it was written in 1958 I believe.  And I was discussing--and I, I always say that the 1954 Brown v. Topeka, Kansas Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] decision was the turning point in civil, in, in civil rights, because for the first time the government declared that separate was not equal.  And so it was possible then to move forward but not before because it was against the law.  So by 1958, it was clear to me that we were never going back to what used to be, that we were gonna move ahead, and so I called the poem 'Midway' because we had already made some progress, but we still had a long way to go.  And of course, 1963 had not occurred yet, but some things were, were changing.  So it's a very rhythmical poem: "I've come this far to freedom, and I won't turn back / I'm climbing to the highway from my old dirt track / I'm coming and I'm going / And I'm stretching and I'm growing / And I'll reap what I've been sewing on my skin's not black."  And the last of three stanzas: "I've seen the daylight breaking high above the bough / I've found my destination and I've made my vow / So whether you abhor me / Or despise me or ignore me / Mighty mountains loom before me, and I won't stop now."  And I don't think it's one--I know it's not one of my best poems, but it is the message that everybody relates to, and it has lived a life of its own.
Story_ID: 509540
Speaker 1: And then another one--so much of the Civil Rights Movement took place in Alabama that in 1963 I wrote 'Alabama Centennial' [Naomi Long Madgett], which was the hundredth anniversary of the--
Speaker 2: The Emancipation Proclamation (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eman- right, right.  And I go through the, you know, the sort of history of that.  "They said, 'Wait.'  Well, I waited. / For a hundred years I waited."  And I talk about the things, the way they used to be, the back door and the, and whatnot, and then coming--and then, then I, I make a reference to Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], but I don't call him by name: "Then a new wind blew, and a new voice / Rose in quiet," something or other, "'No,' it said.  'Not "never," not "soon," / Now.  Walk!'"  "And I walked the streets of Birmingham [Alabama]," and then I refer to the buses and whatnot.  And I, I had occasion--I was at, reading at a PTA [Parent Teacher Association] meeting and didn't know that they had in, invited a special guest. And I was ready to sit down when Rosa Parks walked in.  So I said, "Oh, I've got to read one more poem," and I read that, and two weeks before Martin Luther King was killed, he, he did, preached a sermon, Lenten, midday Lenten service at the church downtown, Central Methodist Church [Central United Methodist Church, Detroit, Michigan].  And I went to hear him.  Now his father and my father [Clarence Long, Sr.] were on the same itinerary in Europe in 1934, when they went to the World Baptist Alliance [Baptist World Alliance], so I knew him; I knew his father.
Speaker 2: That's where his father changed his name to Martin Luther King.
Speaker 1: His, his father was Michael.
Speaker 2: Right, he was Michael before that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: --right.
Speaker 1: But I, I knew [Reverend] Martin Luther King, Sr., 'cause he had come to visit when my father was here when they were at the same convention once.
Speaker 2: Were they, they part of the National Baptist--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --Con- Con- Convention [National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.] as well?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so I had met him twice.  And, and, and my father knew Martin Luther King, Jr.  But I had never met him before, so I said, "I know there's gonna be a big crowd here, and I want him to have a copy of this poem."  So I said--I wrote on my business stationery that had my address and phone number, "Please read the poem on such and such a page," and I identified my family, and two weeks later he was killed.  And I wondered if he had ever had a chance to read it, and I had just recovered from surgery and gone back to school at Northwestern [Northwestern High School, Detroit, Michigan], and so I came home from school and took a nap.  And the day before the funeral the phone rang, and a man said, "I was a friend of Martin Luther King, and he wanted me to give you a message."  And he said it just like that, and he said, "I read the poem to him."  And he said, "He said be sure to call her and thank her for it."  So I did have the pleasure of knowing that he had read it.  But those were the two poems I wrote specifically about civil rights during that, during that period.
Story_ID: 509541
Speaker 1: But there, there were some other racial poems too.  And some of them were, were critical of, of black people and their behavior, but, but not, not that many--
Speaker 2: Well, what's one that was critical of black people in, inside that you can cite for us?
Speaker 1: There's one called 'New Black'.  I've forgot which of the book it's in, and I can't, I can't quote it.  But it was during the period when people were distinguishing between Negroes, spelled K-N-E-E-G-R-O-W-S and true black people, and I thought that was so divisive.  And, and you know, I criticized the, the people who made that distinction, because we're all black together.  We have not all had the same experiences, but we have the core experience of, of being the recipients of the same injustice, no matter what other experiences we've had.  And we've experienced injustice in various forms.  But if you're black, you have that core experience.  So, you know, I, I just deplored the, the division that people made, some people made, in that regard.
Speaker 2: Right, I remember those days, days of the Black Arts Movement and a lot of--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --the, lot of the poets, like Amiri Baraka, who was, or LeRoi Jones, before he even changed, you know, made distinction between, distinctions between colored people, Negroes, and black people, and yeah, as, as evolutionary stages of it and I guess consciousness evolution, I guess.
Speaker 1: I don't--Haki never referred to it, but you know, I was referring to him (laughter), but he, he never let on that, that, that he knew I was, you know, what I was saying.  He may never have read, even read the poem.
Speaker 2: So that poem was addressed to [HistoryMaker] Haki Madhubuti, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I didn't--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was thinking about--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know, 'cause, 'cause he, he was the one that used the words--spelled the word K-N-E, K-N-E-E-G-R-O-W-S, and some of his phrases are in there, but he never let on 'cause we're good friends.
Story_ID: 509542
Speaker 1: There was during a period of time--now you're in a generation that included Gwendolyn Brooks, I guess.  She's ahead of you, but, you know, the people who were writing poetry as the Civil Rights Movement was unfolding.  And then there was this new generation of poets that came along with the Black Arts Movement, I suppose, that are, are a bit younger, maybe ten, fifteen years younger.
Speaker 2: But I, I have never followed trends.  You know, I write what I write.  And I, I don't do much rhyming anymore, and if I do, it's not as, as obvious.  A few, a few contemporary poets rhyme, but the rhyme is so hard to detect that you don't even realize it's rhyme, but your ear picks up on something that's happening that is--that sounds good.  But one of the reasons I don't care much for 'Midway' [Naomi Long Madgett] is that jumper--jump rope rhythm, but once I got started in that rhythm, I was stuck with it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite poem of, all your poems?
Speaker 2: I have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, I--yeah, you were saying that--
Speaker 2: I have several favorite poems, but one that has stuck by me for years and years, and I wrote this when I was, I think I might have been in college [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] when I wrote 'Quest' [Naomi Long Madgett]: "I will track you down the years, / Down the night, Till my--," why can't I remember it?  So much of my early poetry was melancholy.   "I will find you, never fear--," I, I, I, "I will find you, never fear, song of mirth."  So this is a quest for a happy poem.  "I will find you, never fear-- / Make you mine. / Think that you have bound me fast / To the earth? / I will rise to sing you yet, / Song of mirth. / I will let you think you won, / Perfect dream, / Till I creep from dark and toil / To your side, / Hold you to my heart and sleep, / Satisfied. / I will track you down the night, / Down the blue, / Till my song becomes the sun / Of the years / And the golden April rains / Are my tears."  And I've all--I used to end all of my readings with that.
Story_ID: 509543
Speaker 1: I guess I should ask you about some of the--now you've--I think one of your first poems published after your, after that early book way back when was a poem published in 'Freedomways' [Naomi Long Madgett] I was reading.
Speaker 2: That was "Midway" [Naomi Long Madgett].
Speaker 1: "Midway," okay, so that was in 'Freedomways.'
Speaker 2: That's where it was first published.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And I didn't know how it got that way.  But Rosey Pool [Rosey E. Pool], a Dutch lady then living in London [England], made an extended stay to Detroit [Michigan], and it was after a conversation with her that I wrote "Midway."  And when she left, she was doing an anthol- another anthology of African American literature, and I gave her a sheaf of my poems and told her to use them, any that she wanted.  And she was a friend of Shirley Graham [Shirley Graham Du Bois], who was W.E.B Du Bois' wife.
Speaker 1: Second wife, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so, she was the editor of 'Freedomways,' and that's how it got in there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, as I said, that poem has lived a life of its own.  It--there is an article I'm going to give you about--no, I can't give you that one; it's the only one I have.  A high school in Upstate New York had just a handful of black students, and every year the school put on a variety show as its major fundraiser.  And a group of the black students were going to recite this poem and dance to it, and at the last--and they got approval.  And at the last minute they said, "The poem is too serious for a variety show.  You can dance, but you can't read the poem."  So one of the main people involved was the daughter of the local NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] president.  So they got involved, and there were protests on both sides, and I got a call from the editor of the local newspaper, and he assumed I knew what was going on, and I didn't.  So he asked me what my reaction was.  I said, "Well, I didn't know anything was going on."  So after he wrote the article, he sent, sent it to me.  And they called off the, off the show because of that poem.  And then, in another case, a lawyer in Washington [D.C.], black lawyer, after the Mississippi Freedom Summer, he collected all of the material he could find and wrote this book, 'The Summer That Didn't End' ['The Summer That Didn't End: The Story of the Mississippi Civil Rights Project of 1964,' Len Holt] as if he had been there.  And Dudley Randall called me, and he said--was it Dudley or Oliver [Oliver LaGrone]--said, "I see you, you've been published in this book."  It's a prose book, but at the beginning of every chapter he started off with a part of a poem.  And he started off one chapter with the last stanza of "Midway," with some words mis- changed, minor words, by an unknown student of the Mississippi Freedom School, and it had no title.  That was the last stanza.  At the beginning of another chapter, he had the title and the first stanza.  So he did not--a student at the Mississippi Freedom School, he did not know that it was the same poem.  So I wrote to the editor, and eventually, you know, I found out that all of the copyright lawyers were hired by publishing companies, but I did get three hundred dollars out of it.  But you know, I, I, I have the book.  And what happened was that one of my former students was down there, and he said you know your poems are very popular, were very popular in Mississippi.  And what I think happened was, that one copy got torn, and he got two pieces of the poem and didn't recognize that it was the same poem.  And as, as you copy things, you make mistakes.  So there were a few mistakes, but it was obviously the same poem.
Story_ID: 509544
Speaker 1: And then an editor of a book about a basket- black basketball player, which had chapters on different, different ones, called me and asked me if I was the author of this poem, and I said yes.  And this person was quoted as saying that he had gotten turned on by a poem that a friend of his used to recite, and he didn't know who wrote it, but he started quoting 'Midway' [Naomi Long Madgett].  And he said that started his interest in poetry.  So, you know, it, it--and then one year--this was written up in Jet.  A Miss California was going into the Miss USA contest, and she was going to use as her, her talent the recitation of 'Midway,' and they said she couldn't use it because of the objectionable work black--word black.  Now that's a long time ago.
Speaker 2: So it did, it has had a life of its own, right?  It's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  So I've got a chapter in--
Speaker 2: It's out here still doing things.
Speaker 1: --in 'Pilgrim Journey' [Naomi Long Madgett] that's called "The 'Midway' Story."
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then I think--did I tell you about the student of mi- the classmate of mine--I think I did--who said I had to meet her minister because he was crazy about my poetry?  This was at my fifty year reunion.  Did I tell you about that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't think you did.  I, I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think you, you mentioned the reunion, but I don't--
Speaker 1: She took me by his, his office at church.  And he said--he had made all of his children memorize that poem, and I never saw it as anything but a civil rights poem.  He saw it as a story of his life.  And he told me where he had come from and how he had rut- risen up out of poverty, and so, you know, he interpreted it that way.  But I, I did a reading at Wayne State [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan] in the library the other day, and one of the students gave me a bouquet of flowers, and the card inside--my name was on the, on the envelope, and the card inside said, "Mighty mountains loom before me, and I won't stop now," (laughter).  So it is a very, very popular poem.
Speaker 2: It seems so, yeah.
Story_ID: 509545
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned Dudley Randall.  I guess we need to talk about him.  Dudley Randall was founder of Broadside Press [Broadside Lotus Press, Detroit, Michigan] in the--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --I guess in the, it was in the early '60s [1960s], right, or mid-'60s [1960s], '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was, 'cause we belonged to an informal group that met at each other's houses.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause I, I figured it's probably the, part, part of a story of a larger context of black writers in Detroit [Michigan] doing things.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I was, I was hoping it was, so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was a lot of activity in the '60s [1960s].  And, and Margaret Danner moved to Detroit and asked the minister if she could use the house next door to the church that wasn't--that the church owned, if she could live there and use it as a, as a, an art center.  So we started meeting there, and we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is the church--which church is this?
Speaker 2: King Solomon [King Solomon Baptist Church, Detroit, Michigan]--no, I'm not sure.  I've got it in my book ['Pilgrim Journey,' Naomi Long Madgett].  But--
Speaker 1: That's--
Speaker 2: --the, the minister's name was Theodore S. Boone, and so we called it Boone House.  And the house is no longer there now.  But there was not much activity there except that we got together the local poets, and we read to each other mainly.  It's been blown way out of proportion.  It was not the cultural center that, that--you know, there wasn't the activity that, that has been described.  But if there were five people other than the poets reading, it was a miracle.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But at any rate, it was during that time--when he wrote 'Ballad of Birmingham' [Dudley Randall], he founded--he had not yet published a book of his own, but he founded Broadside Press because he printed that poem as a Broadside.
Speaker 1: And a Broadside is, for those who don't know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --is a one sheet--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So that's when he founded Broadside Press.
Speaker 1: The one sheet of a poem that's usually, well, sold as one sheet or passed out as one sheet, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm.  But we, we didn't meet long after that because people involved started going out of town.  And Margaret Danner went into hiding.  And--
Speaker 1: To hiding, what?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a story about that.  When she came to Detroit, she had been given a grant to go to, to Africa, and instead, she stayed here and spent the money to live on, and then she just disappeared.  And then I can't find--I know somewhere I've got the article in the Free Press [Detroit Free Press] saying that she was finally going to Africa but that she had, you know, spent the money and had finally been able to raise enough money to go back to, to Africa.  But so the Boone House group fell apart.
Story_ID: 509546
Speaker 1: But at that time, there were not that many black poets that I knew of in, in Detroit [Michigan].  When my second book ['One and the Many,' Naomi Long Madgett] was published in 1956, I was the only black poet I knew in Detroit.  And then later I met Oliver LaGrone, who was also a sculptor, and, and the two of us, as far as I knew, were the only two, and we did interviews together and read together.  And Rosey Pool [Rosey E. Pool] has never been given the credit; it's R-O-S-E-Y, P-O-O-L.  She has never been given the credit that I have given her for being catalyst in bringing the black poets in Detroit together.  Because, because of her activity here, during her extended stay, we met other black poets.  And that's how our, our group began, began to be formed and how we, we got to know each other.  Now some of them were not--didn't write as much poetry as others, but I have a copy of The Negro History Bulletin that was published about that time, with an emphasis on cultural activity in Detroit.  And Ed Simpkins [J. Edward Simpkins] was dean of education later at Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan], and he's, he's not really writing any poetry, but he had written a few poems.  And Harold Lawrence, who later changed his name to Kofi Wangara, he went to Africa.  And they were both teachers, and he didn't write that much poem--poetry.  And Betty Ford was one, and Dudley [Dudley Randall] and I, and there were only about six or seven of us.
Speaker 2: Was Ron Milner doing any poetry in those days, or--
Speaker 1: Did he ever do poetry?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't know if I've ever read one.  I just, I just wondered (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I don't--not that I know of.
Speaker 2: Or Woodie King [HistoryMaker Woodie King, Jr.], I know he was more--
Speaker 1: They were both--
Speaker 2: --drama, yeah.
Speaker 1: --both playwrights.
Speaker 2: Yeah, who produced, like, productions that included a lot of poetry of, you know, through Concept East I think in the early days they had po- poets as a part of the program at Concept East.
Story_ID: 509547
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  And this is a completion interview.  Today is June 27th, 2007.  Hello.
Speaker 2: Hello, how are you--
Story_ID: 509548
Speaker 1: We're gonna start by talking about when you first arrived in Detroit [Michigan].  So we're gonna go back a little bit, and I want you to tell me what you found here as far as poets and poetry in Detroit when you arrived.
Speaker 2: Well, I arrived in 1946.  And I was writing poetry continually because I had--my first book ['Songs to a Phantom Nightingale,' Naomi Long] was published when I was seventeen in St. Louis [Missouri].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But I--in 1956, I was ready for another book to be published, and there were no other black poets that I knew of in Detroit.  In fact, it was a very dry period all over the country.  There were not many books by black poets being published at all, and you could count the black poets on maybe one hand.  I, I can't remember many black poets being published, and it was such--my--the publication of my book was such an event that I got reading engagements from as far away as Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and all of the major newspaper wrote feature stories about it.  And a woman who belonged to a literary club in Grand Rapids, Michigan, invited me to do a reading there.  So it was a major event, and it was a very lonely period because I didn't know of any other black poets here.  Dudley Randall came back to Detroit that year, but I didn't know him; he had lived here before.  He had not published a book yet.  But I eventually met Oliver LaGrone, who was both a sculptor and a fine poet, and we got along so very well.  We did interviews together.  We were, you know--we would read each other's poetry, or I'd read a poem and that would lead into one of his and that sort of thing.  We just got along famously.  And so we were the only two black poets that I knew, and then a Dutch lady who had been living in London [England] since World War--the end of World War II [WWII], Rosey Pool [Rosey E. Pool]--and her name is, is often misspelled; it's R-O-S-E-Y E. P-O-O-L--she had become acquainted with African American poetry in 1925 when she was studying at the University of Amsterdam [Amsterdam, the Netherlands], and she ran across Countee Cullen's first book ['Color'].  And she went on from there and started corresponding with some of the Harlem Renaissance poets, including Langston Hughes.  And so in--I forgot what year it was--I think it was '58 [1958] or '9 [1959] she came to Detroit for an extended period.  She had already published several anthologies, one in Dutch and one bilingual and one in England, and she was gathering material for a new anthology of black poetry.  And I think she was on a fellowship at Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan].  And she did a weekly program on, on educational, the TV called 'Black and Unknown Bards.'  And as a result--and we met early during her stay here and got to be great friends.  And the fact that she was doing black poetry over the radio, drew out a lot of black poets that I didn't know existed, and we didn't know each other existed.
Story_ID: 509549
Speaker 1: So we finally formed a--she [Rosey E. Pool] was a catalyst that drew us toge- drew a group of us together, very informal group.  We had no name or anything, but we would meet e--at each other's homes and critique each other's poetry.  And eventually--I don't remember when--Margaret Danner came here from Chicago [Illinois], and I don't know at what point she joined the group.  But she had gotten some grants to go to Africa, and instead, she asked the minister, Reverend Theodore Boone [Theodore S. Boone], who was pastor of--I forgot the name of the church now on 14th Street [King Solomon Baptist Church, Detroit, Michigan]--if she could live in the house next door that was empty and that the church owned and use it for a cultural center.  And he gave her permission to do that.  So then we started meeting there once a month on Sunday evenings, and we were mainly reading to each other.  If there were more than five people there, I don't remember it, and I was always there.  That has been blown way out of proportion.
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: You, you were saying that it was blown out of proportion.
Speaker 2: Yes, it has been written in several places that it was a major cultural activity and that just was not true.  If there were more than five people there, and sometimes there were only two, usually Arthur [Arthur Reese] and Sarah Carolyn Reese were our regulars.  But nobody came; we were reading to each other.  And also, it has been assumed that because Dudley Randall later became famous that he was the leader of the group, and that just was not true.  There were no leaders, and the only cultural activity--I did see some children's drawings on the wall, but the only cultural activity I ever knew about was our readings.  And it was, it was an interesting house.  It was old, ramshackle, neglected.  The furnace didn't work.  Some of the lights didn't work.  And in the wintertime we would just huddle around the fireplace and really enjoy each other's company.
Speaker 1: This what you call the Boone House poets.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in my autobiography ['Pilgrim Journey,' Naomi Long Madgett] there's a chapter about it called "A Fellowship of Poets."  So that lasted from nine--but we still were meeting in other people's homes in the meantime.  That Boone House lasted from 1962 to 1964.  And then Margaret Danner suddenly dropped out of sight; she just disappeared from the scene, and the group fell apart.  Harold Lawrence, who had named himself Kofi Wangara, went to Africa.  James Thompson moved to New York.  And the, and the--several things happened, and the group just sort of fell apart.  But then later there was another informal group that was interracial, and some of the--Oliver [Oliver LaGrone] and Dudley and I were in that group.  Professor Cantoni, Louis Cantoni [Louis J. Cantoni], from Wayne State University [Detroit, Michigan], who was Caucasian, Ethel Gray Seese, who was Caucasian, and several other Caucasian members, we continued to meet for a while in, in other people's--in each other's homes--
Speaker 1: As homes, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and do the same thing.  But that, that group eventually fell apart.  But we had come a long way from 1956, when I was the only black poet I knew of in Detroit [Michigan], at least actively writing.  And, and later years, when black poets are--published black poets are so many, you can't begin to count them.  Some of them you've never even heard of, and yet they have been published by major publishers, many of them.
Story_ID: 509550
Speaker 1: So you said that you were ready for your second book to be published at this time.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you find a publisher who was ready to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did--
Speaker 1: --publish for you?
Speaker 2: --a Exposition Press in, and New York [New York] published that.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was the title?
Speaker 2: 'One and the Many' [Naomi Long Madgett].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now during this time in Detroit [Michigan], you worked for the Detroit Public Schools [Detroit Public Schools Community District]?
Speaker 2: I first--the--my daughter [Jill Witherspoon Boyer] was born in 1947.  The marriage fell apart, and I had graduated from college [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] but as an English major.  But there wasn't really much that an English ma- a black English major could do, because magazines weren't hiring black editors, and I needed a job badly.  So there was a--the Michigan Bell Telephone Company had several central offices where people communicated with them by phone.  And they had, perhaps they had maybe three public offices where people could come in, and the service representatives took care of anything that any--the major offices could take care of, but we would have to phone them for details.  And they were not ready for black service representatives for a long time, and when they did decide that they would open up a black public office in a black neighborhood, all--there was a black manager, the most wonderful person in the world to work for that you would ever know, and five black girls.  And we did everything that was necessary to do: we handled bill payments; we investigated bills where there was some dispute; we took orders.  We did everything that any other--they took these black girls off the elevators where they had been working before and trained them as service representatives.  So I had to go to work after the marriage broke up.  And I learned from a friend who worked there that there was an opening.  One of the girls was going out on maternity leave.  So I, I applied, and I was hired.  But that was very interesting because Mr. Scruggs, Raymond Scruggs, who as the manager, had known my first husband [Julian Witherspoon] before the war [World War II, WWII] when they both lived at the black YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association].  And when we moved into our first house, it was impossible to get--there was a long delay in getting telephone service there.  So my husband went to that office and raised Cain and said that his wife was pregnant and had prat- had complications, which I didn't have, and we had to have a telephone.  So Mr. Scruggs came to our home to make sure that I was pregnant, and obviously I was very pregnant.  So when I had to go to him several years later to apply for the job, I had been told don't let them know that you have a small child; don't let them know that you have a college diploma.  They will pay you for up to two years of college, but if, if they know that you have a degree, the will figure that you'll, you'll be looking for a better job and won't stay long.  So I went in as Ms. Long [HistoryMaker Naomi Long Madgett] and hoped to goodness that he would not recognize me.  So we, we had an interview, and then he sent me to the central office to fill out the papers.  And then they arranged for a physical exam.  And I said, "Oh, my goodness, if this nurse examines me, she's gonna see the stretch marks, and she'll know that I have a child."  And they wouldn't hire a person with a small child because they thought they would be absent a lot.  So all that week I agoni- weekend I agonized, and then I said well, the medical department isn't interested in my morals.  So when she examined me she said, "Have you had a pregnancy?"  I said, "Yeah," as offhand as I could.  "How long ago?"  I said, "Oh, maybe two or three years," which implied I didn't have the child.  So I passed the test.  And I had to board her out because there were--during the week because there were no childcare centers.  I didn't have a car.  And I had to board her out and pick her up on weekends.  It was very difficult time in my life.  I don't know how I made it.
Story_ID: 509551
Speaker 1: But after I had established the fact that I was going to be regular in my attendance and that I was good, doing a good job, then I told my best friend there, "You can let it out."  So they, while they were waiting for my new nameplate for my desk, a man who knew me as Naomi Witherspoon [HistoryMaker Naomi Long Madgett] said, "I thought her name was Witherspoon."  So it didn't come out a minute too soon.  But anyhow, Mr. Scruggs [Raymond Scruggs] would sometimes take us to the Alpha House after the office closed.  And, and we respected him so much.  We would call him by his first name there.  And he would sometimes arrange for the cook there to have dinner ready for us.  But then when we got back to the office on, on, on Monday morning it was Mr. Scruggs.  And it wasn't because he required that, but we just respected him too much to call him by his first name.  But anyhow, after I had established, you know, and it came out that I was Naomi Witherspoon, I said you know, "I, I was so afraid that you would, would recognize me."  He said, "I knew who you were.  I didn't care as long as you did your work."  He was that kind of person.
Speaker 2: So how long did you stay at the telephone company [Michigan Bell Telephone Company]?
Speaker 1: For six years.  And he, Mr. Scruggs, was hired out of Michigan Bell to AT&T [American Telephone and Telegraph Company; AT&T Inc.] in New York.  And the other only pers- the only other black man in that, in that department took over his job, and he really wasn't prepared for it, and he was just the opposite of Mr. Scruggs, and he made everybody's life miserable.
Story_ID: 509552
Speaker 1: And by that time I had gotten married again, and my husband [William Harold Madgett] said you know--I was so tense all of the time.  He said, "You don't have to do--you don't have to put up with that.  You can go back--you can leave there and go back to school."  I had taken some courses toward my master's [degree], but I couldn't see that there was any time that I would be able to take off from work and just go to school full time until I did get married again.  So in that one year I took several undergraduate classes, which I should have taken when I was in undergraduate school [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], but I was so set against being a teacher that I wouldn't take the education courses.  So I had to take those courses that I could have taken very easily before, and graduate courses, and do my ste- student teaching at the same time.  So that was a very, very busy year.  I would--my, my husband had two sons that I raised, and my daughter [Jill Witherspoon Boyer] was there, so I was gone all of the time.  I'd fix breakfast, go do my student teaching, come back, wash the dishes, go down to Wayne [Wayne University; Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan], come back, cook dinner, go back to Wayne and whatnot.  And I was gone so much with notebooks and books in my hand that a neighbor, who assumed that I was writing numbers, said, said to my father-in-law who lived upstairs, "Tell your daughter I don't care what kind of deal she's got; I'll give her something better."  He said, "That girl is going to school," (laughter).  But, anyhow, I graduated in nineteen fifty-f- I finished my coursework in '55 [1955], and I started teaching at Northern High School [Detroit, Michigan], which I loved.  And then, at the beginning of the second semester the enrollment dropped, and they sent me to a junior high school.
Speaker 2: And you hated the junior high school [Burroughs Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, did I ever.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: If I had not gotten transferred to any senior high school I would have stopped teaching.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So they, they transferred me to Northwestern [Northwestern High School, Detroit, Michigan], and I loved it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I stayed there until 1968, when I was appointed as associate professor at Eastern Michigan University [Ypsilanti, Michigan].
Speaker 2: All right.  Now, you introduced the first course in African American literature in the Detroit Public Schools [Detroit Public Schools Community District]?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Literature and creative writing.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Tell me about that.
Speaker 1: It was the summer of '65 [1965], and I was getting ready to go on a fellowship at Oakland University [Rochester, Michigan] to write a textbook.  I had won a statewide award for this fellowship, and that was for the year, school year '65 [1965], '66 [1966].  But we--they let me do an experimental course that drew students from all high schools, but there were only a few there, and that was experimental.  But then when I came back from the fellowship, it was introduced as a full course, a full course, you know, accredited, and then it was after that--Northwestern was so wonderful.  I did--we had courses that no other course in, in the city had.  Don Thomas [ph.] was the only person qualified to teach radiation biology.  We taught Russian.  We taught African American literature.  I, I had the first accredited creative writing course in the city.  And they let me handpick my students and keep the class down to twelve, and [HistoryMaker] Pearl Cleage, who is now famous, was one--and her sisters [Kristin Cleage Williams] were students of mine in, in my creative writing classes.
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  And this--you stayed at Northwestern until?
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 2: In 1968, okay.
Speaker 1: And I started Eastern Michigan in the, September of '68 [1968] and stayed until '84 [1984].  And I retired then as a full professor and profer- professor emeritus.
Speaker 2: All right.  Now--
Speaker 1: I also introduced--I taught creative writing there.  I didn't introduce it, but I did also start the first course in African American literature there and a graduate course on the Harlem Renaissance.
Story_ID: 509553
Speaker 1: Now during the '60s [1960s], off camera we were talking about the fact that in different books they portray your poetry as being political and not political.  During the '60s [1960s], which was the Civil Rights Movement, did you write any poetry that addressed what was going on during those times?
Speaker 2: Yes, and both of them were written after conversations with Rosey Pool [Rosey E. Pool].  My most famous poem--people say, "Oh, I love your poetry."  Sometimes all they know is 'Midway' [Naomi Long Madgett], and it's a civil rights poem.  And it has, it has lived--there's a chapter in, in my book ['Pilgrim Journey,' Naomi Long Madgett] called "The 'Midway' Story."  It has lived its own life.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It has had so many influences.  And it has been set to music.  It has been danced to.  A sports write- a NBA [National Basketball Association] player had in, in a book about NBA players, that he was introduced to poetry through this poem, and he didn't even know who wrote it.  And Ms. California was preparing to go into the Miss USA contest, and her talent was to recite this poem.  And they wouldn't let her recite it unless they took the word black out.  Now that was not a time when black was the popular term.  And that was written up in Eb- in, in Jet magazine.  And then a small high school in Upstate New York that had only a handful of black students in it, they were going to--they had a variety show every year that was the main fundraiser for the school.  And the black students were going to recite the poem and dance to it, and they approved--the administration approved it.  At the last minute they said well, this is a variety show.  It's, the, the words are just too serious.  You can dance to it, but you can't recite the poem.  So one of the students involved was the daughter of a former president of NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] locally, so they got involved, and they protested, and then the white po- parents, parents protested.  And the editor of the local newspaper called me up and asked me if I knew what was going on, and I said no.  So he wanted to know what I thought of it.  I had no idea.  So after it was over, they canceled the whole variety show because of this poem.  And then--it is a very rhythmical poem.  And then when I went back to Sumner High School [Charles H. Sumner High School] in St. Louis [Missouri] to my fifty year reunion, one of my classmates said, "Oh, you have to, you have to meet my minister.  He just loves your poetry."  Now I never thought if it as anything but a civil rights poem, but he thought of it as the story of his life.  And that's what's good about poetry, that different people interpret it in different ways, according to their own experiences.  And so he said he had made all of his children memorize this poem.  And so it, it--and the last thing that I just found out the other day, a rapper, that I didn't realize was that famous, grew up next door to me, and his mother--his grandmother is still there.  Maybe about a year ago he got shot as he was about to shoot somebody else.  And he was known--his, his real name was DeShaun Holton [Proof].  And his mother's over there all the time.  And he--I, I was looking up 'Midway' to see what was online, what was on the Internet about it, and here came [HistoryMaker] Naomi Long Madgett, 'Midway,' DeShaun Holton.  So I don't know how he had used it, and I haven't had a chance to ask his mother yet if she had all of his recordings and if she was aware that he had somehow used one of my poems.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: And then the other civil rights poem was written in 1963, a hundred years after the Emancipation Proclamation.  And it's called 'Alabama Centennial' [Naomi Long Madgett] because so many--so much of the civil rights activity took place in Alabama.  And when I finally did go to Alabama for the first time to a convention two years ago, I said I can't believe I'm here.  But anyhow, I was reading that at a PTA [Parent Teacher Association] meeting, and I didn't know that they invited a special guest.  And I was about to sit down when Rosa Parks walked in.  So I said, "Oh, wait a minute.  I've got to read one more poem," (laughter).  So those are the two civil rights poems that I wrote.
Story_ID: 509554
Speaker 1: And I, I really didn't write much about World War II [WWII], except as it affected me personally, because my brother [Wilbur Long] was a fighter pilot in World War II, and he was reported missing--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and then he was in prison camp.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And when he was reported missing I wrote a poem about, about him ['White Cross,' Naomi Long Madgett], and I've written a poem since about him ['Lonely Eagle,' Naomi Long Madgett].  But, you know, I, I real, really write more personal things than topical things.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So let's, let's take a minute to talk about that, about how you decide what you're going to write.  You said it's more personal.  I, I know that earlier you said that when you were younger that most of your poetry was very melancholy.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Why was that?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  I, my childhood was not very happy.  My two brothers ganged up on me.  I was the youngest child, and they ganged up on me.  They didn't want me following them around all the time.  And all the bo- all the kids in the neighborhood were boys.  And they gathered in our backyard and played baseball and football.  And sometimes if they needed another player, they'd let me play.  But I did--I was a tomboy--I did all the same things.  I'd sit on the fence and watch them.  I'd climb the tree.  And, but the boy next door, they were just like this (crosses fingers) with my brothers.  And they just didn't want me following me around, and they built a house out of scrap lumber and put padlocks on the doors so I couldn't get in it, so I was very lonely.  And when my cousin and her mother came to live with us for two years, she was close to my age, and, and I was in heaven then because I had a girl to play with.  When she left two years later, I was devastated, and that, I remember writing one of my first poems, 'The Reason Why I'm Lonely' [ph.].
Story_ID: 509555
Speaker 1: So you were devastated when your cousin left.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so you wrote your first--
Speaker 2: It wasn't the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) one of your first poems--
Speaker 2: --one of the first poems--
Speaker 1: --the first poems, okay.
Speaker 2: --'The Reason Why I'm Lonely' [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then, you know, after we--they teased me mercilessly.  And--
Speaker 1: Why did they tease, tease you about?
Speaker 2: Everything, everything (laughter).  But after we, after we got into our teens, my younger brother, he was--both were older, but he and I, you know, palled around together in St. Louis [Missouri], and for a while he was going with my best friend, so we would take the bus and streetcar over to south St. Louis where she lived together, and we would do a lot of things together (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Together.  So, it was a gradual change in your poetry?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  As I, as I grew older, I became more concerned about aging, and family, and especially after all of mem- all the members of my family started dying.  We were--there were no deaths in the family for a long time, but then my, my father [Clarence Long, Sr.] died in 1976.  And my brother [Clarence Long, Jr.], who was a minister in Washington [D.C.], died of pancreatic cancer just after he had turned sixty, two years later, and my mother [Maude Hilton Long] died in 1982.  And then my niece died two years before my brother who was a pilot died.  And his death was the most devastating of all because we had had a chance--you can't really prepare for death, but my, my brother in Washington, we knew that he was terminal, and it was the same year, about two weeks after we found out that he was terminally ill, I had an automobile accident coming back from Ypsilanti [Michigan].  And the car turned upside down, and my neck was fractured, so I couldn't teach for the rest of the year, and I do believe what I call in my autobiography ['Pilgrim Journey,' Naomi Long Madgett], providential timing.  I think that there are things that need to happen at certain times, or they wouldn't happen at all, and because I was in this rigid neck brace, I was able to go back to Wa- Washington and spend quality time with my brother and sister-in-law [Laverne Sansbury Long (ph.)] eight times before he died.  So, and I watched him go down from being a heavyset man to a skeleton.  But with Will [Wilbur Long], my other brother, he had arthritis but, but nothing that we thought was life threatening.  And I was doing a poetry reading at the main library, and I told the young man who was picking me up to be here on time, because I wanted to have a chance to relax before it was time for me to read.  Thank goodness he got here early, because if I had waited another ten minutes, my sister-in-law's [Katie Butler Long] frantic telephone call would have been on the phone.  When I got back and listened to my voicemail, she said they had been out shopping, and he put something on the stove to warm up, and then he got a pain in his stomach.  And he went upstairs and sat down with his head in hands, and she called an ambulance.  And he was bleeding internally.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: And they said by the time an abdominal aorta ruptures and they find out where the bleeding is coming from, it's too late.  So I called New Rochelle Hospital [Montefiore New Rochelle Hospital, New Rochelle, New York], and they said they had transferred him to another hospital, and I--they gave me the number.  So I talked to someone, and then I talked to my sister-in-law.  And then the operator, whoever it was, got back on the phone, and she said, "Well, the doctor's coming out of the room, and it doesn't look good."  So, my sister-in-law said, "Well, you don't have a brother, and I don't have a husband."  And that was so sudden, it was just devastating.
Story_ID: 509556
Speaker 1: How did these deaths affect your poetry?
Speaker 2: I have written poems about my brother [Wilbur Long] since.  There's one in 'Connected Islands' ['Connected Islands: New and Selected Poems,' Naomi Long Madgett].  When he died, I wrote a poem called "Lonely Eagle" [Naomi Long Madgett] because when a Tuskegee Airman dies, that's what they're called.  And I, I haven't written a lot of poetry.  I used to write very, very often, and then I would go through dry spells, and I would get very upset that I had lost it as a poet, you know.  But then I would come back again, and my poetry would be somewhat different, but I have been going through such a long dry spell in recent years, that I thought well 'Connected Islands' will probably be my last book.  But, I was recently a judge at an elementary school for children reciting poetry, and they gave all of the judges beautifully leather bound journals with gilt edged pages.  And I said, "This is just too nice to scribble in."  And then I am vaguely associated with an organization here called InsideOut [InsideOut Literary Arts Project, Detroit, Michigan], which sends poets, wor- working poets, into public schools that choose to be a part of it.  And the, the poet stays with the students all year.  And at the end of the year they publish an anthology of the students' best poetry and art.  So during the month of April, which is National Poetry Week [National Poetry Month], they write a poem a day.  I said, "That's what I'm going to do."  So I started May 28th, and I have written a poem a day.  They're not all good.  They all--you know, some of them are just exercises, and some of them need reworking, but some of them are, I think perfect the way they are.
Speaker 1: So what is your, your technique?  How do you begin to write a poem?
Speaker 2: It, it depends.  And I, I get panicky because I don't know, what am I gonna write a poem about today?  I'm gonna run out ideas.  But I start scribbling something, and thing something else comes to me.  So I have, I have succeeded.  I said, "Well, when I get to a hundred I think I'm gonna stop and work on the ones that I've already written."  But sometimes I'm inspired by--I remember when I was in high school [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri] I wrote a poem ["Refuge," Naomi Long Madgett] that Langston Hughes included in, in one of his anthologies ['The Poetry of the Negro: 1746 to 1949,' eds. Arna Bontemps and Langston Hughes].  I was on my way to school, and two men were standing on a street corner.  And I just heard a bit of their conversation.  And one of them say, "Hey, man, you got a cigarette?"  And the other one said, "Yeah, man, that's all I got."  Those were the two lines of a poem.  And I made up this story of his having to leave the South and to leave his family behind.  And the end of the poem says, "I only got one cigarette; you might as well take that."  And sometimes I write a poem about a character in a movie or a television drama that affects me a certain way.  Sometimes it's something that, that I read in the newspaper.  I'm a cat lover.  I can't have one because of my daughter's [Jill Witherspoon Boyer] allergy, but I read in the paper that the woman who euthanized animals at the Michigan Humane Society was retiring, and she said it's the only way.  And that, that struck me.  I know, you know, you can't keep all of these stray cats and dogs if nobody wants to adopt them.  But I used to feed stray cats when I didn't have a cat of my own. We, we--they lived between our garage, and they were wild, between our garage and the garage next door.  And they wouldn't let you come near them, but they finally got a little bit closer.  But sometimes I fed as many as fifteen cats and kittens at once.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: And I talked about them in the poem, to say that's not the only way; somebody can feed them.  So, you know, ideas come from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) From different places.
Speaker 2: --then, then, then I write.  As I get older, I write more about family and about aging.
Story_ID: 509557
Speaker 1: Well, your latest book--
Speaker 2: 'Connected Islands' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Connected Islands'--
Speaker 2: --'New and Selected Poems' ['Connected Islands: New and Selected Poems,' Naomi Long Madgett].
Speaker 1: Right.  Have you selected a poem you'd like to read for us?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My--I, I wrote a first poem about my father [Clarence Long, Sr.] whom I idolized.  He was the greatest in- single influence in my life, and he taught me so much in terms of integrity.  And he spent a lot--during my lonely childhood he spent a lot of time with me, and you know, he was, he was my salvation.  But I was also influenced by the church, because he was a minister, and by church music.  And so some of the poems in here are from a unit of seven poems, and this goes back to where I get my ideas for poems.  They're based on, on hymns or spirituals, and they're in fra- but from the modern urban black experience--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and they're in street language.  And I, I included some of those in this book.  So, you know, I, I'm writing differently.  I--my poetry has evolved so that I'm not writing the same kind of poetry that I, that I didn't--that I used to.  But it took me seventy years to write this poem about my mother [Maude Hilton Long], and she was really a wonderful--I couldn't have had better poem--parents anywhere.  But she was a stay at home mom, who did all of the drudgery in times when there were no modern conveniences, so I didn't want to be like her, and my father was in the limelight.  And I, I purposely--and poets lie a lot; they exaggerate.  I made him sound more flamboyant that he--he was not flamboyant at all.  But I made him sound a little bit that way to contrast him with my mother.  And it's called "Reluctant Light" [Naomi Long Madgett]: "Mother, I didn't mean to slight you but / it wasn't you that I adored. / You hid your energy in shadows / and I was dazzled by the sun. / I idolized the one whose voice soared to prophetic heights, / whose words rejuvenated epics of the ages.  Some fine June Sundays, / slender and magnificent in morning coat, he would electrify the pulpit / with eloquent pronouncements of doom and glory so divine / the very gates of heaven seemed to part, bathing the atmosphere in crystal light. / Seeking his favor, I rehearsed raising my hand like his in benediction, / earning the childhood name of Preacher, shortened in time to Prete. / You gave us daily sustenance but there was never / a choir's fanfare or the soulbeat of the mighty to grant applause. / You baked the bread for which we seldom thanked you, / canned pears for winter and mended Depression-weary clothes, / scrubbing sheets on a washboard, humming hymns to lift your sagging spirit, / and cultivating beauty in endless flower pots. / The summer when he toured the streets of ancient Palestine and Rome, / you consoled yourself by painting pictures of Appian Way / using the kitchen table for an easel. / You coached me with my homework, rejoiced / in my small trumphet--triumphs, and prepared me to confront the enemy, / tapping your umbrella against my fifth grade teacher's desk / to punctuate your firm demand for justice.  I didn't recognize / your subtle power that led me through blind, airless caves, / your quiet elegance that taught me dignity-- nor could I know / the wind that bore him high into the sunlight / emanated from your breath.  I didn't want your journey, / rebelled against your sober ways. / But I have walked through my own shadows and, like you, / transcended glitter.  I have learned / that I am source and substance of a different kind of light. / Now when they say I look like you and tell me / that I have deepened your wisdom, softened / to your easy grace, I claim my place with honor / in that court of dusky queens whose strength and beauty / invented suns that others only borrow.  And Mother, / I am glad to be your child."
Speaker 1: That's excellent.
Speaker 2: She never lived to hear that.
Speaker 1: She never hear that.  Okay.  And this is your, your, from your latest book.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 509558
Speaker 1: 'Connected--
Speaker 2: 'Connected Islands' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Islands.'
Speaker 2: --'New and Selected Poems' ['Connected Islands: New and Selected Poems,' Naomi Long Madgett].
Speaker 1: The title, tell me about the title.
Speaker 2: I guess it came from the introductory poem.  Do I have time to read that?
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: Okay, and I'm, I'm gonna sing part of it because--try to sing part of it, because it, it's excerpts from songs.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But everything is connected ["Connected Islands," Naomi Long Madgett]: "Disjointed words and phrases come to me in dreams like scattered islands.  Rising from secret places, they flow to the surface of consciousness, spill onto empty pages.  But I tell you this, they will all come together.  Everything means, and nothing is isolated.  'Rock-a-bye baby on the treetop' a mother in Africa rocks her infant, dying of starvation, belly distended.  'When the bow breaks,' a sergeant in Baltimore on furlough scribbles a note before she leaps from a ninth floor ledge.  So long, badness.  I did love you.  See you there.  Her broken bones lie at awkward angles on the sidewalk.  The next week, her married soldier-lover follows her in suicide.  I cover the waterfront, searching for a love that cannot live, yet never dies.  A woman shivers under the boardwalk in Atlantic City, with only a box for shelter.  In a funeral home in London the ring that covered head of a year old baby rests on a pillow in a small white casket.  Nearby the shriveled hands of a woman in her nineties hold a rose with his sheep securely fold you.  The space between them is heavy with formaldehyde, ends and beginnings, change and decay.  They're alone; they are together.  Even separate islands are connected by some sea.  And we are sisters touching across the waters of our disparate lives, singing our untold stories in a harmo- harmony of undulating waves."  So that, I decided that that should be the introductory poem to the book.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 509559
Speaker 1: And you also wrote your autobiography.
Speaker 2: Yes, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you've been referencing it.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What's the name of it?
Speaker 2: It's called 'Pilgrim Journey' [Naomi Long Madgett].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And since I have been so influenced by church music, the title comes from the spiritual and from a hymn.  "I want Jesus to walk with me all along my pilgrim journey," ['I Want Jesus to Walk with Me'] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Pilgrim journey.
Speaker 2: And then, "Thou, my everlasting portions, savior more than life to me.  All along my pilgrim journey, Jesus let me walk with thee," ['Thou, My Everlasting Portion (Close to Thee)'].  And one where--I read at one bookstore, and the owner had read the book.  And he said this is indeed a spiritual journey.
Speaker 1: And the book has won an award.  Is that right?
Speaker 2: Yes, in April it won, won the College Language Association award, 2007 award for creative scholarship.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was the second time I had won an award from them.  My, my book 'Octavia' ['Octavia: Guthrie and Beyond,' Naomi Long Madgett] and other poems won the creative achievement award in 1988.
Speaker 1: Octavia, did--I, I don't think we've talked about Octavia [Octavia Long] and, and the poetry that you've written about her.  She was your aunt.
Speaker 2: She was my father's sister.  And he was closer to her than he was to any of his other siblings.  She died at thirty-four at the--of tuberculosis, because in those days, you know, they didn't really know how to treat it.  And she was thirty-four, and she died in 1920, three years before I was born, and I was said to have looked like her.  And two of the pictures in the book of me at the age of about four or five and her at about the age of forty-five--four or five, we, we do look alike, but I outgrew the like, likeness my father [Clarence Long, Sr.] said.  Although, when the book came out with her picture on the cover, my college roommate said, "Naomi [HistoryMaker Naomi Long Madgett], is that you?  Where'd you get those old fashioned clothes?"  And my niece, Karen [Karen Long Rowe], whose middle name is Octavia, she, she looks like Octavia too.  But anyhow, I heard my father talk about her so much.  And he wanted to name me Octavia, but my mother [Maude Hilton Long] said he was still so full of grief that it would be too much of a reminder.  So he named me Naomi, but I did get her middle name, Cornelia.  So--
Speaker 1: But she was very accomplished also.
Speaker 2: Well, she, she, she--their, their longest place of residence--my grandfather [Frank Long] dropped her--dragged them all over the Southwest.  He had graduated from--he was the first male graduate of Leland University, then in New Orleans [Louisiana], in 1881, and that's where he met my grandmother [Sallie Mumphord Long].  And he--I don't think she stayed to graduate.  But they got married the following month.  And then he was the first black instructor at Bishop College in Marshall, Texas, although he nev- he didn't stay there for very long.  He went on to earn a degree in theology.  And he was an ordained minister, but he never pastored a church.  He worked as an educator.  And about 1902 he left the family in Guthrie [Oklahoma], and he went to Hot Springs, Arkansas, where he was a principal of a high school.  And I don't know if they considered themselves separate, separated or not, but I just imagine my grandmother saying, "I'm tired of moving all over every place."  He said she--I'm thinking that she said, "The girls and I can teach here.  So if you want to go, go on; we're gonna stay here."  But I, I don't know what the reason was.  But he stayed in close touch with the, with the children.
Story_ID: 509560
Speaker 1: But Octa- we were talking about Octavia [Long Madgett's paternal aunt, Octavia Long] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Octavia, okay.
Speaker 1: She--
Speaker 2: She--
Speaker 1: --went to college.
Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother [Sallie Mumphord Long] had enough Cherokee Indian [Native American] blood that all of the children were given government land in Hugoton, Kansas, and my brother seemed to remember hearing that oil was found in Oct- on Octavia's land; which if it's true, and she sold the land, that would be enough money for her to pay to go away to Lawrence, Kansas, to high school because at that time Guthrie [Oklahoma] didn't have a high school for, for blacks.  And my father [Clarence Long, Sr.] got his high school training at Bishop College [Marshall, Texas] in the high school section of it.  And Octavia went to--graduated from high school in, in--and then stayed there and got her degree in English at the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas] in 1909.  So I had grew up with this sense of identification with her because my father talked about her so much.  And I was a skinny little kid, and he'd say if you don't take better care of yourself, you're going the way Octavia went.  And he would feed me these awful tasting tonics, trying to save me from her early death.  And I felt as if I was Octavia reincarnated, but I finally grew out of that.  But the University of Kansas was putting the--their literary magazine was putting out an issue of literature by bla- African Americans.  And they invited me to submit something.  So I said, "Oh, Octavia graduated from there.  I can write a poem about her."  Well, the poem never got finished because it kept growing into a book, and in the process, I was given a grant to finish the book.  In the process, I took some of the grant money and went to Guthrie.  Now nobody was, in the family was living there.  I didn't expect anybody to know because the other children had, and my grandmother was dead; both my grandparents were.  I didn't expect anybody to know anybody in the family, but I had letters from four different addresses and some pictures that I took there, old family pictures.  And a lot of these letters were very revealing.  We've lost the art of letter writing.  But the letter--what they said about and to each other told me what their personalities were like.  Octavia and her sister, Ethel [Ethel Long Johnson], were very close emotionally, but they were not at all alike.  And in one of the poems that--based on a letter that my grandmother wrote to my, my, father when he was at Virginia Union University [Richmond, Virginia] getting his degree in theology, was about the fact that Ethel had married and moved to Brooklyn [New York].  And in this letter she didn't know how she--I'm sure she had no idea how she--how the contrast in these girls was brought out.  She said, "I, I will miss Ethel more than anyone because she has been through--been my best friend through all my tribulations, never giving harsh--giving me harsh words to treat me--to, to grieve me."  Then she talked about other things.  And then at the end she said, "Write to Octavia often; advise her to go to Sunday school and, and church;" and cautioned her about her harsh and cruel words--"her temper and her harsh and cruel words, but don't let on I said anything to you."  So, there was all this contrast, which gave me ideas for the poems.  And I brought out the personalities as they were revealed to me in, in letters and in, in photographs.  So I e- but when I went to Guthrie, I went--I found two of the houses still standing, one boarded up and probably torn down now, near Cotton- between Cottonwood Creek and the railroad.  And, and I can't tell you what an emotional experience it was to find that house.  But anyhow, as I was coming out of this from the backyard, a man was coming out of the only occupied house in the house and looking at me strangely: who's this stranger?  It's a very small place.  And I told him who I was and what I wanted.  He said, "Follow me up the street.  You need to talk to Frank Smith."  So we went up and to about two blocks up the hill.  And the woman sitting on the porch said. "I can't help you, but, but my husband can."  While we were waiting for him to come out, I said, my par- grandparents' names were and Octavia.  She said, "Octavia Long, she was my high school English teacher."
Story_ID: 509561
Speaker 1: I thought she was mistaken because my father had always said that Octavia [Octavia Long] taught fifth grade.  But then I realized that when the first high school for blacks was built, he had been long gone from Guthrie [Oklahoma], so that would not would have stuck in his mind the way the, the fifth grade teaching would have.  The first high school was built in 1912.  And she, after her sister [Ethel Long Johnson] got married, she went to Washington [D.C.] for a short time, got married, and that didn't last, for unknown reasons.  And she came back to Guthrie to teach at the first--to Faver High School [Guthrie, Oklahoma], the first black high school.  But so, I thought the lady was mistaken, but then across the street was another lady on a walker, and she was all--had also been taught high school English by Octavia.  And then we went around the corner and visited a lady in her--she was ninety-five years old.  And oh, she was so sharp.  She was smoking a thin brown cigarette.  Her nails were painted bright red.  And they said she walked on the highest heels in town.  And she said, "I knew the whole Long family.  Marcellus [Clarence Long, Sr.] tried to go with me, but I was too young for him."  And I said, "Marcellus was my father."  She said, "I ought to cook you a chicken dinner."  So we exchanged pictures and whatnot.  But when I went back to read from the book the next year at the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas], she had died.  And, and there were, there were several other ladies who had been taught by Octavia, so I knew they were right.  and I didn't think--I, I thought I was--I didn't really intend to--didn't think I was gonna find out much, but I wanted to get a feeling for what the city was like, very small city.  And I just, you know, I, I was right in the process of writing a poem about Octavia walking to school and the weather and the street.  I said I don't know anything about the weather or what the streets looked like, so I went to Guthrie.  And I never would have been able to describe it accurately if I hadn't gone there.  But to meet all of these people who had known her, was just miraculous.  And then I went to the Oklahoma Territorial Museum [Guthrie, Oklahoma] because when they lived there it was not a state yet.  And the curator said well, we don't have much information on early black families.  And he wanted to take some of the pictures that I have--had with me of my grandmother [Sallie Mumphord Long] and her first grade class in 1900 to make copies.  I said no, I'll make a copy and send you, 'cause that was the only one I had.  And he said but we can go in this room and see what we can find out.  So an Indian [Native American] woman was working in there, and they pulled down a couple of dusty ledgers.  And here was "F.C. Long [Frank Long], colored, principal, Lincoln School [Guthrie, Oklahoma], 1900," and there was other information about the family.  But that was evidently the only year that he taught there.  And, and then the house, the old house I found by the creek [Cottonwood Creek], I was--it didn't have a number on it.  But there was another house similar to it across the street with 707 on it, and it was abandoned, and I said well, that must be 708, but I wasn't sure until I saw this ledger and saw the diagram of the house.  I said that's it.
Speaker 2: Right.  Okay, so that gave you the basis to be able to write all of those--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --those poems about Octavia.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 509562
Speaker 1: You said you worked at the--until 1984.  But--
Speaker 2: No, I taught (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(Simultaneous) we, we have to go--
Speaker 2: I taught until--
Speaker 1: Taught, taught school.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But Lotus Press [Broadside Lotus Press, Detroit, Michigan] was started in 1972.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So let's talk about Lotus Press.
Speaker 2: Okay, I was trying--'Pink Ladies in the Afternoon' ['Pink Ladies in the Afternoon: New Poems, 1965-1971,' Naomi Long Madgett] was ready for publication, and I couldn't find a publisher for it because it wasn't the kind of poetry of rage that was being written at that time by black poets.  And white you'd all--black poets have always had a problem with white editors because either you're not black enough, or you're not universal enough, or you're too political, you know, and that sort of thing.  So, but even the, the black editors were hesitant about publishing it because they didn't think it would sell.
Speaker 1: What was 'Pink Ladies in the Afternoon'?
Speaker 2: It was about aging.  I sit pink, "Pink Ladies in the Afternoon" and wonder where my best friend went.  It, it was about--well, that was the title poem, "Pink Ladies in the Afternoon."  But it, it was about a number of things, but it was not racial, and it certainly was not about rage--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --not at a time when people were: "Nigger / Can you kill / Can you kill / Can you kill," ["The True Import of Present Dialogue, Black vs. Negro (For Peppe, Who Will Ultimately Judge Our Efforts)," Nikki Giovanni].  And even the poets who have survived changed their style completely and their subject matter after that period, but I wasn't writing like that.  So I was getting very discouraged, and Harlo Press, which published 'Star By Star' [Naomi Long Madgett], had stopped publishing, and it was, it was just being a printer.  And I didn't really want to do it myself, but--and self-publishing hadn't really caught on at that time.  So I was talking to some friends of mine who were always interested in my work, and they said that they would put up the money for it if I would do the legwork.  So I came up with the, with the name Lotus Press, and I was thinking about the lotus of the Nile [Nile River], not the oriental, and there's a story about that.  When I went to Egypt a few years ago, I was expecting to find the lotuses in the Nile, and they're not there anymore, but I said I'm not going back home without a lotus.  So the only place I could find them was outside--in Cairo [Egypt], outside of the antiquity--museum of antiquities [Egyptian Museum, Cairo, Egypt].  And they have a pond there with papyrus at one end and lotuses at the other.  So after we had gone through the museum and had about a half hour to ourselves, I sat on the edge of the pool, and I pulled up my (laughter), my lotus and brought it back home and laminated it because it changed colors and closed up as soon as I put it in my purse, but I still have it.  But anyhow, that was what happened.  And I thought they were going to do more with the book in promoting it.  But I guess they figured that after they had put up the money, that was all their--they needed to do.  So my husband and I paid them a minimal amount for the stock, and we took it over.
Story_ID: 509563
Speaker 1: And I didn't really expect to be a real publisher [at Lotus Press; Broadside Lotus Press, Detroit, Michigan], but I, when I was teaching in high school and during that period when, when so much black poetry was alike, and I was introducing black poetry into the classroom, one white teacher said, "If you've read one of them, you've read them all."  So, I knew better.  So I had bought a Gestetner duplicator, which printed in color.  You put tubes of ink in it.  And that was before computers, of course, especially color printers.  And so I, I paid ten or was it twenty living--I think it was ten living authors, black author--poets to let me reproduce on cardstock, eight and a half by eleven, poems that showed the va- the variety in, in black poetry.  And also, because I knew a lot of English teachers are required to teach poetry, but they don't really love it, and they don't know what to do with it, I wrote a teacher's guide to go with it.  And rather than to insult them, I said, "I know you have found your own successful way of introducing a unit, uni- unit of poetry into the classroom, but here is an alternative."  And I had a study quest- discussion questions for each one of the poems, and then a method of getting into, and some related activities that they could do.  So that was the second thing I did.  Then when, when I was at Eastern Michigan [Eastern Michigan University, Ypsilanti, Michigan], there was a black student who was bringing me her poetry, and I would sit there and critique it for her.  And then she would rewrite it, and after a while, she was getting really good.  And I said, I've got this Gestetner duplicator.  I could, I could do a little chapbook of her poems to encourage her; didn't know what I was doing.  I--it was gonna be folded, eight and half eleven folded and stapled in the middle, saddle stitched.  I didn't realize that the pages did not follow consecutively, the page numbers.  So after printing up all of this, all of this paper, and collating it, the pages were all wrong.  So then I had to make a, a dummy copy, number the pages, take them apart, and see which page fa- faced which other page, because only the two middle pages were consecutive.  So I had to do it all over.  And oh, it was the most terrible looking mammy made book you ever saw in your life, trying to use all these colors (laughter).  But I was so proud of myself, and she was; she was very proud of it.
Speaker 2: Who, who was the poet?
Speaker 1: Her name, her birth name is Pamela Cobb, but she has changed it to Baraka Sele, and she later asked me if I would be her godmother, so we stay in close touch.  She's the director of a performing arts center in New Jersey [New Jersey Performing Arts Center, Newark, New Jersey] now.
Story_ID: 509564
Speaker 1: Then I went to a poetry festival.  I was participating in a poetry festival in, at Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College] in Baton Rouge [Louisiana].  And I met, met May Miller, who was the daughter of Kelly Miller, who used to be the dean at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  She was elderly, but we just hit it off, and she had, she had written plays during the Harlem Renaissance, and then she turned to poetry.  And she had had some po- chapbooks of poetry published.  So I decided I wanted to publish her next book of poetry, and altogether I put--I published three of her books and then, softcover, and then her collected poems in hardcover.  And she called, and she said, "I never thought I'd live to see the day that I could hold this book in my hand."  She was in her nineties then, and that's what it's all about.  That, that's what rewards me for all of the work I've put into Lotus Press [Broadside Lotus Press, Detroit, Michigan].  So it just kept going on and on from there, and people started sending me their poetry.  They heard about Lotus Press and started sending me their poetry, and if, if I liked it, I would publish it.  And I published Toi Derricotte's first book, and she's famous now, but she said she wanted her--I had done most of the books up to then, up to that point on a typewriter that printed proportional letters.  And she said she really wanted hers typeset.  So I found a man who worked by himself locally, and he was very good and made very few mistakes.  So he would--and he knew I was gonna pay him as soon as the job was finished because that's how we stayed out of--stayed in existence.  We don't owe anybody anything.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) money.
Speaker 1: So, I would cut the, the pages, galley proofs into page size so I could handle them.  And then I would--whatever mistakes I found, I'd sit there and wait until he cut, cut in the, the correction.  And then I would paste them up by hand, even pasting up the page numbers.  I had a--I still have the light box, and I used graph paper that the blue lines didn't show and a photo blue pencil that doesn't show when it's reproduced.  And I was, you know, just putting them together by hand.  And well, I had, I had--by the time of Toi Derricotte's, we were having them commercially bound.  But for a while, I was doing, doing them, collating them, stapling them, trimming them by hand.  And I got so good, instead of folding the paper in half, I would cut it in half, stack the front part on top of the other, use a heavy duty stapler, staple it on the outside, and then take the cover paper with a razor and cut--score it so that it would fold easily but not cut through, and fold it over.  And it looked like a perfect bound book with a spine.  But anyhow, after, after I started doing--after I did tear--Toi Derricotte's book, then I always had it typeset.  And then when we got a contribution big enough for me to buy a computer, I was in seventh heaven, and then when I got a laser printer, that was, that was all I needed to do it myself.  So I get the books camera ready for the printer now.  And so many of the poets that we publish have, you know, have their work on computers, and they can send me to disks so that it doesn't have to be retyped, although James Emanuel uses a typewriter.  And when we did his last book of almost four hundred pages, I had to get somebody to type all of that.  And the last book that we publish, who was--which is by a poet who was ninety years old, she doesn't use a computer either, so we had to do the same thing.  But it's usually not that hard.
Story_ID: 509565
Speaker 1: So, how many employees at Lotus Press [Broadside Lotus Press, Detroit, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Employees (laughter) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Are you the only employee?
Speaker 2: I am not an employee because I am not paid anything (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, for the first few years I contributed three to five thousand dollars of my own money to keep the press going because poetry doesn't sell.  And one, one editor told me we had to stop publishing poetry, because it doesn't sell.  I said, "That's why somebody has to do it, even if it's at a sacrifice, even if it doesn't sell that well."  So we don't get a lot of copies of a book printed.  If it, if it should happen to go into a second printing, it's more expensive, but so few of them sell out.  So, even the best sellers usually don't sell out.  But 'Adam of Ife: Black Women in Praise of Black Men' [ed. Naomi Long Madgett] the anthology that I edited, that did sell out and went into a second printing.  But--
Speaker 1: Do you print anything other than poetry?
Speaker 2: No, the only other thing I, I did was my autobiography ['Pilgrim Journey,' Naomi Long Madgett], and the reason--I didn't want to do that.  But I sent a proposal and sample chapters to an editor whose family I know.  It took her six months to tell me that they didn't publish autobiographies.  Then I approached a literary agent, with whom I had served on a, a panel in New York some years ago, and I asked her if--when I finish this book would you be interested in looking at it.  And she said, "Oh yes, I would 'cause I, I've always admired your work."  So I sent her sample chapters.  And she said, "I love what I see; send the rest of it, but it'll be about ten to twelve weeks before I can get to it."  Well, that was understandable.  The weeks passed, and I didn't hear anything from her.  I emailed her, and she apologized for the delay.  And she said, "I'll be looking at it within the next three weeks, and I'll get back to you then."  Three weeks became six, became twelve, and continued to multiply, and then when I emailed her again, she said she thought the university press would be the best way to go, and she had eight of them in mind.  And I said, you know, this could take ten years, and there would be no guarantee that any of them would take it, because I'm not famous, and most people buy autobiographies of famous people even if they had somebody else ghost write them.  So I said I can do this myself.  I had it out in three months, and I am so glad.  Wayne State University [Wayne State University Press, Detroit, Michigan] wouldn't publish it because they said it was too long.  I said, "But I'm eighty-three years old, and there's nothing I'm willing to cut out of my life for the sake of saving them expenses."  So there are almost five hundred pages with fifty pictures.  So I had complete control over the way the book looks, and its size, and it's, it's doing very well.  I am so glad that I did it myself.  But that is the exception; I would not consider doing anything else that's prose.
Story_ID: 509566
Speaker 1: So now in, was it 2001 that you become poet laureate?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that experience.
Speaker 2: Dudley Randall was the first poet laureate of, of Detroit [Michigan], and Coleman Young appointed him many, many years ago, even though as he became older and had some mental problems and other sickness he was not active at all.  He still had the title.  And then I can't--he was poet laureate for so long, I don't remember how long it was, but he died in 2000.  And in 2001, then-mayor, Dennis Archer, then-mayor, Dennis Archer, appointed me poet laureate, and there--it's just an honorary title.  The only thing that he wanted me to do was to write a tricentennial [tercentennial] poem for the City of Detroit, to be sealed in a type--time capsule and opened in a hundred years.  So I said, "Well, if I don't read it, nobody will, living, will ever hear it," you know.  So I asked him if I could read it at the ceremony, and he, he let me read it.  And I watched it sealed in the time capsule.  And it has, it, it, it's, the honor has helped.  You know, the, the fact that I have that title has made me more important to some people.  And I say I'm the same poet that I was all the time, you know. But she's the poet laureate of Detroit (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 509567
Speaker 1: Do you know any of the other poet laureates of different states?
Speaker 2: Of states--Gwendolyn Brooks was the poet laureate of Illinois.  I don't know--
Speaker 1: Did you know her?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, very well.
Speaker 1: Did you?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  We, we got to be very good friends, and I have a lot of notes that she sent to me; at least they're at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] now.
Speaker 1: What about Rita Dove [HistoryMaker Rita Frances Dove]?
Speaker 2: Rita Dove was the first official poet laureate of the United States, but before that, there was a li- Library of Congress poetry consultant, which really was the same thing.  And Robert Hayden was the poet laureate, was the--I don't know if he, he--he might have been the last one.  I'm, I, I don't think he was.  I think there was another one before we established a, a national poet laureate, but while he was there, he had me record at the Library of Congress [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: This, so this was back in the '70s [1970s]?  Because he was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was in the--
Speaker 1: --poet in '76 [1976]--
Speaker 2: It was, it was in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: --through '78 [1978].
Speaker 2: Yeah, because my brother [Clarence Long, Jr.] died in seventy--'78 [1978], and that was the year that I was going back and forth to Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And during one of those visits he had me read--record at the Library of Congress.  And--
Speaker 1: Do you--
Speaker 2: But one of our authors who has--and, and I'm happy to see--because Lotus Press [Broadside Lotus Press, Detroit, Michigan] is small, and we don't have much money.  We're a nonprofit 501(c) (3) organization, and we exist on, to some degree, on book sales but also on grants and, and individual contributions.  One of our authors, Pinkie Gordon Lane, was for a while the poet laureate of Louisiana.  She didn't become that.  She had written, published other books, but it was not until we published her book that she became the poet laureate.  And another one of our poets, Dolores Kendrick, is the poet laureate of Washington, D.C.  And it seems to me that Eugene Redmond [Eugene B. Redmond] is the poet laureate of East St. Louis, Illinois.  Governor Eng- Engler [John Engler] did not want a poet laureate of the state, so there are several cities in Detroit [Michigan] that have city poet laureate--poets laureate.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When, when--after I was appointed poet laureate and the mayor [Dennis Archer] gave me a reception at his riverfront estate, which the city owns, I had always thought it was silly for people to have vanity license plates.  I said, "Why not?"  So my license plates says Poet One (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you know of Quincy Thorpe?
Speaker 2: Quincy Troupe.
Speaker 1: Troupe, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: --I know, I know him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 509568
Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you, you talked about [HistoryMaker] Pearl Cleage, some of the younger female poets.  Have you read or do you enjoy reading any of their poetry?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think Pearl is an excellent writer.  She, she always was, and Melba Boyd is a good poet; she's here in Detroit [Michigan].  And, and I, I think some of the winners of the Naomi Long Madgett Poetry Award are better poets than I am.
Speaker 1: And when, when was that established?
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-three [1993], and I established that to celebrate my seventieth birthday (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Birthday.  Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: So, the re- the--I don't, I don't normally serve as a judge.  We have had really outstanding poets, some of them Pulitzer Prize winners who contribute their time to serve as judges, and I think some of the poets are, are better poets than I am, and I don't hesitate to say that.  I, I, I am mature enough and realistic enough to know what my limitations are.  And I don't think I measure up to the best contemporary poetry that's being written.  I think my poetry is good, and I am pleased that so many people relate to it.  I'm not a hack poet, and my poetry is not that easy to understand.  It's not, it's not really accessible or inspirational poetry or anything of that sort, but so many people relate to it.  And, and, and that--and, and I am very happy to have some of the younger poets refer to me as an elder, because they look up to me.  And, and many of them say that I taught them a great deal--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I had an influence on their lives.
Story_ID: 509569
Speaker 1: Off camera we were talking about the, the spoken word.  And you were talking about literary poetry and that the spoken word might border on entertainment.
Speaker 2: I'm not saying that one is, is any better than the other, but they are different genres.  The spoken word or performance poetry is very popular now, but so much of it depends upon the author's performance of it, and a lot of it--some of it stands up well on the printed page, but some of it doesn't because the poet is not there reading it.  And literary poetry, on the other hand, you don't have the poet.  If you go to a poetry reading, of course, you have the privilege of hearing the, the, the, the poet's own interpretation as he or she reads.  But most of the time when you buy a book of poetry, you don't hear the poet's voice, and it has to stand on its own two feet on the printed page.  Now it's open to interpretation, but you don't have the voice there.  So, there, there is a difference.  And, and I'm not going to knock it down and say that it isn't any good.  But, but Lotus Press [Broadside Lotus Press, Detroit, Michigan] publishes literary poetry, and that has been my choice because I was brought up on literary poetry.
Story_ID: 509570
Speaker 1: What do you hope to accomplish in the next couple of years?
Speaker 2: I hope to get another book out--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --a book of poetry out.
Speaker 1: Are you gonna use the hundred poems that you're writing now?
Speaker 2: I--probably not all of them, but I'm going to do some--I have been, here within the last month I've been writing a poem a day.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And as I copy them, I'm revising; I'm constantly revising them.  And some of them I, I'm satisfied with just as they are, but some of them I know need more work, and some of them I look at as just exercises because I didn't really feel them.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: They're more intellectual than any--they--if I don't feel a poem, I don't, I don't really--even though it may meet--be my own poem, I don't really like it very much.  So, maybe I'm trying--it's very difficult to find something to write about every day, but I have managed so far, and it's been over a month now.  And so maybe if I can manage to do a hundred, then I won't hold myself to that obligation anymore, and maybe from that hundred poems there would be enough, with revisions, to, to get out another book.  But I don't know how they would relate to each other because--well, I see some of them falling into certain categories already.  About three of them are about the difficulties of writing a poem (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 509571
Speaker 1: Do you belong to many organizations?
Speaker 2: I'm not much of a joiner.  I am a golden soror of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority.  I was initiated in 1942 at Virginia State [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia].  And I belong to the Fred Hart Williams Genealogical Society [Detroit, Michigan], which is a black organization, and I am interested in, in, you know, trying to find time to do more research on my family history, especially on my mother's [Maude Hilton Long] side.  I was an early member of what was then called Detroit Women Writers, and that was an interesting experience because I integrated the group.  Most of them were suburbanites, even though they, they were--we met at the Detroit Public Library [Detroit, Michigan], and I was on a fellowship at Oakland University [Rochester, Michigan] and met one of the members.  And even be--and they're now called Detroit Working Writers because they have a couple of men in the group now, but they put on a two day literary workshop every year, and I, I was invited to, to do a couple of the workshops before I became a member.  So this woman was talking to me and about something, and she said, "Well, you know, you're a member of DWW."  I said, "No, I'm not."  And she looked very strange, and she said, "Well, I know they're gonna ask you to join, and they don't normally ask people to join."  But I, I just forgot about it.  Then something came out in the paper.  At that time, they were meet--had been meeting at the Women's City Club downtown [Detroit, Michigan], which did not permit black people in the building.  And because they wanted me, they stopped meeting there and started meeting at the Detroit Public Library, and it was after that they, that they asked me to join.  But, the governor's wife at that time was a member of the Detroit city club.  And she insisted that they take a vote to see if they wanted to change that policy.  And they voted to keep the policy, so she resigned.  And when that came out in the free paper--pre- Free Press [Detroit Free Press], I said that's about me, and I always knew it was.  But the members of the Detroit Women Writers decided that they would not lay that burden on me, so they wouldn't tell me, but one of the members eventually did.  And I said I knew it all the time.
Speaker 1: Time, right.  And any other organizations (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I belong to Plymouth United Church of Christ [Detroit, Michigan], which is congregational, but I'm really Baptist (laughter).  But I don't really see that much difference in the denominations.  Eve--we have even gone to--my church has even gone to, to doing baptisms by immersion in the Detroit River for those who wanted to be baptized that way.  That was one of the differences in the denominations.  They just sprinkled children whereas in the Baptist church, we didn't--we were prayed for, and, and then you were baptized by immersion.  My father [Clarence Long, Sr.] baptized me in the pool underneath the pulpit at, at church and almost drowned me (laughter).  He told other children--I was eight years old--and he told other children to hold their noses, and I guess he figured I knew it.  And I didn't, and I came up coughing (laughter).
Story_ID: 509572
Speaker 1: Is there anything that we have not spoken about that you'd like to talk about?
Speaker 2: Did we mention the University of Michigan Special Collections Library [Ann Arbor, Michigan]?
Speaker 1: No, we have not.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I think it was five years ago I--the Special Collections Library at the University of Michigan purchased the Naomi Long Madgett, Lotus Press papers.  And I had already donated some of my papers to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee], but they don't have the staff or the money now to take proper care of them, so I stopped sending them things some years ago, and some of the originals are still there.  And the director at University of Michigan did not want me to take material from there to give to them, but they would accept copies of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So when I was in Nashville [Tennessee] a few years ago to a convention, I spent an afternoon pulling out some of the things, and I borrowed them and made copies of them, including a notebook in which--of, of my poems in which Langston Hughes had written some comments, and sent the originals back to Fisk.  But the last box of things that I sent them, I sent them some, about three journals that were sealed, and I didn't want them opened until a certain year when everybody involved would be dead.  They don't have any record of ever having gotten them, but they just throw things into, into folders, and there's no organization.  And a letter that Countee Cullen wrote me in 1944--I think it was '44 [1944]--they took his letter out of the envelope and have the envelope filed separately.  And I don't know why, because it shows who--where he was living; it has the date on it; the postmark; and it also shows where I was living at the time.  So I don't know, I don't know what that's all about.  But they just don't--I, I think they have one person working there, and she may be part time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They just don't have the--but I, I was very happy to, to have them ask me because--and to combine Lotus Press [Broadside Lotus Press, Detroit, Michigan] and, and my papers because Lotus Press and I are inseparable.  As I--you asked me once before how many employees we had.  I work virtually alone.  I do have occasional volunteers, but we are unable--we don't have the money to pay anybody.  And I am really very much concerned about what's going to happen to Lotus Press when I am no longer on the scene, and I don't, I don't, I don't have an answer for it.  It may go out of business, but I hope some publisher will take on the existing stock so that, that it can still be available.  But I'd, I really do want the Naomi Long Madgett Poetry Award to continue.  And the winner receives five hundred dollars, and we publish the book.  And at first I was taking the five hundred dollars out of my own savings.  And I said well, I can't--there's no point in doing this forever, so I sold some stock I had, so that--hoping that the interest on the stock would, would sustain the five hundred dollars, but if necessary and the money is no longer available for that, then at least I hope they will at least publish--well, I don't know who would publish it.  I just don't know what the story is.
Story_ID: 509573
Speaker 1: When you look back over your life, would there be any one thing that you would change?
Speaker 2: Oh, I would change a lot (laughter) of things.  There are, there are some--regret is futile, I know, but I have, I have learned from mistakes.  I think I'm a wiser person now than I used to be because of the mistakes.  My values have changed, and I, I am at peace with myself.  I have found compensations in all the ages I have been, and I don't wish to be any younger than I am now.  I hope I can continue to live and to work.  But work is my life.  I don't know what I would do if I didn't--I'd have to invent work.  If I didn't have Lotus Press [Broadside Lotus Press, Detroit, Michigan], I would have to invent something to do.  I don't know how people can just sit around and watch television all day and play bridge and--well, I shouldn't talk about (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: I shouldn't--
Speaker 1: --well--
Speaker 2: --I shouldn't invoke, you know, impose my values on other people.
Speaker 1: Well, is there something that you would like to do that you have not done yet?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd like to have won some major prizes (laughter), but I know I'm not going to.  So, what has happened, has happened, and I'm grateful for that.  I have had a very fortunate life, the greatest parents [Maude Hilton Long and Clarence Long, Sr.] in the world, good brothers [Clarence Long, Jr. and Wilbur Long].  My mother would take the shirt--she would go hungry before she let us go hungry, not that we had to.  My father was the most, most wonderful father in the world.  They came here to this house to live with me in their old age.  And I hadn't married for the third time yet.  And I re- have a vivid picture of him walking into the living room, taking off his hat and saying: "Here I raise my Ebenezer," from the hymn ['Come, Thou Fount of Every Blessing'], which goes back to the Bible.
Story_ID: 509574
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I hope that some of my poems will survive and continue to have meaning for people.  I regret that 'Midway' [Naomi Long Madgett], which is my most popular poem, is not one of my best poems.  And I wish--and, and I also wish that anthologists would go to original sources instead of reprinting the same forty year old poems over and over and over again.  My poems have been included in a number of journals and close to 190 anthologies here and abroad.  And some have been translated into foreign languages.  In fact, the last one was a book published in Slovenia, and without--only one thing is English, and that is the acknowledgements in the back.  And that was the only way that I could identify my five poems (laughter), because I, I can't read that language.  But I--because I think my poems are important when people want to reprint them.  That tells me that they have meaning for somebody, and a lot of them are in textbooks on different levels.  So, I, I, I don't regret that I have not been more--well, in a sense I do.  But Browning, Robert Browning, who is my, one of my favorite poets, said, "Ah, but a man's reach should exceed his grasps, or what's a heaven for?" ['Andrea del Sarto,' Robert Browning].  So I have a, a chapter in my autobiography ['Pilgrim Journey,' Naomi Long Madgett] "Reach and Grasp."  You're not supposed to accomplish all that you want to in this life.  But as I--you know, when I taught at Northwestern High School [Detroit, Michigan], whose student body was almost a hundred percent black, some of the white teachers didn't expect much of their students, "Oh, well, you can't expect these kids to do so and so and so."  And so they didn't, didn't expect much of them and accepted whatever they did.  And I said, "If you set your goals up here (gesture), not everybody is going to come that high, but they will come closer than if you set them down here."  And I said, "I will accept nothing but your best," and most of the students that I failed did not fail because they couldn't do the work but because they didn't.
Story_ID: 509575
Speaker 1: Because your information is going to be available for future generations, what message do you want to send to the future generations?
Speaker 2: I would like parents to get back to values.  Life has changed so much and has be- and, and it's not our fault, but technology has changed our lives so much that families don't sit down and eat dinner together.  Everybody watches television.  They don't have conversations with each other.  They don't write letters; they email.  And that's beyond our control now, but I would like parents to teach children values, integrity.  And some of--that is supposed to come from the home.  But because it doesn't always come from the home, as a teacher, I was doing some of the things that some of the parents should have been doing, teaching values, and integrity, and explaining why it was not right and not acceptable to cheat, to be honest, to do what you say you're going to do, to put things that you borrowed back where they belong (laughter).  These--I'm, I'm just really funny about that, and it, it, it's, it all starts in the home.  But I have heard--it, it really irks me to be in a supermarket and to hear a mother curse at her child or to hear a woman out-curse a man.  That shows she doesn't have any respect for herself.  So why would anybody else respect her?  I would like ladies to be ladies.  Now, I believe in equal rights.  I think women should get equal pay for equal work, but I enjoy being a woman, too.  I like for a man to hold the door for me.  I like to be considered not just a woman, but a lady.  I, I want to ha- I want to be a dignified person.  I want people to look at me and say, "I want to be like her."  And that has happened in so many cases.  There--when I was teaching at a high, at the, in high school, there was a one, one woman scholarship committee, who tried to find scholarships for the right people that she thought were the right ones for those particular scholarships.  And she called one girl in her office and was offering her a scholarship to some college or university.  And she said, "I don't know about that, but where did Ms. Madgett [HistoryMaker Naomi Long Madgett] go to college?"  And the, and the teacher told me that.  She wanted to be like me, and I, I, I'm always running into Northwestern [Northwestern High School, Detroit, Michigan] former students.  And I--just about three weeks ago, someone said, "I went into teaching English because of you."  So I would like to be an inspiration.  I would like to lift people up and not drag them down.  You know, I would like--I'm not, I'm not going to speak incorrect English for everybody else's approval because they speak that way.  They're gonna have to come up to my level.  I'm not coming down to theirs, and maybe when they hear me speak good English, they will aspire to do the same thing.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I don't know if I answered your question or not (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You did.
Story_ID: 509576
Speaker 1: Well, one last question.  You told me what you would like to, you would like to inspire people.  But when it's all said and done, what do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: That I tried to help somebody, and I did it in my own way. What is that song ['If I Can Help Somebody']?  "If I can help somebody along this way, my living will not be in vain."
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, I want to thank you from The HistoryMakers for taking the time to share your story with us and the future generations.
Speaker 2: Well, I enjoyed talking to you, and I hope something that I said will be of value to others.
Story_ID: 509577
Speaker 1: That is my maternal grandfather and grandfather [sic.], Sidney Ham Hilton [Sidney Hilton] and Mary Adelaide Hilton [Mary Saunders Hilton], from Richmond, Virginia.
Speaker 2: That is my Grandmother Hilton again, by herself.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right, next.
Speaker 2: That is my first studio picture.  I think I was about four or five years old.  And if you'll notice, I'm wearing cotton-ribbed stockings, and high-top shoes, and a big bow on my top braid.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That was taken at Virginia State College [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], it was then.  And I see a part of my AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority] pin, so it must have been around '42 [1942].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Hold it there. Okay.
Speaker 2: I am not sure when that was taken, but I'm thinking it might have been taken around 1956.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm not sure when that was taken either.  It was later than the last one but maybe in the early '60s [1960s].  I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: That--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMEA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMEA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That is my father and his siblings as children.  On the left standing is Octavia Long Johnson [sic. Ethel Long Johnson].  Beside her is Octavia Cornelia Long [Octavia Long], the eldest.  The next one is the baby in the family, Robert Elliot Long [Robert Long].  And to Octavia's right is my father, Clarence Marcellus Long, Sr. [Clarence Long, Sr.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a picture of a life size bronze bust of me that was created by [HistoryMaker] Artis Lane and is now a part of the Charles Wright Museum of African American History [Charles H. Wright Museum of African American History, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: These are my parent--my father's mother and father, Sallie E.K. Mumphord Long [Sallie Mumphord Long], who was part Cherokee Indian [Native American] and my grandfather Frank Cornelius Long [Frank Long], who made history that has not appeared in the history books.  He was a very accomplished gentleman.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good. Next.
Speaker 1: This was taken in St. Louis [Missouri] between the years of 1939 and 1941.  Seated in front, I am on the left.  My mother, Maude Hilton Long, is in the center.  And my aunt, Ethel Long Johnson, is on the right.  Standing on the left is her youngest son, William Johnson [ph.], my Uncle Robert Elliot Long, Aunt Octavia--Aunt Ethel's husband, William Johnson [ph.], and my, father Clarence Marcellus Long, Sr.
Speaker 2: That is a picture of my last husband of twenty-four years, taken in California at, outside a restaurant on a pier.  His name was Leonard Patton Andrews [Leonard Andrews].  And that was taken, I would think, in the mid-'70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That is a fairly recent picture taken in this room of my daughter, Jill Witherspoon Boyer.
Speaker 1: That's a fairly recent picture of my granddaughter, Liliana Malaika Boyer [Liliana Boyer].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: That is a picture of my mother and father on their fiftieth wedding anniversary in New Rochelle, New York.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This, this is a picture of my mother, Maude Selena Hilton Long, about the time that she and my father got married in 1913.
Speaker 2: And this is a picture of my father, Clarence Marcellus Long, Sr., about the same time that they got married in 1913.
Speaker 1: All right, these pictures were taken of the entire family following my father and mother's fiftieth anniversary celebration.  On the left standing is the elder of my two brothers, Clarence, Jr. [Clarence Long, Jr.], from Washington, D.C.  On his right, my sister-in-law, Laverne Sansbury Long [ph.], behi- to her right, my father, and then my mother, then my brother, Wilbur Franklin Long [Wilbur Long] and his wife, Katie Butler Long, and my daughter Jill Witherspoon at that time, Jill Annette Witherspoon, and I am on the extreme right.  The children, the three children on the left front are the children of Clarence and Laverne, Clarence Marcellus Long III [Clarence Long III], Cheryl Long, who is a federal judge in Washington, D.C., now, Patricia Long Tucker.  And then the two other children are the children of Wilbur and Katie Long.  The first one is Kara--Kathy Etolya [ph.] Long [Kathy Long], and the second one is Karen Long Rowe.  And this was taken, what, in nineteen sixty--
Speaker 2: Sixty-three [1963].
Speaker 1: --sixty-three [1963].
