Story_ID: 228300
Speaker 1: My name is Regennia Williams, and I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers, an African American oral history project based in Chicago, Illinois.  The project was launched in 1999 by Julieanna Richardson, who has an interesting and wonderful background.  She's Harvard [Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]-trained attorney who also loves history and theater.  And so there are a number of categories of HistoryMakers that the program representatives interview all across the country.  And Northeast Ohio is one of the areas that we've designated beginning in 2004 and 2005 to identify more HistoryMakers.  So we're very grateful for the time that you've set aside to be with us this morning.
Speaker 2: Well, thanks for asking me.
Speaker 1: Well, I should say also that this is a grand and glorious and ambitious program.  So far about one thousand people have been interviewed.  The goal is to amass an archive that will contain five thousand interviews.  And so it's, again, a very important project, not the first time that oral history interviews have been taken or collected in a systematic way, but they're being collected in a way now that they be--will be made widely available to students and others who have an interest in American history, thanks to the technology that we have through the digital archive and the websites that are available anywhere in the world.  So, I want to begin the interview by asking if you would please state your name, first, middle, and last and spell all three for us.
Speaker 2: Jeffrey Carlton Mumford, J-E-F-F-R-E-Y, C-A-R-L-T-O-N, M-U-M-F-O-R-D.
Speaker 1: And [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Jeffrey] Mumford, would you state the name of the college where the interview is being conducted?
Speaker 2: Oberlin College [Oberlin, Ohio].
Speaker 1: And the location on the campus.
Speaker 2: Beautiful downtown Oberlin [Ohio] (laughter).
Speaker 1: And for the record, would you also state today's date?
Speaker 2: This is January 12th, nine--2005.
Story_ID: 228301
Speaker 1: We also like to, to ask a series of what we call People magazine-ish type questions. And the first one requires you to let us know what your favorite color is.
Speaker 2: I would say blue.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I'd say late spring, early summer.
Speaker 1: And how about a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: That's difficult.  I've been a lot of pla--wonderful places.  Would this have to be someplace that I have been or someplace I'd like to go, that I've never been?
Speaker 1: Well, it's up to you.  It's your story.
Speaker 2: Well, among places that I have been, I guess I'd like to say that Brussels, Belgium, was a wonderful place that I've been.  I loved it, a lot of wonderful experiences.  I had a summer there and seven weeks.  I had a bicycle.  I rode around to all of the places.  I just was one year shy of getting a European driver's license, so I had access of a bicycle, so I got in good shape that summer.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I suppose (laughter), expect fried chicken (laughter).  Is that too generic?  I don't know.
Speaker 1: And how about a favorite phrase or a saying, do you have one?
Speaker 2: There was a man in Washington, D.C., who had a radio program, named Ernest White.  The show was called 'Cross Talk.'  And lately the saying that he ended every show with, is one that I find very inspiring to me now, it's, "be encouraged."
Story_ID: 228302
Speaker 1: Now this first main section of the interview concentrates on your family background and your childhood.  Would you please tell me when and where you were born?
Speaker 2: I was born June 22nd, 1955, in Washington, D.C. at [The] George Washington University Hospital, 7:30 in the morning on Tuesday (laughter).
Speaker 1: And would you state your parents' names and also, if you would, spell them, and include your mother's maiden name if you know that?
Speaker 2: My mother is Sylvia Jefferson Mumford, S-Y-L-V-I-A, J-E-F-F-E-R-S-O-N, M-U-M-F-O-R-D.  My father is Thaddeus Quentin Mumford, T-H-A-D-D-E-U-S, Q-U-E-N-T-I-N, M-U-M-F-O-R-D (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not often asked to spell all of--
Speaker 1: Well, we thank you for sharing that with us also.  But do you know their birth dates?
Speaker 2: My mother was born April 20th, 1926, I believe.  My father was born February 14th, 1923.
Speaker 1: And were they both natives of the D.C. area, or did they--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: My father was born in Rockingham, North Carolina.  My mother was born in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: And do you know, or do you recall any stories that your father told about how his family came to live in Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: Well, he went, well, he, his mother raised him pretty much as a single mother.  His father left the scene early on.  I'm not quite sure of the circumstances of that.  He went to college early.  I think he went at the age of fifteen.  He is now a dentist.  He is still practicing.  He's eighty-one years old.  He came to Washington to study at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  Before that he was at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee].  And pretty much that's the story.  There's a lot of people who came from North Carolina up to D.C., the [Great] Migration--(unclear)--we talk about it.  And a number of his contemporaries also came from that area.  And the distinction that Rockingham--has for me is that it's right next to Hamlet [North Carolina], which is where John Coltrane is from (laughter).  Otherwise, I had no idea what Rockingham, wherever it was until I found that out and--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember your paternal grandparents' names?
Speaker 2: My paternal grandparents, no, except for Ruth Myrick.  It's my father's mother, but I don't, her, her father, his father I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how about--
Speaker 2: R-U-T-H, M-Y-R-I-C-K, Ruth Myrick, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 228303
Speaker 1: And how about your maternal grandparents, do you know their names?
Speaker 2: Yes, well, Joseph Jefferson, J-O-S-E-P-H, Jefferson, and Willa, Willa Jefferson, W-I-L-L-A, Jefferson.
Speaker 1: Now, is--
Speaker 2: He worked at the [U.S.] post office and--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, do you remember--
Speaker 2: He was a practical joker.  I remember that too.
Speaker 1: Oh my (laughter).
Speaker 2: A big practical joker.
Speaker 1: Now is there a story you want to tell about that grandfather?
Speaker 2: Oh, he just always had a mischievous expression on his face all the time, and he always, when I visited, would have this way he'd play with me, where he'd tickle me by starting out here and going boo-she, boo-she, boo-she, boo-she, boo-she, boo-she, gangbusters in my stomach.  And I'd always fall for it and always crack up.  And he was, he was the life of that family.  My, my grandmother, for whatever reason, was a very serious person.  Everybody, you know, has their own story, but I remember as a child wondering why she didn't smile very much.  My granddaddy always (laughter) had a joke, was always pulling your leg, you know, always telling stories.  And he would talk about, he'd have phrases for things like a baseball player had a batting average of 225.  And he'd say well, "He's batting two dollars and twenty-five cents," (laughter), and just always remembering him creating a nice environment in the house.  I'd spend the night over her house plenty of times, and she'd come and babysit me, my grandmother.  But I always remember going when I went over there for dinners and things, I remember my, my grandfather was the one who had more of a sense of humor, and I really appreciated that (laughter).
Speaker 1: I'm wondering did your mother [Sylvia Jefferson Mumford] share any special stories with you about her growing up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was always very close to her father too.  She always talked about how he was a delight in her life.  And she, my mother had passed away.  She passed away in 1982, so, we'll speak about her in the past tense.  She grew up as one of three children, Elaine [ph.], Joseph, and herself.  She was the middle child.  She was always very determined, very smart, very focused.  And I think there was at play some sense of trying to please my grandmother to the extent where they worked very hard at that, and that leaves its own legacy.  I don't mean for this to be an encounter session or, but children have their own path in life and their own social dynamics within their family.  And so my mother, it was very important to get the affection of her mother.
Story_ID: 228304
Speaker 1: Now, Washington, D.C. has an interesting history, especially when it comes to the history of the black middle class.  And when you talk about your father [Thaddeus Mumford] coming to D.C., transferring from Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] to study at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and, and some folks have called it, at least one of my favorite writers, Zora Neale Hurston, called that the black Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in America.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, sure.
Speaker 1: Would you say that your parents were mem- members of that black middle class--
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely.
Speaker 1: --in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: Sure, yeah, my mother [Sylvia Jefferson Mumford] was a teacher; my father was a dentist, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your mother also study--
Speaker 2: They were solidly the middle class.
Speaker 1: --in D.C.?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: Did your mother also study in D.C.?
Speaker 2: She studied at Miner Teachers College, which has now become the University of the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Do you remember their, their college graduation dates or roughly the era that they were in school?
Speaker 2: Well, I know that my father was in the [U.S.] Army in the late '40s [1940s], stud--stationed at Fort Meade [Maryland] as a dental officer.  He had the rank of captain.  So he would have had to graduate before that.  He didn't have to serve in the Korean War.  He would tell the story about his friends would always give him a little bit of ribbing about having to be in the Army at that time.  And then he said, "Just wait."  He said, "I'm doing my time now.  You're doing yours later," (laughter), and they did.  And he got out of the Korean War, and he never had to see any action unfortunately.  But my mother, well, we were always, we had a lot of conversations at home about what it was like to grow in their, in their time and the, the challenges that faced all of us as black people in this country period and, and in certainly in Washington as a segregated time.  And the legacy of, for us, as my brother and I, who is four years, five years older, my brother, Thad, Jr. [Thaddeus Mumford, Jr.], it was instilled in us very early the primacy of education and the fact that we would probably have to work three and four and five times harder than any white student ever did because she did, and society just expects that of you because, you know, you always have to prove yourself.  That has changed some, but still not enough, and the legacy still is that to gain credibility in certain marketplaces, you still do have to work three or four times harder and be the squeaky wheel.
Story_ID: 228305
Speaker 1: Can you tell me a little bit more about the [Miner] Teachers College [University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] that your mother [Sylvia Jefferson Mumford] attended?  I know you said it's become (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The University of--
Speaker 1: --a public university now.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But then was that a historically black college [HBCU]?  I guess that's--
Speaker 2: Well, I think it--
Speaker 1: --the main question--
Speaker 2: I mean it think at the time it was, yeah, it was a black teachers college.  And she taught second grade for many years at Charles [E.] Young [Elementary] School in [Washington] D.C. and then at John Burroughs [Elementary] School [Washington, D.C.].  And she was a very focused teacher.  I remember her many hours downstairs in the basement drawing up lesson plans.  And I remember having a ditto, my own ditto machine in our house 'cause we always get dittos at school as students.  And I thought how cool it was that my mother had her own ditto machine downstairs.  And when she would run off lesson assignments for kids, and I remember the smell of the (laughter) carbon paper.  She talked about teachers that he had, and particularly a Ms. Winston [ph.].  The principal of Charles Young School was very inspiring to her, to work for.  And she, I think she was a very important person in my mother's life--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in her early career.
Speaker 1: May I ask, and this may seem like a minor point, but because of the history of science and technology, some of the viewers, some of the students may not know what a ditto machine is.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: So, can (laughter) you just tell us what the machine does and--
Speaker 2: A ditto--
Speaker 1: --why a teacher would want to have one?
Speaker 2: A ditto machine predates Xerox machines.  It's a process where you have paper and carbon, which reproduces what is printed on it.  And there was a crank that you would crank these papers through this machine to run off copies, literally handmade copies of assignments for students.  It's a reprographic process.
Speaker 1: Now, are those the ones that would be in the blue ink or--
Speaker 2: Purple ink.
Speaker 1: Purple, oh, okay.
Speaker 2: I guess you had blue print--purple/blue too, but I remember it being purple more.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I just remember the smell, see.  When, as a student in, in elementary school you got a freshly dittoed, you could always--we (laughter)--smell.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you for that explanation.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Story_ID: 228306
Speaker 1: I'd like to continue the discussion about your childhood.  You said your mother [Sylvia Jefferson Mumford] was a second grade teacher in the public schools of [Washington] D.C. (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did she ever teach at your school?  What school did you attend?
Speaker 2: No, she didn't.  I went to Bunker Hill Elementary School [Washington, D.C.].  And I always wondered what it'd be like to have your mother as a teacher.  It's probably a mixed bag, but no, I never had the pleasure and opportunity to study with her.
Speaker 1: And your said Bunker Hill--
Speaker 2: Bunker Hill, yes.
Speaker 1: --Elementary School, okay.  And how many years--
Speaker 2: Through third grade, and then I went across town to another school, Phoebe Hearst [Elementary] School [Washington, D.C.], which is in Northwest D.C.  And the thinking there was that my, for whatever reason again, there was the east of the park [National Mall, Washington, D.C.] and there was the west of the park.  And the West of the park was where there were more affluent schools.  And my parents wanted me to have the opportunity of going to a more affluent school with as they presumed, and probably was, a higher standard of education.  So I went there for fourth, fifth, and sixth grade.
Speaker 1: And do you remember the name of the middle school that you attended?
Speaker 2: I went one year to Gordon Junior High School [Rose L. Hardy Middle School, Washington, D.C.].  And then until twelfth grade Sidwell Friends [School, Washington, D.C.].  It's a Quaker, private Quaker school in Washington [D.C.].
Story_ID: 228307
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Jeffrey] Mumford, would you describe yourself primarily as an educator, as a composer, musician, or just--your profession?
Speaker 2: Well, as you know, we all wear many hats.  I consider myself first and foremost an artist, a composer, a musician.  I teach.  But I think the fact of being an artist is primary to anything that I do, and my philosophy, and world view.  And I think that anything I offer my students only comes from my being who I am as an artist.
Speaker 1: I just wanted you to state that for the record because now I'd, I'd like to backtrack--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --and see where the inspiration came from for you to make that choice for a career.  Was it in the home or somewhere in the schools?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess the environment in my house was one that was very stimulating in terms of the world of the mind.  My mother [Sylvia Jefferson Mumford] was a very intelligent person and my father [Thaddeus Mumford] as well.  And my mother being a teacher, it was very important to us that we be exposed to lots of things at a very early age.  So we got, you know, we spent a lot of time at the National Gallery of Art [Washington, D.C.], listening to music, going for long drives, having long discussions about issues of the day.  At the dinner table--that was during the Vietnam War.  It was coming in your living room or your dining room, wherever you had dinner (laughter).  And at four o'clock--broadcasts are different now, but they came at four o'clock then--and so we would be eating.  My mother--my father, as a dentist, would have two shifts sometimes.  He would come home, have dinner, and then go back to work later in the evening.  So the dinner table was a, a time when we spoke a lot about what we were dealing with and what was--going on in the world.  And so I remember the speeches of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] era on television, scenes of the war.  When [President] John [Fitzgerald] Kennedy was shot I was in third grade [at Bunker Hill Elementary School, Washington, D.C.], and I remember wondering what was going on.  Why did I get let out of school early?  Why were my cartoons preempted by Walter Cronkite?  And then we went to see the case on--down the--you know, it was a very heavy occasion, but as a third, you know, third grader, you're not sure what's going on.  My mother made it very clear what was going on and how sad a legacy that was for us not only as human beings but as black people, because Kennedy was someone that we had a lot of hopes for, for the betterment of our situation.
Story_ID: 228308
Speaker 1: You said you also had a brother in the household (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I have a brother.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, and what is his--
Speaker 2: His name--
Speaker 1: --name please?
Speaker 2: Thaddeus Mumford, Jr.
Speaker 1: And he's an older brother?
Speaker 2: He's five years older, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did either--either of you serve in [the] Vietnam [War]?
Speaker 2: Thankfully not.  I, my number was high enough in the lottery that I didn't have to serve, although my mother [Sylvia Jefferson Mumford] proclaimed very loudly that she was prepared to send me to Canada (laughter).  She had to 'cause no son of hers was going to die in a war.  I appreciate that, you know, because we, she was a staunch antiwar activist.  She was, she was part of the Democratic National Committee [DNC] in the 1972 election.  She was friends with Patricia Roberts Harris, and she had a lot of friends in Washington [D.C.].  As the circle of blacks in D.C. is, people tend to know each other very well.  My father [Thaddeus Mumford] and my mother had a very wide circle of friends, some of them fairly influential friends.  My father belongs to a social club call the Consorts, which numbers amongst its members, you know, city councilmen, lawyers, doctors, professionals of all sorts.  He also member of the Boule [Sigma Pi Phi], which numbers among its members politicians, and lawyers, doctors, and professionals of all sorts, and they have a wide circle.  My stepmother, Gloria Cooper Mumford [ph.], also has a wide circle of friends, and together they are very active in--town.  One of my stepmother's relatives is [HistoryMaker] Marian Wright Edelman, and so I am fortunate to be in, in a good situation (laughter), that way where we are able to be in a circle of people who are doing good work.
Story_ID: 228309
Speaker 1: And I still would like to ask about the music--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --and the art and where that inspiration came from.
Speaker 2: My brother [Thaddeus Mumford, Jr.] and I were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You, you said there's a lot going on, but--
Speaker 2: Oh there's, yeah, my brother and I were given an album as kids--I believe I was five and he was ten--called 'The Child's Introduction to the Symphony' [sic. 'A Child's Introduction to the Orchestra'].  It was an LP [long play]--I remember LPs with the large black discs (laughter) that you put on record--that had excerpts, small sections of pieces from the standard repertoire of orchestral music.  And we would play it over and over and over again and memorize these pieces and play around with them.  We had a game we played where we associate certain themes with football teams.  We used to watch football on Sunday afternoons.  Then it was black and white television, and the, the--maybe that was where I got my fascination or helped my fascination with light, because each stadium had a certain light and a certain energy to it.  So Cleveland Browns stadium [Cleveland Municipal Stadium; FirstEnergy Stadium, Cleveland, Ohio] at the time was, you know, the old stadium in Cleveland [Ohio], Memorial Stadium in Baltimore [Maryland] where the [Baltimore] Colts [Indianapolis Colts] played, Soldier Field [Chicago, Illinois] where the Chicago Bears played, the stadium [Giants Stadium, East Rutherford, New Jersey] where the [New York] Giants played all had different energy to it, where the light filtered through the, the stadium where the time of day where it was played.  And so we would associate various themes, various pieces with these football teams.  For whatever odd, silly reason we just did that.  And that made a kind of world of the imagination for us in a way.  We had our, we had our ups and downs, as siblings do, but one of the best things about it was that we were able to make each other laugh.  And we both loved to express ourselves.  And so we would go around singing and humming these tunes.  And then accompanying this disc were yellow records you put on, you know, 45s that had, you know, smaller numbers of pieces on them.  And so we played those too.  And so they would be stacked up in our rooms. And so I think, I'm convinced that I heard certain pieces in a previous life.  So when I've heard--(unclear)--pieces like the 'Songs of the Auvergne' ['Chants d'Auvergne'], which are French provincial folk songs orchestrated by a French composer named Joseph Canteloube, I know that I know them from some other lifetime.  And I think other pieces had that effect on me too.  And so when I heard them in real life, they resonated in a particular way.  More than that, I, I can't really say.  It's, you know, these things cannot always be articulated, but they're felt deeply.
Story_ID: 228310
Speaker 1: My brother [Thaddeus Mumford, Jr.] developed quite a fascination for musical comedy, and he was quite adept at memorizing and playing, you know, these pieces.  He'd play LPs [long plays] of them and knowing the whole scenarios and, and would be able to recount them.  He acted in small productions in town, children's theater and other things.  And I did one stint as a, as a seat announcer for one play.  That wasn't for me (laughter).  He was more interested in that aspect of things.  But I remember my, my room being right next to his room, and through the walls I would hear 'How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying' [Shepherd Mead] a thousand times, over and over again, 'Mame,' [Jerry Herman] 'Damn Yankees,' [Richard Adler and Jerry Ross] all kinds of musicals.  So I got to know them, too (laughter).  He was very interested in collecting baseball cards.  He was very interested in building replicas of things.  He built a live working model of a stage complete with curtains that open and close. Lights that worked.  It was very brilliant.  He built a complete scale model of Yankee Stadium [New York, New York].  He loved the [New York] Yankees.  He would, one of his dreams was to, I'm sure, be a Yankee player.  He didn't get to be a Yankee player, but he did get to be a ball porter for the Yankees.  And he would take trains rides up to New York [New York] and stay with our cousin Florence, cousin Florence Covington [ph.], who is on my father's [Thaddeus Mumford] side, a great-cousin.  And he was--she was living and, and still is, she lived in Bedford-Stuyvesant [Brooklyn, New York, New York] until her death.  I guess now this must be ten years ago now.  Florence Covington was a good friend of Cab Calloway's.  They used to go to horse races together.  And Florence would have dreams of the numbers that the horse would come in, and she would bet the number that she dreamed, and she would win (laughter).  Cab Calloway was with her, didn't--she was an amazing woman, very centered, kind, gentle woman who'd give, you know, the shirt off her back.  I remember a Sunday dinner she would make when I had the opportunity to go there, fried chicken, roast beef, and three different kinds of pie and biscuits, homemade, ah, such delicious food.  And she was a wonderful person, and she was one of the gentlest souls I ever knew, never had a bad word to say about anybody.  And so my brother would stay with her when he went to New York.
Story_ID: 228311
Speaker 1: If we look at the receipt then of the, the record collection as your formal introduction to classical music--
Speaker 2: I guess it was.  And then I'd, later on I went to, as I said to public school.  And Phoebe Hearst [Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] had a program with the National Symphony Orchestra where we would go.  I think there are three performances a year.  I remember one particular performance, which is very formative for me in which the '1812 Overture,' [Pyotr Ilyich] Tchaikovsky.  The--
Speaker 1: Could you hum a few bars?
Speaker 2: --'[The] Sorcerer's Apprentice' [Paul Dukas]. Pardon?
Speaker 1: Could you hum a few bars?
Speaker 2: (Humming). Okay--'The Sorcerer's Apprentice' and the 'New World Symphony' by [Antonin] Dvorak were played.  And 'Sorcerer's Apprentice' is by Paul Dukas, French composer.  And so that stayed with me and stays with me to this day as the, a formative experience of hearing a live orchestra perform in DAR Constitution Hall [Washington, D.C.], which is the hall that, as we all know, that Marian Anderson was not allowed to sing in.  So we had these little mostly scruffy kids going into this ornate, plush, wonderful hall, and I'm being very inspired by the idea, the presence of the moment and hearing this orchestra perform.  And part of me I'm sure said I want to do this.  I want this to be part of my life.  I want to enter into this world of sound that was presented in front of me.
Speaker 1: You know, I'm curious, when you are introduced to the, the 'New World Symphony,' [Antonin Dvorak] did anyone explain that a lot of folk believe that, that piece was influenced by his hearing African American spirituals before?
Speaker 2: I learned that later.
Speaker 1: Um-hm. But not at the time of the--
Speaker 2: At the time--
Speaker 1: --of the introduction.
Speaker 2: --it just was this big sprawling piece that I remember hearing.  Then in music class we would sing the slow movement--to the words of 'Going Home' [Antonin Dvorak]: "Going home, going home."  So that, you know, that stayed with me, too--it's such a haunting melody.
Story_ID: 228312
Speaker 1: So when did you go from being a listener of the music to a music maker in your own right--
Speaker 2: In--
Speaker 1: --even as a student?
Speaker 2: In fourth grade [at Phoebe Hearst Elementary School, Washington, D.C.] I started playing clarinet, and I played it through finishing out elementary school.  I wanted to play trombone, but it was already taken.  We walked into this music, this room where all the instruments are laying out on the floor.  And I remember pointing to the trombone as something I wanted, and, and the teacher said, "I'm sorry that it was taken.  There were only so many trombones," and I didn't get there in time (laughter), so what was left was this metal clarinet.  So I played this metal clarinet, and then I got a wooden clarinet.  And my teacher thought I would have a pretty good future playing it if I kept it up.  And I kept it up for, you know, a few years, but I decided I wanted to do something else that was cooler.  So, I took guitar lessons 'cause guitar playing was cooler than playing clarinet, you know, so, at least I thought so at the time.  I studied with a guy name Bill Harris, who is a jazz guitarist in [Washington] D.C.  I have to confess I wasn't the best student.  I just liked the idea of (laughter)--I actually didn't practice as much as I should have.  I practiced clarinet much better than I practiced guitar, and I started to improvise on the clarinet even before improvisation was, 'cause I just in, enjoyed discovering what sounds it made, you know, and so it made these squeaks and squawks, which I later, as an adult, heard were a term called multiphonics.  Multiphonics are chords that can be played on wind instruments.  I was making these chords before I knew what they were (laughter).  They sounded really neat.  And then later on there was this fancy term we learned for it called multiphonics, which--so, that was my early memory of starting playing.
Story_ID: 228313
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Jeffrey] Mumford, in the first segment you talked about some of those early influences that maybe sparked your--creative genius--let's call it that--as a student--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--yeah--
Speaker 1: --(laughter) not just having a mother [Sylvia Jefferson Mumford] who's a teacher and exposed you to recorded music, but also being able to listen to live symphony orchestra performances.
Speaker 2: Well, I also want to say that my father [Thaddeus Mumford] has, and when I grew up, I was listening to, you know, as an early, you know, early on, a huge Count Basie collection.  He's a great student of jazz.  And I remember growing up in the house being filled with Count Basie, and Ray Charles, and great band leaders, particularly Basie.  So I want to make sure that's included in this because that was also a similar influence on me.  How could it not be, I mean, hearing this stuff all the time?  And you know, my father would be singing with Ray Charles 'I Can't Stop Loving You' (laughter).  And I remember those wonderful times when we'd be in the basement trimming the Christmas tree, and there was a [HistoryMaker] Billy Taylor Christmas album we'd listen to a lot and [HistoryMaker] Ramsey Lewis.  And those things are, are, are richness, you know, that are, it's very inspiring.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: So I want to make sure that's said because--
Speaker 1: Oh, sure.
Speaker 2: --my father is, is a very, very bright man and a very cultured man.  And introducing me to this music in, in the informal way that he did, just by having it around, was very important.
Story_ID: 228314
Speaker 1: So then the influences are there then from the European classical music tradition, the--is jazz, some people have told me, black classical music?  I don't know.
Speaker 2: It is what it is.  I mean I, you know--
Speaker 1: But it's African American music?
Speaker 2: Labels are labels, and they are hopelessly limited and limiting.  I would say that it is a music rich in tradition, rich in expressivity.  The term classical has many implications and baggage.  I teach at a conservatory.  The word conservatory has lots of implications and baggage. Music is music (laughter).  There is a tagline that is attributed to Duke Ellington that is said at the end of a show called 'Schickele Mix,' hosted by Peter Schickele, the composer.  And it goes to the effect that Duke Ellington said, "If it sounds good, it is good."  Now, I think that categories can be helpful to a certain extent, but can be harmful to another extent as well.  The term jazz, you know, who invented that term.  I mean it's a term that describes a certain kind of improvised music that comes from a tradition.  Classical music, what does that mean?  In strict terms, it refers to music written in the 18th century in Europe.  But there's classical music written all over the place, every minute of every day, now, tomorrow, next year, next week, and until the future.  Who can decide how that music is defined?  I just like to think that music is something that is engrossing, and inspiring, and moving on whatever planet it exists on.  I happen to write music that is notated, which means that I write everything I want to be played down, which to some people would separate it from being jazz because jazz is improvised music.  But there's a lot of jazz that's also notated and then improvised later from that.  The tradition of jazz is such that it is primarily music that is, as I said, the definition of jazz is music that is composed in real time, which I love that definition, which means it's, it's being constantly re--reconfigured, rediscovered, revisited as one performs it.  These terms can be little hooks that you could hang things on, but I think we need to look past those terms.  Does that make sense?
Speaker 1: Oh, it makes perfect sense.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Would you agree me then if I said (laughter)--many rich musical traditions that shaped your early life as a student musician--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, yes.
Speaker 1: --including jazz?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, and you mentioned--
Speaker 2: I'm not trying to be difficult (laughter).  I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no, I just wanna make sure--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I understand so we can continue our--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --discussion.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Okay, and it's your story.  You can say whatever you want.
Speaker 2: I mean jazz is called creative music.  It's called, you know, music written in, in real time.  It, and I think that it's constantly being redefined as well.  In, in past times, it had a, it had certain phases: big band, bebop, post-bop, fusion, (laughter) you know, all kinds of things.  And all of that only approximates what the really the music is in the first place.  It is what it is, and what, how it comes into your ears and your heart--
Speaker 1: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) with the passion that goes into it.
Story_ID: 228315
Speaker 1: You've mentioned a number of influential composers, performers, vocalists, instrumentalists; I think I heard Ray Charles, Duke Ellington.
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Ramsey Lewis.
Speaker 1: And in--
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Billy Taylor.
Speaker 1: --in Harlem [New York, New York], "Minnie the Moocher"--who was the person you mentioned again?
Speaker 2: Cab Calloway.
Speaker 1: Cab Calloway, the friend--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --of your cousin's--
Speaker 2: I finally got to meet him later in life.  Yeah, I was--
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: --in the, at the [John F.] Kennedy Center [for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.], yeah.
Speaker 1: Being honored?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think he was being honored, yes.  I, I think his orchestra [The Cab Calloway Orchestra] was performing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then I, we had a, a little chat, and I reminded him of the stories my cousin Florence [Covington (ph.)] would tell, and he did remember, which was very nice and--
Speaker 1: That's good.  So--
Speaker 2: --very classy of him.
Speaker 1: Again, I'd like to, to have a better understanding of when you decided, a student, that you would be serious and practice more, not just--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --with the early guitar lessons but practice in such a way that you could perfect the art.
Speaker 2: Well, as a performer, I, I play only occasionally.  I like to improvise a lot at the piano, and I start, I've started doing a lot more of that.  In that curiously strange category that's--defies boundaries of new music and jazz that filter in and help inform the, the music--the pieces that I write that are notated, fully noted pieces.  But they, for me, provide a laboratory of, of material that I can use later on.  And it, it helps keep my fingers active and my mind active, and--excuse me--to provide, as I call, a repository of pictures and, and materials that I use for my, my work.
Speaker 1: And were you doing that as a high school student, too, or was that something that--
Speaker 2: A little bit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I took theory class in tenth grade.  It was a new course at the school I went to, Sidwell Friends [School, Washington, D.C.], taught by a tenor named Ralph Williams, a black tenor.  And he, he had a way about him that I found very helpful, in that he let us write our own exercises and write pieces in the style of various composers.  I, I was writing pieces in the style of baroque, or, or at the baroque that I understood at the time, being a tenth grader.  But I thought that was a very good approach for us, giving us license to own the music, to own the, the theory that we were learning.  I think the best way to teach theory is to have people write music because theory is that--theory.  It doesn't live until it (laughter) becomes something living.  You can talk your face off, 'til you're blue in the face about all kinds of rules and dictums--this is my own philosophy.  I mean I'm not trying to denigrate the practice of, of teaching theory.  I think music, again, supersedes and is bigger than genres, rules, and theories.  I mean I think that through, through composition, through owning what you're doing, practicing the art, writing things down, discovering combinations that work, then you become richer as a musician.  And these things start to make real sense in real time as opposed to abstract sense in a book.  They're in plenty of good books.  I love books.  I read (laughter) books.  There are better and worse theory books, but I find the best approaches to theory are those that allow the student to personally engage in the creative process.
Story_ID: 228316
Speaker 1: So you think that tenth grade teacher [Ralph Williams] was the one who really inspired you?
Speaker 2: He was very inspiring.  There were many ones.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he was one of the ones.
Speaker 1: Would you like to mention some of the others in high school [Sidwell Friends School, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: In high school an English teacher named Mrs. [Anne] Yondorf had the good taste, I think, the good judgment to be constantly in the mode of discovery.  She assigned us to write a third act for 'Waiting for Godot' by Samuel Beckett.  And it, she was a teacher that did not like you to regurgitate what she taught in class but rather for you to crit- critically think about what she, the concepts that she was discussing.  And that approach is what I like to use in my own teaching.  I don't like memorization.  I don't like--I like discussion.  I like what is called the Socratic method of teaching, where you ask questions of the student, and they bring to the table themselves, their heart, their brains, their thought process, their critical thinking skills to engage in a dialogue which we are all the richer for at the end of the day.  Mrs. Yondorf was that kind of teacher.
Story_ID: 228317
Speaker 1: Now, I wanted to ask also, in addition to all the interesting sounds that you're describing that I would associate in my mind with the music that you're listening to and now creating for yourself, what are some of the, the sights and the smells that remind you of life in [Washington] D.C.?
Speaker 2: Well, the first thing comes to mind is spring.  Spring in D.C. is one of the most glorious seasons than anywhere on this planet.  And I remember Rock Creek Park [Washington, D.C.] and many parks, many spring days in the, the bright, the vibrance of the green of the leaves in the springtime, and the softness of the air.  I remember, I feel, and I hear the music that was played on the, an AM radio station, WMAL [Washington, D.C.], back then hosting Felix Grant, who brought a good deal of Brazilian music to our attention in, in the D.C. market.  He would play [Antonio Carlos] Jobim and other composers.  And I became fascinated by the idea of this, this music in the context of spring in D.C., and it just became part of the whole, you know.  I loved it.  Bossa nova and--it's great stuff that he would play, with this, his, his delivery and his advocacy for this music on the air was one of clearly loving it and being so elegant about its presentation.  So those are my, those are some of my early memories and persistent now memories, continual memories of D.C., always the National Gallery [of Art, Washington, D.C.], always the fact that so many museums are free, and we can come and go and have access to this incredible legacy of human achievement.
Story_ID: 228318
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Jeffrey] Mumford, you said that dinnertime was a special time for your immediate family, but I, I wonder if there were special celebrations that you also recall from holiday seasons in your house.
Speaker 2: Well, as I said before, trimming our tree at Christmastime was a, a family occasion we, that we, we took very seriously.  My brother [Thaddeus Mumford, Jr.] recalls this book that is now dog-eared and I mean, called 'The Tall Book of Christmas.'  And we'd read from that book Christmas stories, and we'd sing carols.  And we'd spray the fake (laughter) snow on the tree and the flocking of it and the lights and strings, and there'd be this wonderful music in the background.  I remember those being very special times.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Thanksgiving dinners we'd have family over and, and the dining room table would be expanded.  And we'd have, I remember my mother [Sylvia Jefferson Mumford] used to say that I used to call stuffing nerve medicine for some reason.  That comes from 'Dennis the Menace,' and Mr. Wilson was always asking for his nerve medicine whenever Dennis got on his nerves (laughter).  I don't know why I called stuffing nerve medicine, but that, I guess, was what I did.  I love stuffing (laughter), I love--(unclear)--
Story_ID: 228319
Speaker 1: Can we talk about your high school [Sidwell Friends School, Washington, D.C.] graduation or especially that senior year, where you have to choose a college.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How do you get from [Washington] D.C. to California?  Who's going to help you make that transition?
Speaker 2: Well, at that time I was a painter.  I had fully intended to go to college as a painter.  I was counseled by the guidance counselor to go, one of the schools was actually Baldwin-Wallace [College; Baldwin Wallace University, Berea, Ohio] here.  And I didn't know what that was, but based on his knowledge of what he thought, I was interested in what, you know, I would appreciate.  That was one of the schools.  I think Hiram [College, Hiram, Ohio], too.  But there was a friend of our family's named George [Owen] Roberts, who was from Sierra Leone, who taught comparative culture at this new branch of the University of California system at Irvine [University of California Irvine, Irvine, California].  And my mother [Sylvia Jefferson Mumford] and he talked a good deal about my future, and they talked period.  He lived across the street, and our families interacted variously.  And he had gotten this post out in California, and so he moved out there.  And he moved out there, and he thought that that would be the best place for me to come, to leave D.C. and put myself in a completely different environment, West Coast environment, and come to this you know, newer school that he felt was doing really good work.  I didn't know Irvine [California] from a hole in the wall.  And the thought at that time of me going to California was this strange place.  I mean I knew California from visits and you know, vacations, but I was an East Coast snob, and I didn't, at that time, take California very seriously.  So, I kind of went (laughter) kicking and screaming, but it was decided that that would a place I should go; I should give it a chance.  I remember, however, when I went out there, the first thing I wanted to do was (laughter) transfer out of there.  One of the places I wanted to transfer was Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio] actually, in art.  But that didn't work out, so I stuck it out there.  And George Roberts is a very bright man, very well read man, very elegant man, and I did trust him.  And looking back on it, it was a good education.  Who knows what would have been if I'd gone someplace else?  But that's the legacy that I have.
Story_ID: 228320
Speaker 1: The second year in my study [at University of California, Irvine, Irvine, California] of painting, another good teacher I had a, a seminal teacher, was a painting professor named, of all names, John Paul Jones, who, again, saw me for who I was and allowed me to pursue my interests, counseling me, guiding me, encouraging me, again the word encouraging.  I think that's one of the most important things a teacher can ever do to a student is to encourage.  Life will teach, teach the student lessons.  I don't think it's any teacher's job to discourage a student.  If a student has challenges, then that's the teacher's responsibility to encourage the student to overcome the challenges the best way they can, I think.  So this is what Professor Jones did with me.  I was in love with painting landscapes.  I did style studies.  I used to paint in different styles to develop technique as I saw it.  That was frowned upon by certain of my colleagues.  I was doing a style study of this 18th century French nude by Francois Boucher, an 18th century French painter, who I thought was quite an amazing painter.  They'll be debate as to how significant he was or is, but at the time I was interested in him and Nicolas Poussin and other figurative painters of the, of the time as well as landscape artists.  And I did this style study--this Boucher painting.  And one day I came back to my studio, found white paint splattered all over it.  Someone evidently was making a statement about what they thought of my work.  And I was quite upset.  I never found out who it was.  It was very devastating, upsetting (laughter).  So, I went to the music department for solace.  I, I just starting inhabiting the practice--(unclear).  And I was taken under the wing by another seminal professor named Peter [S.] Odegard, who was theory teacher there, also a composer, studied with a very wonderful composer named Roger Sessions at University of California, Berkeley [Berkeley, California].  And he saw that I was passionately interested in music as well as painting.  And I audited classes, and took other classes, and under his tutelage started arranging composer's concerts and composing through his encouragement and nurturing.  I finished out my degree in painting, but I also took a number of music courses as well.  So while it wasn't an official double degree, I had a lot of credits (laughter), and I graduated with a pretty good GPA [grade point average].  And I got an award as the, having the highest GPA of any black student in the school of fine arts, which is very nice.
Story_ID: 228321
Speaker 1: But all that just goes to say that I just was very serious about what I was doing [at the University of California, Irvine, Irvine, California], and I found something that, through this accident of critical abuse, shall we say, maybe turned out to be the best thing that happened to me in a way, that I discovered my love of composition.  And I had a teacher [Peter S. Odegard] who saw that in me and allowed me to develop my own path.  Again, I approached that in a similar way that I did painting.  I, I wrote style studies.  I wrote pieces in the style as I understood it, in the style of [Robert] Schumann, [Igor] Stravinsky, and a composer named Francis Poulenc, who was a member of group called Les Six, six composers in Paris [France] who were trying to, in a way I don't want to say so simplistically react against Impressionism, but they saw the path of French music being different than that which was laid before by W.C. Ravel.  And their music was much more influenced by I guess that aspect of popular culture, of the cafes, music halls and so forth.  And that music spoke to me very personally, so I wrote this piece, a, a suite called 'The Six Early Pieces of Use,' and each piece was a piece in a style of a different member of Les Six, as, again, as I interpreted it.  I was pretty pleased with it, and I wrote a number of other pieces under Professor Odegard's tutelage--culminating in my senior year with a, a big rambling cello sonata in, influenced by a composer named Elliot Carter, who I discovered in the listening lab at the, the university.  One of my work-study jobs was to work at the listening lab to make some money.  And I loved listening lab.  It had, you know, again, walls and walls and walls of LPs [long plays].  And again, an, an education comes in many ways.  And I think one of the most important ways that composer or any musician can educate themselves just to sit down and listen to lots, and lots, and lots, and lots, and lots of music.  It's what I encourage my students to do.  And so I went systematically through the shelves (laughter)--listening to as many LPs as I could just get my hands on.  I'd bring food in with friends.  We'd sit there and just listen to everything in there and just--I discovered Elliot Carter, another composers.  And this cello sonata was a piece that just grabbed my attention and my heart in a very visceral way.  The first movement had this ticking motor from, in the piano over which was this soaring cello melody.  And I'd runner, run around the place dancing to it 'cause it had this kind of walking bass.  You know, I--I, I loved it, you know.  And so, that influenced this cello sonata that I was writing.  Another composer I discovered there was a composer named Billy Jim Layton, who later on became head of the music department at SUNY [State University of New York], Stony Brook [University, Stony Brook, New York]--State University of New York in Stony Brook.  He wrote this string quartet which had strong jazz influences in the first movement, particularly had this walking bass and the cello and had this incredible abstract, and soaring, and, and compelling violin lick melody (laughter) flying in.  And I would run, dance to that, and I would just play that over and over and over again.  And those had big influences on my music as well.
Speaker 2: Okay, so, so that was the, the capstone of the undergraduate years--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --the cello piece.
Story_ID: 228322
Speaker 1: You decided to stay on the West Coast for graduate school.
Speaker 2: I did.  At the time there was a composer named Bernard Rands, who was teaching at University of California, San Diego [(UCSD), San Diego, California].  Now he teaches all over the place.  He teaches at Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  I think he may be retiring soon.  But he won the Pulitzer Prize a few years ago.  He's a brilliant composer.  He was born in Great Britain, a student of Luciano Berio, Italian composer who I have a great deal of affection for and respect, and I am influenced by his work as well.  And he was conducting a group called SONAR, which was the contemporary music ensemble at San Diego.  I had met the bass professor, Bertram Turetzky, who was a champion of new music for the double bass, he went to Hartt School of Music [The Hartt School, University of Hartford] in [Hartford] Connecticut and helped form what was the fabric of the course of study at UC San Diego.  And a student named Laurie Croquel [ph.], a cello student, I met, I guess, I think through Bert, and I wanted her to play my cello sonata.  It turned out she never did play it.  She played another piece of mine later.  But I got to know certain people at UCSD, and through that meeting and through meeting Bernard and SONAR coming up to [University of California] Irvine [Irvine, California] and then performing, they offered me a scholarship to go there.  They wanted me to come, and I was flattered that they wanted me to come, and so I took two years off between undergraduate and graduate work.  I boned up on my theory and other things and took the GRE, the Graduate Record Exam, which one takes before they go to graduate school.  At the time, those two years I also started out my professional life as a composer because there was a group in Washington, D.C., called the Contemporary Music Forum.  And I got my first commission through that group for a piece for violin and a piano, one of my first review in The Washington Post, which was a very good review.  And I, you know (laughter)--always very encouraging as a young student to get a good review on a major newspaper.  And I got the princely sum of five hundred dollars for this piece, and it was wonderful.  And it was played by two wonderful musicians, Helmich Brownlic [ph.], violin, and Barbro Dahlman, who is a, is a Swedish pianist who was married to a Swedish composer named Ulf Grahn, who are to this day dear friends of ours.  And so that experience helped me a great deal in entering graduate school because I had a professional performance, and I was--that had charted a course for me, you know, being a professional musician.  So I felt that going into graduate school, it had enriched my experience and gave me I guess what I call more of a sword of Excalibur, which is a, a sense of confidence in one's abilities--(unclear).  So, I entered graduate in 1979, having graduated undergraduate in '77 [1977].  And I was able, I scored high enough on the, the test to get a full scholarship, which was nice.  And that experience in graduate school was very, very formative as well because I met, I got to further meet and know Bernard Grahams [ph.], another seminal teacher, who is a great humanist.  And I mean humanist in terms of making music for the right reasons, making art for the right reasons, which is for its communicative and expressive content.  And from him I learned a great deal about orchestral and instrumental color.  He has a great ear for timbre.  His teacher burial has a similar wonderful ear for timbre.  His music full of life and, and subtleties and richness.  And Bernard's music is similarly rich.  So from him I got a sense of that aspect of why we do this in the first place.  He is a very passionate yet gentle and elegant soul.  And those are qualities that I prize.  You'll notice in the course of my interview and discussion I bring up the word elegant and gentle soul a lot because those are things that I think are all too rare in society these days.  And what I hope to contribute in art is a sense of tapping into that spirit that we have in ourselves which is inspirational, creative, the soul of expressivity and communication that is the best of who we are as a culture and people.  So, that's why those things, whenever I met them along the way, made that impact on me.
Story_ID: 228323
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Jeffrey] Mumford, at the end of the last tape we had started to talk a little bit about art and race and racial art, if there is such a thing.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I'm borrowing that term from the, the 1926 essay by Langston Hughes, 'A Negro Artist in the Racial Mountain' [sic. 'The Negro Artist and the Racial Mountain']--where he complained about this effort to force individual creativity into the mode of standardization.  You have to be this way--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --if you're making American music or creating American art.  Do you think there is such a thing for Negro artists as racial art in the 21st century?
Speaker 2: Well, that's a, a huge kettle of worms.  I mean there is a composer named Virgil Thompson, a distinguished music critic in New York [New York] for many years as well as a composer, who was asked on some occasion, well, what's American music?  How, what, how do you define American music and what goes, what are the qualities that define it?  And he said, "Well, the best way to write American music is to be American and write music."  And I would extend that to the idea of whatever black music is.  It can't be anything else than be the experiences that you as a black person are creating and expressing.  So, I don't think there's any such thing as one kind of black music.  There's many kinds of black music.  However, the, and this is, I teach a course called More Than a Blip on the Radar Screen: The Experiences of African American Classical Composers--there's that word classical--in America.  And that course attempts to explode preconceptions about who we are and what we are and self-definition and, or our roles as creative entities.  And I'm happy to say that both times I've taught this course--I've taught it twice so far in the last five years--whites and black students have been in the class.  I think it, it's equally beneficial to both of us as a culture, for black students to know better who we are, and what our capabilities are, and to know limitations that society has relentlessly tried to put on us, and for white students to have a sense, a greater sense of what we do and how we do it.  A lot of them have never heard of the composers that I have discussed and as well, unfortunately, a lot of the black students haven't either.  But this is what learning experience is about, and you have to start somewhere.  And I've been gratified that the response has been very powerful and positive both times, both by white students and black students.  And I think it's a necessary course.  And I've been told by none other than George [E.] Lewis, a recent MacArthur [Foundation] recipient who's a professor down at Columbia University [New York, New York] who was a guest in my class when I taught it here [Oberlin Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio].  One of the composers and trombonist, who again explodes boundaries between new music and jazz, that this course--a kind of course like that is not taught anywhere else.  And I'm very happy to teach it, and I think it needs to be taught everywhere by everybody because there's so much that needs to be explored in what we do, and so much needs to be discussed in terms of politics and sociology because, unfortunately, they enter the--into the picture.
Story_ID: 228324
Speaker 1: I mean when you can have a subscription season of a major symphony orchestra and have black composers only appear on the 20th of January and the month of February, that's a real problem.
Speaker 2: And why those times, please?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Because the 20th of January is [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]'s birthday, and February is Black History Month.  And you know, there are composers who actually have said, "Don't call me in February.  There are eleven other months you can play my music," (laughter).  "Don't be calling me then."  I appreciate that.  I mean I, you know, I understand the pain that that comes from and the, the sense of your resentment that, you know, we are pigeonholed, you know, this is your time, know your place.  We'll play you then.  We'll celebrate your history in this month, and then the rest of the season we'll play all the other real music, you know, which is ridiculous.  So, in my class we talk about self-definition, to what extent is black culture quote, unquote defined by the vernacular, defined by popular culture, the legacy of people working in the genre of symphonic music and opera, and how else you want to define concert music, classical music, whatever is vast--dates back centuries.  The violinist that was the dedicatee of [Ludwig van] Beethoven's 'Kreutzer Sonata,' George [Augustus] Polgreen Bridgetower was a mulatto.  The Chevalier de Saint-Georges [Joseph Boulogne] was court musician to [King] Louis XVI, a violinist and a composer, in his own right a brilliant composer, called the black Mozart, as if it has to be the black Mozart (laughter)--(unclear)--you have to name him something, right.  Again more labels and pigeon holes.  But the effort to give him legitimacy, right, so it has to be called the black Mozart as opposed to [Wolfgang Amadeus] Mozart being (laughter) the white Saint-Georges, right.  But anyway, I digress, as Jack Paar would say.  So this class talks about those kinds of things.  Fortunately, I had the opportunity to have living composers and scholars come into the class and discuss their experiences.  And we used a book, among other sources, called 'Musical Landscapes in Color[: Conversations with Black American Composers'] by a composer colleague of mine, William [C.] Banfield, which is a series of interviews of musicians of all stripes, from popular jazz through classical, including [HistoryMaker] Herbie Hancock, Patrice Rushen, [HistoryMaker] Olly Wilson, distinguished composer and professor emeritus at University of California, Berkeley [Berkeley, California], [HistoryMaker] T.J. Anderson, and Hale Smith, the late Hale--Hale Smith is still alive, but he's in a coma, a brilliant man, and we need to all give him our prayers and good wishes because he, he is a wonderful resource for us all.  He's from Cleveland [Ohio], went to Cleveland Institute of Music [Cleveland, Ohio], and again, stood between jazz, classical, to different areas of music, and worked at the publishing company, and has been a major force in our music and music in general.
Story_ID: 228325
Speaker 1: I hear you saying that there is still a need to consider race as a factor, impacting the lives, even of the folks in the conservatories and the concert halls of our nation.  But I'm wondering, too, about the, the ongoing influence of some of those pioneers who, even in the era of Jim Crow, were able to overcome some of the obstacles that perhaps stood in the way of other would-be concert performers.  And I'm thinking of the name of William Grant Still because someone introduced him to me as the dean of Negro composers.
Speaker 2: Well, there's always another label, isn't there, like Aaron Copland is the dean of American music and William Grant Still is the dean of African American (laughter) composers.  Yes, William Grant Still is a very--important figure in art history and the history of the period.  Some people might not know that he studied with a composer named Edgar Varese, who is a, a composer of experimental and very progressive and--(unclear) called advance music, very complex music, a French composer who then came to America, brilliant orchestrator, amazing ears, amazing vision in his music, and Still studied with him.  Still's music is not in any one style.  It was, as Lou Rawls said on this video that my family and I check out regularly called 'Black Music in the Seventies,' [ph.] Lou Rawls was saying that his longevity is attributable to him being what was required at the time.  And what label he had then was soul singer, but he's been a blues singer; he's been a jazz singer; he's been--and William Grant Still's music was whatever it needed to be at the time.  He wrote for Hollywood.  He wrote for concerts quote, unquote, art music.  He wrote all kinds of music--movies and so.
Speaker 1: And if I'm not mistaken, he also studied in Ohio, did he not?
Speaker 2: He studied here at Oberlin [Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio].
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--at Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] and Oberlin also?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 228326
Speaker 1: Now, I want to talk for a little while about another pioneering African American composer who also studied here at Oberlin [Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio], R. [Robert] Nathaniel Dett.  Does his name come up much in your class?
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely.  His, I mean one of the most famous pieces of his is called, the suite, 'In the Bottoms' for piano.  The last movement, 'Juba: Dance,' is one that I remember my mother [Sylvia Jefferson Mumford] and Aunt Elaine [ph.] talking about as a child.  And it's, you know, I guess perhaps the most famous movement of that suite.  R. Nathaniel Dett was actually born in Canada and attended Oberlin and then went on to Hampton University [Hampton Institute, Hampton, Virginia].  And his importance is certainly vast.
Speaker 1: You know, I'm grateful as a student of history that Dett wrote a lot about his feelings, about Negro music, and using Negro themes as the inspiration for source material for larger works.  So he would take a melody from a spiritual, and then he'd have this huge work--this great chorus in Virginia, you know (laughter), hundreds of people singing the little slave melodies that we traced back to the antebellum era.  But he always said that made it Negro music.  It was the source, you know, that counted, okay.  And, and so for him, the racial music was the music where you could obviously see--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --the influence--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --okay of the Negro melodies and the, the melody makers.  But obviously you've broadened that definition (laughter) for your students to--
Speaker 2: Well, I think so.  I mean because sources come from many different sources, without being too cute.  History will either arbiter of that as whatever the source material has been for decades of composers since that period.  For instance, there's a piece by [HistoryMaker] T. J. Anderson, Thomas Jefferson Anderson, called 'Variations on a Theme by M. B. Tolson.'  M. [Melvin] B. Tolson is a poet.  And I assigned this piece in my class.  The first class I have as--black composers course, I challenge the students to already question their preconceptions.  I assign six pieces to listen to at the beginning, movements of short pieces.  And if it's a piece of--short--it's the whole, the whole piece.  Three are by white composers and three are by black composers.  And I asked them to define, in their own way, from their own frame of reference, which they think are written by black composers and why.  Invariably they get it wrong, I'm happy to say in a certain way.  And the pieces I--choose on purpose, one is the Elliott Carter cello sonata which I told you about, which has the, quote, unquote, walking base ticking motor from the piano.  Another piece is this is Billy Jim Layton's string quartet, which is this, it's a string quartet, very finely wrought, distant, complex piece that has this jazz undertone to it.  Another piece is a piece for string quartet by Max Roach and this T. J. Anderson piece for mezzo soprano and chamber ensemble.  And another piece that I can't remember right now, but invariably, the pieces that have the grooves are the pieces that the students think are written by black composers.
Story_ID: 228327
Speaker 1: And I have to remind them [Mumford's students] that these influences pervade society in many different ways, and it's not always what you think, and that this particular piece ['Variations on a Theme by M. B. Tolson'] by [HistoryMaker] T. J. Anderson, a black student made the observation when I asked why didn't he think that piece was written by a black composer.  And his answer was, well, this piece was far too complex to be written by a black composer.  And so, of course, I knew my work was cut out for me.  And that is always instructive every time I teach this class to understand where people think we are, what people think we are capable of doing and what people think we're not capable of doing, even within our own culture.  And so I leave it to history to decide where the source comes from.  The source for T. J. Anderson was the twelve-tone technique of, of creating what's called a total chromatic, a dissonant language where all twelve pitches are played before a note is repeated in the series which defines a very dissonant, harmonic language.  Then it morphs into a blues-related language at the end of the piece.  It's a very sophisticated, wonderfully coloristic, finely wrought, elegant piece of music that speaks to this composer's inspiration and, and sophistication in this world.  Now, I would challenge anybody to articulate the sense that anything is too complex for a black person to conceive of, perceive.  What does that mean?  What does that say about a kind of self-hatred within our culture in a certain way actually.  So, at the end of this course, the people understood the full range of our creative abilities.  Society, however, will let us, would have us believe that we only write hip-hop music.  We sing gospel music.  We write jazz.  Maybe we do R&B here and then.  The whole other area of expression of symphonic music, concert music, whatever, is unexplored, at best, ignored at worst, and, and, and, and said that this is, in a way, this is not your turf; this is something you shouldn't be done.  I mean it's not spoken verbatim like that, but you get the message when you don't see those pieces played on symphony concerts or, or, or chamber series.  It's a subtle way of saying well, you know, this is what you do, and we'll leave this other to white Europeans, you know, kind of thing.  But, increasingly no more; increasingly because of the work of my colleagues and the, just orneriness of people daring to continue to write music, doggone it (laughter).  It will not happen anymore.
Story_ID: 228328
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Jeffrey] Mumford, at the dawn of the 20th century, William Edward Burghardt [W.E.B.] Du Bois I think spoke very prophetically when he said, "The problem of the twentieth century is the problem of the color-line."
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: It's understanding differences between the people of Asia, Africa, America, Pacific Islands, all these different--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --places.  This color line is not just an American problem.  These are global issues, and that was I think true of all of the 20th century.  He said that in 1903.  Now it's 2005.
Speaker 2: How about that?
Speaker 1: And I hear you saying that the color line is still there--
Speaker 2: How about that?  And it's--
Speaker 1: --in music.
Speaker 2: It pains me horribly to say these things.  Things have improved to some extent, and I--I'm convinced it will continue to improve.  But they only improve by perpetual vigilance and by the insistence of artists to speak their voice.
Speaker 1: When I, I had an opportunity as a student to work at the Cleveland Museum of Art [Cleveland, Ohio], and I came across a book titled 'The Art of Exclusion[: Representing Blacks in the Nineteenth Century,' Albert Boime].  And it talked about the reluctance on the part of curators to collect works by African American visual artists and, and other artists and sculptors.  They just weren't in the collections of the major museums, and it had been that way for a long time.  But when I think about the work of people like maybe, I pronounce it Romare Bearden--some folks in Detroit [Michigan] tell me I should say Romare, but Bearden--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and, and some of his pioneering work in New York [New York] in the 1960s, he was sort of a trailblazer.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: In addition to [William Grant] Still, are there other classical musicians or conservatory-trained musicians that--you would put at the top of the list as sort of the trailblazers, the door-openers that made it possible for you to be composer-in-residence here [Oberlin Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Well, I, as I said, I, I certainly would cite Hale Smith, [HistoryMaker] Olly Wilson, [HistoryMaker] T. J. Anderson, George Walker, who is also an alumnus of Oberlin.  Younger generation: Alvin Singleton, who's, that term (laughter) kids--is relative because we're all getting up there in years.  And Alvin is still my senior, but he falls between the Olly Wilson and myself in terms of generations.  And he's a very accomplished composer.  Others: Florence Price, Margaret Bonds, of the older, yet, another earlier generation, [Robert Nathaniel] Dett himself, of course, Chevalier de Saint-Georges [Joseph Boulogne], all these composers and more, Coleridge-Taylor Perkinson, who just passed away, Howard Swanson, who was the first black composer to have a piece performed by the New York Philharmonic [Philharmonic-Symphony Society of New York, Inc.], countless others.
Story_ID: 228329
Speaker 1: I'm grateful that there are historians who are also composers who, who put these ideas together for us in neat little packages, and especially grateful for the work of [HistoryMaker] Samuel Floyd in the power of black music and the wonderful texts that he put together.  And it sort of markets to the historians (laughter), my colleagues, sort of a gentle introduction to the power of black music for non-musicians, even though there are musical examples in there and so--he's one of our HistoryMakers too.  We have his interview in the archives.  But are there other music historians in addition to those composers whose written works our viewers of this transcript or readers of the transcript and viewers of the interview might want to consult if they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I cite the book that I use, the William [C.] Banfield text ['Musical Landscapes in Color: Conversations with Black American Composers'], which is a very important book, and the work of Eileen Southern [Eileen Jackson] and--
Speaker 1: Can you tell me please what it is that--
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think about this, but there are unfortunately not enough.  There needs to be more.
Speaker 1: But Southern's text, is that sort of a comprehensive study?  Is it more classical or jazz or?
Speaker 2: It's pretty comprehensive, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember the title of that?  I know there was an early--
Speaker 2: It's called--
Speaker 1: --work by her.  And I'm saying early, thinking '80s [1980s], 'The Music of Black Americans[: A History,' Eileen Southern]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is that the same one you have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Music of Black Americans,' right.
Speaker 1: --in mind?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Story_ID: 228330
Speaker 1: --[HistoryMaker] Mr. [Jeffrey] Mumford, I just want to backtrack a little bit because we spent a lot of time talking about those formative years in Washington, D.C., growing up in the nation's capital, born in '55 [1955], sort of coming of age in the '60s [1960s] and then sort of out and about (laughter) in the early '70s [1970s].  But you were in D.C. in 1963, I suppose--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --perhaps on August 27th [sic. August 28, 1963], when there was the great March on Washington for jobs and peace and freedom.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Were you a part of that?
Speaker 2: I was a little kid.  I remember my mother [Sylvia Jefferson Mumford] and father [Thaddeus Mumford] talking about it.  I think we went down.  It was a huge crowd, and I was quite sure what to make of all of it, that and [President John Fitzgerald] Kennedy's assassination, which, you know (laughter), you know, that year, you know, was an amazing year, wasn't it?  I mean, so, sure.
Speaker 1: And, and the reason I ask is because you told me you remembered, you know, getting out of school early in '63 [1963], November '63 [1963]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --when President Kennedy--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --was assassinated.
Speaker 2: Right.  So in August we were already out on vacation, but--
Speaker 1: But you remember something in the air?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a big, yes, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And how about in 1968--
Speaker 2: Well, I--
Speaker 1: --the year of [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]'s--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --assassination.
Speaker 2: And I was in seventh grade at Gordon Junior High School [Rose L. Hardy Middle School, Washington, D.C.].  And they told us to immediately go home.  Do not stop anywhere.  We were to in assess, in excess seek shelter immediately.  There were boarded up businesses.  It was all kinds of devastation and, and fury around.  I remember all the boards having written on them, "soul brother," to let people know that they were friends and to hopefully spare their business.  We had a neighborhood supermarket owned by a wonderful white couple who were Jewish.  And unfortunately, they had to undergo some destruction of their property.  They couldn't have been better, nicer people.  So, the understandable rage at such a thing can also get out of control.  And we hope that the best part of us, again, can resolve these feelings in a more civilized way, not diminishing at all the justifiable anger at senseless violence.  But having senseless violence be the result of other senseless violence doesn't, I don't think solves anything.
Story_ID: 228331
Speaker 1: That civil rights era of the 1960s, and, and I'd have to say into the '70s [1970s] as well, was really a transformative period I think for the nation.  And I just wonder, when you look at the balance sheet at what existed, you know, on the eve of the March [on Washington] in the summer of 1963 and perhaps what was in place in 2003, just as we're getting into the 21st century, have we made progress?  Have we overcome (laughter), as the sparrows, spirituals suggest that we would.  We shall overcome.  Have we overcome yet as a people?
Speaker 2: Not yet.  I mean we've overcome a lot.  We have made some very significant progress.  But without getting too political (laughter), I think we are in a, in a place of retrenchment now.  I think the current administration [President George Walker Bush] and administrations like this anywhere--but certainly I can always speak best to my own country--are quickly undoing things that were done.  And people's bloodshed, and hard work, and sweat to create is now I think in a way being made a mockery of by certain people in this administration.
Story_ID: 228332
Speaker 1: Are there specific areas where you, you noticed that we're losing ground as a nation?
Speaker 2: The sensitivity to education, this No Child Left Behind [Act of 2001] legislation is a mockery, and it is a complete joke.  I mean you punish schools that least afford being punished for standards that are impossible to, to reach at the way they're reaching it.  The educational theory tells you that students learn at different rates and in different ways.  And there's a multi-modular approach to teaching and learning.  And you have a one size fits all approach that reside, relies on testing as a sole criterion, an arbiter of, of, of learning, you're going to lose students through the cracks big time.  And I (laughter) as an educator and as a father of a nine-year-old daughter who's in the system that is part of this whole just, I can't be angry enough about this, you know, testing philosophy, as if that's going to solve anything.  My daughter's [Josephine Blythe Coleman-Mumford] a wonderfully creative, brilliant, sensitive child who learns in various ways.  Viscerally she learns by, she learns by this force of her imagination, by doing things, you know.  And to force her and other students, creative students like her into a mold where you sit in a row, and you learn this.  And you have the sheet in front of you.  You write these things down, based on what a teacher is barking at you.  And you have this arbitrary systems established there to justify a basic antieducational philosophy, which would, of course, have you--any Fascist society would like to stay a Fascist society by--continuing ignorance and into population.  And the first thing to go in a society is the artists and the intellectuals.  And if you cease to have a foundation that fosters creativity and, and intellectual pursuit and the sense of discovery, you get what you get, and you get a society that allows what happens in 2000 and 2004 to happen as opposed to what happened in the Ukraine, where there's 98 percent literacy rate.  You continue to dumb down society and create impediments by having so, such a high incidence of having to work your butt off just to keep ends meeting so you can't criticize and question what's going on all around you.  And that's by design, I believe strongly.  So, you see where (laughter) my political leanings are.  I can't but think, and there was also a report on the radio this morning about how people making, you know, what was considered a very good income are finding it harder and harder to find, be able to afford a house.  You can't afford, you can't afford basic things in your life, and you have to work overtime and then, then there's a whole legislation, which is going to eliminate overtime.  You know, it, it continues to create a climate of fear, apprehension, and anxiety in society.  When you have fear, apprehension, and anxiety you don't think clearly.  It's been proven that when students are ashamed or are fearful, they don't learn well.  The part of their brain snaps off.  When you have that part of your brain snapped off on a nationwide (laughter), nationwide, what is left are the people in control with, I think, purely evil intentions.
Story_ID: 228333
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Jeffrey] Mumford, at the end of the last tape, I suggested that, or I should say I agreed with you perhaps or echoed you in saying that a lot of folks are concerned that government perhaps is doing some things, our national government, to stifle creativity.  But I, I wondered aloud if perhaps there was a positive role that government should play in fostering creativity, perhaps through agencies like the National Endowment for the Arts [NEA].  Do you have feelings on that?
Speaker 2: Oh, I have strong feelings on that.  I've, I've served on many NEA panels and have been all too delighted to do so because I thought it's, it's a way for me to hear more what's in the field and to discover people I have not heard, and, and ensembles, and orchestras, and people out there doing good work that I don't know about.  I like to be able to help the process, and I'm very honored that I've been asked to, to do that.  I think the NEA is a wonderful organization that needs to be fifteen times bigger as the, quote unquote civilized country that we claimed to be.  To have a national endowment with such a miniscule budget is an embarrassment to any thinking and feeling person, and should be if it isn't.  There are cities, the--years ago there was a statistic that the, the budget for the City of Berlin [Germany] was three times the whole budget for our whole country.  And that's just absurd.  And what do you expect?  And again, it shows our disregard for the creative process, re, regard for the world of the heart, and the mind, and that which lifts us up, and inspires us, and makes us better people.  Well, clearly our priorities are skewed.  We think nothing of sending billions of dollars to Iraq and billions of dollars to make other people, supposedly improve other people's lives, which we're not doing, and they resent us horribly for it, but we don't care about what's going on here.
Story_ID: 228334
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Jeffrey] Mumford, I--I remember in the late '80s [1980s], going into the 1990s, great public outcry.  I remember this because I was in grad [graduate] school studying arts management as part of a public administration program [at Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio], the business, the government's business in the arts, dabbling, whatever.  But in any case, great public outcry about tax dollars being used to not to encourage people to create art, but perhaps to create pornographies, and it was Andres Serrano, and--
Speaker 2: Oh, right, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --Robert Mapplethorpe with--who really loved black male nude, photographs, and children were sometimes in some of the photographs, of some of the other artists.  And taxpayers were appalled--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that public funds were used to support those kinds of artistic--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --endeavors, and they called for the elimination--
Speaker 2: Oh, I know.
Speaker 1: --of the National Endowment [for the Arts (NEA)].
Speaker 2: One of them--
Speaker 1: What about censorship?
Speaker 2: --was a state repre--congressman from Ohio named [Senator] Ralph Regula.  Yeah, I remember.  What do I think of that?
Speaker 1: Or the idea of censorship.  Should government act to censor?
Speaker 2: I think in a civilized society, again, you have to trust in the diversity of the fabric of society.  You're not always going to like everything that comes out of what's created, but I think an intelligent dialogue then can occur about what is created, if you in fact care about the process of creating art.  Messages vary.  Not every message is a message people want to hear, but the fact that people feel like the message just needs to be out there, is something that should engender a serious and intelligent debate.  And the more art that is created allows us to have an even richer debate.
Speaker 1: So you're not in favor of censorship?
Speaker 2: No (laughter), I don't see how any thinking person could be.  I mean, everybody brings to the table a different set of experiences, and preconceptions, and prejudices.  But what makes us rich is the fact that we can talk about them and discuss them in a civilized forum, which is all to our betterment, right?  I think that cutting things off prematurely creates a society of anxiety, a society of distrust, a society of closedness, and there's enough of that.  Why would we have, why would we want to continue that?  We see the, we see the road that--takes us down when fear is the motivating force for public policy.
Story_ID: 228335
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Jeffrey] Mumford, you mentioned that you have a daughter in the public school system.  And I think you also mentioned that you have a wife--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --who's a creative person.
Speaker 2: She's a painter.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit more about your, your family?
Speaker 2: My wife, Donna Leslie Coleman, I should spell?  D-O-N-N-A, L-E-S-L-I-E, Coleman, C-O-L-E-M-A-N.  My daughter Josephine Blythe Coleman-Mumford, J-O-S-E-P-H-I-N-E, B-L-Y-T-H-E, C-O-L-E-M-A-N-(hyphen)-M-U-M-F-O-R-D (laughter).  It's a mouthful.  We call her Blythe.  Blythe was a name we decided upon by, you know, looking at numbers of names before she was born that we both liked.  And we had lists, and one person liked this, and another didn't like that list.  And so we finally agreed on the name Blythe, which means happiness, and our daughter is a very happy, vital, intelligent, creative person.  She's nine years old.  She's in fourth grade.  My wife, Donna is a wonderful painter.  Her work is very rich and allegory and reference to many different influences, not the least of which is the work of Hieronymus Bosch and [Pieter] Bruegel [the Elder], Franco-Flemish painters of the 17th century, 16th century.  And her work evidences a fanciful environment wherein human relations are explored and discussed, and so.
Speaker 1: And where might we view some of her works?
Speaker 2: She's had exhibits at the Dead Horse Gallery here in Cleveland [sic. Lakewood, Ohio] and the [Flora Stone] Mather Gallery at Case [Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio], here at Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio] at the [New Union] Center for the Arts downtown, FAVA [Firelands Association for the Visual Arts, Oberlin, Ohio].  She's been exhibited in other cities in, in New York [New York], and Switzerland, and [Washington] D.C., and she's now painting, building up a critical mass of, of new work to, to show.
Story_ID: 228336
Speaker 1: And [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Jeffrey] Mumford, we're in a space, unfortunately, where there are no musical instruments.  And so (laughter), where can we hear your music performed, either live, okay, if there are performances coming up in the--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --the near future or in the, perhaps in 2005, in the same--
Speaker 2: Well, in 2005--okay, since this is a time-specific and then, then timeless video, I mean, I have now a new CD [compact disc] that just came out on the Albany Records label.  It's called 'The Promise of the Far Horizon.'  That title comes from a string quartet that is on one of the pieces on the CD, played by a fantastic young ensemble called The Corigliano Quartet, named for the composer John Corigliano.  As well, there is another CD on the same label called 'Dark Fires[: 20th Century Music for Piano],' which is one piece of a multi-CD expression of music of black composers by pianist Karen Walwyn, who was in the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  I'm not quite sure where she is now.  She may be in Spain now.  And she undertook to do an anthology of black composers, piano music.  And I'm honored to be included on that.  I was the, the first volume of a multi-volume set.  Also I have two other CDs on the CRI label, Composers Recordings [Inc.] and corporate label, which has now been, now made part of the New World Records label, one that was called 'The Focus of Blue Light.'  The other is volume II of an anthology of the Bang on a Can Festival [Bang on a Can Marathon], which is a festival of new music in New York [New York].  So those can be, those could be purchased through Amazon and through New World Records.  And the Albany CDs can be purchased through Amazon and from Albany Records.
Speaker 1: Okay, and is there--
Speaker 2: Also there's a--
Speaker 1: --print music that--
Speaker 2: Also I have one, it's a--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: --another piece on a CD anthology from the Cleveland Composers Guild, which is an organization on, I think it's the oldest composer organization in the country, located in Cleveland [Ohio].  And that's on the Capstone [Records] label--a solo piano piece played by a wonderful Vietnamese pianist--Tuyen Tonnu, called 'barbaglio dal manca,' which is translates to the Italian, as dazzling from the left side--there's a lot of left-hand passage work.  And it was written for the Swedish pianist I told you about earlier, Barbro Dahlman, so.  I'm published by Theodore Presser Company, which is located in King of Prussia, Pennsylvania.  They're a wonderful major publisher.  And they have been very good to me, very kind, and supportive of my work, and I'm very honored to be among their composers.
Speaker 1: And are there any new works that we can expect from you in the near future?
Speaker 2: Well, I have been recently commissioned by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra to write a, a large piece for the, which will be premiered in the fall 2005, it's a concerto for orchestra, which means that every group in the orchestra gets a chance to show off (laughter) and shine.  And, and then after that--I'm going write a solo violin piece for, the first violinist to that--I told you about, Lina Bahn, amazing, insightful, passionate, and intelligent violinist, for solo violin.  And then after that I've been commissioned to write a piece for the Cleveland Orchestra to celebrate both the legacy of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and the 78th anniversary of the wonderful hall they perform in, Severance Hall [Cleveland, Ohio].  And I'm greatly honored to do that.  Cleveland Orchestra is one of the, and the Chicago Symphony [Orchestra] are two of the best orchestras in the, in the whole world and that composer's dream to write music for such amazing organizations as those.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in Cleveland we've been saying that we have the best band in the land, but you're saying in the whole world.
Speaker 2: I say among the best orchestras in the whole world, yes.
Speaker 1: Among the best.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you.
Speaker 2: I say they, and Chicago, and Berlin Philharmonic and a few others, yes.
Story_ID: 228337
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Jeffrey] Mumford, I, I wanted to ask also about any concerns that you have about our society here--
Speaker 2: More than I've already said (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, special concerns beyond education and censorship in our society at the dawn of the 21st century for [Josephine] Blythe [Coleman-Mumford] or, or humanity that you would like to have be a part of this record.
Speaker 2: Well, in continuing on my little political diatribe, I'm just going to say that I'm deeply afraid for the, for our civilization in the hands of people for whom fear is a motivating factor for public policy, and that we are seemly unable to see the collective humanity in all of us, and that the priorities should be 180 degrees opposite to where they are now, that we are at the precipice energetically and spiritually I think at a time when there's enormous shift in our consciousness.  And we have the opportunity to learn from our mistakes and to celebrate the best in who we are as, as a society in this civilization, but we need to do that soon (laughter).  And I, I, I want the world for my daughter and, and all the daughters and sons and people to be one where people are, are honored and appreciated and celebrated for who they are and, and what they can create and not what they can destroy.  So, that's basically (laughter) where I am on that.
Story_ID: 228338
Speaker 1: I know you mentioned that you have commissions to produce new works, 2005 for Chicago Symphony [Orchestra] and 2006, [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] Day around January 20th or whatever that Monday, holiday--
Speaker 2: You're right.
Speaker 1: --(laughter) will fall, with the actual birthday being January 15th.  But 2006 for the Cleveland Symphony [sic. Cleveland Orchestra], best band in the land.  But are there other things that you, in addition to composing or perhaps more composing, that you still want to do that you have not yet done?
Speaker 2: Oh God, this, I mean, one's life as an artist is one that constantly unfolds and new challenges--and projects, and passions occur daily.  So the board is full of ideas of things to do.  I mean I could, I'd love to have more orchestral music recorded on CD.  I want to write a double concerto for violin, cello and orchestra.  I want to write some choral music.  I want to write more of what, what I've done already.  I mean I, I love writing period.  I love the act of composing.  I love writing orchestral music.  I, I love the opportunity to work with really good, insightful, inspiring, and committed performers.  And I've had the great benefit of working with some fantastic people, and I look forward to working with more fantastic people and discovering people I don't even know yet and write.
Story_ID: 228339
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Jeffrey] Mumford, why did you decide to share your story with The HistoryMakers?
Speaker 2: Well, (laughter) I, I have to say that I was honored to get a, a, a communication asking me to share my story with you.  A friend, [HistoryMaker] Amy [Tate] Billingsley in Washington, D.C., recommended me for consideration for this, and I'm very grateful to her.  I think the more stories that are out there by us, the better.  And I think that it's an important legacy to have.
Speaker 1: And by us, you mean composers--
Speaker 2: Black people (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, black, okay.  And, and that leaves to my final question.  What do you want your, your legacy to be, that you shared the story, or is there something else?
Speaker 2: Oh my (laughter) thinking on my feet.  I want my legacy (laughter)--I, have not turned fifty yet, and I haven't really thought about the grand question of that.  I guess I want to be known as someone who was passionately committed to what I do, who speaks from his heart, who is concerned about the greatest of us, the aspect that is, which uplifts, hopefully in my humble way, whatever, to contribute to the fabric of creative expression in art that's out there, to be known as someone who has done a good job (laughter), all of that, you know, who loves his family, and who wants to bring life, and joy, and inspiration to people that I meet and people I don't even know yet, and just be a good person.
