Story_ID: 628022
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers project.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am could please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Sure [HistoryMaker] Toni-Marie Montgomery, T-O-N-I, hyphen, M-A-R-I-E, M-O-N-T-G O-M-E-R-Y.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story behind your first name?
Speaker 2: Well, actually the Toni-Marie, yes.  There is.  My mother [Mattie Drayton], her mother, mother's first name was Marie, Marie Jones, Marie Cross [Marie Cross Drayton], sorry.  And my mother didn't want to have the first name Marie, but she thought let's have a second name of Marie.  And she thought of Ann Marie, and there were lots of them.  And she says that she remembers somewhere in Savannah, Georgia running into a little Italian girl and her name was Toni Marie.  And so, I actually added the hyphen in there with the Toni-Marie so that people wouldn't separate.  Usually if I just say Toni Montgomery, then they'll say, "Oh, that's a boy's name," so I usually use the Toni-Marie.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Marie was originally a middle name and?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I just elided them together.
Speaker 1: Okay, about, about what age were you, when you ali- put them together?
Speaker 2: I'd say probably high school [Merion Mercy Academy, Merion Station, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, trying to make sure the difference (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: June 25th, 1956, and I was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And ma'am what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: So, I'm dean of the Bienen School of Music [Henry and Leigh Bienen School of Music] at Northwestern.  And I'm also a professor in that school at Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you are the first African American dean?
Speaker 2: At Northwestern that's correct.
Speaker 1: And the first woman dean of that school?
Speaker 2: Yes, so I'm the seventh dean, first woman, first African American.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: August 25th, is it, 26th.  August 26, 2010.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: 1900 South Michigan Avenue, in Chicago, Illinois.
Story_ID: 628023
Speaker 1: Now that we have identified ourselves, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I would say dessert and most likely I would say chocolate ice cream but it would have to be Ben and Jerry's [Ben and Jerry's Ice Cream].
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I'd say pink, not because it's lightweight or you know, feminine it's just I look good in pink, and so, I like it as far as clothes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring when after a long winter things are coming alive and--as far as plants--and people have a new sense of energy and vigor.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: San Diego, California.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is do you have a, a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't know if it's a favorite, but I frequently say that's ridiculous.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 628024
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Milton Montgomery (ph.)] side, but we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Sure, it was Mattie, M-A-T-T-I-E, last name Drayton, D-R-A-Y-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Drayton?
Speaker 1: Drayton.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Savannah, Georgia, November 18, 1928.  She passed away September 30, 2000.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now well what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: Well, there were nine children including my mother.  And her mother was Marie Cross [Marie Cross Drayton].  The father was Sylvester Cross [sic. Sylvester Drayton].  And I know truthfully very little.  There are brothers and sisters who are remaining who live in New Jersey, actually two, a brother and then a sister, Paul Drayton and then Josephine White [Josephine Drayton White].  So, two aunts of mine.  And then there were a couple of bro- brothers who are in the South who were ministers [Jerry Drayton and Jesse Drayton].  And so, there wasn't a close relationship as you can tell and more so with the New Jersey relatives since I grew up in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Are there any stories about what the family was doing in the 19th century, or, or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --that far back?
Speaker 2: No, I think really just because life in Savannah, they were poor.  The, the family struggled, so from my mother she didn't talk a lot about--she hated Savannah.  I do recall going back to Savannah to perform, and she went back also.  But I could tell it was a difficult time and she didn't really relish any memories or many memories growing up there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You ge- got the sense that she didn't like it, but did she tell any stories about growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, one story that I actually was able to get out of my Uncle Paul was that my mother dropped out of high school in order to help her mother because I guess her mother was not working.  And just help raise her brothers and sisters.  She did go back to high school to complete, I think it was her senior year was the time that she had dropped out.  Other times just talking about how, you know, just living on the wrong side of the tracks.  And doing housework for white people and so none of the stories were really good ones.  She had a--who was it?  It was god mother and truthfully I'm not even remembering her first name.  But her god mother had actually offered to raise her, my mother, Mattie Drayton.  And for whatever reason her mother didn't allow it, my, my grandmother.  So, she has--had good memories of this god mother and the god mother apparently, you know, had some type of means financial means.  And going over to her house and having just better days.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you say she finished high school in Savannah?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did she go onto college, or?
Speaker 2: No, she moved to North Carolina where she had a brother who was a minister.  So, this was Winston-Salem, North Carolina.  And then she came up to Philadelphia in the early 1950s.  And that's when she met my father.  They did not marry and I'll jump to the chase that my father had no, interactions with me.  So, even to this day I have not met him.  So, continue with the question about education.  So, when she was trying to raise me as a single mother, she went back to school for nursing.  And so, just the one year program to become a practical nurse.  And then basically she worked from the 1960s as I can remember I was in first grade [at Most Precious Blood of our Lord School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] when she passed the nursing, you know, the exam, for the State of Pennsylvania.  And she worked as a--primarily as a private duty nurse, meaning just taking care of one patient at a time, usually in hospitals.
Story_ID: 628025
Speaker 1: So, you didn't know your father at all?
Speaker 2: Right, that's correct.
Speaker 1: Do you know who he was at all, or?
Speaker 2: Yes, so his name is Milton Montgomery [ph.] and so obviously I have his last name.  He was an aviation mechanic at Vert- Vertol [Boeing Vertol; Boeing Rotorcraft Systems, Ridley Park, Pennsylvania].  I think it's V-E-R-T-O-L, an aviation plant, outside of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And he did contact me eight years ago, when--because I was in Essence magazine, Ebony magazine and Jet, because I was the first African American at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois].  So, first some, some relatives of his contacted me and then he did contact me.  So, I know that he's in Philadelphia.  He has a wife, one daughter at least from that marriage.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he know about you when you when you --?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right but does, he just, the, the relationship whatever didn't, compel him to really do anything?
Speaker 2: Right.  And he did, he was forced to but he paid child support.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, he did, okay he did that.  Do you know much about his, his--where family is from or?
Speaker 2: Nothing, yeah.
Story_ID: 628026
Speaker 1: When you think about your, your parents--now I don't know much about your father's [Milton Montgomery (ph.)] talents or whatever, but talents and disposition and who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well, obviously I have no knowledge of the, you know, the paternal side, but I know that as far just talent, musical talent, that there's no apparent musical talent from my mother's side.  My mother [Mattie Drayton]--the reason that I took piano lessons and I began at the age of six, is because my mother always wanted to take piano lessons.  So, in Savannah, Georgia, you know the story was that, the lessons were fifty cents a lesson; the family couldn't afford it.  So, you know, this was obviously a dream that my mother had.  And she would always say that I asked for these lessons, but I'm sure that, in fact, it was that she wanted it for her daughter.  But, it turned to work that, you know there was this talent.  And, you know, it was something that I wanted also.
Speaker 1: Okay, it just sounds, just listening to the story that your mother wanted things in Savannah that, you know, beyond what was being offered and was trying to find a way to get in a position to, you know, to have a better life.
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely.  You know I, you know I think that so many of, you know, the fact that she really was a very smart woman.  And so, what she could have accomplished had, you know, there been someone who could have encouraged her, provided some type of assistance.  'Cause you know, when I, I--many I times I see people who were her age, and who were able to go college and you know, again didn't come from wealthy families, but the education was just im- important and it was stressed.  And people found a way, you know, that continues these days.  So, that fact that I was able to accomplish as much as I've able to accomplish is really, you know, it's primarily because of her.  And because she wanted a better life for herself, but you know, was able to accomplish that through me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--and you are the only child?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Only child, okay, all right.
Story_ID: 628027
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: One memory, I don't know why but I remember waking up on a Christmas and seeing I guess it was my first real doll and it was a black doll.  And her name is Suzy, was Suzy.  And she was one of those walking dolls.  And probably I remember because she kind of scared me because she was probably my size.  I mean, you know, she was--I guess I was about four [feet] so.  So, I don't have Suzy any more but I have another doll Marie, who also a little black doll.  And she has hair and you know, I have a couple outfits, you know, for her winter and then summer.  But, did keep Marie I didn't keep Suzy, I don't know what happened to, to Suzy, the little walking doll.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Yeah, I remember when those were popular (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --those walking dolls and stuff.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, so you were about six years old.
Story_ID: 628028
Speaker 1: Were you raised in the same neighborhood in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] the whole time, or?
Speaker 2: Well, no, so I'd say from probably as an infant until, let me see, thirteen, we lived in North Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which is now not a good neighborhood.  And I'd, at that time it wasn't a good neighborhood because there, the riots were going on, you know, when I was in grammar school [Most Precious Blood of Our Lord School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And I do remember a woman who actually lost her sight, she lived across the street.  Because someone had thrown a brick, you know, into one of, they were I guess, tossing it at one of the storefronts, but it hit her and so she lost her sight.  When I went to high school--so I received a scholarship to Merion Mercy Academy [Merion Station, Pennsylvania], a private all-girls catholic high school, and it was in Lower Merion [Lower Merion Township, Pennsylvania].  So this was on the equivalent of the North Shore here in Chicago [Illinois].  And its call the Main Line and I would take a bus.  But we ended up moving to the west side of Philadelphia so a better neighborhood.  My mother [Mattie Drayton] bought a house.  And so, that was, you know, about age thirteen then.  And let's see, so we lived there until I guess I was twenty.  We then moved to a high rise basically I guess a better neighborhood in Philadelphia, just on the out skirts of Philadelphia.  And then my mother lived in Philadelphia for most of the rest of her time and then she did move to Kansas where I had gotten my, I was the first dean, African American dean at the University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas].  So, she, her last year, she then was living in an apartment there in Lawrence, Kansas.
Story_ID: 628029
Speaker 1: Well, we always ask this question: what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: I'd say the city life of jumping rope, doing Double Dutch, skating.  I--it's funny 'cause I just think of summer, and I don't think of winter when you're inside of downtown Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], city center, I would say.  Going to piano lessons, I can remember Fridays for several years, studying with a teacher at the Settlement Music School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which is on the south side of Philadelphia.  Having dinner with my mother [Mattie Drayton], you know, after school and before the lesson and then going for the lesson then going home.  I think of all the historical aspects of Philadelphia, so downtown going to City Hall [Philadelphia City Hall, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and the Liberty Bell [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] when visitors would come and you know, doing those touristy things.  The art museum [Philadelphia Museum of Art, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and you know, the stairs that of course became famous because of the Rocky movies.  Soft pretzels which I still, you know, I love soft pretzel even today.  I guess a lot would be with Catholic school nuns.  My first piano teacher was a Catholic school nun.  And she's still alive, Sister Maria Rafaela [ph.].  And I guess holidays too, when I think of smells with, you know, certain foods.  I think that's about it.
Story_ID: 628030
Speaker 1: Now, you said earlier, you said that you really, it was your mother's [Mattie Drayton] idea that you played the piano?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so, you didn't have any desire to be any musical in- you know, thoughts, I mean, you know, that was, that wasn't on your mind as a little kid?
Speaker 2: Well, I started when I was six, and so I can't remember before then.  And so, when I think of being six years old taking the lessons, we didn't have a piano at home.  We lived in an apartment and so after I guess it was the first year, 'cause I was then practicing at the convent [Most Precious Blood of Our Lord Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  So, I can actually see the stairs going up, you know, to the porch to the convent.  And so, my mother had asked the teacher [Maria Rafaela (ph.)] well you know, should I buy a piano that was a great investment.  So, I do remember my Wurlitzer Spinet piano.  And then, you know, I remember being nine years old and playing the organ at church.  So, I would play for services, and I truthfully remember how long that went on.  But every Sunday, of course this is not a paid gig, I was playing and barely reaching, you know, the pedals the organ (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, now were these, were these session, were you playing the, just as a song maybe you know, or were you actually accompanying the choir and playing?
Speaker 2: Both, so, there would be some, this was you know, the Mass, and so there would be certain sections where I was just play a hymn.  People would sign along or I would, you know, I could be for instance during communion and it would just be background music.  I do remember playing for the choirs.  I also, because let's see for that high school [Merion Mercy Academy, Merion Station, Pennsylvania] I went from first grade through eighth grade.  And so, then there were musicals, you know, like 'Hello Dolly!' [Michael Stewart] and things that the same nun who started me on piano lessons would lead those.  And so, I would play the piano for those and you know, again accompanying individual singers who were on the stage singing and dancing, or you know, bigger choruses of people.  So, from you know, I guess like nine years old and through high school when I think about it, did I ever consider another major I mean it was just assumed that I would major in music.  I, I'm a writer, and so I thought, I considered, you know, maybe writing but I guess that just pays as much as being classical musician does.  And you know, I, I, good with writing like op-eds but not with fiction, and so I think I didn't seriously consider that as another major. So what happened when I--after I graduated from high school, I didn't go directly into college. I stayed home for two years, and I practiced eight hours a day. And so I was studying with a teacher in New York City [New York, New York], I would take the train.  During that time, I played on WNYC [WNYC Radio, New York, New York], the radio station and played concerts (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, I don't want to get too far--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: --ahead, far ahead yet, we want to go back to grade school--
Speaker 2: Sorry (laughter), all right were still at grade school.
Speaker 1: But, we, we're speeding too far now, but--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) All right sorry.
Speaker 1: That, that, that's not unusual in this, you know--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --in this for people to do that.
Story_ID: 628031
Speaker 1: Let me take you back to when you were six, I guess, and just ask you, did you--now, when you started taking these lessons now, had you started school?  You--I guess you were in first grade (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, yeah I was in first grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, in fact, started school in kindergarten.
Speaker 1: Okay, well what, what was the name of your first school?
Speaker 2: Most Precious Blood [Most Precious Blood of Our Lord School].
Speaker 1: Most Precious Blood and--?
Speaker 2: So, Catholic school, Catholic church.
Speaker 1: Was it on the north side of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All black school.
Speaker 1: The nuns were they all--mostly black too?
Speaker 2: No, they were all white.  Yeah there were no nun--no, white nuns, no, white priest.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now when you, you started playing piano, was that, was that your mother's [Mattie Drayton] idea that you, you would learn?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, and okay.  I was, I was asking because I wondered if the nuns saw something in you.
Speaker 2: No, because at that point you know, I have a horrible singing voice so, there's no way that they would have been able to say, "Oh, she has musical talent."  So, yeah, it was my mother's idea.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, well did it come easily to you?  Did music come--
Speaker 2: Apparently it did.  You know, I can't really remember playing with one hand, then playing with two.  But yeah so, the nun, Sister Maria [Maria Rafaela (ph.)], saw that I had musical aptitude and my mother enjoyed hearing practice apparently so, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, was there a, there a, was there a lot of music played in your home?
Speaker 2: The radio (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not live, but the radio.
Speaker 2: --and records.  I do remember as a child my mother taking me to the, hear the Philadelphia Orchestra.   You know, they had children's concerts, you know in the '60s [1960s].  There was Leonard Bernstein you know, with New York Philharmonic.  And so, you know, that was the thing to do.  And so, we had records and I still have boxes of LPs from childhood and then of course from later on.
Speaker 1: Okay, well you know, it's unusual your, your mother taking your to classical concerts.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Most people in the black community are, (unclear) were not into classical music?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: You're right.
Speaker 1: --this is an unusual, you know, I guess interest, you know, for your mother to have.
Speaker 2: For that she had, you're correct.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  'Cause we have classical highlights you know, of, of the, well like even now you know, they'll advertise these on TV  but you could then purchase records that were the highlights of music.  And so, you know I can hear some of those in my, in my mind, you know that I would hear them over and over again.
Speaker 1: Did she bring 'em home, did she play 'em at home?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes so we had a, what would it be?  A record player.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did she u- used to listen to popular music on the radio too?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes, so you know, most music that I remember as a child would be Motown [Motown Records].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, I still enjoy Motown.  So, it's funny if The Beatles are played, and I, I just I don't know that music at all.  You know, I remember though seeing them on 'The Ed Sullivan Show' and being excited but I, you know, that was just not part of my growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay, did--that station wasn't played, you know?
Speaker 2: Right (laughter), no it wasn't.
Speaker 1: So--okay, all right.  So, when you growing coming along I as- I assume that there was a black radio station in--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --oriented radio station in Philadelphia that--
Speaker 2: Yes, it was played.
Speaker 1: --dominated the--
Speaker 2: I don't remember the call numbers, but you're right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: It was an AM station.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So, now what about--did you--well, you said you watched the Leonard Bernstein's 'Young People's Concerts'?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you know, on television and yeah.  They, because they as I recall they were held during primetime basically on CBS or one of the major networks?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, yes.  I don't remember how frequently I would watch them but I do of course remember him, because, you know, he was an icon, really opened up, I think so many homes to classical music, just making it assessable.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Instead of stuffy.
Speaker 1: I, I recall they were specials and it would happen periodically but--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I maybe four times a year maybe I don't know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't even remember that either.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That's a long time ago.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it wasn't a regular thing, but--so, okay your, so your mother is conscious enough of classical to expose you to some of the--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did, did, did you have any sense that she, where did she get her interest was that from her god mother or?
Speaker 2: I think truthfully it, that interest and also she had terrific taste, for instance, in just decorating the apartment.  And so, I think she learned a lot from cleaning other people's homes.  And she would see, you know, just not only the taste but also that there--other people lived much better.  And that they are opportunities and, you know, she should have some those.  Or at least, I should have them.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she, she, she associated the music and with the lifestyle of the people that had means and--
Speaker 2: And education, I think more so.  Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, that makes sense.
Story_ID: 628032
Speaker 1: So well, history has shown as we will reveal in this interview that you, you are, you know, proficient on the piano so you (laughter)--so as you start, I mean, are you, are you did you draw a lot of attention, as a young piano player?
Speaker 2: Yes, I mean, at least at the school [Most Precious Blood of Our Lord School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], at the church [Most Precious Blood of Our Lord Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  I'm thinking when I went to Settlement Music School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] you know, I would do recitals every year, and so, I had attention there.  I played with an orchestra.  I'm trying to this of other opportunities.  I went to music camp from I think the age of twelve through fifteen and that was in Maine.  Again, something (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was the name of the camp?
Speaker 2: Amherst Summer Music Center [Raymond, Maine], Amherst A-M-H-E-R-S-T, it doesn't exist anymore.  But, I met a lot of musicians they mainly came from New York City [New York, New York] area and Long Island [New York].  And that was great exposure because you know, my grade and all my experiences had been with African American students.  And there were maybe two or three African Americans at this, at these camps.  And also, not only just diversity, ethi- of ethnicity but also diversity of talents.  So, I saw that you know, here are some of these very talented pianists.  For--I remember early years I wasn't--early years of going to the camp--I wasn't playing the type and level of music that I should've been playing at that time, so that then precipitated to my changing teachers.  And so, 'til today I'm a stickler for having a great foundation, for, for young people, as far as musical training.  And not staying with a teacher, who you know, really doesn't have the experience or the knowledge of the repertoire because that foundation is really important for, you know, them moving ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you advocated people change teachers as they grow in, in--
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: --ability.
Speaker 2: And so, I am you know, it's not anger but I'm a little annoyed that, that first teacher, the nun [Maria Rafaela (ph.)] didn't tell my mother [Mattie Drayton] earlier.   "You know, I've given Toni [HistoryMaker Toni-Marie Montgomery] as much as I can, she should move to another teacher."  So, I stayed with her too long.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And Amherst Summer Music Center is similar to Interlochen [Interlochen Center for the Arts, Interlochen, Michigan] in Michigan, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yes, 'cause we had pianists, but also instrumentalists, there were some singers.  And we were all about the same age, you know, young teenagers through older teenagers.
Story_ID: 628033
Speaker 1: Now were there, were there any financial rewards for being a musical prodigy in those days, in the community?
Speaker 2: No, I'd say you know, just the scholarships that I received for lessons, especially say at Settlement Music School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and others.  So, I always because of that then you know, my mother then paid less for the private lessons that I was having.
Speaker 1: Okay, now Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] has such a rich musical heritage, I mean, so many--
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: --especially jazz musicians out of Philadelphia.  And it's just, it's almost unbelievable I, we interviewed [HistoryMaker] McCoy Tyner--
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.
Speaker 1: --about five years and he was just telling all the different people and.  Were you all, were you aware of that kind of heritage?
Speaker 2: Truthfully no. when I went to undergrad school, can I jump to that?
Speaker 1: Well, we, we don't want you to jump over high school [Merion Mercy Academy, Merion Station, Pennsylvania], but just to say--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but just to say that that would be the first time I really--that I was made aware of say the jazz musicians but also the Philly sound, you know, remember that from popular music.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Philadelphia International [Philadelphia International Records]--
Speaker 2: Yes, the records.
Speaker 1: Gamble [HistoryMaker Kenneth Gamble] and Huff [HistoryMaker Leon Huff]?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, did you, you, you heard their songs on the radio I guess.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But, you didn't you didn't you weren't aware that that was a Philadelphia product sort of?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I, I don't think I really associated the two.
Story_ID: 628034
Speaker 1: Now, you went to grade school in the same--okay at the--
Speaker 2: Most Precious Blood [Most Precious Blood of Our Lord School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Most Precious Blood, and you were there through all of grade school, or just?
Speaker 2: Well, what happened was I--kindergarten through sixth grade and then for seventh and eighth grade there was a special program where we bused.  It wasn't--basically it was still to an African American school but it was in another part of the city.  And students from about four grade schools throughout the city were also bused to this Catholic program.  And so, we were then considered, you know, the brightest students and we were put together.  So, we then went to this other school, which I don't even remember the name of now, but that was for seventh and eighth grade.
Speaker 1: That was the next question (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, I don't remember the name of it (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 628035
Speaker 1: --To one school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, from about four grade schools to this one school that I'm not remembering the name of, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was that--did you find that environment more stimulating than the other school [Most Precious Blood of Our Lord School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: I don't remember much of my previous six years.  But I do remember me meeting different people and you know the friendships that were formed there that then continued.  And I do recall, you know, that we were being challenged and at least encouraged to, that you know, you're bright and so you need to work harder.  And then remembering going into high school.  And I'm, I'm sure that that's how the connection was made then with Merion Mercy Academy [Merion Station, Pennsylvania].  That Merion Mercy was offering scholarships wanting, wanting to diversify their student, student body.  And so, that's how I got that academic scholarship then to go there for high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went to Merion Mercy--
Speaker 2: Academy.
Speaker 1: Academy.
Speaker 2: So, it was all girl's private Catholic school.  In fact, there was a lower school so from first grade but then they had the high school.  And there was a separate boys' school [The Haverford School, Haverford, Pennsylvania] that was close by.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, where was Merion Mercy?
Speaker 2: So, it was in Lower Merion, Pennsylvania [Lower Merion Township, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just about I'd say it was tw- maybe a twenty minute bus ride from the edge of the city limits of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  So, from the western city limits of Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Now that's the one that you said is, was on the Main Line, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And explain what the Main Line is, 'cause I, when I first had my first Philadelphia interview people kept throwing out, and I said what is the Main Line.  And I, I had to go look, look it up, but what's (unclear)?
Speaker 2: So, just a very wealthy suburb of, well actually several suburbs that make up this area, like, you know, we consider the North Shore here in Chicago [Illinois].  And so, a Lower Merion [Pennsylvania] was one, Ardmore [Pennsylvania] was another, I'm trying to think of any other, Bryn Mawr [Pennsylvania] was another suburb.  And, you know, celebrities lived there, but again just wealthy individuals.  And they would also take the train usually the men, like the Metra here.  So, taking the train into the city, and I assume that that's the Main Line, the train, train rides then coming into the city.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know often people in the south--well, North Philly [North Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] (unclear) work, you know, they do different jobs--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --one of the Main Line, you know.
Speaker 2: Unfortunately I do remember seeing actually lots of African American women who were on the bus or waiting at bus stops to be picked up, and they were doing house work.
Speaker 1: That's right, right, right.  That's the part of town that's featured in the part of Philadelphia featured in a movie 'The Philadelphia Story,' I--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: I saw it on TV a couple of weeks ago.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no I think that that's a great movie.  In fact, I've watched it several times.
Speaker 1: The Main Line.  So, yeah Lower Merion, that's where Kobe Bryant went to high school [Lower Merion High School, Ardmore, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Oh, really? I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they always announce that when he plays.
Story_ID: 628036
Speaker 1: But okay so you're in a, this kind of tony community here in this, in this school.  And well, how would, you know, how'd, how did you like that school?
Speaker 2: Well, what I say about Merion Mercy Academy [Merion Station, Pennsylvania] was that I received a great education and I did.  When I think about, again English language and math and science and all the classes that, that was a great opportunity for me.  I never truly felt a part of the school, there were only sixty girls in my graduating class, and there were five African Americans of those sixty girls.  So, you know, I remember graduating with honors.  Yeah, I'm very proud of that, but I remember going to, you know, making some friendships with certain girls, going to their homes.  A few of them would come to my house in the city, but I just mainly think of being in the other, not really feeling a part of the majority population, and even with the African Americans that not really making a good connection.  There were some who weren't African American girls who were on scholarship, and their parents were paying.  And so still not, you know, finding that niche.  So, I'd say to tell you the truth, I don't keep in contact with any of the girls from that time.  I had until maybe ten years ago, but you know our lives are so different.  I received the Merion Mercy Academy, the newsletter periodically because, you know, they're asking for donations.  And I'd look at the girls who graduated in 19--when did I graduate--'74 [1974] and you know, most of them are grandmothers now.  You know, there's just the religious aspect of being Catholic.  I, during high school, I stopped going, really participating, as a Catholic, and I'm not a Catholic anymore.  And just the expectation that you're gonna get married, you're gonna have children.  And I remember actually in, in religion class just questioning that, you know, with the nuns and just saying why.  You know, why set an expectation that that's our, our responsibility in life?  And I remember the other gi- some of the other girls just saying, "Well that's what it, the way it should be, that's the way it is."  So, when I look at the newsletter, that's what I see portrayed.  And so, it just it's another world.
Speaker 1: Okay, I mean, often I think that African American students can see, see an institution as another, and you never really fe- felt like you were a part of it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  But again I got a great education and so you know I see that as being a positive.  'Cause had I gone to a public school in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] I don't feel that I would have gotten that education.  And in fact, that's the reason, because my mother [Mattie Drayton] was raised Baptist, so she sent me to Catholic school because she knew that I would get a better education.  I mean that's from kindergarten and she did convert to Catholicism.  I, you know, was baptized and then also confirmed.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, so I take it did you participate in the prom did they have one of those?
Speaker 2: We had a prom and I didn't go to the prom.  Didn't meet many guys, because it was an all-girl school.  The community that I lived, I--again, you know, I mainly practiced.  You know, I, I don't remember say from in high school you're not gonna jump rope or really hang out.  I didn't hang out, you on the street.  So, I didn't meet many people that way.
Speaker 1: So, back in your neigh- was it most of your social life back in your neighborhood or did you have much social life back at home?
Speaker 2: No, I'd say it was mainly in high school and you know, with those girls and the few, you know, relationships or friendships that I had there.  And then, I'm trying to think as far as church, 'cause there was a church in the community that I attended on Sundays, rather I think infrequently.  But again I didn't have a cadre of people that I was friendly with there.
Story_ID: 628037
Speaker 1: When you were a senior in high school [Merion Mercy Academy, Merion Station, Pennsylvania], did you see yourself becoming a professional musician at that point did you, that that your goal was?
Speaker 2: Well, what I had hoped for and (unclear)--at that time but even early I just assumed, oh I'm going to become this classical pianist and soloist, but not really knowing what that meant because there few role models.  There's still are very few role models.  There is Andre Watts, you know, who everyone can mention.  And yes, so that's one.  There was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]--
Speaker 1: He has a Philadelphia (unclear), right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, he in fact took lessons at the Settlement Music School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], where I took lessons later.
Speaker 1: Did you ever meet him, during that--?
Speaker 2: Oh, not as a student, no.  He's ten years older than I am.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm in at that point in, you know, he was playing with the New York Philharmonic, Philadelphia Orchestra, won competitions.  Natalie Hinderas, H-I-N-D-E-R-A-S, another Philadelphia pianist.  She taught at Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  She is deceased, but she did a couple recording of music by I think at that time it was called 'Black Composers' ['Natalie Hinderas Plays Music by Black Composers'].  And she really opened the, the world, the world's eyes to music, classical music by black composers.  So, I remember in college [Philadelphia College of the Performing Arts; University of the Arts, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] then playing some, you know, again doing a recital at the Free Library of Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], music by Philadelphia black composers, so that was a great opportunity.  So, yes I thought that I was going to become this classical pianist, not really knowing well how is that going to happen.  And so, rather than going to college then I figured I needed to learn lots of repertoire, I needed to prepare for competitions, piano competitions and study.  And so, for two years then, that's a period where I stayed home and I was practicing I'd say six to eight hours a day.  And, you know, my mother [Mattie Drayton] was supporting that.  And I was traveling to New York City [New York, New York] to study with Professor [Paul Emerich]--isn't that horrible.  I feel like I'm, you know, I has, have Alzheimer's or something.  I'm not remembering his name, so I'm either gonna have to stop or--
Story_ID: 628038
Speaker 1: After I graduated from high school [Merion Mercy Academy, Merion Station, Pennsylvania] then I stayed home to practice.  I studied with a private teacher in New York City [New York, New York] and would travel once or twice a week on the train to take lessons.  Played on WNYC [WNYC Radio, New York, New York], the radio station; played for the Austrian Embassy; didn't really compete in a lot of competitions, 'cause I found out early on that I wasn't competition pianist where I had nerves steel.  So, I performed better just in, in doing recitals.  So, I'd say in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, so what is that like anyway, we those of us who have never done it, you know, tried to perform in competition except at a ball game or something (laughter).  How does it--so it's, it's a lot of pressure you feel under pressure.
Speaker 1: Oh absolutely, you are just a number.  You are called in, there's a set list of repertoire pieces that you're supposed to perform.  And--
Speaker 2: So, they assign the repertoire to you?
Speaker 1: Well, they'll at least give you categories for certain pieces so they'll say, you know, a Chopin [Frederic Chopin] etude or Chopin sonatas so you can choose within categories which the composers are going be, basically consistent.  And then they'll say--usually they'll allow you to start with whatever you'd like to start with.  And then they'll select, you know, it could be the third movement of this sonata.  You wouldn't just start at the beginning.  It could be, it could even say start at the coda of this section so it's not just starting from the beginning.  And, you know, you have ten, fifteen minutes or so.  I always was concerned while I was playing about what, you know, there're judges who were sitting there in the audience you could hear them, because they were using a pencil and paper and you could hear them scratching. I'm just wondering okay was it, in that, or are they writing because of a certain note, you know, like a wrong note that I play or what.  So, I wasn't really thinking about music making; I was thinking of playing perfectly, you know, note wise perfectly.  And so, was more like being a robot, and, you know, that is one negative about competitions where there's an expected--you're supposed to play note perfectly and that's, that's really impossible that, you know, that you're gonna do that.  You know, that's unfortunate part also about CDs [compact disc] now that people prefer to sit at home listen to their CDs which are note perfect and there no errors because the person then has, you know, recorded and rerecorded and rerecorded twenty times in this one section, you know.  And then it's pieced together and so, note wise it sounds great, but then you miss a lot of just the musicality as we say of live music, live performances where you, you have this adrenaline and things happen that don't normally happen, even with wrong notes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I never really knew that aspect of it.  I, I know, you know, I know a lot of people who have tried to play cla- classical pieces.  And when we were in high school we played, we'd often hit wrong notes, but we thought it was because we weren't good enough (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So, you're saying that people that actually are the top notch people who are in these big com- competitions occasionally hit a wrong, o- often hit a wrong note?
Speaker 1: Yeah, well it's impossible not to hit wrong notes, I mean, it's just not possible.  In fact, Arthur Rubinstein, pianist, he played wrong notes all the time.  But he, I guess he would be, in my estimation like the one pianist that we can say was notorious for playing wrong notes.  But then, the audience just loved him, because again with live performances, you get this sense of inspiration, and each performance was distinct and unique.  They weren't, didn't sound like, you know, like a, like a robot.  There was just no sense of, you know, speeding up here, slowing down, where we would call that rubato, just really being musical and being inspired.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 628039
Speaker 1: I know the jazz musicians we interview at--well some have played jazz and classical music and they always talk about the difference of the, you know, of the attitude.  Where in jazz you're encouraged to improvise or do something different--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and classical you're really not.
Speaker 2: And you're--yes, with classical you're basically you're recreating what's written on the page by a composer and we do that to the best of our abilities, because many of these composers, you know, they've been long gone.  And then you have the tradition of recording were you hear it's, sometimes it's the composer himself--most of the time, it's himself, it could be herself--performing and what sometimes if they are say a pianist in this example the way that they play, it's different from the notations that they wrote actually on the scores.  So, that's always interesting.  But, you know, we pay attention to the tempo and if they put the metronome marking, how quickly, you know, should it be.  If it's the dynamic, if it's soft or mezzo piano or forte if it says ritard or you know, you're slowing here.  So, all of those primarily, well expect for American composers, there gonna be writing in Italian.  You know, these notations and we're paying attention to that and good teachers are saying, "Wait you're not, you're not paying attention to that, did you miss this?"  'Cause it's not just the notes it's really, again it's recreating.  The other thing that the difference with classical pianist and then jazz musicians is really the technique is just very different.  With classical pianists, it's the hand position, you know, old fashioned is keeping your hands rounded.  With jazz musicians, it's more playing kind of flat fingers, and the technique is very, very different.  It's--you can't--I think really it's not possible to switch back and forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It'd be confusing (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah, it's very different.
Speaker 1: So, would muscle memory play a, play a part in this too, I guess if you're used to playing--?
Speaker 2: For, for, well again, classical pianists, solo pianists play from memory.  And so, yes, when you're memorizing a lot people then are doing it, just from muscle memory, but if you're a smart musician, you have to understand the structure of the piece; the keys, what key are you in now, what key are we then moving into, the harmonic structures.  So, classes like music theory, music history, all those things are important to just really making a, a smart musician.
Story_ID: 628040
Speaker 1: What was your--did you have a favorite, you know, piece to play in these compositions?  What was your strength?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd say an era, maybe a couple of eras.  My favorite would be Impressionistic so thinking of, for artist it would be Monet [Claude Monet] and Manet [Edouard Manet].  For composers, it would be Ravel [Maurice Ravel] and Debussy [Claude Debussy] and Poulenc [Francis Poulenc], and I just have an affinity for that period.  But I also enjoy Romantic period, thinking of Schumann [Robert Schumann] and Mendelssohn [Felix Mendelssohn], and even, you know, modern music, but to a degree.  I have to be careful since we--well, at my school we obviously have modern composers.  And if it's, you know, it's not that I'm just looking for music that you can sing or hum, but I still, I think, really do tend to prefer that type of music rather than something that's just a combination of sounds that appear at least, to the listener have no connection to, you know, each other.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you--so, so was there a particular a name of a piece that you liked the best or, or?
Speaker 2: No, I, I think really that I prefer just to say those the Impressionistic era.  'Cause I played, you know, there are thousands of pieces for solo piano and you know, a particular one, no.  But, there is a body of works that in order to really be a great pianist you need to know.  And so for instance Beethoven [Ludwig van Beethoven] composed thirty-two piano sonatas.  And when you think about the Johann Sebastian Bach with all of the keyboard preludes and fugues that he composed, there's tons of music that we just have to learn.  As opposed to say, you know, modern instruments saxophone classical music, or any--the wind, brass instruments, they have limited repertoire simply because people were writing music for those, those instruments.  So, they also will then transpose pieces that we know were written, say, for an organ or even the solo voice and transpose them for their instruments.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 628041
Speaker 1: So, at any rate, back--catching back up--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you were, so you studied at home for two years--
Speaker 2: Right and then--
Speaker 1: --before--?
Speaker 2: --I, at that time I was studying with Professor Emerich, it's E-M-E-R-I-C-H.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Paul Emerich and he taught in his home.  I learned from him, I'd say primarily a good system for memorization, memorizing music.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so Emerich is fairly famous for what he--or well known--
Speaker 2: No, I don't think that he was that well known.  He was a referral from another teacher in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And so, I think he was a, a good teacher for me for those two years.  And then, I felt just kind of the isolation of practicing at home, wondering, you know, what am I gonna do.  Not having the interaction with other musicians which is really critical.  You know, musicians, we literally and figuratively play together.  So, I decided well it's time to go to a university or to a music school.  So, I auditioned at the Curtis Institute [Curtis Institute of Music], which is in Philadelphia, entirely free school, endowed.  They--for the pianist give them at least loan the pianist a Steinway grand piano [Steinway and Sons].  I remember auditioning unfortunately because it's just so selective I was not expected.  And so then my second choice was at that time it was called the Philadelphia College of Performing Arts [University of the Arts, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which was located right next door to the Academy of Music [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] where the Philadelphia Orchestra perform.  And so, my teacher that I was assigned, to whom I was assigned was Jeanne J-e-a-n-n-e, second name Behrend B-E-H-R-E-N-D [Jeanne Behrend], and I do have a photo of her.  So, Jeanne was a piano prodigy; she did attend the Curtis Institute, the school that I had auditioned to, was, wasn't accepted.  But she was a child attending that school.  She had a great lineage as far musical teachers, previous musical teachers, and she became in a way, you know, like a relative.  Because, you know, when you're taking private lessons you of course are talking music but you also as a good teacher you're talking about, you know this students, their life and encouraging them to do various things.  She--I still would remember her giving me a check to attend this summer music program in--outside of Paris in Fontainebleau, France.  And so many composers and other musicians studied with the pedagogue, Nadia Boulanger, who was in charge of that school.  And so, the year that I went would have been 1976, was her Nadia Boulanger's last year there.  But, I couldn't have afforded to have attended.  I think it was about fifteen hundred dollars.  But I remembered Jeanne Behrend saying to me, as she was giving me the check, that she had many opportunities when she was growing up and so I should have those opportunities, too.  And I didn't really have a wonderful teacher during that summer, there at Fontainebleau, but it was just the experience of going to another country, again being exposed to--it was an American school, so lots of talented musicians, primarily from the East Coast and different instruments.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay so you were there until 19--is it '80 [1980]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty [1980] I graduated from yes, PCPA, Philadelphia College of Performing Arts.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 628042
Speaker 1: And then, you can't do much with an undergraduate degree in music, and so, I decided okay I'm going to go onto another school for my master's degree.  I was definite and firm about spending just one year to get a master's degree and not spending two years, which is the usual amount of time.  I did do it in one year, and then a summer.  But--well I, was accepted to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], great program, great school.  And I loved my teachers so much, Professor Bossart, Eugene Bossart, B-O-S-S-A-R-T.  So, I studied with him for my master's degree and the doctorate.  And I continued on for the doctorate because I had a full scholarship for the master's degree, had a full scholarship for the doctoral degree.  I just felt that I had some much to learn as far as again, repertoire.  I wasn't doing solo piano; I was pursuing chamber music and accompanying.  So, I was learning repertoire to be able to play with singers, with instrumentalists, and all along even as an undergrad I was thinking what am I gonna do with this music degree and I don't want to be unemployed or be a poor musician.  And so, I pursue the chamber music and accompanying route simply 'cause I said everybody needs a pianist to play for them.  And so, I was confident that I was going to be employed.  That was a probably naive.  I was the second graduate of the doctoral program in chamber music and accompanying at Michigan so, relatively new degree.  Now I'd say most music schools offer that degree.  But, when I finished I went back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] without a job and I was a Kelly Girl [Kelly Services, Inc.], meaning--
Speaker 2: Wait a minute, now let me go, I'm gonna take you back to the University Michigan for a minute but--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --who, who else is there, with you.  Any, any who were some of the, were there any black professors in the music department then?
Speaker 1: Yes, one at that time and that was Willis Patterson.  Voice teacher but he also was an associate dean.  And I consider him a mentor.  And 'cause I remember the penultimate year, the year before I graduated.  I went to him just saying, "Well you're an associate dean.  How did you get a job like that?"  I was looking for a different route, thinking well if I'm not going to be successful as, you know, performing musician, because I was seeing so many other graduates and talented people who just weren't finding jobs after they were done.  And I think, you know, when you're in a school, university or conservatory as a musician, you're still thinking, oh I'm going to make it, I'm going to be, I'm going to be able to support myself as a full time musician.  But, realistically, you're going to have to teach and you'll have an opportunity to perform.  The best route and the only reason that you would get you a doctorate is to be able to get a job in higher ed [higher education] in a university or music conservatory.  So, I do consider Willis Patterson as a mentor, because he gave me advice.  My last year at Michigan, I was his research assistant.  He planned a symposium on black classical music, which today still musicians, we all talk about.  That was to have occurred in 1984, but it didn't take place until the next year 1985.  So I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did you go back to it?
Speaker 1: Yes, so I came back I performed a lot, and made connections with various musicians.  So, in fact that connected me with Chicago [Illinois] and [HistoryMaker] Samuel Floyd, F-L-O-Y-D, who was the director of the Center for Black Music Research at Columbia College [Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  And so, Sam then started the performance arm of the center, which was called the Black Music Repertory Ensemble.
Speaker 2: I wanted to ask you, was, was Dwight Andrews [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Dwight Andrews] at, at the University of Michigan, when you were there?
Speaker 1: He--I think maybe like my first year that he was there, 'cause I do remember his name.  But I don't remember him well.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I'm trying to think of some other musicians who were there.  Well, I do remember--it's funny I see lots of faces but people for instance who now are working at Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] in charge of the choir.  Some singers but, no one who's world famous.  Aaron Dworkin D-W-O-R-K-I-N, he won one of those genius awards [MacArthur Fellows Program].  He started the Sphinx competition, S-P-H-I-N-X [Sphinx Organization] which is primarily for African American and Hispanic string players.  And there was a cadre of musicians those of us who were there at that time pursuing you know higher ed and I think all of us are still in the music field.  And, you know, at different colleges, universities.
Story_ID: 628043
Speaker 1: The conference that was held at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] in nineteen eighty- '85 [1985]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, what, what did you learn at the conference?  You can't tell us all of it but that's (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, sure, in school when I think about all of the training that I received in music, most of these composers I mean, there were live composers and musicians who were present.  [HistoryMaker] Billy Taylor was present and performed, these people that I knew nothing about.  And so, I think that's why even today when I talk to other musicians about that ni- that event in 1985.  It was several days, say three or four, with concerts also master classes so people teaching then other students in a public situation.  Just the--and the contact of having say a meal with these people who basically were icons.  And you could look to them saying--just thinking of what--the struggles that they had had.  But the fact that they were in a field, classical music, where we thought well there's so few, because you know, most of the time you can think of only the few who have succeeded and most have been singers.  But when you think of instrumentalists again, it's Andre Watts.  How many solo violinists can you name who were African American?  None.  And so, it's a tough field, definitely a tough field.  So, I learned not only the names of the, these individuals and had the individual contact with them but also learning new repertoire.  Which, you know, again being a student when we're walking down the hallways that at University of Michigan, looking for a practice room, we hear the same Beethoven [Ludwig van Beethoven] sonatas and the same repertoire being taught by faculty, year on, you know, from year one to year ten.  And yet, none of these works, which are, many of these are excellent works were unknown.  So, it was an opportunity then for me to perform this music to educate others about this music.  And so, it's just really, it was a terrific short period of time, but then it had an impact on my life later.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite composer from this, or--?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I can just think of many.  David Baker who is head of the jazz program at Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana], and yes, he was in charge of the jazz program, but he has written sonatas.  I've performed, you know, his sonata for cello and piano many times and recorded it in fact.  Ollie Wilson--George Walker who's also a pianist who went to that Curtis Institute of Music [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  In fact, George Walker recently wrote an autobiography, which is very just illuminating.  Because you think of how talented he was as a pianist, he was just extremely talented as a composer and yet still, it was it was--took until 1996 for him to receive a Pulitzer Prize.  You know, the first African American to receive a Pulitzer Prize in music [Pulitzer Prize for Music].
Speaker 1: This is George Walker?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: For his piece 'Lilacs,' which was for singer and then orchestra.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he's still alive.
Story_ID: 628044
Speaker 1: Recently I know, there's been a film made about the life of Chevalier de Saint-Georges and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes in fact I've accompanied violinists on some of his works.  Yeah, it's just really amazing, you know.  Some of these really wonderful works, that unless, you know, an instrumentalist or singer they unearth them and introduce then to the world.  And, you know, it doesn't have to be just an African American musician, but just really bringing to life these works, it's, it's important.
Speaker 1: I, know there was a--in New York [New York], about fifteen years ago they did a, they restaged 'Treemonisha' by--
Speaker 2: Yes. Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Scott Joplin.
Speaker 2: Scott Joplin, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, these are works that--as a--I was part, part of an argument once that took place, were, were one of ours arts leading arts figures, black arts figures in Chicago [Illinois] argued that, you know, why would a man like Scott Joplin want to play classical music?  Was he just trying to get out of the black community of what, you know.  There, you know, so and then it was pointed out that he died actually of syphilis, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Having to play in these dives, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, do you have any thoughts on the, the strivings of black people, in terms of music?
Speaker 2: Well, you know I can hear Hale Smith who died just last year, composer, who said I'm not a black composer, I'm a composer.  And so, you know these composers and musicians, we bring obviously our culture and our heritage to the works that they create or to the works that we are performing.  But we shouldn't just be identified as a black singer, I mean, or a black pianist because certainly, you know, if someone's Jewish they're not the Jewish singer or, you know.  It just doesn't make any sense.  But yes, there may be aspects of jazz or spirituals that a composer will bring to his or her music.  But, that's just what all composers bring, you know, to their, their heritage.  And certainly, you know, we've lived during the period of Mozart [Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart], and so Chevalier de Saint-Georges lived during that time, and that was part of society and that was the music that they were hearing.  And so, why is it that then that they should have been just been playing spirituals, which of course hadn't even been, well wasn't part of that, that heritage at that time in Europe.  But still, we're individuals.  And so, there's an extra burden that's for sure.  And still, when we look at the numbers who are there not only who've made it, but also as an educator when we I look at the numbers of people of color--and primarily I'm talking about African American and Hispanic--who're interested in classical music the numbers are really small.  You know, in our school, Benin School of Music at Northwestern [Northwestern University Henry and Leigh Bienen School of Music, Evanston, Illinois], we have 685 students from undergraduates through doctoral.  And there are less than ten African American students, the largest ethnic group will be Asians and if you look at major symphony orchestras I'd say predominately you're gonna see Asians.  And the numbers have slowly I remember when I was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] there were two African American musicians in the Philadelphia Orchestra, and I think there's a third now, but those other two are still there.  And Chicago Symphony Orchestra we have one African American musician.  So, I think many parents still-- doesn't matter if it's classical or jazz--they, if they're encouraging their students, their children to pursue higher ed [higher education], they are going for more professional training degrees.  You know, to be a doctor or an engineer.  Go into business rather than encouraging them to go into, to music.
Story_ID: 628045
Speaker 1: Is there a good living in music without getting a Ph.D. and teaching, in, in classical music?
Speaker 2: In classical music, not unless you're--I'll separate it, if you're a singer, there are more opportunities if you're interested in opera, because, almost every small town in Europe has an opera company and so there're opportunities there.  In the United States, it's still very difficult.  There are more training programs for younger singers, and so I'd say there are more African American classical singers around.  And then, of course, they can supplement it with being in the choir or teaching privately.  You don't have, you know, to just be associated with a university.  For instrumentalists, if you can get into an orchestra and there are four hundred orchestras in the United States, the top sixteen meaning Philadelphia [Philadelphia Orchestra], Chicago [Chicago Symphony Orchestra], New York Philharmonic, you know, the competitions, there are thousands of people all races, who are competing for one position.  But what--I think that for most musicians they're doing a combination of different jobs.  It may be part time teaching, part time performing and then they maybe supplementing their work also with waiting tables or some other job, you know, just like actors.  So, definitely it's possible and there are new fields in music, say with music technology.  People who are say sure they could be working in a recording field which is not doing so good now.  But they also can be specialist with sound, so the ring phones for cell phones, you know those are musicians.  So, there are definitely new areas that are being created as we speak.  So, now we see the training of more entrepreneurial musicians.  Entrepreneurship is you know, like the buzz word in music schools in addition to just providing young musicians with business training.
Story_ID: 628046
Speaker 1: Is there--would you consider there's a, any kind of a black aesthetic in classical music?
Speaker 2: I don't understand that question.
Speaker 1: Well, is, do black artists bring a particular kind of--and I'm generalizing here--you know, a particular kind of general feel or, or presence to the compositional classical music, or performance of it?
Speaker 2: As an instrumentalist, I would say no, because I guess what first came to mind was if you're doing an audition for an orchestra the first couple stages, you're behind a screen.  And so, I again you're recreating the music the score and so, you're not going to be able to tell, you know, is it, is this person, African American, Hispanic, Asian, White.  And you shouldn't be able to tell that.  For singers though, I think that, just with the timbre of the voice that, most of the time, they are bring something that's kind of a richness of sound.  And the sound quality simply, I don't know, it's part of your body.  You know, your instrument, the voice is part of your body.  But certainly there is a sound that you could say there's something it that it has a shimmer, or just something about the timbre that you, you're suspecting that that's an African American if you didn't see the person.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 628047
Speaker 1: Now, back in the 19th century, I think, oh, you were, you were, just before we broke you were, you were going to talk about the development of the ensemble--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and yeah.
Speaker 2: So, the Black Music Repertory Ensemble was, still is, the performance arm of the Center for Black Music Research at Columbia College Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  And [HistoryMaker] Samuel Floyd, Dr. Samuel Floyd a musicologist, was the founder of the center, but also it was his brain child to have this performance arm.  So, he as a musicologist then was investigating the--all the historical aspects of music then during a certain period, but then you can find music, but music is not music unless it's being performed.  And so, it made sense then that he would put together this ensemble, fifteen musicians, there were four singers, and then the other were instrumentalists.  And we came from all over the United States.  A large group came from the New York City [New York, New York] area, but at that time as a pianist--and I was the only pianist in the group--I was working at Arizona State University in Tempe [Arizona].  There were people from Florida, just all over.  And so, there were newly commissioned works by say Hale Smith composer, Ollie Wilson, [HistoryMaker] T.J. Anderson, specifically written then for that ensemble of the fifteen musicians.  Then they there were works that Hale Smith composer transcribed that were say, could be original piano pieces that then were transcribed for the instrumentation of this ensemble.  So, we performed of course here in Chicago [Illinois], but also went to--we played in New York City at Avery Fisher Hall [David Geffen Hall], great performance, did recordings, went to different colleges and universities.  And so, this was mainly in the '90s [1990s] that I participated in that group.  Funding came from National Endowment for the Arts.  And then there was a period where the ensemble, we were performing any, more simply because of lack of funding.  More recently I'd say maybe with five or six years, maybe even a little bit longer, there's the Black Music Repertory Ensemble II [New Black Music Repertory Ensemble], which is composed only of local Chicago musicians.  And so, last summer that group got together.  There were a couple of the singers from the original group, Donnie Ray Albert, actually just one singer, who from the original group who performed on this CD [compact disc] that we did.  And so, there were two major works performed, or recorded.  One was by Mary Watkins and then Ollie Wilson.  Ollie Wilson used to teach at Berkeley, he was in fact chair of the music department there at the University of California.
Speaker 1: That's in Boston.
Speaker 2: Oh Berkeley, California.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, University of California, Berkeley [Berkeley, California] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause I know there's a Berklee School of Music [Berklee College of Music, Boston, Massachusetts], that's what--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I was trying to be smart, I know Berklee.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) The other Berkeley, yes.
Speaker 1: The other Berkeley, right.
Story_ID: 628048
Speaker 1: Now, well let me go back and kind of recap your career now.  You, you, we got, when you--now at the University of Arizona [sic.], now how did you--?
Speaker 2: Arizona State University [Tempe, Arizona].
Speaker 1: Arizona State, Arizona State.  Now, when you finished University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Did you go right to Arizona--
Speaker 2: No, I was unemployed for a year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I went back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] worked as a Kelly Girl [Kelly Services, Inc.].  Saw at one of the places Hahnemann Hospital [Hahnemann University Hospital, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] a newspaper that's called The Chronicle for Higher Education [sic.].
Speaker 1: Now, this is what year about?  What--this is like you, you come out of University of Michigan and--
Speaker 2: Ninety eighty-four [1984], 1984.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was 19--yeah, '84 [1984], '85 [1985] that I was unemployed.
Speaker 1: You were are Kelly Girl?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You're typing and so on--this is--
Speaker 2: Yes and typed pretty fast too.
Speaker 1: Did they have any idea that they had a, a concert pianist typing?
Speaker 2: Well, that's really funny because one of the places that I worked was a bank.  And my teacher Jeanne Behrend that I mentioned, her nephew was working at that bank.  And so, Jeanne had come in and she was not happy that I was working there, but you know, because she thought I should be doing something in music.  But the people offered me a job because they thought I was doing such a great job and I said thank you very much but I have a doctorate in music, you know, I'm just doing this temporarily.  But at Hahnemann Hospital I saw The Chronicle of Higher Education, first time I'd ever seen it.  It has articles, it comes out weekly.  It has articles about issues in higher ed [higher education], but in, the bank has a major listing of various jobs in higher ed.  And so, I saw what became my first job, which was at Western Michigan University in Kalamazoo, Michigan.  And so, the job was piecing together several part time jobs, but the main position was a new one and I was the first director of the music performance institute [Bullock Performance Institute, Kalamazoo, Michigan].  So, a couple in Kalamazoo had given money so that performers on the university's two concert series rather than just coming giving the concert and leaving.  They would stay for residencies.  Some of the residencies were as short as two days.  Others were a week long, actually in the case of one, three weeks long.  So, my job was to work with the artist, come up with these residencies activities meaning a brown bag lunch were there would talk about the music, say at a YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association], master classes, different performances.  They wanted a pianist assuming that these musicians would need someone to play for them.  And then I was also--what was I, what else?  Oh, I was teaching class piano, in the school of music and then I was coordinating this four day arts program for high school kids.  So, I stayed there for two years, second year became assistant director of the school of music, still kept the music performance institute.  Realized that I didn't want to become a presenter, presenter, meaning just giving just concerts.  I mean presenting concerts, bringing in artists.  So, I moved to the University of Kan- no--the University of Connecticut in Storrs [Connecticut] and I was assistant dean for the School of Fine Arts.  And--
Speaker 1: Now, this was in '87 [1987] I guess (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, '87 [1987] to '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And the dean at that time had promised when I was interviewing that I could get a tenure track job.  So, in higher ed, you know, tenure--it's the only place where you can have a job for life.  And so, he was then saying that I would be on this tra- trajectory so that I would be tenured and would have a job for life.  He had not had that conversation with the head of the music department.  And so, she wasn't really keen about, you know, making this a tenure track job.  So, mainly I was an administrator; I was the assistant dean in charge of curriculum for art, music, dance, theater programs.  Stayed there for two years, and then left in December of '89 [1989].
Story_ID: 628049
Speaker 1: Moved to Arizona State University in Tempe [Arizona], T-E-M-P-E, right outside of Phoenix [Arizona].  And I was hired as an assistant dean in the college of fine arts [Katherine K. Herberger College of the Arts; Herberger Institute for Design and the Arts], was quickly promoted within weeks, because the associate dean was moved up.  So, I was promoted to associate dean.  And so, I stayed in the role for six years.  I was also an untenured faculty member, and got tenure at the end of the sixth year, as is custom.  And then, the last four years that I was there I was director, School of Music.
Speaker 2: Okay, now what--well any--well, what, what are the highlights, I guess, of what, you know, of this position at, at Arizona State, it's seems like a real--?
Speaker 1: Well, it's longest that I stayed anywhere 'cause to, up 'til that time I was moving every two years.  It was because Arizona State was such a great,  I mean, a big school.  There were at that time, I think close to forty thousand students; there're more now.  So, because of the size of university I was able to just get experience in general education, for instance, the math, science classes that every student takes.  I learned a lot just about being an administrator.  I had--I think of mentors in positive and negative ways, and the mentor that I had there was a negative one, the one who was dean and so I learned a lot of things about what not to do as dean and things that really should be encouraged.  I made connections with other associate deans on campus, and in fact we formed an associate dean and assistant deans group.  So, all of the assistant and associate deans on campus and we were then recognized by central administration, the provost and president [Lattie F. Coor], received funding and training.  I kept in contact with many of those people, you know, and one is actually a college university president, now.  So, I think just I garnered a lot of administrative experience from being at a large research university like that.  The last four years as being director school of music, I gained budgetary experience, supervisory experience because we had sixty-three full time faculty members.  I don't know the number of staff we had.  There were seven hundred students enrolled.  And the school, for a state assisted program, I mean, it's considered say one of the top twenty music programs in the United States.  So, got a lot of experience that way, became known among--there's a fine arts deans group, but there's also National Association of Schools of Music.  That's an accrediting body, there's over six hundred members of that.  So, I've been known and recognized, you know, and in those two fields.
Speaker 2: Okay, any outstanding students that, that you, you can remember or, or other faculty members that--?
Speaker 1: As far as students, no.  No one that again that I would say, "Oh they've made it big time," or even, you know, part time.  People who then have gone on to jobs in higher ed [higher education] who are, you know, professors.  As far as faculty members, many of them were still there at ASU, have moved on to other institutions.
Story_ID: 628050
Speaker 1: So, at the same time you're performing with the ensemble [Black Music Repertory Ensemble] around the co- country too, and did you appear on 'The Today Show' with the--?  Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, so I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But actually only my hands appeared on 'The Today Show.'  I still remember that, this space just too small for the fifteen musicians.  And so they showed the back of my head and then my hands.  And I wasn't wearing the ring I'm wearing now, but I was wearing a ring.  And so, they showed my hands I think maybe twice during this one number that we did.  So, that was an interesting time, 'cause we performed in Avery Fisher Hall [David Geffen Hall, New York, New York] the night before.  Then about two or three o'clock in the morning, we were picked up to go to the studio.  I remember, you know, we were falling asleep we were in our gowns and tuxedos and then we were the last segment on that show, so it was what maybe nine o'clock on the morning or so that we, we were on.  And just for, you know, a fleeting moment, but we can say that we were on 'The Today Show.'
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now part of the repertoire, I mean the repertoire of the ensemble is the, is the music of black composers, right?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And some original compositions drawn from Negro spirituals and other music?
Speaker 2: Well, and original compositions written primarily for that ensemble.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I had mentioned Ollie Wilson and Hale Smith, [HistoryMaker] T.J. Anderson.  But, also transcriptions then of some works then that may have been just songs or that had bur- marches for instances that were played by a band but, then they were transcribed by a composer, usually Hale Smith, for the instrumentation of that specific ensemble--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which is not a normal, you know, ensemble.  It had a string quartet, had then woodwinds, had piano, the four singers.  So, it was an interesting combination of different instruments.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 628051
Speaker 1: How did you come to leave Arizona State [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona] and--?
Speaker 2: Oh, well I--ten years was a long time and during that period I was thinking well what do I want to do next?  And I was contacted by the University of Kansas about a dean's job.  It was dean of the School of Fine Arts.  So, there were, let's see, departments of art, design, music and dance were together, and then the performing arts center, the lead center.  I couldn't even imagine going to Kansas, just as I recall when I first visited Arizona, I said, "I could never live here. It's too hot."  And it was 90 degrees then, but when I moved there it was 122 degrees one day.  So--but still I had never been in the State of Kansas and just thought, you know, of corn fields.  I said to no to them about even going for an interview, and they continued with their search.  They had a failed search.  They contacted me again just to come for a visit in the summer, so I met with the provost, with the chancellor [Robert Hemenway].  And I thought well it's a dean's position, it's a step and big step up.  So, I agreed to participate in this then second round of interviews and was offered the position.  So, I was there for three years.
Speaker 1: Okay, it was the University of Kansas at Lawrence [Kansas]?
Speaker 2: In Lawrence, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: So, maybe about forty minutes away from Kansas City, Missouri.  I spend a lot of time, I'd say almost every weekend going to Kansas City.  Because there, there was a lot of culture there, being visual arts, music.  Of course it's, the jazz museum [American Jazz Museum, Kansas City, Missouri] is there, and it was a good time.  I was supported greatly by the provost who was second in line to the chancellor.  He was in charge of all the academic programs and the deans.  And so, the decision to leave was a difficult one just because that provost was just so supportive, David Schulenburger.
Story_ID: 628052
Speaker 1: That area, Kansas, is a home of a lot of black musicians--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --especially the big bands era--
Speaker 2: Jazz, you're right.
Speaker 1: --a lot of big bands and such a rich history there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Negro Baseball League [Negro Leagues Baseball Museum, Kansas City, Missouri] too.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.  Lot of entrepreneurial music and sports and everything in that Kansas area.
Speaker 2: And wonderful barbeque.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, is--did, did you learn anything surprising about the, the black life and culture in Kansas City [Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess I was surprised by the people who still had gold teeth.  You know, and I'm being facetious, but really I was, I was taken aback by it.  Just old people, younger people who had, you know, gold teeth.  And, you know, it seemed like an old fashioned thing from the South, you know, like in the 1950s.  But there were so obviously transplants, and I think Kansas City was still and is still a southern type town, city, but I think a lot of, you know, southern influences.
Speaker 1: That's interesting, somebody's gonna watch this and pick up the same thing they're gonna say that's right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Hopefully they won't be offended by my, you know, my commenting on the gold teeth.
Speaker 1: I know but that's those are the kind of, you know, you do notice certain things in locales that you don't notice in others, that's an interesting observation.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna be looking for 'em when I go there, to Kansas (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, it's funny because I had friends who visited and I had told them about the gold teeth and so they asked someone at the airport for directions and the first person they asked, they wore the gold, I don't know how many he had, but he had some gold teeth.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so your mother [Hattie Drayton] joined you there, too, in Kansas (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, yes.  So, yes and she passed away what four months after I had moved there.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, well was that you last time before you come--now this is 1990, this takes us to 1990?
Speaker 2: It was 2000 was when I went (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Two thousand [2000], okay.
Speaker 2: Two thousand [2000] to 2003.
Speaker 1: Okay, to 2003.
Story_ID: 628053
Speaker 1: University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas].  We were talking about the University of Kansas from 2000 to 2003, you were, you were dean of the school of music.
Speaker 2: School of Fine Arts.
Speaker 1: Of fine arts, okay, School of Fine Arts.  Did you, was it, was it a challenge to try to do what the other fine arts?
Speaker 2: Absolutely (laughter).  In fact I was pleased and that was part of my decision in coming here to Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] to just have music, a music program.  Because it's not unusual actually just with fine arts, it's not--I should say it's not specific to fine arts.  So, say if you were a dean of a college of arts and sciences.  If you were on the science side then the humanities people would think that person is just not going to be supportive of me.  And so, what I saw then were visual artists, the design people and then the dancers to a large degree too, thought that I was going to then only be interested in music.  And so, it's almost like being a parent, where you're showing less preference, you know, I think that music lost out in some regard, 'cause I didn't want to show that I was, you know, having any preference for music.  It was the area that I know, not that I thought that they should get more resources.  Then I also found that in even talking to people, students or faculty, I would mention exhibitions and productions rather than saying concerts first.  Because they would all think oh, that's all she's interested in are music concerts and recitals.  So, even though I believe that a school or a college of fine arts is the best configuration for putting the arts together, the reality is that we, we speak the same language but we speak in different dialects.  So, musicians--I said this earlier--that we literally and figuratively work and play together.  We're in ensembles, choirs, bands, orchestras.  The visual artists, they work, so- you know, alone.  Sure we practice alone, but the visual artists they're doing their work, alone.  Most of them don't care if somebody comes to their opening.  I mean they, they're not interested in that.  They're doing their art and being general but they're doing their art for their own sake if you don't like it, it doesn't matter.  Whereas, with musicians of course we want you to like us.  You know, we're putting ourselves on the line, and so are dancers.  You know, you're putting yourself through all these hours you're practicing you want to do a great job.  Then if you have two people to perform then it's, you know, then you have this let down feeling.  Sure you need to still perform well for those two people, but.
Speaker 1: --and there's a standard there too--
Speaker 2: It's not the same.
Speaker 1: --I guess, especially I guess for classical musician they're trying to reach a standard that's been--a bar that's been set.
Speaker 2: You're right about that because, you know, when I think about students they're probably the worse critics.  It's very hard playing for--if you're a student--playing for your colleagues.  'Cause they're sitting there with the score looking to see, okay they messed this movement up they, missed this note, they had a memory slip and you know, they're kind of proud for finding these, identifying, you know, the problems.  And I don't think visual artists, you know, are the same.  So, there is a difference just in behavior but just the way the way we operate.  It's very different.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think artists are--even artists are often baffled at what, what artists might do and what the public likes as to opposed to not like.
Speaker 2: That's true too, definitely, but, you know, there still even when I think about our school of music we have two department so one is the larger of the two is performance.  So, all the instrumentalists, the singers, and then there's the academic program, academic department.  So, it would have music education, music history, music theory and there are distinct differences between those two groups, distinct.
Story_ID: 628054
Speaker 1: Were there any good stories out of this, this three year stint?
Speaker 2: Oh at, at University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I would say well I don't know if it's a story but I made a great relationship with a couple Bernie [Bernard Levine] and Joan Levine, who I consider my adopted parents whom, I keep in contact with now.  And, you know, they call twice month, and they come here to Chicago [Illinois], I actually haven't gone back to Kansas City [Missouri] but--L-E-V-I-N-E.  And I've made other good friendships there, keep in contact with the people.  I'm trying to think of some stories.  Truthfully, can't remember, you know, I, I raised a lot of money there.  Even a year ago I was in New York City [New York, New York] at a gala for the New York City Opera.  And there was a contingent of people from KU, University of Kansas and some I knew.  Some had arrived after I did and they were in town to buy a piano, and they also came to the gala.  And so, just the comments, you know, I, I really enjoyed it, of the people who didn't know me and they said, "Oh, you're really an icon there.  And you did so much, you know, for the school," and they were at the time looking for another dean.  And so, they were saying, "Oh, would you come back?"  I feel that even though it was a short period that I really was able to with, obviously, participation and assistance of the people who were there really makes major in roads.  Not only with financial I mean financially but just in hiring good people and developing programs.  So, I will always remember KU with fondness.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 628055
Speaker 1: One story I didn't ask you about at the time, but you mentioned the purchase of a piano.  And I had--it reminded me of the story about your mother [Mattie Drayton] buying you a Steinway [Steinway and Sons].  What, what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, so I was fifteen--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and in tenth grade [at Merion Mercy Academy, Merion Station, Pennsylvania].  I guess it was just because of my lessons and you know, teachers just saying that with the spinet, the Wurlitzer [Wurlitzer Spinet] I had since I was six that, you know, the tone, the development, even the technique, that a piano like that wasn't going to assist with the development of better technique (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, was this a upright kind of piano--
Speaker 2: More, yes, but not as high.
Speaker 1: --that's popular in churches and--okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes.  And so, the Steinway, you know, to me it's still the best instrument.  Some people will say a Baldwin [Baldwin Piano Company] or Bosendorfer are better, but, you know, I stand by the Steinways.  And so, this was a reconditioned from 1945.  So, the only thing that is--remains from 1945 is the case.  So, all the strings, you know, everything's new inside, and, you know, this was a major investment for, you know, a woman who was a nurse.  To say it was like buying, well a half of a house actually.  At that time when I think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In those days, that's right.  In those days it was--
Speaker 2: 'Cause it was more than a car, it was several cars.  And but she saw that this was, you know, an investment that was important.  And so, I do remember my old Wurlitzer being removed from the house.  And I remember my mother, "Oh do you feel sad about, you know, get, leaving the Wurlitzer, that's it's gone?"  I said, "No."  But I do remember that day and the piano coming in, and I, I definitely, I practiced for eight hours that day.  And just, you know, the touch was different so when I say touch the amount of weight and distance between--if you depress the key from the time you touch it to the time it hit key bed, and the action of the piano was different so that, you know, that was like building up my technique also.  And it was just really wonderful.  So, I still have that piano, and obviously it's--well I have tuned, but also work has been done with redoing the strings and the action.  But, you know, it has a sentimental value, so even if I get another piano I still will keep that one, I could never sell that one.
Speaker 1: Okay, I see that, that would make a tremendous difference in someone competing with other classical pianists (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Practicing on the same kind of piano, you're gonna--
Speaker 2: Right, you're gonna perform on.
Speaker 1: --perform on.
Speaker 2: Absolutely. I agree, it, it really is amazing the difference.
Speaker 1: And your mother really, you know, got one baby and she really showed her dedication, you know, yeah.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah that's true, I know I was very fortunate.
Speaker 1: Okay, (unclear) that story I don't why how I could have skipped that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and actually I didn't bring it up either.
Speaker 1: Right, okay I'm not looking at the outline that's why I'm--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: 'Cause I--you know, I think I know it.
Story_ID: 628056
Speaker 1: So, okay, 2003, you made a move, so--from University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas]?
Speaker 2: And I made that move because I came for two interviews here to Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], and I wasn't interested in the job.  I basically was saying, "Show me--tell me why I should leave KU."  Even though University of Kansas was a state assisted school, money was an issue, not like it is these days for state schools.  Northwestern, you know, I say Northwestern to people and their eyes, "Oh, wow, Northwestern."  So, private institution, great reputation.  But, I knew that the music school was good, but I couldn't even, though I was in the field, couldn't tell you any specifics.  Who were the faculty here?  What were the real strengths?  And so I think that the school didn't do a great job of really marketing itself.  And so, I wanted to see, did it seem like it was fit for me?  Because I, through my years of seeing lots of people who have moved to jobs, and the person to whom they report may change or they, I mean physically they may change as far as moving to another job, or just at their level of support changes.  And it's not--it wasn't a good move.  So, the fact that I was in a good situation, it wasn't that I wanted to jump ship I had to really think about it.  But it was Henry Bienen, B-I-E-N-E-N, for who our school is now named, how many years later.  My last meeting with him, during my second interview was really the time.  I remember sitting in his conference room and his talking and saying that he was an honest man, and he was asking, what were my aspirations, as far as the program, and what I would do with this X number of billions of dollars.  And I felt like I had an out of body experience where I really wanted the job then.  That was the first time with all the people that I had met during those two interviews that I felt like, ah this will be a good place to be.  So, Henry Bienen retired last year but during the time, so seven, six years, no he retired in, lets, 2009, so six years I had then with him.  He certainly did give his support, we're moving forward with plans for a new building, because of him.  As I said the school was named for him and his wife Leigh [Leigh Buchanan Bienen], so it's now the Bienen School of Music [Northwestern University Henry and Leigh Beinen School of Music, Evanston, Illinois].  So, great, great man.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And so, he was the, the head of the--
Speaker 2: University.  So he was the president.
Speaker 1: President of the university okay.  All right, okay so, he all right I didn't, I didn't get that at first, so, all right.  So, he was keenly interested in the music department apparently, for the music department to be named for him (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, he hadn't shown that much interest before my arrival but he and his wife still--Leigh--still come to concerts, student concerts, guest artist concerts, but they have an interest they're like renaissance people, in so many things.  In theatre here on in the city but also on campus in the sciences, so they just have this, you know, interest in finding out about things.  But, you know, especially when you think about a university president, and I said this actually at a one of his retirement events.  I've worked with lots of--not directly--but I've known lots of university presidents and for the most part the arts are not important.  There, you know, there something that they have at the school at their university, they'll bring donors to gala events, but they themselves don't that the time to attend performances.  And I know that they're very busy, but I think that just the fact that, that you would see the president and his wife or just the president sitting in our halls.  It could be a student performance, as I said it could be a guest artist it could be a faulty member that they just have this appreciation for the arts.  So, it is amazing.
Story_ID: 628057
Speaker 1: As I said, if your name is Googled what they used to, what used to be called Dyche Stadium [Evanston, Illinois] is now, is not is a different name (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  Ryan Field, yes.
Speaker 1: --yeah Ryan Field now, pops up on, on the, on YouTube, but all these football fields, you know, interesting (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's so funny 'cause I haven't done that on YouTube. So I'll have to see.  But, then you're thinking, well what does that have to do with her.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but dean of the--
Speaker 2: Other than the marching band we hired the faculty member to conduct the marching band [at Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois].  But most of the marching band students are not music majors.  I'd say, you know, out of a 150 students maybe three music majors.  So, they come from all parts of the campus.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's interesting, I, you know, I never really thought of that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --but, it, it makes sense, but I never really thought about that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, most people don't, they just assume that they're music majors, but music professors don't want their students walking and playing at the same time.  It's not good for the embouchure, the, the placement of the mouth on the instrument.  And the, it's just, it's more club it's a social group. And yes they're together and their playing instruments but they, most of them certainly did not receive training for many, many years on an instrument.
Speaker 1: Does it, I mean in your, to your ear does it tell, does it show that they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, (laughter) yes.
Speaker 1: Can you tell when you hear them play?
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  I was part of a high school group marching I, I don't know it's just always, I could, even listening to them on television, you, you--the big colleges, they don't sound like they're that precise.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, you're right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It's noise. Well, it's musical noise.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they won't watch this interview (unclear) (laughter).
Speaker 2: Ah, I was just thinking of that.  Yeah, (laughter) musical noise.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 628058
Speaker 1: How has the experience been at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], you know?
Speaker 2: Well, it's been an interesting experience.  I've--I think that working at a private institution is so different from working for public institutions.  You're able to make change very quickly.  You know, most state universities or colleges, we talk about how bureaucratic things are. It takes forever for a decision to, to be made and then to implement it, and at private institutions you just, you can be more nimble, and you can make change.  My first year was probably spent on responding to the decision that I made early on, I guess it was the fall or winter, to eliminate the organ program.  So, this is organ the instrument.  And this was a trend in music school; there just aren't people who are interested in organ anymore.  There're all these churches with organs and they can't find organists, because there're just, there's a dearth of them.  And many churches too they went say in the days of the '60s [1960s], '70s [1970s] with guitar and drums.  And so, no organist playing Johann Sebastian Bach.  It's just not of interest, you know, modern day people.  So, I made that announcement that we were closing our program for various reasons and we hardly had any students, and there's a group of the American Guild of Organists and there are about three thousand members.  And so, because they were thinking about their future, they have on their website, "Write to that dean, write to the president, no this can't happen."  So, I received tons of emails and hateful letters and even though I'm smiling talking about this, during the time, I was actually concerned about my own safety, and there was an incident with someone, you know, on, in Evanston [Illinois] who was planning to do something.  The police got involved so nothing ever happened, but people became just, you know, so emotional about the fact that this one school, which is a major music school, was setting this precedent.  And after I took the heat, other schools were following suit, they didn't make the announcement that, you know, we made about eliminating the program they just quietly did it.  But if you look at most music schools today, either they don't have a music program, sorry, an organ program or they may have two or three majors, so.
Speaker 1: Now, now did the American Guild of Organists come up with an idea to provide scholarships for people or any of that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: No (laughter).  No that was the thing, that I received so many letters from alumnus, and some of them were organ alumnus, and they would say, "I'm never gonna give you another dime."  And so, of course then I would contact my development director saying, "Okay look at, look this person up.  How much is he or she given?"  And, and nine times out of ten cases it was zero.  Or it could have been, "Oh they gave twenty-five dollars, you know, how many years ago."  So, no one was offering any type of financial assistance, or just yeah.  It was just all emotional.  So, today no one talks about the organ program, I mean if I'm sure if I were in a group of organists they would.  But it didn't--what eliminating that program did was basically give me credibility on campus with the president [Henry Bienen] and provost [Lawrence B. Dumas], who saw, 'cause no one including those two men, thought that there would be the type of response, you know, kind of public response.  And so, they saw that I was able to come in, see that this should have been done by my predecessor.  It wasn't, but I was able to make this difficult decision and I stood strong.  And, you know, today I still--that was the right decision to make.  It wasn't a popular one, so that my honeymoon on the job was really short lived, you know.  It was really--it was unfortunate that I spent so much time then responding and I was on TV, you know, local TV, just about that one decision.
Story_ID: 628059
Speaker 1: Another difficult decision which, you know, I landed on top was with our jazz program.  So, the director of our jazz program [Don Owens] decided--he told me in December that he was gonna retire at the end of the year.  And I was just amazed, because in order to have a faculty search the person announces the year before that they're going to leave, and then, you put together a search committee in the fall.  And so, it usually takes from, say if they start working in October then it will be the winter, March or so, when you have finally have candidates on campus.  So, there was not enough time to have a, a search for his position.  We had an interim person.  I brought in consultants whom I know from good music programs, jazz programs, to look at our program saying what was necessary, and then we did search.  I turned down recommendations from the search committee of people who, whom they would like to have as director.  I didn't see that any of those people were gonna change the direction of our program.  It was just okay; it wasn't great.  We weren't known for jazz.  And so, I wasn't willing to make an appointment of someone who then was just, we were gonna have an average program.  Why would we invest, you know, hundreds, thousands, millions of dollars, into a program that was just gonna be average?  So, there had been an outcry because we're so close to Chicago [Illinois], that people were saying that they didn't believe that--they thought I was ending the program.  I wasn't ending the program; I just was waiting.  And so they were saying that there are tons of jazz musician in Chicago and certainly she could find someone.  That's true.  There are tons of jazz musicians, but jazz musicians who have the credibility and experience of working in a music school where pri- predominantly you're gonna have classical musicians.  So, you had to have your own respect, level of respect and recognition that then was gonna compare with some of these other faculty who are members of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra.  You can't come in, 'cause jazz for the most part has been a second class citizen in our music schools.  I remember being at KU, University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas], and graduates saying to me, "We weren't allowed to play jazz in our school."  Well, that wasn't unique to the University of Kansas.  Every music school if you were caught playing jazz you could be suspended.  It just, you know, was considered low brow, and, you know, was certainly wasn't a elitist like classical music is.  So, I wouldn't want anybody to come in with one arm tied behind them, because they didn't have the reputation or performance ability as some of these other faculty.  So, we were able after several years of hiring Victor Goines who had been the first director of the jazz program at Juilliard [The Juilliard School, New York, New York], G-O-I-N-E-S.  And he plays with Wynton Marsalis in the Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra.  And people who had no interest in jazz are coming to jazz concerts.  He's spoken to alumni groups, he's just really, he's just a wonderful ambassador.  So, the program is strong.  We got a major gift from a family foundation for his jazz program, so we're doing well.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, yeah, I've--I constantly read good things about the jazz program.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 628060
Speaker 1: What else?
Speaker 2: We've done well with fundraising. I'd say in six years I've raised, well, in the previous six years, so it's--I'm starting my eighth year now.  So, the amount was 24 million [dollars] raised in the first six years.  We are--because of Henry Bienen, the former president--building a new building for the Bienen School of Music [Northwestern University Henry and Leigh Bienen School of Music, Evanston, Illinois], which will be on the lake front.  Half of our school is located there on the lakefront.  The other part is on center part of campus a half mile away.  And so, for musicians who play together being a half mile away is just really significant.  People don't know each other, the students don't know each other.  So, this will bring us together for the first time in decades.  It will be a center point for the campus, because I stole the idea from Jazz at Lincoln Center [New York, New York].   You know, there's Rose Hall [Frederick P. Rose Hall, New York, New York] that has the glass back that's overlooking Columbus Circle [New York, New York].  And so, our recital hall's gonna be four hundred seats will have a glass back to the stage, back of the stage, and it will look onto the lake [Lake Michigan] and the skyline of Chicago [Illinois].  So, it's just gonna be really stunning.  So, that's a major project.  It's a $124 million.  And university doing a large part of that and then also we've received gifts and are continuing to fundraise.  Other new faculty have come.  Our numbers for the school have increased we have over two thousand applications for only two hundred spots, student spots every year.  So, even though, with the economy the way it is, still the reputation of the school and its programs are attracting people to audition for the school.  So, we can be very competitive.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 628061
Speaker 1: Having been a minority student yourself in school, are, are they any, any initiatives to, you know, bring, you know, mi- more minority students to the campus, on the (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the new president [Morton O. Schapiro] does have an initiative for bringing more Chicago [Illinois] and Evanston [Illinois] minority students to campus.  For music, you know, the top eleven, top music schools the deans and presidents or those schools, we get together twice a year.  I should mention that I'm only the second woman of, leading one of the school, and I'm the only woman now, because the other woman retired, so we never overlapped.  At any rate, the issue if diversity is one that we continue to grabble with, and the entire--our accrediting body National Association of Schools of Music, that's always an issue, because we had just really small numbers.  University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] I still see as a leader in the numbers of ethnic diverse students but also in the numbers of faculty.  There are several singers there and well known [HistoryMaker] George Shirley.
Speaker 1: Shirley Verrett, I know.
Speaker 2: Shirley Verrett, that's right.  Another instrumentalist whom, with whom I've done a CD ['Music for Cello and Piano by African American Composers'], Anthony Elliott, he's a cellist, he's on the faculty.  So--oh, Daniel Washington.  So I can name four, I don't think there's a fifth one, but when we say four faculty out of probably, I don't know how many faculty they would have, I'd say seventy, seventy-five, and that those numbers for full time faculty are the largest then, you know, that's a sad testament to the rest of us.  We have two full time African--well, actually three, two are tenured, one is a lecturer, in our faculty of 125, but that includes part time people.  So, students I can name, I think know all the African American students in our school.  And two hands would be too many to actually--well there are not two handfuls of African American students out of our six hundred plus students.  So, there many reasons for that, we talked about it earlier with parents encouraging students to go for more professional type careers.  To the public schools not offering music, so there's not the access to musical training.  The expensive of musical instruments, I mean, there's a long list.  And so, we can do what we can.  There are, you know, community music schools especially in Chicago, like a People's Music School [Chicago, Illinois], which provides free tuition.  There's Merit music school [Merit School of Music, Chicago, Illinois].  So, these community music schools are really addressing, or trying to address music training.  CSO, Chicago Symphony Orchestra; Ravinia [Ravinia Festival, Highland Park, Illinois] providing programs to schools so, we do what we can, the reality is that for school like Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] and other private institutions, the numbers are really going be even smaller than state assisted institutions like University of Michigan, because the competition is so much and because the tuition is so high.
Story_ID: 628062
Speaker 1: We were talking about minority invo- students and involvement with the, with the minority community in Evanston [Illinois] and Chicago [Illinois], and you were talking about the alternatives available to people to get involved in music.  Oh, this is the questions I had, like with the changes in music, I, I saw a piece on, on Sunday morning on CBS about how Columbia University [sic.] was opening up a school for hip hop musicians.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's funny.
Speaker 1: To do, you know, spinning records--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh (laughter).
Speaker 1: --dubbing all that sort of thing.  Has Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] gone into any of that kind of aspe-
Speaker 2: No, and the reason I'm laughing is because I'm actually at a presentation that Victor Goines, our jazz director, did for the room was full.  So, I don't know how many hundreds of people where there who were their alums [alumni].  And so, a young guy stood up and he said, "Well, I'm glad that there's a jazz program and so what about having a hip hop major?"  And Victor tried to defer to the provost [Lawrence B. Dumas] of the university saying, "Well, you know, write a proposal and then I'm sure it will be considered."  But no, nothing like that.  I think that's just too dramatic as far as--when, when I think about our school of music, it's just so conservative and as I said 90 percent of the school, are, is classical music.  And, then we have jazz and then there are the academic programs.  So, that wouldn't really fit our mission, because I'm thinking we would have to hire a whole bunch of new people as faculty members 'cause we have none of that expertise there.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a tendency in music departments to consider hip hop culture is a tra- as temporary and?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And not--trendy.
Speaker 2: And not taken seriously.  There are though, you know, I dismiss it as a major but, as for instances people offering classes.  We're looking at an ethnomusicology person coming in.  So, this is--would be a position of faculty member.  And ethical studying obviously ethnic aspect of music, the culture, the people, the music, but making a connection with African American studies.  So, the person would have a joined appointment, and so, someone that we're looking at would be teaching jazz, has done hip hop classes, more for the general university student as an undergrad, but not to have a major in it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, definitely we feel that's our responsibility.  The school used to offer classes in The Beatles, you know, so following kind of popular music.  So, those type of classes definitely are of interest.
Speaker 1: Okay, but not as a major?
Speaker 2: Yeah, not as a major.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I may have misspoken about at Columbia, I thought it was Columbia I'm not sure.  But, so anybody from Columbia watching this later and says we didn't do that, we never said that.  Well, I may be wrong, so (laughter) but--
Speaker 2: Well, but just thinking about, the other thing I was going to say, if it's Columbia or in, well if it's Columbia, they don't have performance majors.  So, someone who would be majoring in piano or majoring violin.  And so, for schools like that it kind of makes sense that they would be thinking more in the academic side, you're going be studying it but I don't know about actually turning the--
Speaker 1: Scratching the records?
Speaker 2: Yes (laughter), don't know.
Story_ID: 628063
Speaker 1: Now, do you have any concerns for the, maybe the, the public appreciation of classical music today?  There, there seems to be an--I know in our community, maybe a dearth musicians anymore, you know, because they're not, not getting music in the public schools--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --reading music, or playing instruments they're too expensive and they're clos, closing programs.  Are you concerned about those kinds of things?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, because when I look at our audiences we're located on the North Shore [Chicago, Illinois].  So, the people who would come to, say, our band orchestra, choral concerts, any guest artist, primarily they live on the North Shore.  You don't get a lot of people from Chicago [Illinois] unless say it's gonna be a jazz program or some based upon the repertoire if it's say the orchestra, and it could be Polish music, I mean, you know, music by Polish composers, there has to be some connection or the guest artist is somebody that they're interested in going to.  But for 99 percent of our concerts what I see are white haired people and there's a true lack of diversity.  And we're not seeing enough younger people.  So, here we have almost seven hundred music majors.  We have what, fourteen thousand students at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], and we're not, except for say the friends of people who may be on the stage.  Their friends will come for concerts, but we don't see a lot of interest even with students coming to concerts.  So, we're very concerned and thinking then programming has a big part to do.  We have a Spring Festival [Spring Festival Concert] where we really do you know off the wall kind of artists, bringing them in, and playing different instruments, different types of music and that attracts people.  I'm hoping that, you know, not just a onetime thing, were they just come for that specific artist or artist but that they'll say, "Oh, okay at Northwestern there are other things that I can come to, you know, hear and participate in."  We also have a child's fair.  These are Saturday concerts specifically for kids from say age two until about ten or so, and the parents, or grandparents, or guardians bring them.  But, again, we're seeing a lot of North Shore people and not a lot of people from Chicago so, again talking about diversity.  It's a continual  effort, and schools along with arts organizations, individuals, I think you know even the government needs to be involved in working together to try to solve this.  Because if we keep saying, "Well it's a public schools problem," we're gonna be playing, you know, for empty audiences.  You know, everyone--fortunately, at a university we're concerned but not as concerned as say an arts organization about how many tickets we sell.  As we're saying, education the most thing, but, you know, still we don't have finite resources, and if you have fewer and few, fewer people coming, then you need to make some adjustments in how many concerts are you presenting and really looking and assessing what you're doing.
Story_ID: 628064
Speaker 1: What are your, you know, future goals for Northwestern school of music and, and for yourself?
Speaker 2: Well, for the school it's definitely breaking ground and completing that new building.  It's a 117,000 gross square feet, so it's a major project.  We'll know in the fall whether or not we're--we'll have the get a, the go ahead to move ahead.  So, we're talking about fall 2013 for moving into the building.  So, that has been a goal since I arrived, just to address that issue.  So, I certainly hope that I'm be able to move into the building.  We're the school we're in the midst of a strategic planning process for the Bienen School of Music [Northwestern University Henry and Leigh Bienen School of Music, Evanston, Illinois], looking at where should we be going.  We--what are new areas when we look at our curriculum are there things that are really unnecessary, things that are missing from the curriculum?  We, this summer, devised an alumni survey.  It will be sent out to our nine thousand alums [alumni].  Asking questions like, you know: if you had the choice would you major in music again?  What are you doing?  Trying to get data, what do they recommend, or--as far courses, in business or even the core classes we have in music theory and history.  Are--were those, those really helpful in making you a smart musician, successful musician?  What other priority do we have?  I'd say we have a lot of faculty changes that'll be happening just as far as aging.  There's no mandatory retirement, but, you know, that there are people who've been there for thirty, forty years.  And so, they should be looking at retirement.  And looking at replacing those individuals with people who can look forward, forward--forwardly I guess would be the adverb--who are going to make a difference for our school, and increase the reputation of the school.  Fundraising for everyone is going to be more and more important.  Hoping that people will open up their pocketbooks and their wallets, because, of course, now even those who have the means are considered about the future.  And so, they're being very wary about in even making say five year commitments, you know, for giving a gift.  So, I think it's just the eternal question about assessing ourselves and those of us who are musicians, you know, every time I perform, I'm very critical, and thinking well, what could I have done better?  How should, how could I have improved that, that performance.  And so, I think we as a school have to be in that mode of assessing ourselves but also being very cognizant of the competitors.  We know who our peer institutions are, and we have to know what they're doing.  And looking at ways, I mean, really being strategic in our thinking that we really have to think about what, looking at the resources of Northwestern what are those that we can do better than other.  What do we have the resources to do?  And admitting areas that we really haven't been a leader in and being honest about that.  We can't be all things to all people.
Story_ID: 628065
Speaker 1: Now you, you still perform and I was able to hear you on a couple of spots on the Internet (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, interesting.
Speaker 1: Playing on a CD ['Music for Cello and Piano by African American Composers'] with Anthony--
Speaker 2: Oh, Anthony Elliott.
Speaker 1: --Elliott, right from, from Michigan State.
Speaker 2: University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], please that's our--
Speaker 1: University of Michigan, that's right, that, that's there's a big difference.
Speaker 2: Yeah, rival (laughter).
Speaker 1: University of Michigan, he's playing the cello, right (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, very talented cellist.
Speaker 1: Okay and but so did now do you, do you have any students yourself that you mentor or, or--?
Speaker 2: No, it's interesting because at Arizona State University [Tempe, Arizona] I had to teach in ordered to be tenured.  That experience taught me I really--I don't have the interest in teaching.  So, I, you know, always say to faculty, "I really admire you."  Because of course their time, they don't work forty hours a week.  You know, they--if you're performance faculty member, you have eighteen hours.  So, eighteen contact hours out of a forty hour week.  They do a lot more I'm sure that, you know, if anybody watches they're gonna say, "Oh, you're saying I'm not doing enough."  They're practicing, you know, their doing whatever, but then they have three months off.  But I'd rather be involved in administration.  I think it maybe that I just like having my fingers in lots of pies, and I like to multitask.  And I would really be bored if I were just teaching.  I don't have that interest about looking at a student, just kind of going back to what I said about the foundation it's really important it's really important for students.  Really monitoring the progress that students make, the repertoire that they're doing, I just have, don't have that interest at all.  So, I'm--my interests are really more so in performing and obviously my main job is being an administrator.
Story_ID: 628066
Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question, and now, you've been in the academy for, for, for years in a number of different cities, what are your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, being in a field where I don't see many people who look like me for myself, it's being a role model, not only for individuals who be African American or Latino, but for women also.  Because even though most people think that the arts are very open, the reality that among our group of eleven top music schools, I'm the only woman that's representing one of those schools.  You would have to go to a school that's ranked maybe twenty-four to then have another woman leading a program.  So, having more representation not only of administrators but also of faculty who then are women who are full professors, which is the highest rank that you can achieve.  So, what ways I could actually address that.  Finding ways, too, that African American other ethnic groups will see that the arts are welcoming, that they do have a place, that you don't have to get dressed up to go to a concert.  When I, for instance just night, last night went to Symphony Center [Symphony Center, Chicago, Illinois] to a concert, full house and diversity of people and just thinking of ways, in which we can have classical music, have--receive that same type of response and interest.  I'm interested, can I stop a second? (Coughs) Sorry.
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Specially, you know, it kills me every time that I'm reading the paper or watching the news and I hear about another young person whose--like was just snuffed out senselessly.  I think about those children who aren't able to just play outside, you know, the way we used to be able to play or the way the way and children in other neighborhoods are able to play without any concern about their safety.  And just trying to figure what way I can actually make a difference for that?  What can we do as a community to address this?  And instill in young people a sense of pride and purpose and stress the importance, the value of human life, because it just seems like it's, it's doesn't matter, it's--knowing that I--that these young people thinking they have no future.  So, there so many issues.  I can, of course, as with everyone of any race, just be proud of the fact because I never thought that in my lifetime there would an African American president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama].  During the election I just said, "It's just not going to happen."  And so, I was wrong it has happened, but then I see the results of that.  And, you know, so many things that are occurring in today's society that I know are, you know, are society's reaction to the fact, "Oh no, how did he get in?"  So, just thinking not only as an African American community, but just as people.  How are we going to live together, you know, I kind of sound like Pollyanna, and I'm certainly not Pollyanna but really hoping and praying that we will be able to make positive change and, and progress.
Story_ID: 628067
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: If I could change anything?  (Pause) I'm really having trouble with that, in responding, because I think that we do have choices.  I think that many opportunities have come to me where I had no control, 'cause I feel want to control things and knowing realistically I can't control it.  Maybe I would have practiced more as a youngster, but, you know, then I think about the lessons that I was having at that time.  So, if I could change anything, it would have been the training that I had earlier, but, you know, that's hindsight and I'm still, you know, I feel like I'm a good musician.  I maybe would have taken more time--family and marriage was never an interest for me.  And so, you know, as I get older I think that I see the importance of family and, you know, people.  So, I've always put a high level of importance on friends, but I think I probably would have probably paid more attention to--it's more family and making those connections.
Story_ID: 628068
Speaker 1: Now, likewise when you look back at everything you've done to this point in your life.  What do you consider today to be your legacy, even though you've got a lot more to do?
Speaker 2: Oh, thank you (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I guess the first of being the first African American dean at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], or the first African American dean at University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas].  The impact, I guess, the legacies that I've left at the institution at which I worked and of course I'm thinking more the longer term schools.  So more ASU [Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona] and KU, Northwestern; my performance, performances with the Center for Black Music Research [Chicago, Illinois], with that ensemble [Black Music Repertory Ensemble]; and the education that I'm providing to others in presenting music by black composers, black classical composers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 628069
Speaker 1: You said your, your mother [Mattie Drayton] passed away in 2003?
Speaker 2: Two thousand [2000].
Speaker 1: Two thousand [2000], okay, all right.  And do you have any other family?
Speaker 2: No, so no brothers or sisters, so that's why friends are very important.  And I have a close cousin [Yvonne Drayton] who was in New Jersey, and I have godparents still in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], the adopted parents that I mentioned the Levines [Joan Levine and George Levine] in Kansas City [Missouri].
Speaker 1: What was your mother's reaction to your success, I mean did she think that you would go that far or?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes (laughter).  Anybody that I would meet that she had spoken to beforehand, they knew my whole life story, so she was very proud.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, I think she expected even more.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) All right.  Well, is there anything I have not asked you, we need to cover before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No, I'm certainly sure (laughter) there is nothing that we missed (laughter).
Story_ID: 628070
Speaker 1: Mercifully, the last question (laughter) is--well it's similar to legacy but a little bit different.  Ma'am how would like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As an honest person, someone who would tell the truth, who was concerned about people, and someone how just cared who wanted the best, not only for herself but for those around her, and who strove for excellence.
Speaker 1: All right, well thank you very much for sharing with us.
Speaker 2: Thank you, Larry [Larry Crowe].  I appreciate it very much.
Story_ID: 628071
Speaker 1: Joan Levine, L-E-V-I-N-E, [HistoryMaker] Toni-Marie Montgomery, Bernie, B-E-R-N-I-E, or Bernard Levine, and this was in Lawrence, Kansas at University of Kansas.  Probably 2003, or two--sometime between 2003, 2004 academic year.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Ready.
Speaker 1: Jeanne Behrend, J-E-A-N-N-E, last name Behrend, bar- B-E-H-R-E-N-D, piano teacher of mine from 1976 to 1980 at the Philadelphia College of Performing Arts [University of the Arts, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Left, Toni-Marie Montgomery, on the right Yvonne, Y-V-O-N-N-E, last name Drayton, D-R-A-Y-T-O-N [Yvonne Drayton].  She's a cousin who lives in New Jersey.  We--this was 2000, the year 2000 November, right before Thanksgiving in London [England] it was at Harrods department store.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Mattie, M-A-T-T-I-E, Drayton, D-R-A-Y-T-O-N [Mattie Drayton], and then Toni-Marie Montgomery in my house in Lawrence, Kansas.  We were house hunting, but that's the house that I bought.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Two--so that would have been, I went in 2000, so it was I'm sure it was the spring of 2000.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This was my fiftieth birthday party, and well four years ago, you don't need me to name everybody do you?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No.
Speaker 1: And I'm in the center in the shiny dress.  And this was at Symphony Center [Chicago, Illinois] on Michigan Avenue above Symphony Hall [sic. Orchestra Hall, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Someone from the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] shaking my hand and this was 1984, May, and I was receiving my doctorate from the University of Michigan, and this was in the football stadium [Michigan Stadium, Ann Arbor, Michigan].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This was in the 1990s when I was at Arizona State University [Tempe, Arizona].  This was photo taking by a photographer, I was being interviewed for The Arizona Republic newspaper. It was at my piano in my music room at my house in Tempe, Arizona.
Speaker 2: Is that your Steinway [Steinway and Sons]?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay, all right.
