Story_ID: 295938
Speaker 1: I'm Larry Crowe.  I am interviewer today for The HistoryMakers and our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is Frank L. Morris, Sr., F-R-A-N-K, L for Lorenzo, L-O-R-E-N-Z-O, Morris, M-O-R-R-I-S [HistoryMaker Frank Morris].
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is July 21, 1939 and as I like to put it I was born in what I consider the armpit of the Middle West, Cairo, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Yeah I would have thought it was East St. Louis [Illinois] but Cairo is--they are (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They are in competition (laughter).
Speaker 1: These are towns that not to be offensive to anybody that comes from there but they are some rough towns for black people.
Speaker 2: And especially when they were in the '30s [1930s] and the '40s [1940s] so I got out in the early '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: Cairo had a big struggle led by Charles Koen back in the '70s [1970s] and it went on and on.
Speaker 2: You bet.
Speaker 1: A struggle that lasted for about ten years down there in Cairo.
Speaker 2: I was too young to be involved unfortunately in those days but--
Speaker 1: It's like being--people have likened Cairo as being a Mississippi in Illinois or something.
Speaker 2: It's the southern part of Illinois.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, right on the Mississippi River.  So you were born there and--okay what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a retired university professor, graduate dean, senior [U.S.] Foreign Service officer so I've been in all those kinds of things.  Hopefully I'm not retired as a bit of a community activist in a number of communities where I lived including this one.
Speaker 1: What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is October 27, 2004.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in my living room at 138 Sandy Creek Drive in Desoto, Texas.
Speaker 1: All right now it's an interesting story as to why you're here.  Just briefly you're here because your grandchildren are here, right?
Speaker 2: Yes when I retired from Morgan State University [Baltimore, Maryland] in 1995 we thought we were going to wind up on the east coast in Cape Cod [Massachusetts] but when we looked for housing in Cape Cod in April, I'll never forget this, in April of '96 [1996] on April 18th there was eight inches of snow in Boston [Massachusetts] in the Cape and so my wife [M. Winston Baker Morris] and I well we need to re-evaluate this and we did and we were looking primarily at Florida and Texas and we were at San Antonio [Texas] and we were just about to make a decision about San Antonio or the Tampa [Florida]/St. Pete [St. Petersburg, Florida] area when my grandkids were transferred to--most of my grandkids were transferred from Minneapolis [Minnesota] to Dallas [Texas].  Oh yes my son and daughter-in-law too along with them and that's how we wound up in Dallas.  Now since they've since gone but we're still here.
Story_ID: 295939
Speaker 1: We start the interview off with five People magazine-ish type questions.  Short questions that only require short answers; it's kind of a warm up here.  The first one is sir what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food, I would probably have to say a Seafood Newburg dish but would include lobster would be one of my favorite foods or just plain broiled live lobsters not live but broiled lobsters.
Speaker 1: Okay now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: No I don't, I like if you can see from my home, we like the earth tones; the blues, the oranges, the browns and so forth, and the different shades of the earth tones, the greens.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes I think that we like--I like when you're married with a lady for forty-five years going on forty-six often I say we my wife Winston [M. Winston Baker Morris] and I but I think that I like the summertime.  We like tropical climates and so I find it much easier to get cool than to get warm in places like we've lived in Chicago [Illinois] and Boston [Massachusetts] and Syracuse upstate New York so we prefer--and actually we were thinking about moving to Michigan 'cause our friends, the Palmers, have a place in South Haven [Michigan] but there is so much up there 250, 252 inches and that's why we're still here in Dallas [Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes any jazz cruise and especially one on a transatlantic one.  Our best vacation was about three years ago on a jazz cruise on a transatlantic on the QE2 [Queen Elizabeth 2], we really had a wonderful time.
Speaker 1: Okay. The last question is, this is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Let's see I guess the favorite one is one my grandparents used to always say two of them.  One is that the trouble with common sense is that it's not so common and second the Lord works in mysterious ways.
Story_ID: 295940
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Lorenzo Morris, Jr.] side and let's start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes her full name is Frankie Mae Taylor Ann Honesty.
Speaker 1: What's the last part?
Speaker 2: Honesty, H-O-N-E-S-T-Y
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her place of birth is Little Rock, Arkansas and I think it was around 1921.  She's been deceased since 1988 and she was seventy-one when she died and I can do the math.
Speaker 1: Now what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: Well we're just beginning to do some really good work on my mother's side of the family.  I want to get this new book about the Brotherhood [of] Sleeping Car Porters because my grandfather, Frank Taylor was married to Alice Taylor and they were in Little Rock and they have a really interesting history.  On my mother's side it goes back to a Wright, we found out a Wright who fought in the Civil War as one of the black regiments out of North Carolina late in the war.  So we're proud of that and on--my mother and my grandfather are really where I would begin to focus because we found out that in 1909 about the time you were having riots in Springfield, Massachusetts my mother's family and it includes--my mother was one of six children of Frank and Alice Taylor.  Frank was a sleeping car porter and while he was on the road there were riots in Little Rock and I found out that my grandmother had to hide my mother and her children under a porch in Arkansas.  I think the house was attacked or burned or something like that, I don't have all of the details.  The end result was that my grandfather and grandmother decided they must move their families out from Little Rock and they moved to Boston [Massachusetts].  I'm not sure of the exact date but they moved in Boston and my grandfather who was as I see now from black history and I want to get this book on the sleeping car porters was a, you know, one of the famous porters of the sleeping car union and they developed--they bought a house now on West Springfield Street which is now of course really gentrified and my grandmother became a beautician and ran a beauty school and she was very, very active in the Boston NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  The Taylor family was really, really quite significant.  I'm still quite honored by the--I guess the only ones that are left are my mother's youngest sister which is Alice Cant Taylor Sanford in Boston.  She received her doctorate in education and Clyde Taylor who is a professor at New York University [New York, New York].  I regret that I never really heard the story of my mother of how in the middle of the [Great] Depression she was able to get a degree from Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] in the '30s [1930s].  As a matter of fact, she met my dad while she was as student and one of the real--I'm sure there was a great story of struggle with her and one of the other interesting stories was that even with her degree from Boston University her jobs that she could get was as a secretary and she wound up being a secretary and administrative assistant for the National Labor Relations Board [Peoria, Illinois].  But I think that here was an example of an educated woman and a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], she was a fifty year Delta but once again the constraints of the society, I think paid a cost for my mother.  I don't think--well that's my mother's side.
Speaker 1: Okay, well your mother and father met at Boston U [Boston University]?
Speaker 2: Yeah my dad was, I think was a student at Suffolk Law [School; Suffolk University, Boston, Massachusetts] and my mother but the story is not quite fairy book because I don't think they ever got married.  My dad went to another--went to New York [New York] with another woman and my mother and the families like in those days, sent my mother--a proper Boston family sent my mother to Cairo, Illinois for a family friend that's where I was born.  And then, I was raised by other people; people who were real strangers but wonderful to me from the age of birth 'til I was six years old.
Story_ID: 295941
Speaker 1: Before we get into who they were I want to go back to--now what was your father's name?
Speaker 2: Lorenzo R. Morris, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you know his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Yes his date of birth was Alabama--oh my mother's [Frankie Taylor Honesty] was nineteen--my dad was 1910, my mother was 1912 that's right.  My dad was July 23, 1910; my mother was June or November. I think it was November of 1912.  My dad was born in Mobile, (unclear) Alabama, my mother in Little Rock, Arkansas.
Speaker 1: All right and what do you know about his side of the family, about the ancestors on that side?
Speaker 2: I know a lot about Dad's--the Morris side of the family.  We've had family reunions; we've had good history work done.  It goes back to the Morris relatives reflect a slave who we think came in on Virginia and wound up in Mobile because of the railroad.  That's where the railroad starts. There was Virginia railroad and he was either building or involved in building a railroad there and he married, I guess my great-grandmother.  His name was Reuben [ph.] and he was a slave and then of course he had my grandfather on the side, the Morris side.  There was Cherokee Indian [Native American] on I think it was my grandfather's side--my paternal grandfather's side and African American.  I've since been to Mobile and saw Afritown [sic. Africatown].  Afritown is where I think was the base of the families that grew up there, very poor.  I'm quite proud of my grandfather and grandmother [Alice Morris].  They were married in 1905 and they had nine kids of which my dad was one and my grandfather was quite a person.  Not only was he strong, deacon of the Yorktown Baptist Church [Mobile, Alabama] there.  We had a big reunion their seventeenth wedding anniversary there in 1976 so we had quite a bit of knowledge about that and I gave the eulogy at my grandfather's funeral, one of the highlights of my life.  I know quite a bit about that.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Lorenzo R. Morris, Sr. and my grandfather was honored while he was still alive for--one of the things that we in the Morris family are really quite proud of back in the 1900s they wouldn't provide schools for African American children so I think the state may have provided a one room school up until the eighth grade.  Well there was no high school in Alabama so my grandfather was--he worked in the lumber yards and as a boom man which is a longshoreman and one of things that those brothers did was to get together and decide to build their own school, the Mobile County Training School [Mobile, Alabama].  Not only did they acquire the land and they built the school, it became the only high school in Mobile County [Alabama].  There wasn't even a white high school and once they had it built they demanded that the state provide a teacher and it did and then of course they built a high school for whites and so forth and so forth.
Story_ID: 295942
Speaker 1: But there's a long wonderful history of both legacy of education, migration and struggle between my [paternal] grandmother [Alice Morris]--of grandmother and grandfather [Lorenzo Morris, Sr.] on their side with a segregated society and the attempt to raise nine children, they had ten one died which is a really wonderful story, I guess five of them are still alive at this point.  Part of that story was a high school principal or in Alabama who really saw great potential in my grandparents' oldest child who is Lillian [Morris] and she was--they encouraged my grandparents to let Lillian come north to Boston [Massachusetts] to school 'cause they felt that she was really beyond high school and my Aunt Lillian is a wonderful story of migration.  Later followed by her brothers Chester [Morris] and PG [ph.] who were next in order and my Aunt Lillian not only graduated from the public high school in Boston, once again the middle of the [Great] Depression, she got a degree from Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] in social work.  Because there were no social work jobs for blacks, she volunteered for a year and then wound up as working as a social worker for the Urban League.  She has a really great history of later marrying Russell [S.] Gideon a pharmacist and becoming a socialite in Seattle [Washington] and I guess now is a senior matriarch of our family.  So it's a wonderful story.  Then the other stories of struggles of the two brothers who were with her, my Uncle Chester which is one of the most poignant and probably difficult stories of the Morris family because my Uncle Chester was very, very bright but he took on the role of sacrificing his own career and probably education and then probably a career in the theater, he was really quite close and knew Frank Sylvester [sic.] because of the need that he felt to support as the older brother to support (simultaneous)-- .
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Frank Silvera.
Speaker 1: That's correct, I'm sorry-great black actor, yes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A great black actor who played different roles.  I think he may have had a Puerto Rican side to the family.  He was like very light and he played Mexicans, good actor.
Speaker 1: But my Uncle Chester is one of his early contemporaries with the black theater in Boston in the--it must have been the '20s [1920s] or '30s [1930s]--it must have been the '30s [1930s] but my Uncle Chester never was able pursue his stage career and I think we all--another example of the country losing people of talent and color because there were not opportunities.
Speaker 2: So he sacrificed to help his siblings?
Speaker 1: Yes that was his siblings and there are many stories like that and Uncle Chester is certainly one--I'm probably sure there are stories like that on my mother's [Frankie Taylor Honesty] side but I don't know them quite as well.  The sacrifices that were made for my mother's education and for I'm sure for Alice [Taylor Sanford] and Clyde [ph.] and all the rest.  But I know the ones on the Morris side and then my dad (simultaneous)--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know there is just a word--I know there is probably not any relation but there was a famous black Civil War correspondent named Chester Morris [sic. Thomas Morris Chester] in the 19th century.  He actually was the only black civil war correspondent, Chester Morris.
Speaker 1: Oh I didn't know that.  Well my Uncle Chester was very, very talented but I think it was, there was always the rest of his life a bit of sadness and maybe a bit of bitterness about the society not being quite right and fair.
Story_ID: 295943
Speaker 1: This may have taken a toll on my dad [Lorenzo Morris, Jr.] too because as my Uncle Chester [Morris] was sacrificing, my dad was also took the migration to Boston [Massachusetts] and he graduated from Boston English High School [English High School, Boston, Massachusetts] and then moved on to Lincoln College in Pennsylvania [sic. Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania] and he was on the law program where he'd do three years and three years and my dad did Lincoln got through on a pre-law program then went to Suffolk College--Suffolk Law [School; Suffolk University] in Boston but never graduated and that's a sad tragedy and that was reflected in the family.  I think he didn't graduate because I was born and I think that totally disrupted his life.  I don't think was really able to deal with that very well but it was another, another loss.
Speaker 2: So what did he do after you were born?
Speaker 1: He then--
Speaker 2: You said he went to New York [New York]?
Speaker 1: Yes he went to New York and he wound up finding a job in the [Great] Depression which was tough as a laborer and so he became very active in the labor union and as a laborer.  He spent--instead a career in law he spent it in--a career in rendering and proud and wonderful kinds of things but I think it was a personal cost.
Speaker 2: Now did you ever get a chance to meet him?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah I met him after I was six years old, he came to Boston where I was raised by my grandmother and grandfather and my paternal grandmother [Alice Morris] and grandfather [Lorenzo Morris, Sr.] and by a wonderful aunt and uncle George [Johnson (ph.)] and Mabel [Morris] Johnson who lived upstairs.  These folks provided my rock and I got to know my dad eventually and I would go visit him sometimes in New York with my other cousin.
Speaker 2: Your aunt was his sister?
Speaker 1: Yes Aunt Mabel.  He has three very powerful Morris sisters, Lillian [Morris], Mabel and Lazetta [Morris Davis] and all of them have been really sort of rocks for me too.  They really--especially Mabel and to a certain degree Lazetta. Aunt Mabel and Aunt Lazetta.
Story_ID: 295944
Speaker 1: Let's go to your childhood.  Are there any other stories from your--from any sides of your family about what life was like in the turn of the century or right after slavery or any of those kinds of stories?
Speaker 2: Oh yes there are many stories of struggle on the Morris side.  I know the Morris ones better than the Taylor side.  But the Morris struggle stories talk about sometimes even very poor African American communities in Alabama jealousies of working parents.  Folks thinking that my [paternal] grandparents [Alice Morris and Lorenzo Morris, Sr.] trying too much to get ahead or examples of where, I don't know how to say this nicely, delivering papers and being abused some of the boys not physically abused but--and how--
Speaker 1: Was this on that paper route?
Speaker 2: Paper routes and how often the protector for my grandparents was because he was a foreman in a lumber mill there and because there was sort of a white protector that kept him from being messed with.  These were the times as I'm looking now and seeing that black men were hauled off to Alabama to the chain gang for no reason at all because they wanted to provide labor.  So there were two questions I asked my grandfather.  I was glad that known him before he died.  I was asking him about, "How did you survive pop?"  He said, "They would have to deal with my--," with the white boss where he was a foreman with the labor union--not labor union but where he was foreman.  So that gave some protection and the other great story was I have asked my family--I've never on the Morris side never really gotten a total answer to this other than it was just God work in mysterious ways was the great flu epidemic of 1918.  How we lost nobody in that and they had children and they said we lost no one.  It sure went through, it went through Alabama and--
Speaker 1: It was devastating.
Speaker 2: --devastated America but our family on the Morris side was blessed we didn't lose anybody on that and I don't think anyone knows the reason why.  Yeah so you have stories of the Morris of course of going into war.  Great struggles for education all throughout down--and getting people trained.  My Uncle Ed [Edward Morris] trained as a very effective mechanic later--not mechanic what do you call it machinist.  A strong union person later working for many years for Boeing [The Boeing Company] and retiring there.  My Uncle Roger [Morris] fine electrician and also a sad story because he had great baseball ability but that was once again the time before African Americans were maybe he could have tried struggle in the Negro League but he went the route of later on and worked for years for GE [General Electric] and so forth and retired there.  My Uncle Robert [Morris] a wonderful, very talented, skilled electrician.  I think Uncle Robert could do most anything and of course he had some great stories about being a veteran in World War II [WWII].  Three of the Morris family maybe more my Aunt Lazetta [Morris Davis], Aunt Mabel [Morris Johnson] volunteered and Aunt Lillian [Morris] all three of the Morris girls volunteered at USO [United Service Organizations] and my young Uncle Walter [Morris] fought, I think he was with the paratroopers and Uncle Ed and Uncle Robert were in the war.  One of the great things I mentioned that wonderful vacation we had on the QE2 [Queen Elizabeth 2] some years ago and it was a very special vacation too for us.  Not only because it was the great jazz but my Uncle Robert and Uncle Ed died just the summer before and we were privileged enough to have my Aunt Theda [ph.] Uncle Ed's widow and my Aunt Kee [ph.] Uncle Robert's widow with us on the trip.  We reminisced the number of times of how different it was for us years late crossing the Atlantic [Ocean] of the QE2 compared to how it must have been as a troop ship for Uncle Robert and Uncle Ed and Uncle Walter and then probably Aunt Lillian too.  As a matter of fact, we did tell stories about Lillian and Uncle Sid, Uncle Ed and Uncle Robert at different times in the European theater.  And Uncle Robert told stories which I'm not going to repeat now about how difficult it was with some of the white officers and the racism they had to endure as black troops and how they dealt with it.
Speaker 1: Segregated of course, I know I've heard stories of how the black troops being relegated to the lower decks of the ship near the boiler and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: And yet overcoming stories and like I said my Uncle George [Johnson (ph.)] he doesn't usually tell very much, he's my Aunt Mabel's husband.  But he rose into colonel brigadier general in the reserves, he was an [U.S.] Army medic and he had some really interesting war time tales.  I've got to make sure that I get recorded in the next year or two.
Story_ID: 295945
Speaker 1: So there's stories of the war [World War II, WWII], there's stories of struggle, there are stories of pride--tremendous pride in education, there are stories in which I witnessed my grandmother as late as in the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s] maybe '50s [1950s] anyway going out and cleaning white folks' homes for additional money.  I also saw my grandparents [Alice Morris and Lorenzo Morris, Sr.] in Boston [Massachusetts] where I grew up with them. They are the ones who raised me along with my aunts and uncles, opened their homes for instance the whole extended family.  I remember a number of friends of the family would come up from Alabama and needed a place to stay and my grandmother and grandfather provided folks like Donald Benedict [ph.] and Gus Richardson [ph.] some of whom married into the family.  Gus Richardson married my Aunt Theda's [ph.] sister and so we had whole branches of families like that.  But I remember the extensively openness of some medical doctor who studied in Boston.  He was from Alabama and Adam [ph.] he was there, he was with the family.  I know my grandmother not only raised me but she raised other cousins of the family, Jimmy Chaney [Jim Chaney], Russ Singleton [ph.].  So there is the story of the extended family networks of my grandparents.  So I look back now and I don't know how they did it 'cause I was a burden with them; a teenager with all the teenager problems that I brought to them but yet they persevered and they were into their sixties then.  I wouldn't want to be getting young to a certain degree a little bit troubled teenager to have to deal with going into the sixties--into my sixties and they did and I'm glad that they did--
Story_ID: 295946
Speaker 1: Okay your early childhood now, now you were, just the circumstances around this now your mother [Frankie Taylor Honesty] conceives in Boston [Massachusetts], I guess and then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No not in Boston--oh I'm sorry maybe yeah conceived right in Boston (laughter).
Speaker 1: And then she has to move to Cairo [Illinois] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) With an aunt.
Speaker 1: With an aunt.
Speaker 2: Yes while I'm unborn.
Speaker 1: And then she goes back to Boston after you are born and you're left with Ms. Davis [ph.], right?
Speaker 2: Ms. Davis and then Ms. Mattie Banks [ph.].
Speaker 1: This is a white lady, Ms. Davis?
Speaker 2: Yes Ms. Davis.
Speaker 1: How did that work out?
Speaker 2: I don't know how my mom--she never told me how Mrs. Davis was selected, I really don't and I guess now everyone is in the grave that would know.
Speaker 1: So Mattie Banks how did she get involved?
Speaker 2: I don't know how Mattie was either from Chicago [Illinois]. Maybe my mother knew some of the connections because I understand that my mom, I didn't know it, would still be contacting some of those and I don't know how the decision was finally made for--determine my paternal grandparents [Alice Morris and Lorenzo Morris, Sr.].  The move from Boston was just one day my things were--I was packed up with this lady who I had never met from Cairo they said my auntie whoever she was and she took me to Boston.
Speaker 1: So you were six years old?
Speaker 2: Six years old.
Story_ID: 295947
Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory, your very first childhood memory?
Speaker 2: It goes back to Carbondale [Illinois], it goes back to the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor [Naval Station Pearl Harbor, Hawaii], I remember all the frenzy around the Japs and remember Pearl Harbor so I was about two years old, I can go back that far. That's my earlier, those are my earliest memories, 1941 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah that's 1941, you were about two or three yeah.
Speaker 2: Two, right that's my, those are my earliest memories.
Speaker 1: So do you remember much about Carbondale at all?
Speaker 2: Yes very nice little rural--.  I've gone back and looked at 502 East Main Street and it's not like it was, it's now part of the University of Southern Illinois [sic. Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois].  It doesn't exist anymore.  It was drummed into your head; all of your addresses as kid were drummed into your head.  You know 502 East Main Street, 411 East 29th Street which is in Chicago [Illinois] it's now Lake Meadows [Chicago, Illinois].  It was a Chicago tenement slum in those days.  Then of course 126--I can almost remember my childhood memories more than I can my adult memories 'cause I had no real reason to after remembering all of my adult addresses as we moved around a lot.  But all my childhood addresses I can remember.
Speaker 1: Yea, I think you're right about that we have those addresses drummed in and we memorize them at an early age and remember them all our lives.
Speaker 2: Yes 'cause you don't want to get lost--in case we're lost our parents say.
Story_ID: 295948
Speaker 1: I forgot to mention in terms of the Morris family how much pride went into my Uncle Walter [Morris], the youngest boy known as the baby boy, in the public schools of Boston [Massachusetts], a graduate of Boston Latin [School, Boston, Massachusetts] and then on to Tuskegee [Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and then on to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] after the war [World War II, WWII], war veteran and has become a famous orthopedic surgeon, very great success and a wonderful asset to all the family.  He and his wife Lela [Duffel Morris] have been just been a, you know, strong support and background.  So once again this reflects that constant struggle for education within the family and actually also success for some of the younger children because my Aunt Mabel [Morris Johnson], my Aunt Lazetta [Morris Davis], my Uncle Walter are some of the youngest of the Morris family although Aunt Lillian [Morris] was one of the most highly formally educated at the other end.  The younger ones I think had access because they had also the strength of the brothers of the family that were working to sacrifice for them along with my [paternal] grandmother [Alice Morris] and grandfather [Lorenzo Morris, Sr.].
Speaker 2: Sounds like a remarkable family.
Speaker 1: It is a remarkable family.  I'm blessed with both sides of a remarkable, of a remarkable family so-of the Taylors and so I'm just so glad that I have this opportunity to be fair to them and 'cause it's a wonderful history of struggle and as I stop to think back as I get older, I realize that my tendencies to want to be struggling with the communities for things that are in the community and others probably come back with some deep root family historical traditions that I'm only now becoming aware of.
Story_ID: 295949
Speaker 1: Okay so when you're six years old you're packed up and taken by auntie auntie (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes Aunt Annie [ph.], I think.
Speaker 1: Aunt Annie okay to Boston [Massachusetts], to Roxbury.
Speaker 2: Yes to Roxbury.
Speaker 1: And so you're leaving Chicago [Illinois].  Do you remember much about Chicago?
Speaker 2: I remember a lot about Chicago.  I remember about South Parkway [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive], I remember about the tenements, I remember about a first time eating grasshoppers--fried grasshoppers out there on the concrete. Guys cook it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They would cook fried grasshoppers in Chicago.
Speaker 2: As kids--us kids would, oh yes.
Speaker 1: You would fry--how would you fry the grasshoppers?
Speaker 2: Just put them--fire and put them over there, yeah. Oh yes.
Speaker 1: And eat them?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes I remember I used to think that some of the best things and I couldn't afford to get them would be those, the skins.  Man those skins, those little greasy skins, hot skins.  I remember, I remember the ice man, you know, hauling ice up those tenements things in Chicago.  Oh, and I remember, I remember South Parkway, I remember, I remember getting baptized, I guess at age six by Mattie [Banks (ph.)] at the Oliver Baptist Church [sic. Olivet Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois].  Oh yes and Reverend James Jackson [sic.].  I could--later on when I found out how conservative he was, I would almost throw up but as a kid at six I was just you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah he was a famous--he was Joseph P. Jackson [sic. Joseph H. Jackson].
Speaker 2: Oh it was Joseph P. Jackson that's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: He's the head of the--
Speaker 2: National Baptist Convention for many years.  Oh yes I remember, I remember Chicago, you know, it's just really ironic later on in '66 [1966] when Mattie died and I went back to the tenement where we were staying there and I couldn't sleep at night.  I mean, I didn't, I realized that we were on the third floor in the inner tenement there a wooden building.  It was just a, it was just a fire trap maybe it was earlier than '66 [1966].  I think it was before Lake Meadows [Chicago, Illinois] but anyway I'm staying there and I'm saying what's wrong with me Frank [HistoryMaker Frank Morris], you've lived here for years and now you come back. All of a sudden you're so snotty or anything that you can't cause you can't sleep because you're afraid of a fire, I mean come on.  So yes I have memories, good memories of Chicago, difficult memories.  I remember that I couldn't start school in Chicago until you were six so I started at the Drake [John B. Drake Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois] and I was a real problem in school in Chicago.  I remember, I wouldn't want to go into it, I was a young problem child.
Story_ID: 295950
Speaker 1: So was that kind of, just kind of disconnect taking a toll on you, you think at that age?
Speaker 2: No when I went to Boston [Massachusetts] I had to make an adjustment.  I had been in kindergarten at six in Chicago [Illinois] and I think I was put in the first or the second grade in Boston so and the public schools were pretty good and I was a problem in elementary school too for a little bit but I got good grades so I think that ameliorated things a little bit.  But one of the things that I've always remembered is that how I was considered in many different times in the public schools that although schools in Boston were predominantly white and the teachers were fair they were Irish and Catholic were fair.  I know many times surprised them because I was--they didn't expect that I would know what I would know.  So I've always recognized that sometimes that the teachers and especially white teachers might underestimate African American kids or especially African American males.  But yet other teachers who were instrumental that if they may--I found in those days that if they under estimate you early, they certainly made a quick adjustment and really some of the--one teacher in particular--a high school teacher, an Irish teacher named Doherty [ph.] in Massachusetts, I had him in Boston Latin [School, Boston, Massachusetts]), I had him at Roxbury Memorial [High School, Boston, Massachusetts], was fundamental in my appreciation of the social sciences.  I had him for four years in high school and when I took the College Board achievement test in social science I wound up in the 97th percentile and Doherty was really something.  I had A's all the way through then at the last exam I took an easy off figuring I would get my A from Doherty, he gave me a D (laugh) that taught me a lesson too right.  So I had A's for four years and one D because--Doherty certainly wasn't going to not give me--he was fair to everybody and so he taught me a lesson then too.  Great teachers are fundamentally very, very important.
Story_ID: 295951
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Boston [Massachusetts]?  What was your neighborhood like?
Speaker 2: It actually was Jewish.  My [paternal] grandfather [Lorenzo Morris, Sr.] had a big home, 126 Crawford Street in a neighborhood that was primarily Jewish and then Italian and then it turned into African American.  Matter of fact I still have some of my friends, Eddie Drakman [ph.] a Jewish friend who is now teaching at University of Rochester [Rochester, New York], Billy Rabinel [ph.] black, son of a famous Boston minister who has since gone to law school and who is very active in Florida politics, we're still friends.  The Williams [School, Boston, Massachusetts] schoolyard we could be very creative in playing games with just a ball and hitting the ball with our hands.  So it was tremendously mixed interaction.  Irish kids, Italian kids, Jewish kids, black kids, eventually it became African American--all African American.  A lot of wonderful interactions and an important role played by our church.  My grandfather was a deacon at Twelfth Baptist Church [Boston, Massachusetts] and in Twelfth Baptist I established some friendships that last to this day.  The Neville family, a large family, poor family but was in Twelfth Baptist and Joe [Dr. Joseph Neville] was our best man.  We were both in high school together, same high school class and Joe has become a very prominent minister at the United Church of Christ and of course I've been very active in the United Church of Christ board and so we still are some of our closest friends and his wife Elinor [Lindsey Neville] he met at--when Win [M. Winston Baker Morris] and I--she was a neighbor of Winston's my wife of almost forty-six years.  So it's just a lot of wonderful contacts.  Bart Graham, Dave Swepson [David Swepson], my closest coterie of friends although I would also include Buzz [HistoryMaker Edward "Buzz" Palmer] now it's Palmer now as adults go all the way back and whenever we get together it's almost like not missing a beat, go back to those early days in Boston in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: And I should also say that I have some other close friends the Burrells, Harold who were also in the church, Harold [ph.] and Leon Burrell [ph.].  Leon has, I think, probably passed away because of difficulties with drugs but Harold was a short order cook who was a little bit older than the rest of us and Harold got a car and--but he introduced us to jazz.  I used to as a young--I appreciated that my grandparents would trust me even at fourteen and fifteen to be able to go along with, you know, some of the older kids who loved jazz.  We'd go down to Newport [Rhode Island], I'll never forget in '56 [1956] I was there at the famous [Duke] Ellington and Newport session in '56 [1956] and I saw Paul Gonsalves go twenty-eight minutes [at the Newport Jazz Festival].  I couldn't believe what I was hearing and things like that.  So I have great memories of Boston, of jazz, of Newport.  I'm going to under age clubs like the Big M [Boston, Massachusetts] and getting a three dollar drink and being able to--being under age but being able to stay there and listen to jazz all night, good clean fun.  So I remember Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] as a struggle.  I wanted to get out of Roxbury, I didn't want to stay there for college, as a matter of fact I was accepted to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] as a community student but that isn't what I wanted, I wanted to get away from Roxbury.  I didn't--I felt that if you were not Italian or Catholic or Brahmin it was not the place for opportunities for African Americans in those days.
Story_ID: 295952
Speaker 1: Give us a kind of school chronology.  Now where did you start--you started school in Carbondale [Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: No I started in Chicago [Illinois] at Drake School [John B. Drake Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And went from there when I went to Boston [Massachusetts] at six, I went to the Williams School--elementary school and then to the William Lloyd Garrison [School, Boston, Massachusetts] and that's where I think I strongly began to be influenced by some teachers.  There was a Ms. Kerry [ph.] who was once again an Irish teacher who I think I blew her mind one time because I think she considered me a little bit of a problem and all of a sudden, you know, there was a field day and many of the Boston schools went down to the Museum of Science [Boston, Massachusetts] and the Museum of Science must have been a lecture hall there must have been about four thousand students in this.  And there was this lecturer from the museum and he started asking these elementary kids, I was in the fifth grade at that time, things about atomic energy.  Basic energy stuff where does all energy come from, of course who knows, I said I do it came from the sun, oh yes, oh yes.  Then he said do you know anything about--then he starts talking about what is atomic energy, you know, so I was able to tell him about neutrons and protons and electrons and all of a sudden Ms. Kerry and the school was very proud.  They thought that I was some kind of genius.  Now I happened to know this and it's sort of funny because my Uncle George [Johnson (ph.)] who was a school teacher was trying to sell my dad [Lorenzo Morris, Jr.]--he was always selling encyclopedias 'World Book' and so he was explaining to me so I could convince my dad how atomic theorists are so clear in that.  And it so happened that--I guess I was in the fourth grade and he explained it to me so well that I had a tremendous advantage when I went to the science museum 'cause I knew all this stuff very, very simply.  So everyone was thinking that I was a genius but I simply had been by accident.  So I got an I guess it was supposed to be a lifetime, a year's admission to the museum of science.  All of a sudden in the Garrison where Ms. Kerry and others were thinking I was this crazy young black trouble maker all of a sudden I was considered a genius in the budding so that was funny the same day it hadn't changed but that was in elementary school they changed their opinion of me overnight.
Speaker 1: Now you went to Garrison (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) William Lloyd Garrison
Speaker 1: Isn't [William Lloyd] Garrison's grave there in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts]?  I believe it is.
Speaker 2: It may be but I didn't know.  You know there's certain things I never when we were going to Garrison was never told who William Lloyd Garrison was.  You know, things I've had to educate ourselves.  Anything that I've learned about education especially as African American you must educate--we must educate ourselves.  It was not until much later when I started books about history from [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin, Lerone Bennett, Jr. [HistoryMaker Lerone Bennett] and I saying wow I went to Garrison School and I didn't know about this guy and so forth and so forth.  Yes Roxbury is full of if not graves or famous landmarks that are not unknown to the young people that are growing up there and I consider myself guilty of that too.
Speaker 1: It seems like the school--I'd think they would make a deal out of the name for Garrison (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no I'm not sure that even those folks in school knew about William Lloyd Garrison.
Speaker 1: That's something, isn't it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. The Garrison School still exists.
Story_ID: 295953
Speaker 1: There are stories of, you know, of strengths and weaknesses.  I went on to what was then the eminent public school a Boston Latin School [Boston, Massachusetts] where you had to take an exam to get in and I went in as a seventh grader and my whole family was really proud of me and my church [Twelfth Baptist Church, Boston, Massachusetts] was a very important part too.  This wonderful--Michael E. Haynes who focused on young people and development of young people who had such things as pre-college club who would take us down and put the church basketball team.  He'd keep a little runt, seventh grade like me on with these high school kids but take us along just because we wanted to talk about pre-college and so from the seventh grade I began to say hey college is a way.  It was a way not only a way out but a way for the future. That was very, very much an important part of the experience of being in the church and I don't want to underestimate that in terms of my longer term development into high school and into junior high.  I was telling about the Boston Latin situation, seventh grade was where I first met Mr. Doherty [ph.] he was a teacher at Latin School.  But it was in the eighth grade in Latin School that things fell apart for me and once again as a high strung young person I was in Latin School and I got into a row with a young man--a young kid I don't even remember now but he was Irish and he called me a nigger.  So I went right upside his head and we got into it.  Well what happened, nothing happens to him but I'm brought to the office and I had good grades but they wanted to call up my dad [Lorenzo Morris, Jr.].  My dad lived in New York [New York] so my Aunt Mabel [Morris Johnson] came who was always this wonderful defender, always in my corner.  They said to her, "Well where is his dad," his dad is not here, he said his dad lives in New York.  Well he said you're going to have to pay tuition and tuition for all the years you've been in the Boston Public Schools.  My Aunt Mabel said what, she then took me aside and said, "Frankie [HistoryMaker Frank Morris] they don't want you here, I understand that you got into a fight, you shouldn't have done that but you both were at fault, I'm going to take you right out of this school and I'm going to take you right back into the--out of Latin School into the non-elite public school," and I said, "Okay Aunt Mae."  So she took me into one and put me in where her husband was a teacher (laughter) at the Roosevelt School [ph.] (unclear) my Uncle George [Johnson (ph.)] who I still have wonderful relationships toward.  But all of a sudden that was devastating because whereas everybody had thought that I was going to be one of the best and the brightest at Latin after getting booted out of Latin School all of a sudden I went even within my family to a person who shall remain nameless 'cause I don't want to embarrass him, I was told I was the black sheep of the family and they knew I wouldn't make it anyway and so forth, devastating kinds of things for a young person.
Speaker 2: How did that make you feel?
Speaker 1: Not very good but once again there were counter acting strengths.  There were strengths that were my Aunt Mabel and Uncle George who were always very positive toward me and my church.  They didn't give up on me; Mike Haynes didn't give up on me and so forth.
Story_ID: 295954
Speaker 1: Actually it was probably an asset because I think I enjoyed being at Memorial [Roxbury Memorial High School, Boston, Massachusetts] and some of the other schools.  It was a--whereas at Latin [Boston Latin School, Boston, Massachusetts] I probably would have been a smaller fish in a big pond, in Memorial and other kinds of schools I was a bigger fish.  Even though I had to make quite an adjustment and one of the adjustments I think it was in the ninth grade when I went to the [Earl] Lewis Junior High School [Boston, Massachusetts] where my uncle [George Johnson (ph.)] was also teaching.  The college course had French taught from seventh and eighth grade.  In order to take the college course there I had to go into this with kids that had French for two years prior and that was one of my greatest academic challenges that I ever faced because these kids were speaking French and there was a wonderful French Canadian teacher named Ms. Sullivan [ph.] and Ms. Sullivan knew I was working my butt off and didn't know what was going on and my first semester Ms. Sullivan gave me a charitable--I think it was a D or a C, I didn't know nothing and I appreciated that she knew I was trying.  Then of course I caught on, I was able then I started to roll and then it was really a good roll from thereon to Memorial all kinds of honors and other kinds of things.
Speaker 2: Now Memorial that's--
Speaker 1: Roxbury Memorial High School in Boston [Massachusetts] and at that time non co-ed they had separated the schools by boys and girls.  I had wonderful high school career there, all kinds of honors and other kinds of stuff there.
Speaker 2: That was about 1950--
Speaker 1: It was from '54 [1954] to '57 [1957] and then graduating in usually Memorial one of the African American kids would get a big scholarship to somewhere and I got the one to Colgate [University, Hamilton, New York].  Carl McCall [HistoryMaker H. Carl McCall] did it a couple of years ahead of me he got his to Dartmouth [College, Hanover, New Hampshire] so I said now I know if Carl can get it to Dartmouth and so I have to do the formula too and I wanted Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] or Colgate and so I got mine at Colgate.
Story_ID: 295955
Speaker 1: Well, it seems like all along in your story you've got like relatives that are like, seeking higher education.  They constantly are teaching you at home it seems like all kinds of things.
Speaker 2: You're absolutely right.  But the most brilliant person of all was my [paternal] grandfather [Lorenzo Morris, Sr.].  He had no more than a fourth grade education but here was a man who always listening to the news, Walter Winchell, Gabriel Heatter, I mean always listening to the news.  I guess I'm still part of a news junkie 'cause' I--and I really regret that we didn't engage each other much other than on sports.  I don't think he was really understanding that I was picking up on his news kinds of things too.  But I saw brilliance in other kinds of ways.  Very, very wise, very, very talented, very, very smart always reading, reading the Bible and reading the newspaper and always--so I was listening to him.  He wasn't engaging me but I was careful to listen to what he was saying to other adults and I don't say this in hyperbole but I've met--my doctorate from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I've been in Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Colgate [University, Hamilton, New York] and Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York] and I've met the intellectual--some of the greatest intellectual lights in this country and my grandfather had he had the opportunity could stay right with them, he could stay right with them.  I can hang with them but he could put them and me to shame so once again a tremendous loss of this person.  I've always thought about that in America we have--there's a lot that isn't knows.  I'm so glad of this project so I can at least from my progeny to understand that there are cost of bad policies that can probably never ever be recouped and we as a country have suffered for it and so therefore, maybe it's been one of the reasons why I've been interested in public policy to stop the hemorrhaging so that this doesn't continue--these cycles don't continue that because we can't cost them out or articulate them we think they don't exist, the cost of omission of not doing the right things, of not being supported.
Story_ID: 295956
Speaker 1: Now did you suffer any social difficulty in high school from being so bright?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: A lot of times--you know the thing now that kids say they're called like names for being smart.
Speaker 2: No I had--you see I was playing sports; I was playing football, basketball, track and baseball.  I was on a city championship almost state championship high school basketball team.
Speaker 1: What position did you play?
Speaker 2: I played forward and I just wished that I had my uncle as a coach in my junior high; I could have really done something.  But that was--for me this was a route of being well rounded 'cause it was my strategy to get a scholarship, I knew I had to get a scholarship, I wanted to get a scholarship and this was part of the formula.  So I was going to be doing that so I didn't have any problem.  I could duke with the best so and if they want to call me something--it got me kicked out of Latin School [Boston Latin School, Boston, Massachusetts] so I didn't have any problems there (laughter) along those lines.  But it's really sad that what we have now that we didn't have then is what a number of great--real good studies from black boys to the cool polls to (unclear) work in Shaker Heights [Ohio] are that we're having a penetration of the sub culture of the streets that's glorified.  In terms of it's like a privilege to go to jail or it's a privilege to be able to--that shows toughness and so forth or streets smarts or it's a privilege to be able to rap with lyrics that may denigrate women or that you're being smart by not competing academically because you then decide you're going to compete in the areas where you can control.  This is devastating and it's foolish and it's brought out of ignorance.  Ignorance because I think young people are not told the odds of bouncing a basketball.  I have a great speech which I've given a number of times when I speak to young people; I call it the dumb Mike story.  I said that for young people to talk about being like Mike it was Michael Jordan at that time, we've got to upgrade it now to whoever is the next black athlete that does foolish things.  That you don't want to be like Mike and I point out how Mike had a five year, $12 million contract with Nike [Inc.] and Nike's gross went up twenty to thirty percent each year and he didn't have a piece of the action.  I said you're getting him for getting $12 million for five years.  I said do you have any idea what Nike was gross meant to Mike and then later on the same thing.  He retired, he came back and Michael still didn't--.  I said Michael could have also done or could have contracted out what Nike was doing and that is going over to Taiwan and buying sneakers for two or three dollars and putting your name on it and then having a distribution system could mean a lot of people could make money.  I said you don't want to be like Mike, you want to be like Jerry Reinsdorf.  They look at me, "Jerry Reinsdorf, who's Jerry Reinsdorf?"  I say, "Folks if you don't know it"--I have this speech in New York [New York]--"He's the one who determines whether Mike plays or not."
Story_ID: 295957
Speaker 1: You had a pretty well rounded life in high school as a teenager and so forth?
Speaker 2: Oh yes a wonderful one.
Speaker 1: Were you still rebellious in high school, did you--you think?
Speaker 2: No other than the family not in school.  I knew that in order to get a scholarship from the ninth grade through the twelfth [grade at Roxbury Memorial High School, Boston, Massachusetts], I had to not only have great grades but I had to have a record that could support a scholarship and so I constantly went about doing it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so what was Colgate [University, Hamilton, New York] like?
Speaker 2: Colgate was very, very interesting.  I arrived there in '57 [1957] and decided I'd play football.  I had a full scholarship in board jump and found myself with kids from a great deal of privilege, white kids.  We were a revolution, Colgate admitted about 288 students in the class.  It was only about fifteen hundred students there total and we were--of the 288 there were six black students in 1957, '58 [1958].  This was a revolution because the other three classes there were two.  So three classes there were two brothers and one was an African brother and the other one was Wally Betts [Walter Betts].  We came in with six out of 280 something.
Speaker 1: Now I've heard from other people that went to Ivy League schools some of these schools actually had a quota.  They would admit no matter what your grades were they had like one or two (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I don't think--since there were classes at Colgate before we got there without any, I'm not sure there was a quota.  I think that what had happened they'd gotten a new president named Everett [Needham] Chase [sic. Everett Needham Case] who really said look even before the--this was '57 [1957] before the civil rights thing was really heavy going he said look get some representation and so we were six and three of the six graduated and it was difficult for all of us.  One of them is still my very close friend, [HistoryMaker] George Davis who is a famous writer who wrote the book 'Going Home' [sic. 'Coming Home,' George Davis] got the Academy Award [Oscar] and he's written a number of other novels.  George was one, myself, Warren Davis who later became a judge--oh no a dentist out of New Jersey, Hal Jackson [Jr.] who didn't graduate, he was a wonderful football player but I think he wound up as a judge in Michigan, Dave Kent [David Kent] who for many years wound up as president of the National Scholarship Service and Fund for Negro Students out of Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and Ernie Ratcliff [ph.], I don't know whatever happened to Ernie.  Ernie was from North Carolina--rural North Carolina and it was a tremendously difficult adjustment for him.  So three of wound up graduating and then they began to have more after that.  But it was difficult--.
Speaker 1: You were with a well-heeled (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well-heeled and we were just not looked upon as being of value at all.  I don't say that as negative, these kids are going to be clicking with their own, not everyone.  There were always I think a few people and one of them is still a close friend of ours named Paul Ingrey.  Paul and I hit it off very, very well.  He's still a friend of the family, wonderful I mean Paul is--I call him an honorary soul brother.  We would hitchhike together because I had to hitchhike with a white guy in upstate New York to get the girls in Boston [Massachusetts] or Philly and New York [New York], you had to hitchhike 'cause you didn't have--and so I had to hitchhike with Paul and Paul was just so open.  As a matter of fact I'll never forget the time when we were hitchhiking to home and we were both getting different rides.  We were going to meet then go to Boston to my uncle's in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] and somehow I misconnected and there's Paul there in the middle of the ghetto in Roxbury somehow he made it to my uncle's but it was just cool (laughter).  There was no barber there to cut your hair so Paul became a barber and he made a tremendous fortune in terms of sort of Prudential [Reinsurance Company] high risk re-insurance and he's given in a lot of ways, he's just so wonderful.  Although it was difficult once again I had a very few lifelong friends that were made there.
Story_ID: 295958
Speaker 1: What was your major at Colgate [University, Hamilton, New York]?
Speaker 2: Economics and politics--economy and poli science, political science in government and that's where I can show you that one of the highlights was going to the Washington [D.C.] as part of the Washington Study Group which really got me into real knowledgeable about making contacts, about foreign service and AID [United States Agency for International Development (USAID)] and working the hill [Capitol Hill].  I worked on the hill in the office of Senator [Leverett] Saltonstall.  I thought I'd be--I was a democrat and I thought I'd be working for Kennedy [Senator John Fitzgerald Kennedy] but no the patrician republican was really much more receptive toward a young black guy.
Speaker 1: I think he was a mentor to Ed Brooke [HistoryMaker Edward Brooke], wasn't he?
Speaker 2: Yes he was; he certainly was.  It was Brooke who replaced Saltonstall, we knew Brooke because we worked with Brooke too.
Speaker 1: I know Senator Brooke told us that 'cause I asked him why he was a Republican and he said well the Republicans in Massachusetts were different.
Speaker 2: Not only Massachusetts, New York too.  I was head of the Young Republicans at Colgate because that was the Republican Party.  Once again we had tradition that had gone from Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] that of course Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] had changed but in the North and the west it was a progressive party.  You had democratic machines in Boston [Massachusetts] that were Irish, that were Catholic and were not very responsive to African Americans.  But you had a Republican Party that paid attention to credentials and who had sort of a clear liberal progressive and fiscally responsible kind of viewpoint.  I mean it was a wonderful party.  In New York people like Javits [Senator Jacob K. Javits] and [Senator Kenneth] Keating, in Boston like Frank Sargent [Governor Francis W. Sargent] and [Senator Henry] Cabot Lodge [Jr.] this was a great party.
Speaker 1: I suppose after you look back even in Illinois we had [Charles H.] Percy and [Everett] Dirksen which is quite a difference from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But Percy was and there was a tradition, yes that's absolutely right.
Speaker 1: It's interesting yeah.  So you were working for Saltonstall.
Speaker 2: Yes I did an internship in Saltonstall's office (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous).
Story_ID: 295959
Speaker 1: I didn't ask you this when you were in high school but what was your career aspiration in high school?  What did you think you'd be when you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Law, law.
Speaker 1: Lawyer?
Speaker 2: I thought I'd go into law and I almost did.  I had a--after Colgate [University, Hamilton, New York] I had a crossroads, I'd applied to law school and I was even recruited by Duke Law School [Duke University School of Law, Durham, North Carolina] 'cause they wanted to have some blacks and my scholarship offer was to Northwestern [Law School; Northwestern Pritzker School of Law, Chicago, Illinois].  I had a law scholarship to Northwestern and I had a scholarship fellowship to Syracuse the Maxwell School [Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs, Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York] and so I had to choose and I made the choice for Syracuse and the Maxwell School.  It was a year instead of three years and I had two little boys [Frank Morris, Jr. and Scott Morris] then and also that was a time when government ironically most folks don't--when I tell my son this by 1961 blacks at Colgate were not recruited into the private sector.  All the interviews there--there were just whites for Procter and Gamble and all of that.  So our choices were professional schools or government or the [U.S.] military.  So I looked at either law or the Maxwell School and that Maxwell School was really a wonderful experience not only--I valued my Master's in Public Administration from Syracuse equally with my Ph.D. in terms of the things that I learned and the opportunities that it gave for me.  People who I said don't believe it but it's true.
Story_ID: 295960
Speaker 1: Now did you actually play football at Colgate [University, Hamilton, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yes for about two years (laughter) until one year when Jim Brown beat us 61 to 7 I sort of lost my enthusiasm (laughter).
Speaker 1: I was going to ask you about that.  You and Jim Brown at Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes and we dropped Syracuse after that but then I decided to concentrate on an academic scholarship, concentrate on getting into grad school and say what we want, most folks do not give the credit of how difficult it is to really play sports in any college and have a rigorous academic program.  It's a zero sum game.  If you have a job and most of the athletes at least in those days had to have a job to part of the year, you have a job, you're engaged in sports, you're tired, you have to get so many hours, you've got to hit the library I mean it's a tremendous--it's about fifty percent additional burden on you it's incredible.  You know scholar athletes are really something.  Those all Americans who are able to keep high grade point averages and outstanding or even just playing sports deserve a lot of credit that they don't get.  The idea of dumb jock is just really, really crazy because the athletes have to really be very, very bright too as we know just to learn the sports part and then to carry that other load is just incredibly difficult.
Story_ID: 295961
Speaker 1: Are there any teachers at Colgate [University, Hamilton, New York] or Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York] that you can look at as mentors or role models?
Speaker 2: Not as mentors. Not as mentors nor role models.  I don't say that lightly but they were good professors.  I had some really good professors but not as role models.  They didn't see me as that and I didn't see them as that and I got good recommendations when I needed them but I was not really close of course there were no African American professors on campus.  Everything was nice it was cordial but it was not sort of personal types of mentoring or development.
Speaker 1: So you're still like a fish out of water.
Speaker 2: No I had my bearings, I knew quite well where my strengths were, things I was interested in and what my goals were so I had no complaints and one of the things that oh I should mention the dean at that time at the Maxwell School [Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs, Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York] named Guthrie [Sr.] Birkhead [Jr.] because once I graduated from Colgate and decided on Syracuse, we had the scholarship or the fellowship and we went there and my wife [M. Winston Baker Morris] and my two kids [Frank Morris, Jr. and Scott Morris], my trailer and all of a sudden we couldn't get into housing on campus which was really, really important.  So we were stuck in Syracuse without housing so for a while I had my trailer at Colgate at my fraternity cook's home and I was commuting.  So I said--finally I went to Dean Birkhead and I said dean look you've got to take your fellowship away, I can't afford--oh we ran into housing discrimination with my wife and my two sons.  So she was working at the Youth Development Center but we--and my fellowship we couldn't afford some of the housing and we were being what do you call it--redlined and so forth and so forth.  I just finally went to the dean and said dean I'm going to have to give you your fellowship back, we can't find housing and we can't get into university housing and to his credit Guthrie Birkhead said, "Frank [HistoryMaker Frank Morris] I'll take care of it."  The next day we were in and we had wonderful friends it was like the difference between one hundred twenty-five dollars a month that we were paying for a place in the ghetto that was really run down and away from campus.  At that time it was one Naval Reserve housing for fifty bucks a month it was wonderful.  We were all in the same boat and some of our happiest times were with some of the--and we still have some of the friends from that period of time all with young kids and so forth and here are some great examples too.  I had a car and we had the (unclear) there was no parking on campus at Syracuse and two incidents which I will always remember, we were all scholars so when Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] got in he developed a surplus food for the poor program and expecting to help West Virginia by getting rid of our surplus food.  So us shrewd guys in the Maxwell School said, "Hey look we students meet the income criteria," so we began to get surplus food.  We got real butter, we were getting margarine, we got butter, peanut butter, the meat was so bad we'd give them to our dogs.  But we had beans, cheese--loads of cheese man we were eating well.  So that was one of the things that we spread the word for the students.  The second thing was it's interesting I laugh at, Syracuse still doesn't like me to tell this but I did.  Because there was no parking on campus we had to park a long way away so I decided one time I'd try this and so I was driving our old Pontiac and I went up to the gate.  The guards were, "Where are you going?  Where do you think you're going," and I said, "Going to clean up Maxwell Hall," (laughter).  He said, "Okay go ahead," (laughter).  All of a sudden the guy said how come you're parked here on campus and I said oh just luck and he said can we ride with you (laughter).  They rode with me and they see the guy just wave me pass.  Syracuse still doesn't like me to tell that story but it's the truth.
Speaker 1: That's quite a story. That's quite a story.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Campus parking and I was giving my colleagues a ride.
Story_ID: 295962
Speaker 1: Tell us how you met your wife now. We've got (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes that's a tremendously important part.  My wife of forty-five years and it's probably due to a coin toss.  I was in college and in Boston [Massachusetts] and one of my close friends who I'd grown with, David Swepson, University of Mass [University of Massachusetts, Boston, Massachusetts], [U.S.] Air Force pilot, retired Phillip Morris [ph.] pilot along with Joe Neville [Dr. Joseph Neville], Bart Graham.  Dave Swepson and I were the childhood friends that remained friend to this day.  Somehow Joe and Bart were going someplace else but David and I decided we were going to check out parties.  So we knew about one party on--if people know Boston it was Hutchings Street, it was really a high falutin street then.  So we went and I had the car, one of my dad's [Lorenzo Morris, Jr.] old cars, Ford, he would always give them to me 'cause I tried to get it fixed up, a Studebaker or something.  So I got the car and David and I pull over to this party on Hutchings Street and we go in.  Now David was in Latin [Boston Latin School, Boston, Massachusetts] and I was at Memorial [Roxbury Memorial High School, Boston, Massachusetts] so a Latin School guy was acceptable to the black middle class families this time but not one from Memorial.  David said if my friend can't come I can't go in so we left.  We knew about this party out in Brookline [Massachusetts] so we go off to Brookline and finally find it.  We go in and it's late in the evening and we go and check the sisters out and everything.  There was this fine sister that was just up in the arms of this other guy.  So David and I said--we had a strategy for this so what we do is we flip a coin and whoever wins the coin toss get everything, the chance to go after the girl, takes the car and leaves the other guy there in the dust, he gets home if he has to hoof it you know (laughter).  If I had lost I would have given David my car and I would have had to get home in a cab.  So I win the toss but the guy who didn't win has to make sure that he covers the back of the guy who goes after the girl 'cause in case the guy has some buddies there, he's the guy you'd calm down while you get the heck out of there.  So I won the flip toss and finally break in for this fine sister with this guy and I found out that she wasn't with this guy and was trying to get rid of the guy because he had bad breath (laughter).  Well the rest is history, that was Winston [M. Winston Baker Morris] and that was more than forty five--that was forty-six years ago.  We went on from there and connections with David and Joe found his wife through that Roxbury Winchester [Massachusetts] connection and the rest is history.
Speaker 1: You're becoming quite a strategist now.
Speaker 2: I don't know about that, that's the way it worked out.
Story_ID: 295963
Speaker 1: So now you're at Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York] and you've got your master's degree.
Speaker 2: Yes Master's in Public Administration (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Public administration.
Speaker 2: Yeah and then it was a matter of where to go from there and so I looked around and decided it was the federal government.  At that time Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was really talking about what to do for your country and the private sector was not opened up and I was really interested in government.  I always felt that I really wanted a career there.  So I got into the Federal Management Intern Program and I was interested in urban renewal and I had a choice and I wound up going into urban renewal on the West Coast in San Francisco [California].  But I had a choice of going to San Francisco or Seattle [Washington] 'cause they had a Seattle office and they needed people there too and I had relatives in Seattle.  So I picked Seattle and that was an interesting choice because not only did my career go off there but I got tremendously involved for the first time in the local chapter of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and that was '62 [1962].  So in the middle of the Civil Rights Movement I had this federal position where I'm traveling but then got wound up as the NAACP president because of the fact that the people were doing it were not really doing anything.  So we got the NAACP really moving then.
Speaker 1: What were the issues there?
Speaker 2: Oh de facto segregation schools, I have newspapers I can show you, de facto segregation schools, unemployment, jobs for African Americans, disproportionately high unemployment rate, job discrimination the typical one that you would not expect in a--well I would in a western state.  So it was full-fledged and then the school ones especially difficult to crack because they were in denial not only about segregation but the quality of education in some of the segregated school, McCarver [Elementary School, Tacoma, Washington] and others.  And it was really no excuse for schools to be so segregated in Tacoma [Washington] because the black population was only ten percent.  So you have seventy, eighty, ninety percent elementary schools and so forth.  So we wound up with following the national issues, mobilizing force support of civil rights.  We had a thousand people when Viola Liuzzo was killed, wound up picketing the home of the school superintendent. I did that there in Montgomery County [Maryland] too almost arrested in some of those places but really fighting for the traditional kinds of racism that was prevalent.
Speaker 1: I know one of the interesting things in that part of the country, I don't know if you were there, remember Sandy Stephens who was a quarterback for the University of Washington [sic. University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota].  That was the first black quarterback I ever saw play.  Were you up there when he was there?
Speaker 2: I don't remember, I really don't remember.
Speaker 1: I think it was around '61 [1961], '62 [1962].
Speaker 2: Yeah I was there from '62 [1962] to '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: They went to the Rose Bowl.  He could never get into the NFL [National Football League], they wouldn't let him play.
Speaker 2: That's true and to tell you the truth I was really focusing on everything from university discrimination in the fraternities, de facto segregation, there were a whole range of issues that we were on the battle lines for, tremendously we reinvigorated the branch. We really went after whole questions of the targeting of the urban renewal programs.  We just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Urban renewal is often being called urban removal for black people because what they take a spot inner city that's decaying and then push people out running a highway through it or something, redevelopment.
Speaker 2: By the early '60s [1960s] one of the things I'd been able--the policy had been changed and there was the development of rehabilitation projects.  So one of the ones I had and I was most proud of was covering Portland [Oregon], the Albina neighborhood which was a black neighborhood that was a housing rehabilitation and that was bringing things up to code and numerous other kinds--special loans and other things.  But also it began to focus on downtown renewal.  They begun to move the downtown college renewal because of the difficulties in the recognition and one of the things I could control.  See one of the reasons as a federal official, I could make sure that did not happen in African American communities and it did not happen there.
Story_ID: 295964
Speaker 1: Okay so now you, you were in Seattle [Washington] through (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seattle, Tacoma [Washington] from '62 [1962] through '66 [1966], yes.
Speaker 1: Okay and '66 [1966] you took a job with [U.S.] Foreign Service with the state department [U.S. Department of State].
Speaker 2: That's exactly right a lateral into the Foreign Service into the Latin American bureau.  When I was at Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York] I had a tremendous interest in management information systems and so AID [United States Agency for International Development (USAID)] sort of recruited me along that line.  Then I went into the Latin American bureau in development policy and moved right on up the ladder there.
Speaker 1: Now you went to Uruguay, right?
Speaker 2: Oh that was in '67 [1967] when they had the presidents- summary of the presidents of America meeting with LBJ [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] and he was meeting with the different American presidents.  And that was a wonderful experience.  That was a wonderful experience for me in a number of ways because as a relatively junior, senior Fo- junior Foreign Service officer for the first time in my (cough) career ever I was working twelve hours on, twelve hours off in the office of the exec staff which was secretary of state staff with Dean Rusk.  I was one of his staff down there.  One of three people that was his staff that prepared documents for him and what I saw it's really not an overwhelming job, you can have a junior office do this if they've got the intelligence, was to see all the intelligence that was coming in to the secretary of state from all over the world including the super-secret stuff from the military intelligence, CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] and all of that and prepare a briefing statement--document for the secretary of state.  So when he gets up in the morning, he sees the things that he must know in case he has to talk to the president.  So we saw embassy stuff from the state department, we'd see the CIA stuff; we'd see the military stuff, so we had to--.  I found out some things then that always I'll always ha- be with me.  One of the things was that how much of what goes for secret--top secret stuff in the U.S. government is over classified.  I would see the same material classified as secret and top secret from military intelligence, state department intelligence and other intelligence, CIA intelligence and it's going to the secretary of state and then I would have because we also had the newspaper clippings from the papers around the world, I would find articles in The Baltimore Sun, The Washington Post, The New York Times and gave greater in depth coverage than what our fantastically super-secret things were doing.  I'm saying who are they keeping it a secret from?  What really hit home and this is a true story Dean Rusk every morning when he got down the one thing he wanted to see before our briefing that we'd worked twelve hours to prepare of all the stuff from around the world was a copy of The New York Times.  This is the honest to goodness truth folks that showed me something about--now, I hope that our press and especially the great papers and their foreign correspondents haven't cut down to the extent that I hope this is still the case as it was then for informing the American people.  And I still believe that it is that the great papers have people from the inside that would give them really good information and so there is tremendous over classification going.  They want to classify things to the American people.  The enemy knows it, but it's to the American people folks want to keep things classified for.  And--so that was a wonderful experience.
Speaker 1: Do you think that maybe it's because since people don't really read the paper like they ought to so a lot of people are going to know anyway if it's in The New York Times?
Speaker 2: That's sad, that's really sad and, you know, what's going to count as an educated person and an empowered person is the ability to differentiate for knowledge.  I used to tell my students that the powerful in the United States don't try to exercise control by limiting media but it's by finding people with information and figuring out that our people are not going to be educated enough to be able to find the wheat from the chaff or know how to do it or want to take the effort to do it.  So this is the essence or one of the essences of being empowered, to be able to filter through-being able to handle large volumes of information whether that's reading quickly, whether it's being able to absorb, being able to record things or take notes so that you will know and to recognize what's important.  This is the essence I think of empowerment in education and also understand how and when bureaucracies are, are vulnerable.
Story_ID: 295965
Speaker 1: Now what you're saying is profound I think because most people think the government is hiding information or dribbling out just a little bit but a lot of stuff is out here for people to read.
Speaker 2: Yes folks don't want to recognize that before the '72 [1972] election, Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] on Watergate there was a lot of things out there.  I mean before this election--this current election we're two week before 2004 presidential election and we're seeing a lot of material that has shown the Bush [President George Walker Bush] administration being incompetent but folks are in denial.  When we saw at time--a good period of time 70 percent and even now 50 percent believe that Iraq was involved in 9/11 [September 11, 2001] when if we were going after the countries involved in 9/11 we'd be moving to attack Saudi Arabia who had fifteen of the nineteen, Palestine who had two, Pakistan who had two.  We would be attacking our allies, we'd be invading our allies--Egypt I'm sorry it wasn't Pakistan, Egypt and Saudi Arabia that's who we'd be attacking not Iraq and most folks because of ignorance just as we didn't know Vietnam [Vietnam War] that was a civil war that goes back for a long period of time.  We don't understand Iraq not knowing the history about the British attempts of invasion in 1920s and facing the same thing we're getting now or and it's so tragic, the history of the long standing differences between the Shias and the Kurds and the Sunni, we don't know what we've gotten into there, When we talk about liberating or seeing ourselves--not being able to see ourselves from the rest of the world sees us will have devastating consequences but I don't want to spend too much of my time there.
Story_ID: 295966
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were talking about intelligence in '66 [1966] and how it's--a lot of stuff is just not, you said, is just not hidden the way people think it is.
Speaker 2: (Nods head) But folks have to be educated, just have to be able to know critical thinking, has to be able, like I said, to be able to know what is important and what is spin and what isn't spin.  I think that one of the real tragedies and I've tried to speak on this in different communities is that our American education system for the majority of Americans--the majority of Americans are not talking about yet college graduates, or getting people exposed to college, but the majority of Americans in their educational system in high school are not taught economics, you know, are not taught different policies that, that--and they aren't even taught survival financial skills.  How to become an entrepreneur or some of the things that the 'Rich Dad, Poor Dad' [Robert Kiyosaki and Sharon Lechter] book's authors taught about passive income and how unearned income is really different than earned income and so forth, and so forth and the advantages and disadvantages of both.  These are things that should be taught to our children and are not taught.  So we have many areas of where our populace even though they have great instincts and are good people are simply uninformed and they will look to the wrong sources or trust the wrong sources to give them vital information.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so this is--you were in the U.S. Foreign Service in the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] and Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] administration.
Speaker 2: Um-hm and Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] later.
Speaker 1: You started working on a master's degree in '69 [1969].  Am I jumping ahead too far?
Speaker 2: Oh, doctorate you mean.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: I, in '68 [1968], had gone to Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.] while I was still working in the state department [U.S. Department of State] to work on a doctorate there and I--it was interrupted because of student revolts in '68 [1968] and I could have gotten my master's there and I really should have because I qualified for it but I said no I want a doctorate and I decided then to go on to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  I had to choose between Harvard and MIT and I picked MIT and it was a great, great move and so I started in '69 [1969], '69 [1969] to '72 [1972] I was doing course work at MIT and then later on from '72 [1972] to about '76 [1976], '77 [1977] I was associate professor of urban affairs and political science at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois].
Story_ID: 295967
Speaker 1: Now before we get there in '70 [1970] you made your first trip to Africa, I believe.  You went to Ghana, right?  Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: That was wonderful and I was at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  One of the beauties of being a MIT graduate student is that sometimes things just come out of the blue.  One of the professors, Bob Rothberg [Robert I. Rotberg] who is now president of Lehigh [sic. Lafayette College, Eason, Pennsylvania] I believe, came up to me one summer and he said, "Frank [HistoryMaker Frank Morris] how'd you like to go to Africa and study at the University of Ghana [Accra, Ghana]?"  I said, "Bob come on no bullshit", that's just the way I speak to him.  MIT was very, very sort of informal this aside some of the professors I had at MIT I'd known because when I was an AID [United States Agency for International Development (USAID)], I hired them as consultants (laughter).  Bob Wood [Robert C. Wood] who was the department chair had been in HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] although I hadn't known him; I was too low down the totem pole in HUD.  He was impressed that I had been at HUD when he was under Bob Weaver [Robert C. Weaver] the deputy director. Anyway so MIT had really pushed the recruitment thing and so I said, "Oh Bob don't BS, I'm not like the other folks here, I've got to work in the summer, I've got to feed my children."  He said, "I'm serious" and I said, "Bob I can't take a summer off from study, I've got to work to make money for next year and to help feed my two kids."  So he said, "Well how much do you make in the summer?"  Later I could have kicked myself, I threw out a figure of about four grand [four thousand], I could have said six or ten but I said four (laughter).  He said, "Okay we'll give you that and go to Africa," I was floored.  They had some special scholarship funds that permitted me to go to the University of Ghana and spend three weeks or maybe four at one of the programs for the University of Ghana and (unclear) it and institute of science technology, Kumasi [University of Science and Technology; Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana] and I was there for the enstoolment of the Asantehene also in Kumasi [Ghana].  It was a wonderful trip.  I just ate up the lectures and African culture, African history; getting my kente cloth outfit upstairs and my stool which is in the other room.  It was a wonderful, wonderful trip.  I enjoyed the cold showers, I enjoyed the African food, it was a blessed experience.
Speaker 1: This is 1970 yeah who was president of Ghana in the '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Banti [ph.] a guy named Banti was past [Kwame] Nkrumah and it was before the military coup before the military coups that were going to hit.  So it was really a decent time in Ghana, the economy had not collapsed they were digging the dam--I want to say Volta dam [Akosombo Dam] that was bringing electricity and it was a wonderful time to be in the country.  I was tremendously impressed with the university Nkrumah built.  It's through the science and technology Kumasi and the University of Ghana were some of the prettiest universities I'd ever seen.  The tropical floor it was just absolutely a wonderful time to be there I think as I found out later in AID when I was at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] I arranged a conference through the Institute for--African American Institute [Africa-American Institute, New York, New York] that from years of underfunding that these wonderful colleges had just been dried up to the bone in terms of the inability to be adequately funded.
Speaker 1: Were there any Ghanaian instructors there that really stand out to you or the contacts you made in Ghana?
Speaker 2: No it wasn't, I was really just more of a recipient there because the areas of which were taught were not the areas of where I was really concentrating.
Story_ID: 295968
Speaker 1: So Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois] this is 1970 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was from '72 [1972] to '77 [1977].  I went there as an associate professor of urban affairs and had a very good time.  I met a number of wonderful people there.  I didn't meet the Palmers [HistoryMaker Edward "Buzz" Palmer and HistoryMaker Alice Palmer] there they came a little bit later. Jan Carew, Bobby Hill [Dr. Robert A. Hill] was there, Marcus Alexis, Northwestern was trying to get a coterie of young black scholars.
Speaker 1: That's when Dennis Brutus was there.
Speaker 2: Dennis was there yes and so I was there and I think a lot of other folks.  We left because Northwestern changed courses to a certain degree.  [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett I had come the same time that he'd been selected to head the African American studies program; he stayed there less than a year that was regretful about that.  When I taught at Northwestern and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is it [E.] Duke McNeil--
Speaker 2: That name sounds familiar but I don't remember Duke McNeil but working carefully with the students but being very active in the community also.  One of the things that I did was I was hardly there a week when I saw that a black councilman had beaten up by the local police and the local paper were criticizing the council person.  Roosevelt Alexander I think was his name; I couldn't believe what I was seeing.
Speaker 1: Evanston [Illinois] is supposed to be this liberal (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, so the community--the African American community was really up in arms.  So I worked with local community activists, a young tough brother named Alton Belcher [ph.].  We decided that we were going down to see this local paper 'cause it had a real racist a guy named William Knott [ph.], K-N-O-T-T has this column in the paper. So we go in there prepared really to deal with this editor.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: I'm sorry we were talking about--
Speaker 1: At Northwestern and the beating of the city councilman.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Go ahead, we have speed.
Speaker 2: I was mentioning that at Northwestern I got there and there was this beating of this city councilman and the newspaper is taking the police and there had been other beatings.  So Alton Belcher, a young community activist and I decided to pay a visit to the newspaper, Evanston Review and their editor (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A guy named Knott.
Speaker 2: --Knott was a columnist there who had been really, really racist for years.  So Alton and I go in and all of a sudden they've got a new editor, a guy named Frank Coakley.  So we go in there looking all tough we're going to really threaten this guy.  He laughs at us and says, "Look you guys have something to say" and we said, "Yeah we have something to say you present Bill Knott and you never have the other side and we don't think you published the other side."  He said, "Can you guys write?"  We said, "What do you mean can we write, what a racist statement."  He said, "How would you like a column?" and we were floored and there became a relationship that lasted, I guess three or four years where Alton and I--but I guess I wrote most of the column called Veritas Negri [ph.] and I have copies of that which dealt with all aspects and gave me a great chance to pass on information and research information about how Evanston High School [Evanston Township High School, Evanston, Illinois]--the black kids at Evanston High School had a national achievement rate that was worse than Parker High School in Chicago [Illinois].  You got more achievement scholars coming out of Parker per black student than you did out of Evanston things like that which made the real estate lobby really mad and so forth and so forth.  But you know I had the facts and I know now whenever I write for the newspaper all everyone would ever want was to be able to catch me wrong in one fact, to try to discredit anything I've ever said.  So I'm always thoroughly checking the facts and passing it on, using it as a great chance--
Story_ID: 295969
Speaker 1: Alton [Belcher (ph.)] and I began a friendship with Frank Coakley that lasts to this very day although he has long since gone past Evanston [Illinois].  We did that and that was one of the most important things I did for the community.  Not only did I do the Evanston Review but with the black paper there, a fellow named Randy Thompson [ph.] ran that and so we did that too.  So I was very active and involved in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] too in the community.  There was an instance where a teacher had a fight and beat a black girl and finally everyone was against the black girl so we looked into it and this teacher had anger management problems and had to reverse that.  One of the things that was sad at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] was that when we came there in '72 [1972] and I guess students had generated this effort to try to recruit top black faculty there was a change.  Northwestern during that time decided to move away from need based scholarships for African Americans to merit based what that really meant--merit based for everybody and that really meant that they were not--the preference of course would be to fund middle class students especially white students 'cause you had much less to commit than you had to give to poor black students and began a trend which really got many of us very, very much disappointed with Northwestern.  So it was a good four years or five years and it was time to leave and I left there to become a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) One thing we didn't mention you were elected Father of the Year by the Chicago Defender.
Speaker 1: Chicago Defender I had the article in there as one of the highlights.
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-seven [1977]?
Speaker 1: Seventy-five [1975] and I have the article and I just had two sons [Frank Morris, Jr. and Scott Morris] that was before my daughters [Rebecca Morris and Kristina Morris] came and so that was a real kind of wonderful thing.  I think you'll see the picture of my wife [M. Winston Baker Morris] and my sons, look quite different then than we do now.
Story_ID: 295970
Speaker 1: Okay alright so okay what happened after Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] where did you go?
Speaker 2: After Northwestern I applied for a national fellowship program out of Washington, D.C. as an educational policy fellow and we moved back to Washington with the--as this national places--what they called educational policy fellows in different aspects.  It was sort of like a lower level presidential fellows program for the education person and I was selected actually to work with Patricia Graham and Michaelton Payne [ph.] in the national student of education [sic. U.S. National Institute of Education (NIE)].  I had lucked in as a special assistant to the executive to the director of the national student of education.  So she was reorganizing the institute.  She wanted people who she could--Pat Graham she's later a Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] professor and she wanted people she could trust and here I was and I became of her person of color.  Oh she had an Asian American, Gladys [ph.] something and then me and she really wanted to be sure she was fair on issues of African American equity.  That's what I wanted to hear so I actually helped reorganize that.  Part of a five person team and we organized the institute and helped to develop some of the programs for greater education equity.  I was able to develop a program that had a contest on educational equity theory.  Research theory is supposed to guide research and we had loads of quantitative research but nothing that dealt with the theory and now we had that competition.  Now of course equity theory has become much more prevalent.  That was one of the things that I accomplished at NIE and also to try to stand up for within the top echelon of administration of some of the African--a few African Americans employees who just have been not treated very well.  Of course after I left I don't know how it reverted back to the old.  So I had an impact there at NIE and then while I was there at NIE I then went back into the federal government.  A position opened up as the chief of policy planning evaluation, the old War on Poverty agency [Community Services Administration] something which was down my line and so I then went to that position because that was a position that controlled the poverty index and so I tried unsuccessfully for these two or three years to try to get the poverty index updated to really reflect the cost of poverty in urban areas.  I met with total frustration because [U.S.] Congress didn't want to do it nor did the administration because it would show more poor people than the official figures would.  Hey this was a Democratic administration at this time.
Speaker 1: It was the Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] administration.
Speaker 2: The Carter administration.
Speaker 1: So it would look like poverty had gone up during his administration (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) If you did a realistic analysis.  I even raise this 'cause while I was there Vice President [Walter] Mondale put this on--put me on a special vice president committee on youth and so I was even raising it there but to no avail.  They didn't want to do it because they didn't want to take what they considered a political hit by showing poverty rising and they didn't want to commit any more resources to it.  But I was able once again to help in development of some of the black employees there.  My main goal which was to really update the poverty for urban areas didn't happen and so it was out of frustration that I then went back into the [U.S.] Foreign Service.
Speaker 1: Well I will speak for the general public here if I may.  A lot of things--when people see or hear statistics sometimes they don't know that's things are that bad but usually there is a suspicion that it's actually worse and you just confirmed.
Speaker 2: Yes it's true, it really is the truth and I guess I'm probably biased because for me knowledge is power.  Knowledge and understanding is the essence.  What's been so frustrating for me as an African American many years and it goes right to this day, right to this last meeting which if we ever get to about the United Church of Christ and it happened to be in the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation is that no matter what your credentials meaning I could have a MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] Ph.D. and other kinds of things if you raise issues that no one else is raising the assumption is that you can't be right.  That if you raise issues that a whole bureaucracy is not raising or has not raised then you can't be right because if it was right someone else, some organization or institution would have raised the issue.
Story_ID: 295971
Speaker 1: Something I kind of skipped over too is you did a critique of the [Arthur] Jensen study (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes I certainly did.  When I was at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], it was my first published work as a graduate student about the Jensen hypothesis [Spearman-Jensen Hypothesis].  I've always been interested in the intelligence--the whole intelligence issue often because it's been used against African Americans and often because I think that one of the reasons why I love the social science is that as the social science has gotten more quantitative, scholars have attempted to use quantification as an attempt to hide bias figuring that folks if they didn't understand the mathematics or other kinds of things would not be able to question it.  So I've always tried to make sure I understand it that you can't be out teched.  But I've also found out that there other things too.  One reason I went to MIT--MIT has a famous quotation they were put in my thesis that says and this is a truth.  This is the Morris law of the social sciences and that says the stronger the relationship in the social science phenomena you can show it by the simpler statistic.  Let me repeat that the stronger the true relationship can be shown by the more simple statistic.  A very strong relationship, ninety percent of African Americans support the Democratic candidate maybe forty to forty-five percent of white Americans or maybe fifty percent of white Americans support the Republican candidate, very strong relationship, very simple statistic.  The weaker the relationship in data and phenomena the stronger the statistic you must use to use it.  As the relationship is weaker you need stronger statistics, stronger quantitative methods to show that.
Speaker 1: So the example of that?
Speaker 2: Almost anything with regression analysis or the more sophisticated operations research technique, factor analysis, numerous kinds of things.  Where in weak relationships you need very, very stronger and stronger mathematical models and statistics.  And so therefore public policy--critical public policy issues must be able to shown relatively clearly and simply because the choices are clear and simple and if they're not then probably those who are explaining them don't really understand them.  If it can't be shown simply then probably those who are explaining it don't want to show them simply because they want to control the choices and this is true.  So my whole kinds of things have been looking into things like Jensen and so forth 'cause their underlying assumptions by that is looking into Jensen I found the work of [Howard] Gardner who showed that there are almost a one hundred nine mental abilities in there such things as diverted production ability or creative abilities that are valued in society but are not part of the standardized test.  This is why later I think I was surely picked for the board of ETS [Educational Testing Service] because they realized that I recognize and was about to critique that intelligence test of ETS and all were doing a very narrow range of the total mental abilities.  We have at least one hundred nine, there's probably more now 'cause I haven't stayed in the field, but only five were being tested and these five were not tested for the most important positions.  We don't give our presidents an intelligence test or a politician an intelligence test.  On verbal ability, mathematical analogy, reading comprehension, maybe we should (laughter) we might do better but we don't because--we don't put our business leaders in because of other abilities, creative abilities, wisdom, judgment are not being tested.
Story_ID: 295972
Speaker 1: So you have children who are tested with a narrow range of abilities that get distorted and are warped, evaluation their own capabilities as human beings.  So I knew this, I can see in the research but and I see graduate schools abusing research making decisions on students thinking that their making aptitude or an innate ability decisions when they are really making decisions based on achievement of what students have learned.  So therefore students who haven't had the opportunity to learn that are judge as not having that capability of the aptitude.  So these are things why I love the social sciences because I've been able to show and demonstrate this and to run up against up people who either don't know it and want to deny it and abuse these kinds of things against African American people.  Distortions which unfortunately many African Americans still accept as truisms when they are real distortions because they don't understand the truth.  The truth about the social phenomena.  Being on the board of Educational Testing Service [ETS] later seeing the top scholars at ETS they are the ones doing the SAT, the law school, and the medcap [sic. MCAT] and admitted that.  They know that it was--these are achievement tests, teaching learned ability and that's where I first finally acknowledged that those achievement tests test things that you've learned--it was aimed at what was in two parts of the high school curriculum what is found in advance placement English and found in the advance placement math.  My high school [Roxbury Memorial High School, Boston, Massachusetts] didn't have advance placement English, it didn't have advance placement math but that's beside the point.  Many high schools especially in poor areas don't have those taught and then we wonder why there is a gap in terms of testing.
Speaker 2: What you're saying and this once again is profound for anybody listening to this they need to focus on this.
Speaker 1: I've been trying to talk about this for many, many years.  But once again as an individual it doesn't matter what credentials I have they don't think or really know what you're talking about.  I don't say every folk but we have folks who know me; folks really know do and they hope that others will ignore you but it's common knowledge.  Things are out there that are common knowledge but are not going to be told to folks until they are challenged and if they are challenged by a few individuals who don't have quote national credibility, they are often ignored and hope that--and those in power just hope that they will go away.
Story_ID: 295973
Speaker 1: Okay, so in 1978 you joined the federal Community Services Administration.
Speaker 2: That was the War on Poverty agency I mentioned before, right.
Speaker 1: And also the board of NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in Montgomery County [Maryland] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes during that time once again I have a life within the work professionally and the life without.  The Montgomery County Board of Education, liberal Montgomery County elected a very conservative and I think racist school board and symbolically first they tried to see how far they could go.  There was a course--well first they fired a liberal progressive superintendent named Bernardo [Charles M. Bernardo].  There was a course that he had instituted called HR14 or 18 [HR-18] which is a human relations course.  The attempt is to make all teachers sensitive to human relations--not human relations but human concerns about diversity.  They call it human relations but it was really diversity concerns and the teachers rebelled.  They didn't like to have to take this extra thing course they didn't really think they needed it and they didn't necessarily value the children.  So this new conservative board comes in fires Bernardo on the first thing they decided they are going to do is get rid of HR-18 and then that's when the hell hit when the community when I was part as the education chairman of Montgomery NAACP.  Some wonderful folks who are still some of my closest friends, Roscoe Nix, Ralph Brown and a number of the Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] brothers in Montgomery County and the NAACP chapters.  We got together and we created a counter force to that.  We had six hundred people at one school board meeting and a thousand in another.  I'm almost getting arrested again by picketing the school superintendent--no the chairman of this new conservative board's home during their twenty-fifth anniversary, I didn't realize it was their twenty-fifth anniversary.  So you had these black picketers out there picketing their home and so forth.  I went off to the [U.S.] Foreign Services before we finally won that but we did win and that board was voted out the next election and things changed for the better in Montgomery County.  As a matter of fact, one of the people Paul [L.] Vance became the superintendent and I was later there to help him get that.
Story_ID: 295974
Speaker 1: So later on in '78 [1978] you join the USAID [United States Agency for International Development] as a deputy director and chief of operations in Jamaica.
Speaker 2: Yes that was one of the highlights of my life going back to the [U.S.] Foreign Service and getting Jamaica.  I was told before going down there--I was almost going to Bolivia and was told you don't want Jamaica because there was first chaos there, there was tremendous political turmoil and there was even a security differential.  Folks can imagine being paid a security differential to go to Jamaica in other words a salary 'cause you had to have gates and burglar alarms and so forth and so forth.  But I was told that they don't really appreciate black officers.  They think in Jamaica that the Americans are sending the second class officer.  If you're black they want white officers are you sure you want to go there.  I said I'll take my chances with Jamaica and it turned out to be a wonderful assignment.  In Jamaica I was able to make a heck of a difference because I had a very good initial ambassador--a career ambassador and then a very good aid director and we turned it around also because events were happening.  Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] was elected and somehow [Edward] Seaga was elected and he convinced Reagan that he was a great private enterprise for us.  So we went from almost the bottom of aid program to the third largest per capita aid program in the world and I was part of the planning for that.  I figured that this might happen so we'd done a lot of planning.  So when Reagan said he wanted to go with Jamaica, it was his first overseas visit, we had everything all planned as a matter of fact I have some certificates on the wall my wife [M. Winston Baker Morris] and I for our efforts there and I spoke all throughout the country on Jamaica.  It was a wonderful series.  Some of the things I did too and I want to tell young people I'm an advisor to the Brown scholarship program [Ron Brown Scholar Program] and there are things that I learned about bureaucracies once again from Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York] that I wanted to always pass on.  While I was in different government bureaucracies and when I was a lower level employee on my working my way up I was always supposed to say do you want help and become also a part-time affirmative action officer and I said no, no, no.  One of things I understood then as I understood now that if you're going to deal with affirmative action first make sure you are in a critical line position rather than staff.
Story_ID: 295975
Speaker 1: Well you were asking about my time in the [U.S.] Foreign Service in Jamaica and I'm really proud of that.  I made some major improvements down there.  When we went down there, Jamaica was not really very much on the radar list of American countries of interest because it had just come out of the [Michael] Manley regime and he was not very friendly with the United States.
Speaker 2: A friend of [Fidel] Castro (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well it wasn't that, he was a Jamaican--an independent Jamaican and I think that we once again the early version was either you're with us or against us.  To stay an independent country you can't be a friend of Castro and be a friend of ours it's an arrogance that is not worthy.  And so when we went down there that's the way it was in '79 [1979].   Then in '80 [1980] they had an election of where Seaga--Edward Seaga who is the other competitor to Manley won in an election that it--was full of violence and so forth and Seaga (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just to be, for point of clarification, Seaga is white, right?
Speaker 1: Yes Lebanese, um-hm, and so Seaga really convinced Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] that he was big private enterprise fellow brilliant.  Seaga [sic. Michael Manley] London School of Economics [London School of Economics and Political Science, London, England] all very, very socialist (unclear), he convinced Reagan he was going to be the private enterprise man and we went from almost being the bottom of the per capita U.S. foreign assistance to almost to the top and Reagan in his visit to Jamaica was his first foreign trip and so we were part of a plan and I figured this was coming.  So one of the things that helped win my award was that we had been planning early the AID [United States Agency for International Development (USAID)] director and I for just such an event that we would have contingency plans if all of a sudden it could be a big increase in aid to Jamaica and sure enough there was so we were able to get it almost underway almost overnight.  But more than that I'll show you the second highest award--agency award in the state department [U.S. Department of State], Superior Honor Award for my work in Jamaica and going out and talking to Jamaicans and encouraging them to look at things differently.  One of the sad things I found in Jamaica was that there wasn't a value of Jamaican products.  Some of the things that Jamaican products--not just their beer but some of the beautiful wood if you look around in my home I have some of the guango wood and other things and some of their paintings.  And Jamaicans had for years I guess one of the remnants of colonist, some Jamaicans, had always believed that things which were foreign were better and one of the things I pointed out that some of their things are some of the greatest in the world and they need to realize that before they could really affectively market them.
Story_ID: 295976
Speaker 1: But even more important was what happened within the embassy.  With a wonderful AID [United States Agency for International Development (USAID)] director and a great ambassador, I was the fourth highest embassy officer I was offered the affirmative action officer position.  Now I'd always stayed away from that for good reason because I understood that if you're ever going to take on affirmative action you can't be a low level employee.  You'd have to be right at the top, you have to have line operational control otherwise you have no respect.  If you can't control the money and the budget forget it.  If you can control the money, the budget or the evaluation of employees then you've got--everything is falling into place.  Sure enough during that--during my time there real significant emphasis on racism against both Jamaican national employees and American employees happened and because of my position I was able to deal with them.  Let me give you just one example that I'm really proud of.  I probably shouldn't name names but the Patrick [ph.] family who is still a black family foreign service. Their daughter had served as the person to take over the commissary which was a very good job there and she worked for a year but when it came time to take it over a really sort of racist management committee decided they weren't going to pick her.  She was smart enough to come to me as affirmative action officer with her concerns.  So I'd worked that into the complaint also.  They picked a college student over a black office--a CIA [Central Intelligence Agency] officer's wife for a secretary position who was much more qualified and a whole series of things.  By this time the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] administration had a conservative ambassador who was the actually from the Deere fortune so I'm sure he was not very responsive to that so this falls in my lap and also a whole series of things had happened to black Jamaican employees.  So one of the things that I was able to do was to read the manuals very, very carefully and I conducted an investigation.  So I conducted my investigation and I find all kinds of racism and so once again it's strategy and how you handle it.  I then decided to go to this very conservative ambassador and put on one of my acts and said, "Mr. Ambassador, I don't know what to do, I'm a [U.S.] Foreign Service officer and the (unclear) says that if I uncover racism in or complaints that couldn't be certified, I'm supposed to report them to the state department [U.S. Department of State] I don't have any choice. I could put my whole career at risk," for now I was very serious about it, "but if I don't do that," and he said, "Oh that's very serious," and I said, "Mr. Ambassador I don't want this embassy to not look right.  You're just here, I'm in a dilemma, we should be able to deal with this in house but my career will be down the drain if word of this gets back to Washington [D.C.] that there were complaints that I legitimately could--were legitimate complaints that are not passed forward."  He said, "What can you do?" and I said, "Mr. Ambassador I don't know I could probably deal remedies that I could bring to the people who have been harmed and if they would agree with that that could preclude the need for a full complaint."  He said, "If you could do that you have carte blanche, you have my full authority." (Laughter) When the ambassador gave me the full authority to kick ass baby (laughter) not only did I--I took care of that and I took care of it in ways that I think folks in the Jamaican nationals are unbelievable.
Story_ID: 295977
Speaker 1: Give you an example, one of the Patrick [ph.] family of course Nina [ph.] got the job and Art I took care of it in another way.  Art Patrick [ph.] a wonderful capital development officer, tremendously talented and one of the things that I have is the not as affirmative action but my position was to evaluate all of the officers for their personnel evaluations which is very, very important.  So some of us were getting medals and I was getting honored and so I saw that Bill Jones [ph.] who was the white head of capital development 'cause we'd worked them all very hard had come in for Art Patrick with a recommendation for unsatisfactory evaluations.  So Art called and said, "Frank [HistoryMaker Frank Morris] this isn't justified, I don't know what to do."  I said, "Art let me talk to Bill," so I called Bill in and I said, "Oh Bill you know you've guys have done a bang up job and I'm thinking about putting you up for meritorious one,"--that's one of the third highest awards, I was going to get superior honor award and Bill says, "Well Frank that's all right I really appreciate that," and I said, "But you know Bill I think I found something that's put a crimp in those plans."  He says, "What, what" and I said, "I thought you guys had been doing great, I thought all the work that you were doing had passed mustard but I see that you have put in for Art Patrick as unsatisfactory rating.  I'm saying the volume of work that's come out cannot be unsatisfactory; I said, (background noise) "You've got to be kidding."--
Story_ID: 295978
Speaker 1: So I call Bill [Jones (ph.)] in and I said, "Bill I think that capital development officer has done a wonderful job this year and I've prepared metals for you, meritorious award obviously with the volume of this job you had to get great production out of everybody," and so forth and so forth.  Bill says, "Oh that's all--Frank [HistoryMaker Frank Morris], thank you so much."  I said, "Bill something has come across my desk that has caused me to put all of this in question, as a matter of fact I'm going to have to start paying much greater attention to reviewing all of the things that have been prepared by capital development."  He said, "What?" and I said, "I saw that you--it was just a two person--two professional Jamaican partners--you and Art [Patrick (ph.)] your deputy you're giving Art Patrick an unsatisfactory rating.  If he's been doing unsatisfactory work and I've been passing it on, I think that Washington [D.C.] has got to be alerted because you have not been able to do it all," and he said, "Oh."  I said, "If he's doing unsatisfactory work then the work of this division is really now in question, I've got to really review everything."  He said, "Oh Frank that was sort of--that was a mistake can I get that back, please Frank just let me get it back and review this."  I said, "Okay Bill."  The next day I get a call from Art and Art says, "Frank what happened?"  "What do you mean?"  Patrick says, "All of a sudden my evaluation has gone from unsatisfactory to outstanding," (laughter).  I said, "Obviously Bill must have just reconsidered Art you shouldn't have been worrying about it."  So we laughed about Art going from unsatisfactory to outstanding overnight.  It didn't go from unsatisfactory to good or to better than average or satisfactory to outstanding overnight.  Needless to say I got my Superior Honor Award, Bill got his meritorious and Art was treated fairly.
Speaker 2: That's an interesting story.
Story_ID: 295979
Speaker 1: And another thing I'm very proud of was that in Jamaica I had a wonderful secretary, two Jamaican national secretaries; I'm the higher ranking officer.  One was named Ovachen [ph.] and in the state department [U.S. Department of State] they have a secretary of the year award it's a worldwide competition to find the secretary of the year at least they did in the early '80s [1980s] and I put my Jamaican national secretary Ovachen, I wrote her up to be secretary of the year for the whole department of state worldwide.  Ova won she was the first maybe still be the only non-American foreign national up to that point this was in 1983, '84 [1984] to be nominated to win the state department's worldwide award for secretary of the year.  So that was a real--and a Jamaican, she was in the national news in Jamaica, the Jamaican press.  Of course then the Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz] deal in Jamaica hired her away from me but that was fine, she got me another one almost as good.  Ovachen had been training her in secretarial school, Carol Brown [ph.].  So those kinds of things and with wonderful friends and Jamaicans speaking all over the country, it was just a wonderful time for my wife [M. Winston Baker Morris], my family and I and I'm really proud of what we achieved in Jamaica.
Speaker 2: Did you ever get a chance to meet Bob Marley?
Speaker 1: I saw him in concert but not personally.  No he was a big reported star and he was--I was there when he died so I saw the national mourning and he was wonderful.  He was just a wonderful artist and there were other things that didn't last in Jamaica too.  One of the Jamaican entrepreneurs developed a nightclub called Blue Monk [Blue Monk Jazz Gallery, Kingston, Jamaica] and he had people like Monty Alexander coming down.  So we were there, we had a great jazz club but unfortunately like most great jazz clubs it didn't make it either.
Speaker 2: So you won the award in '82 [1982] Superior Honor Award (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's exactly right; I'll show you in the other room on the wall.
Story_ID: 295980
Speaker 1: So in '83 [1983] you returned to [Washington] D.C.?
Speaker 2: Yes ironically that's another story how I got to be head of the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation when I returned.  Normally when you are oversees and you are a senior officer, you had numerous congressional delegations that come to visit and in Jamaica often they are coming on junkets and so normally as a senior officer you delegate this to junior officers, you have them like flunkies 'cause whatever the congressman wants they get.  They had them do a lot of running around for the congressman but in contrast in spite of the fact that I had a heavy workloads, I made it a point that I would be the officer for all congressional delegations coming to Jamaica and that included the black congressional delegations and the white ones and folks couldn't understand but for me it was a chance to really talk to congressman off the record 'cause I was a senior officer they didn't treat me as a flunky 'cause they knew who I was, my rank in the embassy.  So I had really great things and for the black congressmen, I would often invite them to our home and invite all the black officers over.  So they would have a chance to have a heads down-no holds barred the true kind of response in a setting that was away from the embassy, totally private and Bill Gray [HistoryMaker William H. Gray, III], Stokes [HistoryMaker Louis Stokes] a number of them they got to know me and I got to know them.  They were impressed and we would get--they would be able to find out something substantive as well and really get the low down on what was going on in their country and in the economy.  So much to my surprise when I got ready to come back to Washington, I got a call from Lou Stokes, he says, "Frank [HistoryMaker Frank Morris] we'd like to consider you for the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation job", which for me was a dream job, an African American think tank.  I said, "Lou you've got to be kidding," and of course it was a done deal.  So I came back through a fluke was able to retire in 1984 from the state department [U.S. Department of State] that's another whole story.  To put it bluntly I was the senior [U.S.] Foreign Service officer of rank and they had a change in the law that said--that tried to get rid of old fogies, senior ranked folks who weren't any good to go into the Senior Foreign Service.  So I went to the Senior Foreign Service because I didn't think that the--oh no the state department came out and said that young officers like me who was in my forties at the time could not use the old fogy position because that was not meant for young officers.  So I said okay and so I joined the senior foreign officers.  Then what happens is the union--the state department Foreign Service union challenges that interpretation and they won. So they had to come back to all the younger officers and say you have the option of retiring at forty-four with full retirement benefits or what and so I like some of my (unclear) or what.  Now the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] administration wasn't about to tell me or the ambassadorship at certain points of time and some of my white colleagues.  So I said okay then I'm retiring and so when I was retiring coming out in '84 [1984] at the Congressional Black Caucus--late '83 [1983], '84 [1984] I get a call from the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation. And there began another era.
Story_ID: 295981
Speaker 1: So what were some of the things you were able to do with the Congressional Black Caucus [Foundation]?
Speaker 2: One of the things I'm proudest of, there were two things.  First that when I took the job the congressman and I probably won't name names yet suggested I fire all the staff and I didn't and I'm certainly glad I didn't because they were wonderful people, Gary Rivers just a number of--Faye Wattleton [HistoryMaker Alyce Faye Wattleton], a number of people who were wonderful, Martha Coleman of value now and who--Sherril Ishmael [ph.] who later went on to head the ACLU [American Civil Liberties Union, New York, New York] magazine publication and worked for Congressman [Chris] Collins who for me it's always a great temptation.  You know you've got to be able to pick your own people but if you lose memory or experience so that turned out to be a wonderful move.  We created record revenues.  The thing that I wanted to do at the foundation was to turn it from less into a social event to more of an intellectual event.  Instead of in the (unclear) I was going in they would have just a caucus weekend from Friday, Saturday and Sunday of where you'd have the Friday fashion show and the evening cabaret and the Saturday dinner and the Saturday legislative sessions we developed issues forums.  So we'd have policy issues all during the week and I got money for some of the things there.  Out of it came a book by [HistoryMaker] Julianne Malveaux about black women and it was published in transaction magazine.  I began to get external funding for a new computer system all for those issues forum.  So that part was really one of the highlights that I was able to do.
Speaker 1: And the book is what 'Slipping Through the Cracks, A State of Black Women' [sic. 'Slipping Through the Cracks: The Status of Black Women,' eds. Julianne M. Malveaux and Margaret C. Simms]?
Speaker 2: Yes very good, I see you've done your homework, right, very good.
Speaker 1: In fact I think there are a couple of times when there would be a cause of black women in a special circumstance that they're under that was focused on I think for the first time in context of the Congressional Black Caucus when you were there.
Speaker 2: So we wanted to raise record revenues, we did a lot of really good things.
Story_ID: 295982
Speaker 1: My greatest-I had two of my--I had two really great disappointments there though that even with the black congressional members when we gave them things that would put them ahead of the curve they were hesitant.  They were hesitant to believe that once again we no matter what or staff MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] Ph.D.s or not and there were two of us there MIT Ph.D.s Martha [Coleman], myself (unclear).  We were telling them that America needs to--we need to create different kinds of things to affect blacks that they should be for (unclear) evaluation in the 1980s.  So we explained to them how (unclear) if it helps stimulate exports and how we were--they really believed that if we were right then someone felt like the Institute of Policy Service--the Institute for Policy Studies [Washington, D.C.] would have suggested that.  They couldn't believe on us not all but the majority wouldn't go along with this.  We had innovative creators for food policy where Mickey Leland--we had some members who took us to bat.  Parren Mitchell [HistoryMaker Parren J. Mitchell, III], Mickey Leland, Bill Clay [HistoryMaker William Clay, Sr.], I'm on two fingers now about the caucus members who really believed that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was Conyers [HistoryMaker John Conyers, Jr.] one who took you seriously?
Speaker 1: John, well we didn't have many things--he would have but we didn't have things dealing with judiciary at that time.  That was before the crack differentials and so forth.  We were really talking about foreign policy, economic policy he was on judiciary.  I think he would have been but certainly Ron Dellums [HistoryMaker Ronald Dellums], Parren Mitchell (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) William Clay you said?
Speaker 1: Clay would really take us serious.
Speaker 2: And Mickey Leland from Texas.
Speaker 1: And Mickey Leland and there were twenty-five members of the caucus [Congressional Black Caucus] and I'm talking four members who really-got out in the forefront.  Even though the caucus by that time had budgets that were showing that we were right.  We were saying then that the two hundred or two hundred fifty billion [dollars] for defense was really too much we showed it to be one hundred fifty billion.  We questioned whether the Eastern Bloc was really a united bloc that could be Warsaw Pact was united and could be brought against you and we said there are real holes in this.  Now later on when the Soviet--and we were told because [Zbigniew] Brzezinski and Jeane Kirkpatrick and all the great commentators were saying that this was bullshit but they were the experts.  Later on the Soviet Union collapsed and we were right.  Those guys are still the experts and no one recognized it.  We were saying this back in the '70s [1970s] in the late '70s [1970s] and the early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)This is a--
Story_ID: 295983
Speaker 1: It's amazing that the--this is something I've discussed with the people having had some courses in college.  The Soviet Union was just barely being held together--there are so many ethnic rivalries there that you just--I don't see how anybody with an education would think that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, but the trouble is and I've run into this and I guess many black scholars and black professionals would too was that many of our people who should know better just can't believe that we could get it right if somebody white hasn't blessed it or initiated it.  They just couldn't believe that we could be right and this is sad and we really lose opportunities for really good truth to be forwarded it and that was one of my main regrets at the caucus in the caucus foundation [Congressional Black Caucus Foundation].  The other is that a couple of other things we couldn't be taken very seriously.  One of the things that I had done was to move toward the modern eras and the famous Prince Benazir [ph.] of Saudi Arabia who was willing to prepare to take our 250,000 mortgage off of our townhouse and then to do that because I had [U.S.] Foreign Service contacts we'd arranged a luncheon with the Congressional Black Caucus wives.  So it was with the modern eras Saudis and the Jordanians and everything and there the wives were invited over to the embassy and had a wonderful lunch, wonderful lunch lovely.  So then it became time to reciprocate so I said okay let's now reciprocate and the wives were willing to do that but their husbands said no.  They said no because they feared a Jewish backlash.  I said we're not talking about Libya we're talking about Saudi Arabia and Jordan and it wound up we never did basically because--and let me just simply say that the one who didn't who was ready to go forth come hell or high water was the wife of Charlie Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel].  Alma [Rangel] said this is right and we're going to do it I don't care what and they're in New York [New York].  But we couldn't do it because it would have been an insult with just a few of the wives.  I say that because once again there are fears in our African American community at the highest levels that prohibit us from just sometimes doing the right things.  That we didn't have additional burdens if folks really don't have no idea that we have constraints or I think constraints that we place on ourselves and that's regrettable.  This wasn't a matter of discussing whether the way we are about support of Israel or not but just a fear of perception that just by having--meeting with moderate Arabs (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think it's the idea of us acting on our own in that situation (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The history has not really been written about how we are I think sometimes we may even place ourselves in constraints.  So we never got that funded but it really showed me of a sort of a fear--
Story_ID: 295984
Speaker 1: The other thing is the question of immigration and of cigarettes.  I'd recruited a young black doctor who did research articles on the impact of cigarette smoking on the black community and I published it and I got in trouble eventually I was fired--the whole staff was fired.  But I won't name the congressman but because we were telling the truth about cigarette companies was a factor I think in our staff eventually being fired even though we were very successful in fund raising and everything.  I was working both ends, I mean we had the cigarette companies who were buying booths at the Congressional Black Caucus [Foundation]. I would sell a booth, I would sell as many advertisements, but in our point of view we were going to be telling the truth and I regret to have to say that this did in fact--I didn't write any books or anything but I'm talking now history.
Speaker 2: For you to be fired, I guess (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It wasn't just that but it was--.
Speaker 2: --well the majority of the Congressional Black Caucus would have to vote to do it, right?
Speaker 1: No they followed whoever--if a member has a particular gripe about anything they will follow that member, staff is always expendable so they will follow a member.  If I really told history what really brought it to a head too was one of the weekends-the entertainment in the weekend we had a cabaret on Friday night and the dinner on Saturday and we have entertainment for both.  So I saw the caucus was spending a lot of money and at that time the dinner chairman was Lou Stokes [HistoryMaker Louis Stokes] tells me, "Frank [HistoryMaker Frank Morris] save some money," and I said okay and I found a way to save money was to get entertainers in advance to-under a contract.  So I'll never forget this must have been '83 [1983], '84 [1984], I arranged to get the entertainment of Tina Turner for the Friday night cabaret for twelve grand [$12,000] and Ella Fitzgerald to do the Saturday night for eight thousand [dollars].  So we had a total of twenty-one thousand [dollars] to pay the entertainers.  So I go have the contracts ready to be signed--I go to the dinner chairman who at that time was Bill Gray [HistoryMaker William H. Gray, III] and I said, "Bill we've got the entertainment."  "Oh who is the entertainment?"  It's Tina on Friday night and Ella on Saturday and he said that's good.  He says, "Are they for free?" and I said, "No but we got them in a binding contract."  "They're not for free; don't you know we're the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation; we don't pay for entertainment I could get free entertainment."  I said, "But Bill it's free."  "No I can get it for free cancel those contracts, I don't want to see any forty-two year old woman's legs."  We cancelled the contract and then Bill is in charge of getting the entertainment and he did get entertainment for free, Al Jarreau would do both nights for free.  So we get Al and Al is free entertainment comes with the following expenses: a twenty-one piece band flown from Los Angeles [California], first class, we put up in the hotel for the weekend, special lighting brought down from New York [New York], I could go on and on.  Al Jarreau's free weekend these guys running up the tab came to $92,000.  Lou Stokes sees that and hits the ceiling and said, "Frank I thought I told you to cut down expenses," and I said, "I had Tina for twelve [thousand dollars] and Ella for eight [thousand dollars]. Here are the contracts that Bill didn't sign."  So Bill and Lou got into it and the way resolved it was to get rid of the staff and after we'd raised record kinds of things that's how that ended.
Story_ID: 295985
Speaker 1: Okay so you left the Congressional Black Caucus [Foundation] in '87 [1987].
Speaker 2: Yes, no.  Was it '87 [1987]?  No it was in '86 [1986].
Speaker 1: Okay 'cause I know you were a visiting professor at Colgate [Colgate University, Hamilton, New York] in '86 [1986].
Speaker 2: Yes we went right from there in '86 [1986] to Colgate which was exactly twenty-five years after I graduated.  In the O'Connor Chair [A. Lindsay O'Connor Chair of American Institutions] so I was really pleased and honored there and one of the things which I wonder whether we--you look back on your life and you see some roads that you chose.  After Colgate I was offered to teach there but my family and I we just didn't think we wanted to spend the rest of our professional lives in upstate Hamilton, New York.  So we then decided to take an offer at the University of Maryland at College Park [College Park, Maryland] under [HistoryMaker] John Slaughter.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we were there for two years once again back in Montgomery County [Maryland] where our friends and other things were.  We engaged in the local community battles again and then when John Slaughter left because of the Len Bias thing in '88 [1988], we then left too to go to Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] for Morgan State.  I was at Maryland in the public school of policy, professor of public policy and associate dean in the graduate school of public affairs and then at Morgan, I went to Morgan in '88 [1988] as the dean of graduate studies and research, professor of political science.
Speaker 1: Now you also in the interim between '87 [1987] and '88 [1988] you went to FESTAC '87 [FESTAC International Conference of African Art and Culture] in Dakar [Senegal].
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, one of the things that in Montgomery County I'd run into was attempts to bring home to the African Americans the FESTAC Conference.  So with a fellow named Nahini Darko [ph.] he arranged a trip and a visit to Senegal.  We paid for part of the trip to Senegal to meet with President [Abdou] Diouf and to try to do the arrangements for FESTAC, FESTAC the festival of African and African American Arts so we had a wonderful trip there.  That wasn't really much of a--I wasn't really a major factor there other than to run into one of my home girls who was I think in Senegal.  She wasn't the ambassador I don't think Harriet [Harriet Elam-Thomas] was the ambassador but was very high in the [U.S.] Foreign Service there.  Harriet Elam who was from Boston, Roxbury [Massachusetts].
Story_ID: 295986
Speaker 1: Okay so at Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland] from '88 [1988] to '95 [1995] dean of graduate studies and research.  So, well tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Morgan was wonderful, I think at Morgan the greatest impact I had on the institution was that I was able to recruit some outstanding people to the faculty.  With Earl Richardson's [HistoryMaker Earl S. Richardson] blessing and of course a--one of whom was to the urban research center--Morgan has a state funded urban research institute and we needed a director and one of the people I was able to hire and recruit as director was Robert Hill [HistoryMaker Robert B. Hill].  He was former national director [of research] of the Urban League [National Urban League, New York, New York], a wonderful scholar and a black family and Bob was really great and we had a staff there of Bob Hill and Eva Toma [ph.] who is now a lawyer in Baltimore [Maryland], a wonderful, wonderful bright sister and also there with Earl Richardson we recruited a young lady from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] named Lisa Delpit.  Lisa from the urban research center [Institute for Urban Research, Morgan State University, Baltimore, Maryland] wound up as the first MacArthur Genius Award [MacArthur Fellows Program] winner in Maryland and it went not to Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland] but went to Morgan and our staff there.  Lisa, of course, has gone on to other things as a chair in Georgia and so forth and so forth.  Also at Morgan one of the things we did, I was president also during that time of the council historically black graduate school and working with representatives from Mississippi--from Louisiana a brother from Washington.  We got the Title I of the graduate education act [Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965] extended to cover some additional schools that included Morgan.
Story_ID: 295987
Speaker 1: And I raised issues the first time, like I said some of which made the front page of The New York Times in '92 [1992] about the preference of American universities for support for foreign graduate students over American graduate students especially African American minorities something that persists right to this day.
Speaker 2: Now you were explaining off camera how that works but do you want to go into that?
Speaker 1: Well really it's sort of a sad commentary on American preferences of American universities.  It works because in other cultures professors are given much higher esteem than they are here.  So American professors especially in the sciences really prefer and like student from Asia who give them great deference, students from Asia who don't raise--who are able to work through American holidays and are not aware of American labor and do not question any kind of burden that were put on them and also it is really much better bragging rights.  I mean if you are a professor in the sciences it's nice to be able to have bragging rights of saying you're going to visit your student in Seoul [South Korea] or (unclear) or Bangor [Wales] rather than saying you have students coming from 125th Street in Harlem [New York, New York] or from 77th and Saugatuck [ph.] or from 14th [Street] and U [Street] and I don't say that to be cynical and also I think there is a non-recognition.  Many of these students are quantitatively trained.  There's not recognition that especially those from south Asia are children of the elite who understood what we don't understand that you can prepare and give achievement test results--prepare students for achievement tests like all the graduate school test of the ETS [Educational Testing Service] and give students an advantage.  Almost all of our American institutions assume that 'cause professors are not hip to understanding the difference in achievement and aptitude tests that they are testing aptitude when they are testing achievement and achievement to select foreign students of privilege.  Meanwhile American students who could do the job especially minority student are not recruited and are out of luck.  Now this is changed a little bit since I first wrote this thanks to the Gates Fellowship Program--scholarship program.  But the Gates scholarship as I've urged is that you got to be very careful as I tell this to the Ron Brown fellows [Ron Brown Scholarship Program] too that on its face a fellowship program seems to be most desirable of all the options that is that you just get paid to go to class.  In reality the most beneficial options are research assistantships because then you are working very closely with a professor and you're able to parlay your work into not only course work, you are going to parlay it into a relationship with a professor who can then publish and then into dissertation if you're smart, if you understand the hustle.  So these things are going to foreign students and not to American students with a devastating and consequences of a knowledge economy and especially knowledge of the economy of the future.
Speaker 2: You initiated Japanese classes for the first time at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes one of the things I did was try to bring outside money.  While I was at Morgan I found a program the Hokkaido [International] Foundation out of Japan that would send us a Japanese student to teach Japanese.  We couldn't afford to teach Japanese otherwise but they sent us Asitkau [ph.] and she was wonderful and I provided her with research assistantship and she got advanced in Japanese classes.  We were teaching our M.B.A. students and others at Morgan Japanese when it wasn't being taught at Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland] or some of the other places.  I don't know whether that was followed up after I left but that was a wonderful program.
Story_ID: 295988
Speaker 1: And you went to the Soviet Union twice in '88 [1988] and '90 [1990].
Speaker 2: Yes with the Soviet Association of Journalists and the Soviet Academy of Sciences [Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia] and I had a wonderful trip.  One of the things that I did was to piggy back with my good friend Buzz Palmer [HistoryMaker Edward "Buzz" Palmer] out of the University of Illinois [at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  He's the one that put those together.  I was blessed enough to be part of that. They were tremendously enlightening experience.
Speaker 1: Now how did you meet Buzz Palmer now he's an interesting person?
Speaker 2: Edward "Buzz" Palmer who certainly should be--has a great place in the annals of black history of tremendously community persons who are not widely known.  I met him when I was in the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation.  Buzz and Alice [HistoryMaker Alice Palmer] had come and I did not know Buzz and Alice at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] but had come in for a request.  I think I was funding South Africa--the new South Africa movement and I was funding a request to have Ron Walters [HistoryMaker Ronald Walters] prepare data that would go to the [U.S.] Congress to challenge the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] administration's assertion of benign neglect and so forth and I think that there was--it had something to do with that.  I think Buzz and Alice either were to support that or they wanted to have that information available to them and I was making sure that they were going to get it for their struggle for the South African movement in Chicago [Illinois].  I made sure they had whatever they needed and it just hit on from that a friendship that's lasted now--that must have been in '84 [1984], it's lasted twenty years of wonderful friendship.
Story_ID: 295989
Speaker 1: Now you served on the National--on the board of the National Center for Immigration Studies [sic. Center for Immigration Studies, Washington, D.C.] as well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes I have served on a number of boards in one time from the early '70s [1970s] in environmental the Global Tomorrow Coalition which went out of business but talked about--brought the concept of sustainability.  I also on national boards of my church [United Church of Christ] supported Ben Chavis [HistoryMaker Benjamin F. Chavis, Jr.] in a time (unclear) on racial justice when they had the first study show what eventually becomes the whole field of environmental racism.  How toxic waste dumps disproportionately located in minority areas with devastating consequences.  And I also became aware when I was with the caucus although that was one of the one things the caucus members didn't want to deal with of how immigration was affecting African American workforce.  It was really pretty clear as I told congress many times that labor is not exempt from the law of supply and demand.  If you bring in a great increase in the supply of labor it affects African Americans because we've always been the last hired, first fired in the least desirable labor source.  No offense to immigrants they are pursuing their own self-interest but as Frederick Douglass and David Walker and W.E.B. Du Bois and A. Philip Randolph and Marcus Garvey noted this has been a tradition in America to look for other labor sources that worked to the disadvantages of African Americans.  It was obvious to me but this was running against the political wisdom.  I've gone against political wisdom and political correctness because many African Americans are progressives saying that well to be against reduced immigration you must be for the wrong thing.  I'm saying wait a minute this is a matter of simple economic interests, no more no less.  And so I've been on the board of the Center for Immigration Studies which is a think tank which really is probably for advocates of immigration reduction.  One of the reasons is because of the impact on labor markets.  As a matter of fact we have some studies that have just recently come out that reinforce that.  As the ways of immigration have gotten greater each year the more apparent it's clear.  As a matter of fact we have on the Center of Immigration Board, George [J.] Borjas who is an immigrant from Cuba who is the greatest labor economist from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] in the country.  In the early '70s [1970s] he and I were battling when I was saying this was its effect and he said no, no, no.  But as he crunched the numbers and each year it's gotten clearer.  Now George points out in his latest work he says that the extent of immigration legal and illegal has cost the American worker--each American low wage worker seventeen hundred dollars a year because of the increase and the supply of these workers if they were here that what the wage depression the fact that it would not happen if they weren't.  The interesting thing is the moral issue on immigration.  The moral issue is that people should have to leave their native lands for economic opportunities.  Economic opportunities we should be in terms engaged in trade and development that would stimulate that and of course it's against the law to come here for economic opportunity.  That's not a legitimate reason to cross our borders.
Speaker 1: I didn't know that.
Speaker 2: That's right no you're not--political asylum can be or you have to apply through regular immigration channels to unify families, if you have a special skill, HB1 [sic. H-1B] and so forth and so forth.  But for economic opportunities--there are two billion people around the world would like to immigrate to the United States.  How do you have a fair system if it's based on simple economic opportunity and the economic opportunity for the immigrant is not cost free to Americans because as I said labor is not exempt from the law of supply and demand.
Story_ID: 295990
Speaker 1: I mean according to the way it works would I have a better chance of coming to America, say as a doctor, as a medical doctor from Ghana or as a laborer from Mexico or something like that?
Speaker 2: It all depends on how the economy is because sometimes when medical doctors from Ghana would have difficulty passing our medical boards and you wind up in the low wage market too and very much frustration.  So it all depends on the individual immigrant but as a laborer you're in economic competition with American workers.  You're in competition with legal and illegal other workers who are also crashing the low wage market with devastating consequences.  That's why it's so supported by The Wall Street Journal because they see this as a wage--labor depressing factor.
Speaker 1: It keeps wages down.
Speaker 2: Yes it certainly does and for blacks it's a substitute of the labor force.  You hardly see any construction.  The idea that immigrants take jobs that Americans especially African Americans don't want is based on ignorance.  The three biggest sectors of immigrant labor is first in the services.  Those are jobs in waitressing, hotels, et cetera.  Second in construction you've almost seen African American young people aced out of the construction market and that was always a job for the less skilled where you could earn a wage and third is light manufacturing.  Jobs that pay up to fifteen dollars an hour from meat packing to chicken processing well now they don't because it's so flooded with labor.  But once again--janitors you found that in California African Americans had their own janitorial firms are forced out because they can't compete with illegal labor because illegal labor is not paying a lot of different things because the workers are so vulnerable.  So there are centers pioneering a number of studies that have really, really shown this and it shouldn't be any debate for African Americans to be ignorant of this is a tragedy.  Part of it is ignorance and part of it is the fact that we are sensitive to other people who we see as the underdog even if it works against our interests.  We seem to be the only group that is capable of this kind of I can say this at sometimes, misplaced judgments, this kinds of judgments, sensitive judgments.
Story_ID: 295991
Speaker 1: Okay now in 1995 you left Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland] and did you go to Europe with the [W.K.] Kellogg Foundation before or after you left?
Speaker 2: It may have been after I'm not really sure about that but I think it was before '94 [1994] was before.  Yeah we had a wonderful trip there the European Union and their contacts with African American once again Buzz [HistoryMaker Edward "Buzz" Palmer] had put that together and included people like Don Wycliff [HistoryMaker N. Don Wycliff] of the Chicago Tribune, Danny Davis [HistoryMaker Danny K. Davis], Floyd Adams [Jr.] the former black mayor of Savannah [Georgia] and numerous other kinds of folks like that.  I was delighted to be part of that group.
Speaker 1: What was the goal of the (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The goal was for European Union's attempt to reach out to African American decision makers, scholars and others to get an understanding of Europe so that it was no longer--that we could be part of the dialog of understanding Europe and to--
Speaker 1: Okay so Buzz's friends like Glen Ford or Harlem Desir and people like that.
Speaker 2: Yes and many people like that exactly right and to meet many others and also engage in dialog.  When I was over there for instance believe it or not in London [England] the Philip Morris Institute was having a conference on migration and I was invited to speak.  So with Buzz you never know where you're going to wind up.   So it was really wonderful and also when I was there one of my home girls who had been Senegal as ambassador was then in Brussels [Belgium] as a very high ranking part of the American embassy in Brussels.
Speaker 1: Who was that?
Speaker 2: Harriet Elam [Harriet Elam-Thomas] Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] home girl.  She's now a professor in residence or diplomat in residence at Florida International [University, Miami, Florida] I think.
Story_ID: 295992
Speaker 1: After you retired, what--I know you taught at the University of Texas [at Dallas, Richardson, Texas] for three years.
Speaker 2: Yes University of Texas at Dallas so I taught at that and basically I'm in retirement now doing a number of things.  One of the things that I'm most proud of is the not only the board of the Center for Immigration Studies [Washington, D.C.] and the fact that I'm very much involved in my own community here but my activities with my church, United Church of Christ.  I've been a major part of the international board for a good part--more than a decade and one of the things that I've uncovered recently, I regret to say, is the fact of abuse of my national church of a trust fund for African Americans that dates back a hundred and fourteen years and when I say abuse I'm very specific.  The fact that amounts are not fully recorded to the trust amounts of irresponsibility and how the trust was invested and actual amounts of the trust not being restricted when it was clearly restricted.  It was a trust that was dedicated by Daniel Hand that says specifically (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Daniel Hand was an abolitionist from Connecticut right?
Speaker 2: An abolitionist that's exactly right.
Speaker 1: From Connecticut associated with the American Missionary Association.
Speaker 2: That's exactly right who really believed that to help the children of slavery you really need to give them a boost up on education.  So early on the fund was really instrumental in not only supporting colleges like Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama] and Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and others but it also supported many schools some of which were burned by the--burned for the American Missionary Association.  In a place in Alabama the Ellison School [ph.] where I think maybe one of my relatives Uncle Chester [Morris] may have gone.  It was burned down because folks didn't like what the--I think that was supported by the [Daniel] Hand Fund.  So a wonderful kind of thing and so over the years it was clear that one of the ways to carry out Hand would be to support the traditional schools that had supported by the American Missionary traditional black schools and that includes Fisk, Talladega, Dillard [University, New Orleans, Louisiana], LeMoyne-Owen [College, Memphis, Tennessee], Huston-Tillotson [University, Austin, Texas].  I'm always forgetting one and Tougaloo [College, Tougaloo, Mississippi].  What's happened there's still the need for these schools but attempts have been made consistently to divert from these funds to other things.  One of the most egregious--well first they didn't hold the trust as a restricted trust.  Now how can we be more specific than the education of children of African descent from the slave states of the Confederacy that seems to be very, very clear and clearly restricted but they held it as unrestricted.  To make a long story short it took battles that I raised when I asked a year ago when for the last generation our ministry was providing a hundred thousand a year to the six colleges all of a sudden in one year because money is tight, decisions made by my ministry, local church they cut this from six hundred thousand [dollars] to four hundred thousand [dollars] to those six schools almost a forty percent cut.  Nothing else is being cut by forty percent and so I began to ask questions and looked and with the help of a very helpful staff person I was pointing out to the original documents of the trust that was found in the Amistad Research Center [New Orleans, Louisiana] that showed that.  When I asked the meaning a year ago October how much was in this trust fund of 1.5 million [dollars] and it should have been more there was even there 'cause that was par value not book value.  I was told seven million dollars and I couldn't believe it.  I said that we really needed to find out about this and you can't answer these other questions.  You can't make this kind of cut.  Do we know what happened to the money?
Speaker 1: Now this initial 1.5 million that was donated in 1892 should have been about twenty-eight million now.
Speaker 2: It should have been actually more than twenty-eight or twenty-nine.  You see the 1.5 million it says in the will this is not market value, this is par value or book value or bookkeeping value for low taxes and everything.  It's not the real market; the market value is significantly higher.  The trust consisted of stocks, bonds and real estate.  So when the trust assets were eventually sold out that 1.5 million should have been adjusted up to reflect the true value of those securities and the real estate in the trust.  It was never done, it was always held at the principle of 1.5 million.  Now this makes a heck of a difference when you're looking at interest over 114 years, my brother.  So the twenty-eight million or twenty-nine million now by 2003, 1.5 million in 1892 dollars should have been twenty-nine million just for that 1.5 in 2003 dollars.  I asked in the board at 2003 October how much was in the fund and I was told $7 million and I said hold on something is wrong here.  I was slam blasted, I was abused, I even wrote to all of the members of the board saying you can't do this; it's racism until you answer some of these questions.  I was completely ignored.
Story_ID: 295993
Speaker 1: So when it came to fall meeting the April meeting and I would have been ignored until they found out I was going to go to some of the justice organizations in the church.  They had a nice meeting and they wanted to find out what are you going to tell them.  I said, "I'm going to tell them first that this fund [Daniel Hand Fund] has been abused and that you've held it as an unrestricted when it was certainly restricted."  Oh they've got to do something about that and they decided to change that.  They wanted to know what else I was going to tell them.  I said I'm going to tell them that I found out and they never knew I found this out that they had--while they were using the reduced amount of the trust to base this four hundred thousand [dollars] on using about five percent of the assets and about $7 million but should have been eight million.  The reason it was only eight million was because it had been up to sixteen million and they had taken out they say five but I think it was more.  But they had taken out $5 million at the time of transition of the ministry and were using that to give unrestricted funds to other parts of the ministry, incredible.  When it should have been taken out of our other unrestricted funds.  So this year, as a matter of fact, just a few weeks--last week I was at the meeting and fighting this fight again and I made sure that the money was not only put back in but they have to now give another two hundred thousand to the six schools this year to make up for the amount that they were--they had cut them down to four hundred thousand.  They're trying a new tactic now with the funds being restricted they are still trying to fund the Amistad Research Center [New Orleans, Louisiana].  Now I support the Amistad Research Center which is great but that's clearly a depository for the whole church.  It's not an educational institution whose mission is aimed at the education of slaves or children of African descent from the states of the Confederacy it's a national archive of the church.  The assumption is that you want to use--fund things which should be funded from national church resources were resources that were dedicated to educating the children of slaves.  Now why this is bad it wouldn't be so bad if the original beneficiaries were no longer in need.  This is crazy all those schools are hurting for additional funding to help support scholarships and to do this.  So I'm in the middle of this battle now.  But the fact of what has been achieved thus far I feel really is one of my significant achievements of one person as a--and that's why I hope that posterity will know that even though you're one you can make a difference a significant difference.
Speaker 2: I'd say so and there's a book called '[A] Crusade of Brotherhood: A History of the American Missionary Association' [August Field Beard] (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes that shows the original will in the trust.
Speaker 2: That's by Augustus Field [Beard] and when was that written?
Speaker 1: Nineteen ten [1910] Augustus Field was the AMA [American Missionary Association] secretary so he was a top AMA dog.
Story_ID: 295994
Speaker 1: Now we always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I think that my hope is that we really can develop an educational system that really meets the needs of the future.  That is that a system that will recognize we have to the change the public school system to empower people who may not have access to higher education in many different kinds of ways.  First, a recognition that education is lifelong learning kind of thing, second basic financial economic management.  I recommend the 'Rich Dad, Poor Dad' [Robert Kiyosaki and Sharon Lechter] books.  Every African American should understand the difference between passive income, unearned income--earned income and how you don't really make it by working for somebody and the importance of entrepreneurialship [ph.], small businesses and these kinds of things, things which are not taught in schools.  We need to understand economics and economic policy.  We need to understand that we've been told a lie in America that government is our enemy and that the private sector works in the public interest, this is malarkey.  Or that all regulations are bad, this is malarkey, this is simply not true.  We've got to learn to be able to read, to understand our--what is spin and what isn't.  We need to know our history and the history of other cultures.  We need to recognize we need to know another language and we need to be preparing our children about the true odds about how difficult it is to make it in entertainment and in sports that that's not really the way.  You'd have an easier shot if you become a physician or a lawyer or a doctor than to be one to play on the [Chicago] Bulls or the [Chicago] White Sox, three thousand professional athletes in this country.  There are things that we need to be--things that we need to do as a people, we can't expect the larger community to really deal with these conceptions of our young people who knock others by saying that learning is white--you're acting white by learning kinds of things.  They need to know the history of what learning has cost in this country and many times they don't.  So there is a full agenda out there of an empowerment agenda which I want to focus on with some of the young people but I don't write off the rest of us not being able to learn also.
Story_ID: 295995
Speaker 1: Now when you look back at your career is there any major thing that you'd do differently?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  I often wonder whether I should have pursued the law degree but I've loved research and social science and analysis.  It probably would not have been as much fun.  There were different times in 1966 when I went back to Washington [D.C.] with the state department [U.S. Department of State].  I was offered a position in Alaska when I went up as part of research of the relief team in '64 [1964] as sort of working with the Alaska State Housing Authority out there.  If I was in Alaska in a high visible position I may have had a political career up there I don't know.  So there are ways that you didn't take and I never regret the ones that we did take.  I haven't talk about also the tremendous assets of my co-worker this journey of forty-five years with my wife Winston [M. Winston Baker Morris] and it's been a wonderful trip and she's been with me all the way and sometimes at cost to her own career.
Story_ID: 295996
Speaker 1: There were some comments you wanted to make about affirmative action and I think we were talking about--we kind of were reflecting on what happened in Jamaica and you said there were some points you wanted to make about affirmative action.
Speaker 2: Yeah I think a critical thing for my Jamaican point was to realize that it's really important to especially as an African American and you achieve a senior position to use it.  I've seen examples of where we as African Americans if we achieve senior positions we think that somehow it's not right to use them to support African Americans who'd gotten us there.  We must be holier than thou and for other folks this is natural that you would support those who brought you there or at least be very sensitive to those issues not that you give special treatment but you certainly would be conscious of it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's time to make it fair anyway.
Speaker 2: Yeah exactly I think that's the time to use it.  I think I've seen it even in my battles with the community.  So many times African Americans are more concerned as to how non-African Americans will perceive them than the fairness of the issue.  As a matter of fact, I was mentioned in my church, a lady from Chicago [Illinois] one of the board members who is an African American who shall remain nameless is trying to see can she--is it unfair to use the [Daniel] Hand Funds for the Amistad Research Center [New Orleans, Louisiana] when it clearly isn't but because white folks believe it is she thinks it must have some merit.  So it's just amazing to me.  I don't think and I hope other young people will realize that you get respect not because you think people are going to love you but you get respect because you must be dealt with or you either have knowledge or information or power that folks will-know they must deal with you to get what they want.  That's what the essence of respect is.  You don't get respect from thinking that if you're going to be nice so that folks will like you that's not what the name of the game is all about.  The name of the game is to pursue correctly your interests and fairly and to be ready to negotiate, bargain and everything else to get it and hopefully stand up for principle, stand up for fundamental principle.  So once you do that, once again that same old wise grandfather [Morris' paternal grandfather, Lorenzo Morris, Sr.] told me that another thing I can pass on to my [Ronald] Brown scholars, he said, "Son you know doing the right thing is not really very hard, it's not really hard to do the right thing.  The hard thing is knowing what is the right thing," and that's--I hope that my progeny and others will be willing to spend time to know--to have the expertise to develop the capability to know what is the right thing so then you can move forward very simply and quickly.
Story_ID: 295997
Speaker 1: Okay now when you look back at your career what would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well it's extremely difficult.  I hope that my legacy will be in some of the institutions that I've touched probably not Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland], probably not the caucus [Congressional Black Caucus Foundation] but there have been some students that I had a chance to influence and I think having to have had an influence in the church [United Church of Christ] and I've influence with the Center for Immigration Studies [Washington, D.C.] and some of my volunteering institutions with DASA [Diversity Alliance for a Sustainable America].  I've been able to influence certain kinds of things there and I don't know whether--(background noise)--I don't know whether it's going to--
Story_ID: 295998
Speaker 1: The question about my legacy I don't know, I really don't know.  I hope that through my children and grandchildren that they will see some things that they're, will be more conscious about and fight for in the future and fight with their heads up a little higher.  I hope some of the students that I had a chance to influence will know that they will make a difference and I hope that some of the institutions that I've had a chance to interact with.  My national church and as a matter of fact, well maybe the most lasting legacy might be one of the things I've done recently.  The fact that I have blown open and I intend to publicize in the event that I won't be the other one but many folks will know about this century of abuse and that this [Daniel] Hand Fund will become a true endowment to many of these six schools because already they would have cut that by one third.  My interventions made a difference of two hundred thousand [dollars] a year and you compound that to many years and it should be add from now up to the future and it should be another ninety thousand [dollars].  So the difference of the keeping the United Church of Christ accountable for a true endowment of Hand Fund which is always much less than it should have been but what will be much different in the future if I hadn't been unable to uncover this.  This might be my lasting, most important legacy.  I hope that other things will be.  I hope to convince African Americans about the importance of immigration and being true to our historical roots of immigration.  It's not wrong to fight for our own particular rights of making sure that until we have a one world that the interest of Americans should be especially African Americans should come first before any interest of non-Americans citizens should in terms of available jobs and other kinds of things.  There is nothing simply wrong with that and I hope that education-certain things we know about education will be demystified, that our parents won't understand that they've got to make sure that our children are taking the right courses.  That if you don't take the right courses and they are tough courses, you're not going to get ahead.  That if they need to find out about entrepreneurialship [ph.].  That small business growth and development is the key area of wealth accumulation in this country and we've got to do a better job of teaching that.  Then also to know that education is power and empowerment and that with effective education that we can influence the government, we can each of us make a difference.  Even if we have to stand alone sometimes, we can still make a difference and the final thing I'm going to find out from most of my own career especially in battles with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] is that often even more so than not working people understand real battles and what's an issue much more so than our middle class folks.  I say that because in Montgomery County [Maryland], here in DeSoto [Texas], in Evanston, Illinois, in middle class African American communities many black parents make this mistake believing that once they get their children into a school system that is middle class and because it does well for some kids it will automatically do well for others without them having to take the time, the effort, the attention and the battle out that's simply not right.  There are systemic kinds of barriers that are placed in schools and parents have got to be ready to recognize them, know them and battle for their children within those systems.
Story_ID: 295999
Speaker 1: There's something I forgot to mention, you've written about reparations and that's a hot issue right now.  What's your take on that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh I think it's very, very simple that there's a tremendous case for reparations.  Look at the years of what the costs of omissions in my family and others of American public policies from FHA [Federal Housing Administration] not letting blacks get developments in the post-world war times of (unclear) where you had federal government reinforcing redlining.  The inability of African Americans to get homestead exemptions--homestead property.  It goes on and on and so the answer of course for reparations is not necessarily a payment but certainly scholarships--the availability of scholarships for African Americans to give an equal access at education.  The ability for startup funds for small businesses to help compensate for the wealth gap.  We all focus on the fact that income differentials between African Americans and it stays at about fifty-seven percent and it's for a whole generation.  But the real gap is the wealth gap.  African Americans we stay between thirteen percent of the population and we are between two and a half and three percent of the American wealth that's what makes the difference.  That is what makes the difference in America for the choices that come from wealth that helps account for differentials in nutrition and education and choice.  The fact that even in DeSoto [Texas]--the community of Desoto where I live in now we moved here nine years ago, it was twenty percent black a wonderful community--integrated community.  It's now fifty percent and it will soon be much more African American because white folks flee.  Things which influence our net worth has been and still are racially influenced and we don't recognize that.  So there are necessities or there should be.  If there was any justice for any justice for any kind of freedom for public policy kinds of aids that not just affect blacks but would affect whites too that compensate for years of past and present discrimination that are not being addressed.  I include those as class based race and class based are really the public policy answers that we should address reparations for.
Speaker 1: There are two more questions.  One is how did your family--you had family members raise you and your mother [Frankie Taylor Honesty] and father [Lorenzo Morris, Jr.] and I guess you really didn't see a lot of them growing but how did your family react to your success?  I know many of them are successful too but are they surprised or do they think--those who said you were the black sheep of the family and all that?
Speaker 2: That was just one a very influential family member but I think my family including my wife's [M. Winston Baker Morris] family have been very full of pride and have accepted me as a wonderful part of their family.  So my mother's family and my dad's family and my in-laws have just been a wonderful asset that I'll always cherish and treasure.
Story_ID: 296000
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well I'd like to be remembered of the fact of valuing education and being willing to stand up if even alone to fight for principle and really to have made a difference in personal and human lives and in some institutional actions that would have been quite different if I hadn't stood up and ironically it's the most recent that comes to mind and maybe my most lasting one.  That being the church; the battle to really free 114 years of abuse by the United Church of Christ of the Daniel Hand Fund and bringing it into clear focus and finally begin to bring about some justice.
Speaker 1: Okay well thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 296001
Speaker 1: Early to mid '80s [1980s] having to do--when I was dean of graduate studies in research.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: Oh that's when we had first hit Washington [D.C.] in 1962 when I was--let's see what did we do in '62 [1962], no it was later than '62 [1962].  We were '62 [1962] to '67 [1967] at the state department [U.S. Department of State] and I was a state department [U.S.] Foreign Service officer.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: These are the Silver Serenaders [of Texas] the senior singing group of which I've been the president--the immediate past president, 2001 to 2003.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: City of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Winston [M. Winston Baker Morris] and I early 1990s.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: My son Frank [Morris, Jr.] and I two years ago at the wedding of his younger brother.
Speaker 2: My daughters Becky [Rebecca Morris] and Kristy [Kristina Morris] two years ago at the same wedding of his younger brother.  I'm sorry that wasn't that, that was years earlier about ten years earlier for my son Scott's [Scott Morris] first wedding that was 1991.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: With one of my grandsons the early 1980s in Baltimore [Maryland] that's Tyler [ph.].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: That was the photo I took when I was going into my AID [U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID)] Foreign Service 1979 going to Jamaica as the deputy director.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: That's one of me when I was very, very young.  I think I may have been picking cotton in Tennessee or Mississippi.  I was less than six years old in the cotton fields out there.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: That's a wonderful picture of my wife of forty five years, Winton when we were on the QE2 [Queen Elizabeth 2] enjoying the jazz cruise in 2001.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: My sons much younger now Frank and Scott.  We were on our deck overlooking Lake Michigan in Evanston [Illinois] when I was at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] from 1979 through--no I'm sorry 1972 to '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: A picture taken in my church in Washington, D.C. of my family after we returned from the Foreign Service circa 1983, '84 [1984] with my two daughters, my two adopted daughters.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me as a very, very young baby.  I don't know who took it, I don't know when but I'm sure that's when I was in Carbondale, Illinois.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: A picture of me also very, very young with one of the ladies who later took care of me my early years, Ms. Mattie Banks [ph.] so I must have been no more than one or two then.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: Same a picture of me very young with Mattie Banks.  That may have been my Aunt Anna [ph.], I don't know.  Look at the car back there, I was just born.  My mother [Frankie Taylor Honesty] gave me that when--I think she had that when I was basically just born.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: Oh one of the only pictures I have of my mom and my dad [Lorenzo Morris, Jr.] and that was during a happy time.  I don't think they every got married but that was one of the pictures I have of them that my mom gave me.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my dad, my sister Cheryl [ph.] and my paternal dad and my sister Cheryl on my right and my cousin Judy [ph.], my maternal side.  So I have two of my maternal relatives and my dad.  That was taken at my aunt's home in Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: I think that was a passport picture that goes right after Colgate [University, Hamilton, New York], look at that mop there.  I think right after Colgate when I was just starting a federal career.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: One of the best pictures I have of my wife of forty-five years, Winston and myself.  I think that was taken around the mid-'70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: Next there's my [paternal] grandfather [Lorenzo Morris, Sr.] in the middle, 1977 when I helped put the reunion on for his seventieth wedding anniversary in Mobile, Alabama.  I think there's the mayor, the city council and others honoring him for founding the Mobile County Training School [Mobile, Alabama] in the early 1900s.  This was the first high school in Mobile Country [Alabama].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-two [1972] to '77 [1977] in Evanston, Illinois one of the community things that we as a matter of fact that was the first essay by Alton Belcher [ph.] and myself in the Evanston Review later we had our full column called Veritas Negri [ph.] and that's how Alton and I looked in 1972 to '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: There is something that I'm really proud of being Father of the Year by the Chicago Defender in 1977.  A picture of myself, my wife Winston, my son Scott, my son, Frank, isn't around and our famous dog Buckley in our house on Sheridan Road overlooking the lake.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Is he related to William F. Buckley [Jr.]?
Speaker 2: He was a wonderful dog, he lived a ripe old age.  In my career in Jamaica one of the things I'm proudest of was my extensive public speaking throughout the island and it got national coverage.  Here was an example of reinforcing Jamaicans that they could find a way out of the economical morass.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: One of my battles consistently in the late '80s [1980s] early '90s [1990s] was to highlight the fact that foreign graduate students were getting much better deals from American colleges and universities than minority students and American students in general.  This was an article which was in the front page of The Chronicle [of] Higher Education in March of probably 1992.  That really highlighted that.  Oh that's one of our great pictures.  See was a great picture of Syracuse [University, Syracuse, New York] when we were graduate students in Syracuse.  My wife, my young family in circa '61 [1961], '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: My son Scott the only ones I have of having my own children in some of the demonstrations against Montgomery County Board of Education [in Montgomery County, Maryland].  We were picketing the school board president's home and it turned out to be their twenty-fifth anniversary.  An NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] demonstration that I was leading, I'm here talking to the press.
