Story_ID: 668636
Speaker 1: So my name is Julieanna Richardson.  I'm the interviewer, and Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  And I want to start out by asking you to state and spell your name.
Speaker 2: Sharon Denise Malone [HistoryMaker Dr. Sharon Malone]; S-H-A-R-O-N, D-E-N-I-S-E, M-A-L-O-N-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your date and place of birth.
Speaker 2: January 30th, 1959; Mobile, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And today's date?
Speaker 2: March 23rd, 2014.
Speaker 1: And our location?
Speaker 2: Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a physician.
Story_ID: 668637
Speaker 1: And I'd like to ask you five People magazine-ish questions.  Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is I would say shrimp creole.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Peach.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: It's--believe it or not, that's a hard one.  I'd say Turks and Caicos [Turks and Caicos Islands].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: There are no accidents in the universe.
Story_ID: 668638
Speaker 1: So I want to start out by asking you about your parents.  The--the history that we were talking about, it is on your moth- your father's--
Speaker 2: My mother's [Bertha Davis Malone] side.
Speaker 1: Your mother's side.  Why don't ask about your--let's ask about your father first.  So can you give his date or birth?  I mean, his year of birth and his name?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My father was Willie Malone, and he was born November 25th, 1893.
Speaker 1: So he was how--so, okay.  So can you tell what--tell us what you know about his background?
Speaker 2: My father--believe it or not, I learned a lot about his background in the course of doing my genealogy.  My dad was born in 1893.  His father was the first generation born free, and he was born in 1867 in Alabama.  There was some question as to who his father was.  He was clearly a mixed race child, but who--and who that person was, and I never knew his mother's name until very recently.  And the reason why is was so difficult to find it was because my grandfather changed his name.  My great-grandmother kept the name of her slave owner, and her name was Luanne Packer [ph.], and my grandfather somewhere between the time he was eleven and the time he was twenty-one, he lost the name Packer and became Bill Malone.  And the reason why I could never find him, because I kept searching for Malones, and there were no Malones.  He just made it up for reasons I just will never know.  But his brothers and sisters remained Packers, and that's how I was able to trace the family history back to his mother, Luanne Packer.  When I find her in the 1880 census, she was a former slave born in 1842, and her mother was living with them, and so I actually can all the way back, her mom was probably born in eighteen teens [1810s] in Alabama.
Speaker 1: So a strong history in Alabama, really, that line in Alabama.  So can you describe, you know, 'cause your--when you were born, when you were born, your father was--
Speaker 2: Sixty-six.
Speaker 1: That's right.  That's why I kept (laughter)--he was sixty-six years old, which today, I mean, there are things like that happening, but that was fairly, you know, fairly old.  So can you tell me what--how you would describe him?
Speaker 2: It's, it's a funny thing to have only known your father as an old man.  He was sixty-six when I was born, so my first memories of him were probably when he was seventy, you know, or seventy-one years old.  He was a very--again, my father was retired, you know.  He was retired when I was born, so we had a relatively nontraditional family.  My mother was twenty years younger than he, and she was working and my dad was retired, so as a child I spent time at home with my father, and he would pick me up from school and, you know, walk me to school in the morning.  That was sort of--so we had a reverse role, you know, even then.
Speaker 1: Would you--did he ever talk about growing up?  There was--was there any discussion about him growing up at all with you?
Speaker 2: No.  And that's one of my great regrets that, you know, again I didn't know enough to ask him.  And I think his story was very common, because people who had grown up in that era, they didn't talk about it very much, because I think there was a lot of what they left they wanted to leave behind, and I don't think they wanted to burden their children with the stories of misery and I can assure you they were.  My dad grew up on a farm, and it's a hard life.  And, you know, as did my mother.  And when they left the farm, and they came to Mobile [Alabama], and they came right after World War II [WWII], and I think they moved there in search of jobs and a better life for their children.  They just left that behind.
Speaker 1: And how, how far were they from Mobile?  Do you know how far when they--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My mother was from a little town called--she's from Wilcox County [Alabama].  My dad was from Monroe County [Alabama]; both of these are probably fifteen, twenty miles from each other, if that, and about eighty miles from Mobile.
Story_ID: 668639
Speaker 1: And so can you talk about your mother?  Can you give her name and her year of birth, and what you know about her background?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  My mother--my mother's name was Bertha Lee Davis [Bertha Davis Malone].  She was born March 6th, 1914.  She grew up--she was one of seven children, and she was the second oldest daughter.  Her mother died when she was young.  She was a young teen, and she had up until that point gone to school, and when her mother died she and her older sisters had to take on the responsibility of caring for the younger kids, so she was--she had to stop school at that point.  And that was something that she was always, you know, she really, really wanted to finish school, so after she--after the younger kids left the house, she actually went back to school and would have finished, I guess, the equivalent of what have been, you know, probably mid-high school, because that was as far as you could go.  It was probably for us about eighth grade.  But, you know, such was her desire to learn, and now I understand that a little better because she was a descendant of educated people and always valued that and wanted that for her children.  And I think that was also a big impetus for why she left the farm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you've done a lot of research on that side.  Can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  It started with my daughter, probably, I don't know ten years ago.  She was in elementary school, and they had to do an ancestry project.  And it dawned on me when I was trying to help her, and, you know, kids could go back, you know, three hundred years and I could--I could barely go beyond--I couldn't go beyond my grandparents.  And I got interested.  I got on ancestry.com and actually started doing these searches, and it's really like--it's infectious once you start.  And being from the South and understanding that, you know, African Americans were only counted for the first time as people by name in the 1870 census.  When I got to 1870, I just thought that that was all you could find.  But I left it, came back a few years later, and then the information had really exploded, and I was actually able to link into someone else's family tree, and I was able to trace my family back to its origins in Alabama.  So we were there--my family has been there almost as long as there has been a State of Alabama.
Speaker 1: So you traced it back to what year and through what person?  Can you speak of that?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was able to trace my family back to the original people who came to Alabama, and they were two slaves, Mike [Michael] and Phoebe.  And they were slaves in South Carolina.  Phoebe was owned by one family, Mike was owned, who is her husband, who is owned by another family in an adjacent plantation.  And when they had--they had seven children together.  And when Phoebe's family moved to--the people who owned her, moved to Alabama, they took her and her seven children and her husband, Mike, was left behind in South Carolina.  And I can only imagine what that must have been like to have to move with her children.  Mike worked for four and a half years, bought his freedom and then moved to Alabama to be with him [sic.] and his children.  So clearly he lived a life as a slave even though he was a free man and together they had four more children.  And my mother is a descendant of that--is a direct descendant of the first child that they had together in Alabama, and then they had three more after that.
Story_ID: 668640
Speaker 1: And when you talk about William J. Edwards and where that, you know, his, his part of the--
Speaker 2: Yes.  William James Edwards would have been one of my great-grandmother's cousins, and he too is one of those descendants of Mike [Michael] and Phoebe, these original--the slaves who came to Alabama from South Carolina.  William James Edwards was again one of Mike and Phoebe's grandchildren, as was my great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: And talk about his role with the, you know, the book that you found.  I want you to tell the whole story.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: When I started doing my research ten years ago, got to it, I thought I had a dead end, put it down and then came back to it about three years ago, and it was on the occasion of my aunt's ninetieth birthday.  And I knew this is my only remaining relative, and she was the youngest child so she didn't know any of these things either.  So I said I'll put it together and make her a nice little family tree.  That will be a nice present.  But when I came back on ancestry.com, there was a lot more information that I had access to because other people had put up their family trees.  And in the course of looking at someone else's family tree, I realized that their tree went back three generations farther than I could and asked how could you know that?  I mean, in my mind, I really thought this was information that was unknowable, and turned out that I sort of, like, Facebook, I sent him a message to say, "Where did you get this information on your tree," and he said, "I got it from a book."  William James Edwards who is one Mike and Phoebe's grand- you know, great-grandchildren has this story, and he wrote it.  He wrote his autobiography and it was published in 1918.  And I said, come on writing a book in Alabama of, you know, your autobiography no less, and sure enough I went online.  The book is called, 'Twenty-five Years in the Black Belt,' and William James Edwards who founded Snow Hill Institute [Snow Hill Normal and Industrial Institute, Snow Hill, Alabama] told his story as told to him by his grandfather of the original--of his original ancestors who came from South Carolina to Alabama.
Speaker 1: And what--so talk about his, you know, what he says in the book.  Some of what he says in the book, you know--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --Snow Hill institute was one of the schools that was established, but can you talk about what you learned?
Speaker 2: Yes.  William James Edwards was born in 1869.  He was again this is the first generation free in Alabama, and his--unfortunately, his mother died when he was very young and he was raised by his grandmother [Rachael Sigh Carmichael].  So he also had access to a lot of information, you know, because he spent time with his grandparents.  William James Edwards knew his grandfather.  Jam- his name is James Carmichael; one of Mike and Phoebe's children, and James knew how to read, so he had taught William James Edwards how to read.  He never formally went to school, because he was a sickly child, so--but he knew enough, he could read, could write, and he wanted more than anything to learn more and to--so he wrote to Booker T. Washington.  And said, "You know, I'm poor, I don't have the money to do it, but if you let me come there I will do anything in order to get an education," and Booker T. Washington answered him and told him to--if he could get there, he could go to school, and he went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal School; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama].
Story_ID: 668641
Speaker 1: And he tells a very, very poignant story, because he said he had no clothes, you know, and this was the first time he had ever met other black people who really had come from families that had parents and, you know, means for that time.  And he said, he had no change of clothes, and had no idea like what pajamas were, night clothes.  And he said that everyone there was very kind.  They would allow you to work, you know, at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal School; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] you could work your way through school.  Everybody had a job.  And they would take donations from clothes, and that sort of how he got himself through school through the kindness of others and, particularly, the kindness of Booker T. Washington.  And the charge that they were all given when they graduated, is that they--what they were to do was to go back to their communities and educate the others.  And that is what he did.  When he graduated from Tuskegee in 18--I believe '89 [1889], he went back to Snow Hill [Alabama] and walked the--he walked through the entire, you know, community.  I mean, many miles in each direction, because he wanted to survey to see how many children were there and what was the status of the schools.  And needless to say, there was no organized education.  It was like a church basement here.  Some little one shack where, you know, people where really trying to learn to read and write, and he got this idea he would start a school.  And he went back to Snow Hill, borrowed some money from--there was a white man there who was an ex-Confederate soldier, and he gave William James Edwards the land to build his school, and he remained, this ex-Confederate soldier, remained on his board for many, many, many years after, and that was the start of Snow Hill Institute [Snow Hill Normal and Industrial Institute, Snow Hill, Alabama].
Speaker 2: And you found the picture--you were showing me the picture of the first board of directors?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Where it's your father [Willie Malone] and--I mean, great-grandfather, great-grandfather (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, my great-grandfather.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.  And so--and you were also saying, Sharon [HistoryMaker Dr. Sharon Malone], that there's a connection also with Spike Lee?
Speaker 1: Yes.  In the course of doing this research, I kept thinking, I was like, "Okay, so we've got this book ['Twenty-five Years in the Black Belt']."  William James Edwards who is actually, you know, who started this school is Spike Lee's great-great-grandfather, and Spike Lee's family would--stayed in Alabama.  All of his, you know, his parents' generation and the generation before, they were all educated at Snow Hill Institute.  So Spike and I are distant cousins.
Story_ID: 668642
Speaker 1: So let me ask you about your siblings.  Can you give their name and birth order?  And I noticed that they're--there were boys and there're girls.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We were--there were three boys and then five girls in a row and, you know, as was the case, you know, back in the days the children got farther apart as we got further down the birth order.  And I'm eight.  I'm eight of eight.  My oldest brother is Elvin Malone [Elvin Malone, Sr.], now my oldest--from the oldest to the youngest, from him to me is twenty-three years' difference.  So Elvin was born in 1936; my brother Clinton Malone [Clinton Malone, Sr.], was born in '38 [1938]; my brother, Charles Malone, was born in 1940; Vivian [Vivian Malone Jones] who is my oldest sister, was born in 1942; and Joyce [Joyce Malone Phillips] in 1946; Gwen [Gwendolyn Malone Moseby] in 1949; Margie [HistoryMaker Margie M. Tuckson] in 1952; and I was born in 1959.  So as you can see there's a big gap between Margie and me, so I am not sure they were exactly elated at the prospect (laughter) that I showed up.  They were--my mom [Bertha Davis Malone] was a month shy of her forty-fifth birthday, and my dad [Willie Malone] was sixty-six when I was--showed up on the scene.
Story_ID: 668643
Speaker 1: What are you--how did your parents meet?  Do you know that story?
Speaker 2: I d- well, I do, and it's a funny story.  My dad [Willie Malone]--since my dad is so much older than my mom [Bertha Davis Malone], the story was and, that my mom--this was during the time that my mom was a young adult but she had gone back to school.  So at this point, she's twenty years old.  And she's at school, and the story was, my dad was, as he said, courting her teacher.  And he--and somehow or the other he comes there to see the teacher and they meet, and the next thing you know, you know, he's marrying the student.  So dad was--dad was forty-one, and my mom was twenty when they married, and so, you know, so I don't know.  But I understand that, you know, my dad was actually kind of handsome so, you know, the twenty years probably didn't matter as such to her (laughter).
Speaker 1: But I know they could have had tails a wagging?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That's always the case.
Story_ID: 668644
Speaker 1: The other thing I, I have a question about is you're relatively fair skinned, and you've mentioned that on your--was it father [Willie Malone]--was it the father's side?  Father's side, there had been some miscegenation or, you know, white, white blood.  What about your--where does the light skin come from?  Is your family--right?
Speaker 2: I understand completely.  This is an interesting tale that I think people don't really understand about how things work in the South.  There are and were a lot of mixed race people in the South.  And there is not one--I mean, we're talking about going back four generations.  There is not one identifiable white person in my family.  But, clearly, on my mother's [Bertha Davis Malone] side and on my father's side, there were, you know, and it goes back to slavery time that the last time that there was any white blood actually introduced into our family.  So if you were to look at the eight of us, we would be, you know, like a Mendel's [Gregor Mendel] pea experiment, you know, you got some at this end, some on this end and, you know the, the half in the middle, because my mother was brown, my father was fair, and so we have, you know, most of my family is somewhere in between the two of them, and I'm just one of those genetic, you know, how it shook out when you got two recessive genes together.  But there has not been a white person in my family for four generations on either side.
Story_ID: 668645
Speaker 1: So what is your earliest memory growing up?
Speaker 2: My earliest memory is going to kindergarten.  I remember that.  I can remember what it smelled like.  I can remember, there's nothing like a cloak room when you have a brown paper sandwich, and you can smell--I mean, a brown paper bag, and you can smell the bologna sandwich, you can smell when you got a banana in there.  It was that kind of, that musty lunch room smell.  That sort of, you know, the first thing I really remember, but when my, my clearest memory comes in when I was in first grade.
Speaker 1: And what are those memories, Sharon [HistoryMaker Dr. Sharon Malone]?
Speaker 2: I lived in Mobile, you know.  I grew up in--it was segregated, you know, forever and it was--we were just on the cusp of things, and we lived--we lived on the side of town where black people lived, and then there was like a buffer of downtown and then white people lived west of downtown.  Well, because we lived at the edge, and I think that's should probably be the name of it, but we lived at the edge of blackness.  So our street was literally the last street before you got to the buffer of downtown and white on the other side.  I lived across the street from a school.  I could throw a rock from my front steps into the playground of the school across the street.  But the school across the street was a Catholic school [St. Joseph's School, Mobile, Alabama].  It was a white Catholic school and--but the black kids in our neighborhood weren't allowed to go to that school, so you went to the black Catholic school [Most Pure Heart of Mary School, Mobile, Alabama] that was probably about two miles away from our house.  So since I started first grade in 1965, my mother [Bertha Davis Malone]--we--my mother had already gone through the experience with my sister, Vivian [Vivian Malone Jones], at the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama].  So my mother says, "Well why, you know, why can't you go to the school across the street?"  And I went to the white Catholic school across the street.  I was one of two black children, at that point colored children, in my class.  I remember the nun.  So I'm in class with all these white people, and this is the first time I had ever known a white person.  You know, there was no reason for you to have any interaction with any white people, you know, up to--in our life up to that point.  And I went to school, and I'm the first person in my family to have ever started school in integrated school.  I remember my teacher, my first grade teacher, and it was a nun.  And you can imagine it's Mobile, Alabama.  It's hot as blazes, and they were wearing the black habits then, those long black habits.  Sister Miriam Regina [ph.], and she--she recognized and always acknowledged the fact that I was smart.  And she let me be smart, and she encouraged me.  So I had her for two years, so I started life never feeling inferior, you know.  A lot of people had to unlearn that experience of thinking that white people are smarter than you and better than you, because you've never had a chance to compare yourself.  But I started life with, you know, white kids and I was like, "Well, you know, I'm the smartest kid in the class."  But after second grade, the bishop at that time decided they could no longer keep the school open because the inevitable tide was going to turn.  This white school couldn't continue to be that white backed up on a black community.  So he closed the school.  And when he closed the school, the kids had to go, and I ended up then going to the black Catholic school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I want to understand what you just said.  You said that he had decided that he couldn't, what?
Speaker 2: He couldn't sustain that parish--
Speaker 1: Because of what?
Speaker 2: It was too close to black people, you know.  If you wanted to keep the school, you know, if you're gold and he was an avowed racist.  He couldn't keep it white because you were too--you were closer to the black community--
Speaker 1: So it was going to become black?
Speaker 2: It was going to--or it was going to become much more black than it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there were a few kids who did integrate and go to the white Catholic school that was much further away, but, again, it was more difficult, and for me then the closer school was the black Catholic school and then after those two years then I went to the black Catholic school.
Speaker 1: So in, but in those two years you had a positive experience?
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Story_ID: 668646
Speaker 1: Did you experience on the other hand any racism, any name calling, any of that?
Speaker 2: You know, the only time that I ever remember, you know, when I say that, you know, I knew they were white and they were a little un- I remember a girl in my class, I was--I must have been in first grade and she--my dad [Willie Malone] came, walked over to school to pick me up, and it was, and it was--I saw this look of like horror in her face, and she looked at me and she said, "Sharon [HistoryMaker Dr. Sharon Malone], your daddy is colored."  (Laughter) And I was, like, "Oh, really I didn't know."  She--that was the first time it dawned on her that I was not, you know, one of them.  But then after then it didn't really matter, you know.  It really didn't.  There were not enough of us to be any potential threat or anything in the classroom, and like I said, and by the time, you know, the school was starting to get a little bit more integrated, then the school closed.
Speaker 1: So you're saying in third grade is when you're going to the black Catholic school.  Now, do you remember any discussions about, "Why am I not continuing--," you know, your parents--anyone telling you that the school is closing and now you're going to go to a black Catholic school or there's no discussion about that?
Speaker 2: No.  I mean, I never, I didn't realize what happened really until many years later about, you know, why the school closed and why I ended up there.
Speaker 1: So what--so you--so how does the black Catholic school, which is--the first school was St. Joseph's Catholic school [St. Joseph's School, Mobile, Alabama]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and then you're going to, it's most--
Speaker 2: Most Pure Heart of Mary [Most Pure Heart of Mary School].  Yes, which is a--is an institution.  It's been in Mobile [Alabama] for a very long time.  And different experience, you know.  I had, again, I'd say overall positive.  But I think it speaks to how early on your self image is set.  You know, and, you know, the experience that I had in first and second grade already kind of, you know, let me know kind of where I stood in the world.  So when I came there, I didn't, you know, other than, you know, being again a new kid, and that's a recurring theme in my life is that I was always the new kid.  I moved a lot and was not--was never new when everybody else was new.  So I'm coming to a new school in third grade with kids who have already been there since first and second.  But one of the things you learn to do, particularly, when you're number eight of eight, is you learn how to get along.  You know, you learn how to blend in and, you know, not make waves and, you know, establish a place for yourself.
Speaker 1: So do you--so when you say it was okay, what was--it's just that it was hard to establish friends or was it the teachers?  I'm just trying to understand what the experience was.  Is there--was the school--could you tell that it didn't have as many resources or was that not the case?
Speaker 2: No, I mean, to be honest with you, the school--St. Joseph's was a school that had been around for--that, that parish and that school was probably a hundred years old.  So it wasn't exactly the, you know, an oasis of modernity.  Okay.  You had this--these schools where--again, we had those old desks where it was bolted to the floor, and you had to pick up your desk and put your books underneath.  It was, that was at St. Joseph's, so actually believe it or not, Heart of Mary was a little more modern than that because it just had--wasn't that old.  But it was an interesting time, because when I got to Heart of Mary and now we're talking, it's 1967, 1968 and through those years, now you're starting to get into the black power era and, you know, and you have a life where you're always sort of on the out of whatever it is.  You know, I'm in a white school and I'm black, and I go to a black school and I'm too light.  And, you know, so now it's black power, and, you know, people, and it's sort of--you know, so you live on the fringe of, of, of whatever it is that's the norm at that time.  And that also has been something, you know, something that you just--you learn to cope with.
Story_ID: 668647
Speaker 1: So go on.  So, so the color thing sort of came, so how di- how was that actualized.  You're--how many, how many other light skinned people are there in the school [Most Pure Heart of Mary School, Mobile, Alabama], and--
Speaker 2: There were a few.  Mobile [Alabama] is a very mixed place.  Because other than, you know.  They have--they're more mixed race people than, than just were introduced during slavery.  There are, you know, Creole people would have been, you know, the French, the Spanish and these are people who actually knew their ancestors from, you know, two hundred years before.  We were not of that, of that ilk, and as is with all things, with color, comes race and I mean not race, there's class that is associated with it.  And--but we were, you know, again I felt in a lot of ways a little cheated because I was like, well, you know what, I'm not really--that's not who I am.  My dad [Willie Malone], you know, my people were--my mom [Bertha Davis Malone] was a maid, my dad was a maintenance worker.  They came off the farm, and somehow I got--you'd get painted with the broad brush of, "Oh, so you're light skinned, you must be, must be, must be."  And I was like, "No, not really."  And that's something that's really--that's followed me through life because people make certain assumptions about who they think you are based on, you know, how you look.  And my experience could be, you know, nothing like I think what most people think it is.  And they're surprised to find out that you know, that my parents are who they were, and we're from, you know, humble beginnings.  But, you know, we were poor only in monetary things, you know.  My mother and my father had a very rich home life and environment for us, but, you know, again it's that people making assumptions and me always feeling like I had to justify myself to say, but you know what, I'm not really that person that you think I am.
Speaker 1: So you're--at this point in time, this is--you're in that school for two--
Speaker 2: Three years.
Speaker 1: Three years.  Okay.  And so that's third to, like, sixth grade (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now I would like to--are there any teachers that take you under your wing or, you know, in that school particularly, or not?  Those were--okay.
Speaker 2: Not so much.  I can't--I know exactly who they were, but there was no one--if I had to say that pivotal teacher was really my--that first grade, first and second grade teacher [at St. Joseph's School, Mobile, Alabama].
Story_ID: 668648
Speaker 1: So the other thing that I wanted to ask, which you just alluded to, can you tell me what family life was like?  You know, cause you're the, you're the baby.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And I didn't even realize--so Vivian [Vivian Malone Jones] had already integrated the--so how old were you when Vivian integrated?
Speaker 2: Four.
Speaker 1: Four.  Okay.  So you really have no memory of that?
Speaker 2: No.  My first memory of that, you know.  And sometimes you incorporate other people's memories into your own.  You know, I've heard the stories so many times.  But my first actual memory was when she graduated.  Now, that I remember because that was 1965.  So, yeah, Vivian went to the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama], June 11th, 1963.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And can you just tell that story--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --since we're here, and then I'll go to the family life?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Sure.  My sister, Vivian, went to, again, all--everybody in my family graduated, you know, high school through the public segregated high school, Central High [Central High School, Mobile, Alabama].  And when she graduated high school, there was--she had some little mix up about her transcript not getting out on time and whatever.  And she wanted to apply to, the University of Alabama had an extension school in Mobile [Alabama], which was also not integrated.  And my parents [Bertha Davis Malone and Willie Malone] didn't have a lot of money, so, you know, the thought of going out of state or going someplace that she really could have gone, wasn't really an option for her, so she decided, you know, she wanted to go some place that was in state.  And just around that time, and now we're talking, it's 1960 when she was applying to college.  They were looking for someone to challenge the University of Alabama, and just through--and, and Vivian was one of probably hundreds of students who had applied to the University of Alabama since Autherine Lucy integrated it, really, in 1956.  After Autherine Lucy was expelled in the University of Alabama for creating a riot, because people tried to kill her the first couple of days she was there.  They never admitted another black student, so they kept, you know, and people would apply.  They would apply and they would--they'd intimidate the parents, they just summarily say no.  And when they had students that they really couldn't dismiss on, you know, academic, you know, qualifications.  If your parents held a mortgage, if your parents had a job, you know, somewhere--they literally would investigate, they would go and have your employer, you know, say hey maybe that's not a good idea.  And this went on for, you know, four or five years.  So needless to say by the time Vivian--when Vivian got to apply, they were really looking for a serious challenge and she had some successes with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in trying these cases.  And Alabama was now, we're talking about they're, they're on the tail end of integration.  So Vivian, because of the fact that she happened to be--she was out a semester because she didn't go right away and was waiting on this stuff.  They were looking for students, they wanted good students, they wanted someone that they could, you know, who they wouldn't challenge, and a bunch of students applied.  And just by nature of the fact that some people decided, hey I don't want to do this.  Some people, you know, got into better colleges elsewhere and left the state, and Vivian went to--while she was waiting, this case went on for two years.  She went to Alabama A&M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical College; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama].  So she went to Alabama A&M for two years before they--all the legal, you know, wranglings played themselves out, and by the time she--you know, 1963 came she and James Hood were the last two standing, and that's how they ended up going to the University of Alabama.
Story_ID: 668649
Speaker 1: Vivian [Vivian Malone Jones] was an amazingly courageous woman, young woman.  And I think about that, and I think about that a lot now, because was--I have a daughter [Maya Holder] who is the age that Vivian was when she went to the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama].  And I think as a parent--and I think about my parents [Bertha Davis Malone and Willie Malone], I said, now, it's 1963, and 1963 was, was a particularly violent year in Alabama.  We had had, you know, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had written a 'Letter from Birmingham Jail,' you know, the children's march [Children's Crusade] with all those iconic pictures of dogs being, you know, put on children and the fire hoses.  This all happened the month before she was to challenge, you know, had to go and register at the University of Alabama.  And so that June 11th with all of that in mind, she had to go and my parents couldn't go with her.  The lawyers from the justice department [U.S. Department of Justice] said--they came and got Vivian and James [James Hood], and they were trying to--because they really had to rehearse, they had to prepare, you know, "What are you going to do if they spit on you, if they yell," whatever.  You know, to kind of get them to settle down.  You know, they'd never been in front of cameras before, and they were trying to, you know, walk them through that process, and they said, my parent, my parents shouldn't come.  So that first week before the challenge actually took place, they had Vivian and James--they were staying at, literally, an undisclosed location, because the--two weeks before that the only hotel that they could have stayed at in Birmingham [Alabama], the Gaston hotel [A.G. Gaston Motel], was bombed.  So they didn't want people to know where they were, and they were staying in private homes.  They were staying at one of her lawyer's.  They had a local counsel, Arthur Shores, who is a civil rights lawyer now in Birmingham.  And Vivian stayed with his secretary, and James stayed with someone else, so if anybody wanted to get to them, they wouldn't know where they were.  And they didn't surface until this actual--this confrontation, the day on June 11th.  And my parents couldn't be there.  And they didn't know--and as this whole thing was unfolding, this is before twenty-four hours news cycle and cell phones, my parents literally didn't know what happened.  And I can't imagine it.  That your daughter is--and you know what people are capable of doing.  They've done it.  And so they confront the governor [George Wallace].  There was no coverage in the press in Mobile [Alabama], my hometown.  They didn't, they didn't mention it, because--I don't know why they didn't.  They just didn't.  They didn't cover it, so my parents had to wait, you know, wait that evening to get a phone call to see if everything was okay.  And, you know, after confronting the governor and she made it through, and she got to her dorm, she thought, okay, I made it, you know.  No one shot me on the way in or did anything.  And that night, she went to bed and woke up the next morning, and that was the night that Medgar Evers was shot and killed in his driveway on that, after midnight, that same day.  And that was also the day that John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] made his--the president made his famous speech on race.  The governor, they confronted the governor in the afternoon, Nick Katzenbach [Nicholas Katzenbach] was down there with her, the president made his famous speech on race; Medgar Evers was shot and killed.  This is all in less than twelve hours on June 11th.
Speaker 2: That's amazing.  And your par- you're right about parents back then, but, you know, there was--it was surprising, and that's not everyone 'cause we hear about the courage- you know, the ones that went forward.  But there were a lot of people not, you know, that didn't have that courage, but there was--there was this belief that you, you know, to be the first to, to go ahead to try to make change.  You know, there was a lot that.
Story_ID: 668650
Speaker 1: Now, what, what did Vivian [Vivian Malone Jones] recount over the years about what it was like, because Hood [James Hood] never, he--he didn't, he didn't--he left, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, oh, he--
Speaker 1: He couldn't do it?
Speaker 2: He couldn't do it.  They were--they, they actually--and there was rationale for why they did it in the summer as well.  They did in the summer, because they didn't want a full complement of students there.  They just wanted the summer school students, because, you know, if the full campus were there, you know, trying to protect them would be more difficult.  James actually was only there, he didn't make it through the summer term.  And he left, I think, it was six, eight weeks after.  That it was probably even, you know, early August and then Vivian--
Speaker 1: But what was it worse for him, or he just couldn't take it?  That's what I couldn't--
Speaker 2: I think he couldn't take it, you know.  And Vivian was then by herself, because she thought, you know, like well, at least I have James someone that would, you know, I can go through this with, but that entire first year she was by herself, and she told--this is.  You know, it sounds like something, but it's sad but true.  Vivian was always one that could make, you know, lemonade out of lemons, and she said, "Well," you know, my parents couldn't--my parents could never afford it for her to have a private room, but she said, "Well, you know, one thing about this," she said, "I got a private room with my own bathroom," because none of the girls wanted to share a room with her and none of them wanted to share a bathroom.  So she said, "Well, hey, you know, I got a nice dorm room with a nice bathroom."  But I think about that, and I said, really?  And these were the kind of things she would do.  She'd go to class, and she said--when the first feud before they got used to her being there.  They'd get up and leave.  People who had been her friends or so she thought when she was in the dorm, because people, after a while people kind of got used to her being there.  They would talk to her in the dorm and she said, she'd walk pass them on campus, and they'd just turn like they haven't seen her.  They would never--no one wanted to acknowledge that they actually spoke to her.  And that's how she went to college.  And you think of college as being this joyful experience and, you know, and making friends, lifelong friends.  And from her entire time at the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama], she only had one friend that she ever spoke of her ever really kept in touch with.  And that was a woman who was actually from Germany.  She was not American, and that's how she did it.  And, and I have to tell you, she--that peace and calm that allowed her to get through that.  You know, 'cause I wonder how do you go to class?  How do you do this when everybody around you is hoping you fail, you know, they want to say, "See, told you."  You know.  And to be able to study and to, you know, not lose it in that environment.  She was a woman, as was my mother [Bertha Davis Malone] and my father [Willie Malone], of great faith, and I think that was the only way you could ever, you know, send your child out into, you know, that sort of hostile environment.  You just had to have faith, and I think they did, and I think that as we say, you know, my mother was a praying woman as was Vivian, and I think she just asked for guidance and that's how she got through it.
Speaker 1: So, you said you remember the graduation?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So what do you remember about that?
Speaker 2: I remember 'cause the first graduation I'd ever been to.  I remember sitting on--we were outdoor--it was outdoors and we were on bleachers.  I remember it was very uncomfortable, you know (laughter).  We're sitting and everybody's out there and it's Alabama, and it's June--May, and it's hot.  And, you know, and my mom, and my aunts, and everybody with their hats on.  And we're out there--and my mom, everybody's so proud and they've got their gloves on and sitting on these bleachers at the University of Alabama.  And Vivian walking by and it's just, she just gave this great smile, you know, as she walks by and she's the only black person in line.
Speaker 1: Wow.  That--and so there was, so you were how old at that point?
Speaker 2: Six.
Speaker 1: You're six.
Story_ID: 668651
Speaker 1: So let's talk about family life.  You know, what was life like in the household so--was there--who else was in the household besides your mother [Bertha Davis Malone] and father [Willie Malone]?
Speaker 2: My--by the time I came along--okay.  So Vivian's [Vivian Malone Jones] away in college [University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, Alabama], my three older--my oldest brother [Elvin Malone, Sr.] was married, so he had kids my age, my other brothers were in college or had moved out.  I was there with my sister, Margie [HistoryMaker Margie M. Tuckson] who is next to me in age, who's seven years older; my sister, Gwen [Gwendolyn Malone Moseby]; my brother, Charles [Charles Malone] who is in and out; and my grandfather.  I remember my grandfather.  We--I, again, I have to, you know, I always laugh because it's like there was always somebody extra living with us.  And imagine you got that many children and that many people, and--but that was how, that was what you did in those days when your relatives got to be older before it was my grandfather, it was my aunt.  And my grandfather who is my mother's father was living with us, and he died when I was in second grade [at St. Joseph's School, Mobile, Alabama], but I remember him but--so that was kind of our family.  I really kind of--even though I had all these brothers and sisters, it was more like being an only child (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) An only child.  That's right.  Because the seven year old, that would be like having a little play doll--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You know, Margie is like I got a little (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, and actually I think she was little bit, you know.  She was used to being the baby, and it's like, you know, then here you are.
Speaker 1: That gets the attention, right?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) So--but anyway, I--my mother, and again my mother and father, imagine it would be really like being raised by your grandmother and your great-grandfather, because that's the age they were--
Speaker 1: No, I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) when I was a kid.
Speaker 1: The age span is so amazing, that's why I was doing the--I'm like oh my god.  'Cause 18--I mean, you were--that was many--that's like--I'm trying to think, my great-grandfather I think on my--was born.  Well, maybe he was born 18- .  I don't know, but he's older I'm saying as--your father is old--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, for the generation that you represent.  So what is life like, though?  What is it?  What, what, what's--?
Speaker 2: My mother was, you know, when we say old school, this was really old school, because my mother was--let's just say, she had rules, you know, and this is how you--this is what you did, and you didn't, you know, you didn't deviate or you did and you paid the consequences, you know.  Which was usually, you know, a spanking or a whooping.  And for those of us who are quick studies, I didn't need to get many whoopings, because I was like, okay, I think she's serious about that.  But--
Speaker 1: With the branches--
Speaker 2: Or a switch.
Speaker 1: Switch.  Go get a switch.
Speaker 2: Switch.  We had a peach tree in our backyard, and peach trees have those little skinny branches that, you know, you go out there and pull one of those and turn it upside down and the leaves would fly off and, whew, that's, that's something.  So like I said, I didn't many of those.  But she believed that, you know, we had a very strict code of, like, you know what the rules were.  You weren't unclear.  Punishment was swift and sure.  And she was, you know, and we were again a church going family.
Story_ID: 668652
Speaker 1: So what--so are--what is your--what is--is it, is it Catholic?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You were--so are you Bapt- what were you (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) A little bit of everything.  My mother [Bertha Davis Malone] was Methodist.  My mother was--
Speaker 1: A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal]?
Speaker 2: A.M.E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A.M.E.  My dad [Willie Malone] was Baptist.  My dad was raised Baptist, and I went to Catholic school, but I grew up in the A.M.E., because we went to church with my mother.  And my mother and father went to church every year, but unless somebody got married or died, they did not go to church together, 'cause dad stayed true to the--
Speaker 1: Baptist?
Speaker 2: --Baptist tradition and mom went with the A.M.E., but we--and church on Sundays was not an optional exercise.  You got up on Sunday, you went to Sunday school, took a little break in between, went and bought some candy, and you came back and you had to go to church.  And you were in church until 1, 1:30, and it was unless you were sick or dying, there was not, you know, an option for you to not go to church.  So that's how I spent my, you know, my growing up years.
Speaker 1: Were you ever an acolyte or anything in the church?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: We didn't have acolytes, but, you know, what we did we had--I was active because we'd have--you'd have, you know, Children's Day, you had, you'd be on the junior usher board, be in the choir, you know, and I used to do all of those things and participate with the--we were talking--I was talking to someone about this, about Easter speeches, Easter programs, you know.  All that (unclear).
Speaker 1: So is there any song that reminds you of growing up in the church?  You know, the--any hymn or a song that reminds of your church, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can, I can hear right now, you know, if you want to say something that would just make me cry if you say, 'cause it was my, one of my mother's favorite songs was 'His Eye Is on the Sparrow' (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sparrow.  Oh, god.  I love that song.
Speaker 2: You know.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 668653
Speaker 1: So go on, so what, so what other things are happening in the household?  Are there family dinners, or vacations, or is there holidays?  I'm just trying to sort of get a sense?
Speaker 2: You know, I loved holidays, because, again, there were very, you know, traditions that we--Christmas was big, Easter was big, and a lot of them, again, around the religion, around the church.  I remember on Christmas at church, you would always get, you'd get a bag of--it would be a bag of nuts and peppermints and an orange, and you then you might get some socks, or something like that.  That was your church present.  And we'd come home, and we, again, a lot of, a lot of kids, a lot of people.  Not a lot of--my parents [Bertha Davis Malone and Willie Malone] didn't have a lot of money, so Christmas was never about gifts, you know.  It wasn't about, you know, oh my goodness what'd you get?  But I like the whole feel of it, because it was when my mother--to this day, I still make the breakfast that my mother used to make for Christmas every year.  I make--I get up, and nobody in my house eats it but me, but, you know, if I have guests they'll eat it, but my kids [Maya Holder, Brooke Holder and Eric H. Holder III] don't like it.  But my mother on Christmas, the only year, day of the year, that she would make--we'd have fried oysters and grits and eggs for Christmas breakfast every year.  And I still make it to this day.
Speaker 1: That sounds wonderful.  Okay.  It must be southern--well you know, Mobile [Alabama]--she's older than you, but isn't--oh, god what's her name?  Used to be head of the school board?
Speaker 2: Peggy (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Peggy Cooper [HistoryMaker Peggy Cooper Cafritz].
Speaker 2: Yeah, she's from Mobile.
Speaker 1: Is from Mobile, because she painted a picture, and I've interviewed a few other people 'cause it was sort of a unique community in that way.
Story_ID: 668654
Speaker 1: Let me ask you--and Catholic schools so they were viewed as better schools is that why you were in Catholic schools?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now the--what else--what type of child are you then, Sharon [HistoryMaker Dr. Sharon Malone], that's what I mean, we know that you were bright, you did mention that the, you know, the teachers recognized that, but are you--if you're almost like an only child.  A lot of times only children live in their head, you know, because they're around mainly adults.  Is that it, or you--or is that not the case?
Speaker 2: You know, I think as I look back on how I felt as a kid.  Like I never--I always felt more grown up than--certainly than my peers.  And probably I felt more grown up than I really was, so you know.  But I did, I was always pretty--I was responsible, you know.  But I always wanted to be with the grownups.  Like I said, if you give me an option, you know, like you said you can be with the kids, or be the grownups.  I'd take the grownups every time.  And I laugh about it, because one of my dear friends that I grew up with, Michelle [ph.], who's a couple of years younger than me, and she used to want to play stuff that I didn't want to play.  Because I was like, oh, that's like kid stuff, you know.  But that sort of--you know, so I've always been a little bit more advanced.  And I say just not--I don't mean just academically, but just socially in how I felt and what I, you know, what I was capable of doing and because a lot more was expected of you when you're, you're on your own.
Speaker 1: And you had these, you had these older siblings that almost would have seemed like adults themselves who, you know, they have gone to school and things like that.  So that's what sort of the expectation, but do you have a lot of--I mean, where are you living.  What is your address at this point?
Speaker 2: I live at 760 St. Anthony Street, and, you know, you wonder whether or not things get in your head, but literally--as I say, it's really the edge of a neighborhood and then you're into the commercial district.  Our little block, next door, immediately to our right, is a hospital.  An old Marine hospital [United States Marine Hospital, Mobile, Alabama] and that took up the entire next block, and then the next block after that another was the Mobile County General Hospital [Mobile General Hospital, Mobile, Alabama].  So I lived, again, I had a school across the street, a hospital immediately to my right, and another hospital in the next block.  Those were--that's the circuit that you made to even get to the grocery store.  So I grew up around, you know, well, everybody grew up around hospitals.  So I can't really say that, you know, had any outside influence on me, but that was--it was and the hospital.  The old Marine hospital was, again, I found this out as an adult.  It was a--in the Confederacy.  It was built after Civil--during the time of the Civil War.  I guess, before the Civil War and they took care of, you know, soldiers in that hospital, Marine [U.S. Marine Corps], and then after it was no longer a Marine hospital, when I was growing up it was a TB [tuberculosis] hospital.  So imagine that, living next door to a TB hospital.  But that's, that's where I was.
Story_ID: 668655
Speaker 1: And the other question I have for you is what, around this period of time of growing up, you know, what sights, smells, and sounds remind you of your childhood?
Speaker 2: For anyone who's ever been to Mobile [Alabama], Mobile smells.  It has a distinct smell, and sometimes not in a good way.  But when you drive--when I used to make that drive from Atlanta [Georgia] to--and I'd come down, and there would be--I'd say even before I drove, before I drove.  Mobile was a place that--its major industry as a kid was shipbuilding.  When the shipbuilding went away, it was like chemical factories and paper mills, and if you've ever been a place where there's a paper mill whatever they were doing, whatever they did at a paper mill, boy there would be a smell that came out of that that was pretty noxious.  And the wind would blow and I remember that.  That would fortunately come and go.  And then there's that also that smell that you smell driving into Mobile.  It's like bay water.  You know that kind of dank smell and you know when you're getting close to the water when you come in.  Those are kind of the smells I remember the most.
Speaker 1: Sights?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Sights, I'd say, we used to live very close--as I said, close to this area, there was an apartment building that was about three blocks away from where we lived that was a high rise, and that was, you know, that was a big deal.  Nobody had high rise apartments, and that was a place, too, where white people lived.  You couldn't live in the high rise apartments.  But it was like one of those things where you see as inspirational like, wow, you know, one day I'm going to grow up and I'm going to live in a apartment (unclear) high rise, you know.  You know, so I guess sort of metaphorically, you know, you looked up to some place that you were going to go, and that sort of what I remember.  And I do remember because it was in quite distinction to where we lived.  Like our houses looked nothing like that, and the people in our house would have shotgun--you know, there were people across the street that had shotgun houses.  So, again, the gulf, you know, in that three blocks was, you know, pretty remarkable.
Speaker 1: And then sounds?
Speaker 2: Oh, I--oh, it's funny.  I lived a block away from a tavern.  There was a tavern on the corner called the 7-Eleven.  It used to be the Golden Eagle [ph.], then it became a 7-Eleven, and it was this place that had a, a--the floor was concrete and you'd go in, and there was a bar, and for kids they'd sell, you know, potato chips and ice cream and have a jar of pickled pig feet on the counter.  You know, and then--but adults, they would serve, I guess, they'd serve alcohol, beer, or whatever.  And the sound that I remember most distinctly was when you--when I sat on my steps, they, they had a jukebox, and people would come in and play the jukebox, and they--that summer of 1967, my memory is of that Aretha Franklin album ['I Never Loved a Man the Way I Love You'], the one with "Respect," because that played--everybody came in and they would play one of those Aretha Franklin tunes, and they'd play, "Respect."  "I Never Loved a Man the Way--" ["I Never Loved a Man (The Way I Love You)"] and it just went.  And that was a continuous loop for that entire summer, and every time I hear, I hear that Aretha Franklin song that reminds me of sitting on my steps at 760 St. Anthony Street with the jukebox playing at the Golden Eagle.
Story_ID: 668656
Speaker 1: --There was this round of base closings.  And when you look at the--you know, I call it the Alabama diaspora.  When Brookley Air Force Base [Mobile Aeroplex at Brookley, Mobile, Alabama] closed, it was a big employer down there, and people who lived in Mobile [Alabama] had an option; you can either retire or you can get transferred, and a lot of people from Mobile ended up being transferred to Sacramento [California].  There was a base in Sacramento, base in Macon [Georgia].  And so that was sort of the two routes that people took, and my mother's sister who lived in Mobile took--went to Sacramento.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And my mom [Bertha Davis Malone] at that point, you know, she was always a little, I would say of her brothers and sisters, she was always the one who was most encumbered, which is why when they left the farm she only got as far as Mobile because she had four kids, and my mother's other brothers and sisters went to Chicago [Illinois], went to Cincinnati [Ohio].
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: You know, they went, you know, farther away.  So my mother worked at Brookley until it closed--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And when the base closed, then she just basically did domestic work.  She worked for, you know, private families cleaning house.
Speaker 2: I see.  Okay.  Okay.  Sure.  So you grew up--when you grow up, then she's working as a domestic (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Story_ID: 668657
Speaker 1: So you go in 1971, you, you finish Most--(laughter) what's it called--
Speaker 2: Most Pure Heart of Mary [Most Pure Heart of Mary School, Mobile, Alabama].
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Pure Heart of Mary.
Speaker 2: We used to just call it Heart of Mary.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, Heart of Mary.
Speaker 1: Then your mother [Bertha Davis Malone] pass--she dies.  You know, which is, you know, when you were telling the story, you were telling a story that your mother's--you know, your grandmother died when she was a teenager, and you are about--
Speaker 2: Twelve years old.
Speaker 1: --what about twelve years old.  So when you were telling me that, I said, well, the same thing would happen to you.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So that--tell me about that period, because it's hard. 'Cause you're--you know, it's not like you're five years old or anything.  You're at a conscious age.  You know, when you're entering puberty, really.  So what was that period like, and then what did she, what did she die of?
Speaker 2: My mother died of colon cancer.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And, again, something--she was fifty-seven, she--in those days, you know, because, you know, you talk about the, the importance of, you know, insurance and why people go to the doctor, and why, and, and somehow subconsciously that sort of--that may be--may have been a motivating factor to know that your mother died of a preventable disease.  You know, certainly something that had she, you know, had she known; had she, you know, had testing for it.  You know, how long she could have lived.  But by the time, she was diagnosed, it was pretty advanced, and she died six months from the day she was hospitalized there, you know.  And I remember that, 'cause I remember being a kid and going in.  We were--I was at the hospital, and as a matter of fact, I believe it was in March.  And going in the hospital, and the surgeon we were all waiting in the--waiting in the waiting room, and the surgeon came out, and I was a kid.  I was twelve.  And I'm there with my older brothers and sisters, and I remember him saying, "There was nothing we could do."  I was, like, you know.  And I didn't really, you know.  You know what that means, but I was, like, I didn't really know what the consequences of that were going to be.  And there was nothing they could do, and she had pretty advanced stage colon cancer, and she died in August of that same year; 1971.
Speaker 1: Wow--so that--okay.  So March to August, so that's over, and that's the summer.  So is Margie [HistoryMaker Margie M. Tuckson]--is she nineteen by this point?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So she's, she's out of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She's--right.  She's in college [University of South Alabama, Mobile, Alabama].  She's a freshman in college.
Speaker 1: So she's a freshman in college, and you're still at home.
Story_ID: 668658
Speaker 1: What does that mean to you--I mean, so what happens?  What is the discussion, because what strikes me about what I saw of your chronology is that you go live with Vivian [Vivian Malone Jones], you know, and then you go live with your brother, and then you're back with your, your, your father [Willie Malone].  So I just want to understand that's an awful--I'm just saying as a young person, that's an awful lot that is happening, because--what I--okay.  I'm saying, but I need you to say, because what I'm trying to understand, Sharon [HistoryMaker Dr. Sharon Malone], is at this point, you're closer to your mother [Bertha Davis Malone] than your father, right?  I mean, she has more influence, you know, he--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So tell me what, what happens?  Is it the belief that your fath- is he distraught, or he's too--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I'm given the fact that I was going to be at home alone with my dad, and my dad was, you know, so we're talking at that point, my dad is seventy-eight, you know.  And when my mom died, and my sister [HistoryMaker Margie M. Tuckson] was, you know, away in college [University of South Alabama, Mobile, Alabama], my mother, my mother--before she died, my mother asked my sister and my brother-in-law [Mack Jones] if they would take care of me; and they said yes.  So when she died, you know--and it was right before school started.
Speaker 1: And that's what I was saying, it's right before (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right before school started.  It's literally, she died August 29th.
Speaker 1: And you're going to a new school, right?
Speaker 2: Going to a new school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) New school--
Speaker 2: --in a new place with a new family.  And I don't know.  I, I wish I had an answer for how you do what you do, but the reality is that what choice did you have, you know.  You could fall apart, I suppose.  But I didn't.  I made it, you know.  I, I started a new school--
Speaker 1: And a new city, that's--
Speaker 2: A new city.
Speaker 1: So you're in--
Speaker 2: And, again, I'm in seventh grade.  So people are ending their elementary school years, and, again, I'm coming in when everybody's finishing up.
Speaker 1: And this is in Atlanta [Georgia]--
Speaker 2: In Atlanta (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) where Vivian was.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  And--
Speaker 1: And now Vivian is how old as this point?
Speaker 2: Twenty-nine.
Speaker 1: So she's twenty-nine, and does she have children?
Speaker 2: She has two little kids [Michael Jones and Monica Jones Shareef].
Speaker 1: Two okay.
Speaker 2: And then now she's got a twelve year old to deal with, and she has not--you know, and we've had a relationship more like a sister and now you've got to be an authority figure, which was challenging at times.  But, you know, and I stayed with them for two years, and I went to Beecher Hills Elementary School [Atlanta, Georgia] in seventh grade and then eighth grade--and then it was a switch, 'cause the schools changed again.  And even though I stayed in Atlanta, I went to a different school in the eighth grade, because that was the break.
Story_ID: 668659
Speaker 1: And then after eighth grade, I went to Dallas [Texas] for a summer, so I thought.  I went for a summer and stayed for a year.  So (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Now, what, is your brother taking over?  Was it--'cause you're teen age.  See that's the thing, you're teen age, you've lost your mother [Bertha Davis Malone]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and are they--do they find you at all spoiled at all?  Or are they--'cause you said, it was strict.  But it's just that that's a hard--I mean, you have your routine when you're growing up in a household.
Speaker 1: I think, you know, again, it gets back to, you know, always feeling like you're a grown up.  And I think I, I was probably difficult to manage just simply because I was, like, you know, I thought we were more peers than we were, you know, than I probably--probably as I think back on that now, we were--so anyway.  So I had a little bit more to say, probably, than your--than I would have had to say to my mother, because, you know.
Speaker 2: It was your mother.
Speaker 1: It was my mother--and your sister [Vivian Malone Jones], you know.  So I went to Dallas for a year, and like I said, I never intended to stay, and things worked out.  I, I just--my brother said I had the opportunity to go back.  I was going to public school [Beecher Hills Elementary School] in Atlanta [Georgia], and, you know.  He said, I would be able to go back to Catholic school and private school when I was in Dallas.  So I did.  And throughout it all, and there's a lot of emotional turmoil that goes on, and--but you're by yourself.  And, you know, and the context is people are living their lives, you know, and it's just me.  And at the--and what the only thing that I could do, and I could keep it together and I would, you know, stay under control was that I always, you know.  I was always a straight A student.  I was a straight A student in Atlanta, and I moved, and it just--whatever school I went to, I would adjust up or down.  And the school in Dallas was a very good school, much more challenging, but I always kept my grades up.  So to the outside world, it never looks like there was as much upheaval going on as there was, because I--because I didn't act out, you know, that way (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's surpris- I mean, 'cause that's what--I don't want to say most people, but a lot of people, you know, there is that, you know, they go up and down.  And it would be apparent, maybe, that something was wrong.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: No.
Story_ID: 668660
Speaker 1: After Dallas [Texas], and after Dallas didn't work out, then I said, well--then I was fifteen--
Speaker 2: And you wanted to go back.
Speaker 1: And then I went back to live with my dad [Willie Malone], and then--so now he's fif- I'm fifteen, he's eighty-one.  And so now we're in, again, a different sort of role, because now I'm more taking care of him, but I'm still a kid, you know.  So, you know, again, you do what you need to do, and I stayed there, finished high school [W.P. Davidson High School, Mobile, Alabama].  I--but, you know, I took care of myself, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, did you have to also take care of him, though?  I mean, like who was cooking, and--was he cooking?  Or--I'm just--I'm trying--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm sorry. (Laughter) I'm sorry.  I don't mean to be asking these questions, but--
Speaker 1: There wasn't--you know what, there wasn't a lot of cooking going on, and I did have a sister--my sister, Margie [HistoryMaker Margie M. Tuckson], was--had gotten married [to Reed V. Tuckson] just as I'd come home.  So she used to look out for me, you know, and I'd go to her house and--
Speaker 2: So she was living in Mobile [Alabama].
Speaker 1: She was living in Mobile.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I would go to her house after, you know, 'cause I worked.  I worked after school, and so I would go to her house for--she'd make dinner and leave it out for me.  And, you know, that's how, that's how I got--when there was a home cooked meal, that's how I got it; it was from my sister.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: And so your father passed away in what year?
Speaker 2: Dad died in 1982 [sic.].  Is that right?  Yeah, he outlived my mother [Bertha Davis Malone].  No, what am I saying?  Dad lived in--yeah, he lived much--he was eighty-nine when he was born--when he was--when he died (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When he died.
Speaker 2: So he lived out--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: --my mother about thirteen years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--so but he--is he pretty self sufficient at that point, or is he watching TV?  I mean, did he have rituals and--
Speaker 2: He was actually--you know, my dad was in pretty good shape up until, probably, the last, you know, year or two of his life.  You know, he was, he was a farmer and my dad still--my dad fed the neighborhood, you know.  'Cause he'd get up in the morning and go out there in his garden.  So he was actually not an--other than the fact that he was just old, you know, and my dad never drove.  Never learned to drive, you know, so, you know, my dad was, you know, when you get to be eighty years old, I'd tell my dad, "All right.  Dad, I'm going so whatever," and you learn that when you're not getting away with something like what's the point?  You know, because I'd say, "Dad, I'm going," and he'd say, "Okay."  You know, and I'd come back, and he'd be asleep.  So, you know, you know, there was never any danger of, like, oh, now I'm going to get caught, or whatever.  And it takes the allure off--
Speaker 1: Of doing something--
Speaker 2: --doing things, because it's like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --you know.
Speaker 1: Didn't really.
Story_ID: 668661
Speaker 1: So were you--are you active in organizations, or--'cause you--the school you come back to is W.P. Davidson High [W.P. Davidson High School, Mobile, Alabama], and is this the public--
Speaker 2: It's a public high school.
Speaker 1: Public high school.
Speaker 2: Public integrated white school--high school that I was bused to, so, you know, and it was, you know, a good decent school.  Decent school.
Speaker 1: And are you--are teachers taking--I'm just trying to understand what life is like?  Do you have friends?  You know, are you--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --dating?  You know, do you like boys?  I'm just trying to understand.
Speaker 2: I have friends.  I have, you know, I have really good friends.  I have a friend I grew up with; Michelle [ph.].  But she doesn't go to my school.  I have another girlfriend, Connie [ph.].  So, no, I had friends.  Socially, you know, at that point, you know, I've--I'm, I'm pretty adaptable at this point in my life, you know.  I can come in, I can roll with it, you know.  And I didn't have--actually, I didn't have many boyfriends, because, again, you know, when you go through life thinking that you're older and much more mature than everybody else.  It kind of makes it hard to find someone in high school, you know, so.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So okay.  So you--how does school come about then?  How does--what happens with school?  I mean, where you're going to go to college.  How does that come into being?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I was always a good student.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And when I got to Davidson, you know, again, you turn it up, you turn it down.  And I, I always did well in school, always, you know--and I must admit, I had people who--
Speaker 1: Were looking out for you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) you know, they encouraged me.
Speaker 1: So were they?
Speaker 2: One of my--my guidance counselor was this woman, Mrs. Posey [ph.].  I'm sure she's passed away now, but this was--she used to always put me up for things that I didn't even know existed.  You know, she said, "Oh, well, you need to sign up for this or sign up for that," or whatever.  But when it came to, you know, the college process, I didn't know.  You know, I had no idea about, you know, what the universe was, really, for college.  And so I knew I liked Atlanta [Georgia], and I wanted to go back to Atlanta, and so that was sort of--that was my, that was my selection process; Atlanta.  What's in Atlanta?  What's the best school in Atlanta?  And that's how I ended up going.  I went to Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia].  I applied to one school, I got an early decision, and I went there.
Speaker 1: Oh, so early decision.  'Cause this is 1977 that you were--
Speaker 2: This is beginning, yeah.  This is 1976.
Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Actually the fall of '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you graduate in '76 [1976].
Speaker 2: In '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: In '77 [1977].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 668662
Speaker 1: And then you, you go in the fall in '77 [1977], you're at Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia].  And Vivian [Vivian Malone Jones] is, is she still in Atlanta [Georgia]--
Speaker 2: She's still in Atlanta (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) at that point?  Okay.  So what was the Emory you came to, 'cause you didn't--you stayed--you went there a year, right?
Speaker 2: A year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you didn't like it?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't like it.
Speaker 1: So what didn't you like about it?
Speaker 2: I thought, you know, you know, you kind of have this image in mind of what you think college is supposed to be.  Emory was very--there weren't a lot of--there weren't a lot of African American students, there was no sports, there was no spirit, there was nothing.  Academically, it was very good, but there was nothing else to do.  And if you weren't part of the sorority, fraternity, you know, there was nothing.  You were just a kid in Atlanta, and you, you--anything that you would do socially, you would have to leave campus and go someplace else, because there was really nothing for you to do.  But, you know, as I said, there are no accidents in the universe.  There are never any accidents in the universe.  And there is nothing that I could say that I took away from that experience at Emory, other than that's when I met my best friend in the world that year.  That was the only reason I can see why I had to be at Emory at that particular time.  And that was my friend, Deidre Hamlar.
Speaker 1: All right.  So--
Speaker 2: We were freshman together, and we would sit and kvetch.  And go, "Oh, this is so awful."  And Deedee was the one who said, "Well, we should just transfer."  And I said, "Well, yes, we should."  And that's how the idea for leaving was hatched (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you both, you both decided to transfer?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, we did.  Except I left, and Deedee didn't.  Deedee stayed.  She got, she got the ball rolling.  I left, my roommate left and Deedee stayed, and she realized like, "Oh, now, I'm by myself."  She eventually left, but she didn't leave--she went to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] after another year and a half (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So--
Story_ID: 668663
Speaker 1: What made you think Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: I started for the first time to feel--you know, I had never, I had never actually thought about, you know, what it meant to go to one school as opposed to another school.  You know, I kind of thought I was going to go to medical school, and Emory [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia] would have been a perfectly fine place to, you know, to get the foundation to go to medical school.  But the summer before my freshman year of college, I spent the summer in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], and I went to the--I was a presidential scholar from Alabama.  And I came up to this presidential scholar program [U.S. Presidential Scholars Program], and so then there are all kids from all over the United States, presidential scholars.  And everybody--you'd have these, you know, events and everyone will say, you know, "Well, where are you going to school, and where you're going to school, and where you're going to school?"  And it was the first time, you know, I met all these people.  And they're like, "I'm going to Harvard.  I'm going to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut].  I'm going to Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina].  I'm going to," wherever, and I would say--and they'd say, "Where are you going to school?"  I'd say, "I'm going to Emory."  And people would say, "Oh."  And you're like, "Oh, that's nice."  You know, and I was--and it, it stung, you know, because at some level, you know, I said to myself there's a little bit.  You know, that, that competitive streak and you're like, well, I could have gone there.  I think.  You know, but that was the first time I ever questioned, before I even got to Emory and realized I didn't like it.  That maybe I had sold myself a little short, and then I met Peggy Cooper [HistoryMaker Peggy Cooper Cafritz] that summer and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now you met her where?
Speaker 2: In D.C.  That was summer of '77 [1977]--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: --I met Peggy.  And because I knew her family from Mobile [Alabama], but I had never met her.  And she had me over for dinner, and, again, I always give Peggy credit where credit is due.  And she said to me--and Peggy said--she said--so, again, it was another one of those, "Where are you going to school?"
Speaker 1: Yeah, at this point in time, what does Peggy do?  You know, is she--what is she doing?  Had she--at that point in time--
Speaker 2: At that point in time, she is living with but not married to Conrad [Conrad Cafritz].
Speaker 1: Right.  And she--had she, had she started the Ellington School [Duke Ellington School of the Arts, Washington, D.C.] at that point or not?  Or she was working--because I'm thinking before that, she was--
Speaker 2: That was '77 [1977], so, yeah.
Speaker 1: I think maybe--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She must have, because--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --just had their fortieth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I meet Peggy, and I go to this, you know, go to Peggy's house, and it's very sophisticated and she's all sophisticated, and I'm sitting there, what am I doing here?  I'm seventeen--I'm eighteen years old.  And Peggy said to me--and she said to me straight up. She says, "Well, you know, again, where are you going to school?"  I said, "I'm going to Emory."  And I said, "I'm going to Emory."  And she said, "Oh, that's too bad."  And I was, like--I was crushed, and I was, like, you know, now in the wake of, you know, having had this experience and feeling like maybe I should have done something else, and Peggy made me feel--you know, and, again, it was, it was motivating.  So when I decided to leave Emory, I decided to shoot a little higher than Emory, and that's how I ended up just applying at Harvard.  And to be honest with you, if I hadn't gotten into Harvard, I would have stayed at Emory.  But, you know, I did.  So that's how I left.
Speaker 1: So you left after your--
Speaker 2: Freshman year.
Speaker 1: --freshman year.  So all of that happens in the--okay.  So you go--so do you go sight unseen or do you visit there before?  So that's the other question I have.
Speaker 2: I had never seen it before I got off the plane.  I--the plane, got off, and I was, like, "Wow. That's not exactly how I pictured it."  (Laughter)  But no I had never been--
Speaker 1: Because Emory's campus may be even prettier.  It's a campus, right?  Or is it?  I haven't been on--I've only been there once at the library.  So--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, so, you get there and then the thing about Harvard at this time, there's a nice community of black people.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  There were many more people at Harvard than there were at Emory.  Many more, but, you know, again, I, you know, I, again, my--I'm now, again, a new person, in a new place where every--my cohorts are not new.  Everybody's been there.
Speaker 1: That is true.  This is your thing, right?
Speaker 2: I keep--this is what I do.
Story_ID: 668664
Speaker 1: And you know the other thing I want to ask, Sharon [HistoryMaker Dr. Sharon Malone], that I really had overlooked, because I was asking--you were talking about.  When do you know you're good at math and science, and when does that sort of come into, into the equation?  Is it very, very early on?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And it got kind of always way, you know, I just like, you know, naturally I went towards that.  But, actually--yeah, I was much more a math and science than a humanities kind of person.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you come in--but things like, you know, your SAT's, you know, like preparation.  You just happened to do well?  Or--
Speaker 2: I got a good night's sleep.  I remember, I think, for my SAT preparation consisted of, you know, those practice books you buy at the store, and I didn't--and I worked, you know.  So I went to school, and I had a job that I worked part-time after school, and at some point I'd do my homework between school and going to work.  And I think I did some vocabulary words and maybe a couple of practice things, and that was it.  And then I'd, you know, again, get a good night's sleep, bring two number two pencils in the morning, and try to eat some breakfast, and you're good to go.  And I've taken the SATs once.  And, again, you know, some people can sing; some people can play the piano; my one and only talent is I'm actually good at taking standardized tests (laughter).  So, you know, that's all I, you know, and, again, but no guidance, you know.  Again, you know, my dad [Willie Malone] had never been to college.  He had no idea what you, you know, what you, you know, what one's supposed to do.
Story_ID: 668665
Speaker 1: So you go--where, where are you living?  What, what house or whatever do you--
Speaker 2: Lowell House.
Speaker 1: Lowell House.  Okay.  And so how do you find--so you're--so who do you gravitate to since everybody has sort of bonded with their class at that point?
Speaker 2: Well, I have one friend that I--I have one person that I actually know who is actually a good friend of mine, and that was a guy named Michael Penn [ph.] who I knew from eighth grade [at Beecher Hills Elementary School] when I lived in Atlanta [Georgia].  So he and I were friends in the eighth, and then now he's at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And then--he's the only person I know.  And he and I flew up together, and so his circle of friends became my circle of friends.  That was my entree.
Speaker 1: So who are your friends there?  Any names that we would know?  Who do you become?
Speaker 2: I don't know that there are any names (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: --that you would know, no.
Speaker 1: So, so how is the experience then?  Those remaining three years?  And what are you doing during summers, but--'cause, you know, did you take--you did organic chemistry and all?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I finished Harvard, I was done.  I didn't have anything.  I had no other, you know, classes I had to go pick up.  I had done all my pre-med requirements.  The only thing I hadn't done was take the MCATs, because I knew the inevitability of it.  I knew if I took the MCATs, and you say, well, you did okay.  Why don't you go ahead and apply.  And then I would have been in medical school, and I didn't want to go to medical school right then.  So I didn't take them.  But all my requirements were done.  And I didn't take my MCATs until I was--I had been out for two and a half years before I had to go back and take my MCATs to--for medical school.
Speaker 1: So did you find, Sharon [HistoryMaker Dr. Sharon Malone]--so was it an--easy for you?  I mean, or was it more difficult, the classes?  I'm just trying to get a--what were your college years like?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I had, you know, it took me a long time to, to get used to Harvard.  I mean, it was going to--it was just a lot.
Speaker 1: Well, of course, you're north.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, my goodness.  Yeah, it's--
Speaker 1: For the first time, it's a different culture.
Speaker 2: It's way colder than I've ever been in my life, and I, you know, again, you sort of get familiar with seasonal affective disorder.  It's the first I've ever been that cold.  It's, like, is dark at just, like, 4:30, and it's dark already.  And it was actually--it was very--it was a rough adjustment.  When I say that, I--because that was the year--as a matter of fact, I got there and that was--now, we're talking '79 [1979], and I got to--when I got there--the first week I was there, my sister, Vivian [Vivian Malone Jones], who's in Atlanta, was diagnosed with breast cancer.  And, again, it was this--I had this deja vu feeling over again, that, you know, this was going to be terrible and she was going to die, and I was going to be in Boston [Massachusetts], and I can't be there.  And then it sort of, you know, and she was, like, "Don't worry about it.  You know, I'm good.  It's going to be fine.  It's going to be fine."  And, ultimately, it took, it took probably until spring before I finally settled in, and said to myself I'll stay here.  'Cause I, you know, I had, you know, almost my middle name was, hi name is Sharon, but I'm not really staying here.  I'm going home.  (Laughter) But then I, you know, you reestablish and you kind of get it.  And I settled into something that, if I can say I didn't love it.  I liked it enough, you know.  I liked it enough.
Speaker 1: So you--but what you consider--so how are you spending summers, and, you know, that type?  How are you--
Speaker 2: I'm going back to--I go back.  See Atlanta now becomes home base--
Speaker 1: It's your home.
Speaker 2: --you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I go back and forth to Atlanta, and I, you know, have summer jobs.  I work, you know.
Speaker 1: In Atlanta?
Speaker 2: In Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Story_ID: 668666
Speaker 1: Were you wanting to become a doctor?  When did the doctor idea--is it after your mother's [Bertha Davis Malone] death, or before--even before that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it was--I don't know why this idea pop- yeah, I was in third grade, I think, you know.  And it was when I got to Heart of Mary [Most Pure Heart of Mary School, Mobile, Alabama], and there were--there was a guy in my class and his dad was a doctor.  And that was the first time I had ever even known.  I was, like, really like black people can be doctors?  And it's--
Speaker 1: In ninth, in ninth--
Speaker 2: No, third grade.
Speaker 1: Third grade.  Okay.
Speaker 2: When I was in third grade, and then that's when it kind of got in my head, and then, you know how it is, it's a self-fulfilling prophecy.  You're kind of, you know, it's a reinforcing; you're good in math and science, you're good in math and science.  So, you know.
Speaker 1: So you graduate in 1981, and you said your father [Willie Malone] died?
Speaker 2: In '84 [1984].
Speaker 1: Eighty-four [1984], so--
Speaker 2: No.  No.  No, he died before I went to medical school [Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York].  So he died in '83 [1983], I believe.  Yeah, '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: Eighty-three [1983].  Okay.  So you're saying you liked it enough.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, at this point in time, at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], most of the black students, are they from--how many are privileged and how many are not privileged?  And who is sort of known on campus, who's the faculty?  Because I'm trying to--let's see, I graduated from law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]--oh, wait a minute.  I graduated from law school.  Courtney Vance [Courtney B. Vance]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Courtney was a year behind me.
Speaker 1: Right.  Because he was in a play I directed at the Loeb theater [Loeb Drama Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts] (laughter).
Speaker 2: What play?
Speaker 1: It was a play called, 'Mars' [ph.].
Speaker 2: Get out!  Get out!  You know what?  I was the--I was one of the executive producers.  My friend, my friend, Michael Penn [ph.], the one that I knew (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right.  That's--
Speaker 2: Michael Penn and Terri Hill [Terri L. Hill] were my buddies, and they were theater types, so they were, like, okay well you--'Mars,' yes.  Yes.  That was my--yes.
Speaker 1: That is so--Sharon [HistoryMaker Dr. Sharon Malone], (unclear) I can't believe--.
Speaker 2: I was--I--
Speaker 1: Okay, we're turning tapes (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 668667
Speaker 1: --And like I said, I believe it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) See 'cause you majored in psychology [at Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  This is--
Speaker 1: I believe that people are just, you know, like I said, they are, you know, something puts you in each other's orbits, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, why did you major in--see, I--that's why I was--that's why I was wondering if, if--medical school.  So you majored in psychology for what reason, 'cause mainly people--do people--oh I guess if you want to be a psychia- did you want to be a psych--
Speaker 1: No.  Well, you know, actually, no.  I probably--and my psychology degree was more in when I say, sort of the neuroscience.  It was, like, psychobiology, so it was the brain more than, you know--
Speaker 2: Like neuroscience.
Speaker 1: More like neuroscience.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  So then you graduate, and then what do you decide--you said that you were tired, and you didn't want to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was tired.  I was just tired.  You know, 'cause again I felt like I had been taking care of myself for my entire life, you know.  And I was, like, I just need a break, you know.  I need a break.  I want to have--see what it feels like to have some money.  I never had any of that either, and that's how I ended up taking the job for IBM [International Business Machines Corporation].
Story_ID: 668668
Speaker 1: Were you recruited on campus [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: I had worked for IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] the summer before.  I got a summer job, and, and mainly I took the job because I wanted to, again, I wanted a job that paid some money as opposed to, you know, minimum wage summer jobs.  And it really was for people, you know, who were thinking about going to work for IBM, and I just took the job on a lark, because I was, like, you know, I hear they pay well.  And so anyway I took the job, and at the end of the summer, you know, they made an offer for me to come back, and then I was just--said, you know, once I decided I didn't want to go to medical school right now, it was easier to take the bird in the hand than go out and try and find something else, and then that's how I ended up working for IBM (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So where you working?
Speaker 2: In Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: In Atlanta.  Oh, you were--okay.  IBM (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went back to Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So, so you're--what are you doing, are you a typical sales--so you're a systems eng--
Speaker 2: I'm a systems engineer.
Speaker 1: So what--so they actually had a, a plant there, or what--
Speaker 2: No, they--actually, all of your--
Speaker 1: 'Cause I--you think of IBM and salespeople mainly.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.  And, and for systems engineers, basically, you're just sort of--you're sort of the technical sales part of it, you know.  You're supposed to know how to do the software--market the software and know how to install it, and, you know, maintain it, that kind of stuff.  So, you know, a typical account would have a sales rep and a SE [software engineer] assigned to the account, so you're supposed to be, you know, maintaining the, the contact once, you know, the equipment is in place.
Speaker 1: Now, are you living with Vivian [Vivian Malone Jones]?
Speaker 2: I lived with Vivian when I first go to Atlanta, and then just until I saved up enough money.  Then I moved out, I got--I bought a condo in Atlanta on Peachtree Street.
Speaker 1: So you bought a condo.
Speaker 2: I bought a condo (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So that's very--now, that is very mature--
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: --right.  I mean, I bought something out of law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], but, I mean, that's pretty mature.
Speaker 2: No, I was twenty-three years old and a homeowner, and I had a condo in Atlanta that I loved, but I lived on my own, and it was my, you know, first time really being an adult.  And then, you know, I said, "I think I'm going to medical school."  And that's how I left and moved to New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So but did, you know, did you like Atlanta during that time period--
Speaker 2: I did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) because Atlanta was hopping in a lot of ways.
Speaker 2: Loved Atlanta.
Speaker 1: You know, who was--was Maynard Jackson, he was--I think he was mayor.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And then we had--you know, and it was a fun time to be a young adult.  And, particularly, when you have a job and you work, and it was after work, and happy hours, and Sysco's [Sysco Atlanta LLC], and Mr. B's [ph.].  It was all beautiful.  It was all beautiful.
Story_ID: 668669
Speaker 1: And then you decide then you're going to--and that's when you were saying when you're applying.  So who--where do you apply?  I mean I know, ultimately, where you go--
Speaker 2: Right. Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) but who were you applying to?
Speaker 2: You know, because I hadn't taken my MCATs, and I didn't know, you know, and, and, you know, again as fate would have it.  I only took them once, and most people would have taken them, kind of see where you are, and then adjust, and take them again.  Well, I took them, and I took them the last time you could take them before applying for that year.  So let's just say, I took them in August, and I had to apply in, you know, in September; whenever it was.  It was definitely in the fall.  So I didn't know what my MCAT scores were, and that was going to, you know, define the universe of where you could go to medical school.  So I applied to Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], and Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], and Harvard [Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts], and Columbia [Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York] was the late addition, because Terri [Terri L. Hill] made me do it, but Emory [Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia]--so I kind of had the gambit.  I had about ten schools that, you know, like, well, if I don't--oh, University of Alabama [University of Alabama School of Medicine, Birmingham, Alabama] was one of the schools I applied to, and because I knew that University of Alabama I would get preference, because I was a Alabama--former Alabama resident.  So that was sort of the universe, and I didn't know--'cause, again, you had to apply blind not knowing.  Imagine like trying to apply at law school, and you don't know generally what your LSATs are.  So I said, okay.  We'll roll the dice and see what we got.  And then the first school, and I got an interview at the University of Alabama because they were going to interview me anyway, 'cause I was an Alabama resident.  And I'll never forget.  It was in November.  I got there at that day, and you're all nervous, and in your little suit, and the woman from the admission's office, she says, "The MCAT scores just got back.  Would anybody who hasn't seen them, would you like to see your scores?"  And I'm thinking, do I really want to see my scores right before I'm about to do this interview, and so I was, like, I can't stand the suspense, so--and she showed me my MCAT scores, and I was, like, okay.  I'm not going to Alabama.  (Laughter) I think we'll go someplace else.  And so that sort of how I knew, and then I withdrew from the other places, because I said, you know what, it's going to be a little bit better.  And I ended up--I ended up--the decision came down to, you know, I had gotten in at Harvard, and then Terri made me apply to Columbia, and then ultimately, it was a choice between Harvard and Columbia, and I couldn't make myself go back to Boston [Massachusetts], you know.  It was like--I was, like, ugh.  And then, you know, I was a kid.  I needed financial aid, and then Harvard, you know how Harvard is, they didn't--they were very, let's just say, miserly on the financial aid.
Speaker 1: They were miserly?
Speaker 2: Very.  Very.  They--you know, Harvard they feel like they don't have to.  It's like why?  And, and Columbia did a much better job and for when you're on your own and you've got no other support.  I ended up, you know, choosing Columbia.  And like I said, and Terri was so adamant.  And it ended up being like the--you know--
Speaker 1: So talk about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) just outstanding decision.
Story_ID: 668670
Speaker 1: Talk about that.  I mean, what was outstanding?  Was it the, the curriculum, the environment, the support?
Speaker 2: Columbia [Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York] was--I think it was sort of all of the above.  It is a--it was--the medical school was a--had a rich, rich, rich teaching tradition.  And that's how, you know, that's how residents were evaluated.  You were evaluated not by how well you did, but how well your medical students were prepared.  And that was, that was how, you know, so you were a valuable part of the team, not like a pest, and they did a really good job of, of picking normal people 'cause medical students, you know, have a reputation for, you know, being a little nerdy and cutthroat.  Columbia had a theatre group.  That's probably the only--at the time, it was the only medical school, they had a theatre group called the Bard Hall Players.  And they just made an environment that was much more cooperative, you know.  And I think a lot of that had to do with the fact that there're pass, fail honors at Columbia.  And when you're not getting a grade.  You know, somebody's getting A, someone's getting a C, you work together.  And, like I said, and they just--they collected just a wonderful group of people.  I mean, I still, you know, am friends with and loved the people from my medical school class.  And a lot of people don't have that exper- didn't have that experience.  Anyway, so no.  And I felt I was very well trained, very well trained.
Speaker 1: So, you know, medical school training; I keep thinking it is so long, you know, but you had had that break.  So you have the four years of school, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then you have one year as an intern, two residence--
Speaker 2: Well, I have four years of residency total [at George Washington University Medical Center; George Washington University Hospital, Washington, D.C.].  So when I leave, when I leave New York [New York], and then the question was, now where am I going to go for, for residency and--
Speaker 1: But when did you decide the OB/GYN [obstetrics and gynecology]?  I mean, when, when did that come into?  Did you come in thinking--
Speaker 2: Probably somewhere--no, I didn't--no, I didn't come to that thinking that I was going to be an OB/GYN.  I thought I was going to be neurologist, actually.  That was my--because I--that was kind of my background, was in neuroscience, but when I really found out what neurologists did, that's why you--that's why it's really important to do these rotations.  I was, like, oh, I don't think I'm doing that.
Speaker 1: What didn't you like about it?
Speaker 2: Because it's a lot of--you make a cut in medical school.  Like, if you're a medicine person or a surgical person, you know, you make that cut.  And then there's another divide that you make, and then the divide is, do you want chronic illnesses or do you want an acute illness that you can fix and go on.  And I'm definitely an acute illness person.  And in neurology, it's stroke patients, it's whatever and it's sort of no matter what you do, they're either going to get better or they're not.  And it's not necessarily because of what you did.  And I was, like, and that was just, you know.  I need--I needed some closure on something.  And that's why--and OB/GYN is actually a happy field of medicine.  So, you know--or if it's not happy, I can make you happy.  You know, because we're going to fix that and move on.  And that's sort of how I gravitated to that field.
Speaker 1: So (cough) in your class, how many, how many males and females, how many blacks, how many whites, or Hispanic?  I mean, what is the break?
Speaker 2: It was about--we weren't 50/50 male, female ratio, but we were pretty close.  I want to say we're probably, you know, 40 percent women.  Columbia made a really strong effort for diversity, so we had, you know, a, a representative group.  I want to say of a hundred fifty people in a class, we probably had twenty, twenty-five, you know, people of color.  When I say, they were African Americans, as well as West Indians that kind of got lumped into that, but, you know, it was enough that you were, you were good, you know.  And you're in New York City, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Story_ID: 668671
Speaker 1: So--but you, do you have time to pursue New York City [New York, New York] when you're--
Speaker 2: I do, and the reason why I do is because it matters tremendously being twenty-five in medical school versus being twenty-two in medical school.  So I had adult friends, and I was so, you know, my getting out didn't--wasn't dependent upon meeting a friend at my medical school class and doing something with them and going in the city.  I knew grownups, so my, you know, even if you had a weekend a month, or, you know, a day it was easy, you know, to get out of this--you could leave because, you know, I had this other avenue that I think some of the other younger students didn't have.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So--but you're saying you just enjoyed it.  You enjoyed it--
Speaker 2: I did.  I did.
Speaker 1: You enjoyed the learning; you enjoyed the cadavers (laughter); you enjoyed--
Speaker 2: Okay.  I probably didn't enjoy that part.  That would be asking too much, but, but I did.  I, I thought it was, you know, I, I can't--I really can't say enough good things about that experience and how it prepares you, and what you learned, and how, you know, how competent and confident you feel after that experience, so--
Speaker 1: And so--so where do you decide to--can I ask another question?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Are there any blacks on faculty?
Speaker 2: At Columbia [Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York]?
Speaker 1: At Columbia at the time.
Speaker 2: There were--there was one that I'm thinking of.  There may be a couple in--maybe one or two per department, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember any of their names?
Speaker 2: Kenneth Forde was a surgeon at Columbia, and then actually, I never--Hilda Hutcherson, who is still in New York.  She was in OB/GYN [obstetrics and gynecology].  She was--I never rotated with her, but there would be, you know, again, there were probably a couple per department, I would imagine.  But you may or may not have contact with them, as far as attendings go, because the academic faculty was different than the attending staff, so--
Story_ID: 668672
Speaker 1: So when you--where do you decide you're going to do your, your residency then, right?  Is it resident?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Residency.  You know, my ultimate goal was to go back to Atlanta [Georgia].  That's always been my--all roads used to lead back to Atlanta.  At some point, I was trying to figure out how to get back there, but I used to come because I had my adult friends, I had a very good friend of mine, Bonnie Howard, who I met at IBM [International Business Machines Corporation].  She lived in Boston [Massachusetts], I lived in Atlanta, but they bring you back with the same group every time.  So she and I got to be very good friends, and she had moved to D.C. [Washington, D.C.], and Deedee [Deidre Hamlar] was here.  Deedee was in D.C. at the law school [Howard University School of Law], so I used to come down from New York [New York].  I'd take the train down on weekends and hang out with them.  And I said, you know, I really like D.C.  So I was, like, oh, maybe I'll go to D.C. and hang out for a little bit before I go back to Atlanta, because, you know, I thought once I got back to Atlanta, that's my final resting place.  So I--they, you know, were here.  They--and I said I got my two girls there, it's going to be great, we're going to hang out.  And Deedee and I actually even--Deedee and I got a place together.  We were going to room--Deedee and I were roommates, and when I tell you that I got--Bonnie got engaged right before I moved down.  And so she got engaged, got married, and moved back to Boston.  So by the time I got here, she was gone and Deedee and I were roommates.  And Deedee--Deedee, you know, fell in love with a guy who was in Boston, and so Deedee left me.  So I was, like, "I came to D.C. to be with you guys," and they left.  I mean, they were--neither one.  Deedee wasn't here six months before she left me.  Okay.  So now I'm sitting at this apartment.  I'm, like, this little place at Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.].  It was, like, Deedee left.  And that's when I met Eric [HistoryMaker Eric H. Holder, Jr.].  Probably, three months later, I met Eric.
Speaker 1: That is amazing.  So the (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Deedee is always in the middle of something, you know.  She made me leave [Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia], she made me come here.  She left me here (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So, so where's Penny Hill at this point too?  Is she--
Speaker 2: Terri Hill [Terri L. Hill]?
Speaker 1: Terri Hill, where is she?
Speaker 2: She's at, she's--she did her residency in Miami [University of Miami Leonard M. Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida].  I think she went to Jackson State [Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi].  She's in plastics, so she's--she's out of the picture at this point.
Story_ID: 668673
Speaker 1: Talk about your meeting of Eric [HistoryMaker Eric H. Holder, Jr.].
Speaker 2: We went to--there was a fundraiser for a group called, Concerned Black Men [Concerned Black Men of Washington, D.C.], and it was a mentoring group.  And we--it was a fundraiser.  And we used to have these, you know, when you're on call as a resident, so you'd have a couple weekends off.  You'd have a weekend a month where you were on call Friday, and you're on call again Saturday--I mean, Sunday.  So you got a Friday, Sunday call, this is Saturday night.  And a friend of mine said, "You know, do you want to go this party?"  And I'm like, "I got to go to work in the morning, and I was on work last night."  And anyway, he was persistent and said, "Why don't you go," and I went to the fundraiser, and that's where I met Eric.  A mutual friend of ours and another guy that he grew up with in East Elmhurst [Queens, New York] worked at G.W. [George Washington University Medical Center; George Washington University Hospital, Washington, D.C.], and so he knew me from G.W. and he knew Eric from East Elmhurst.  So he said, "You know, I got somebody I want you to meet," to Eric and that was that, that was that.
Speaker 1: And I read that Eric had had a break up, you know, recently, but he told--that he was attracted to you, but you're on rotation, and he was--
Speaker 2: I got to go to work the next day, you know.  So we're--there are--and I'm on a very terrible rotation where I'm on call like, you know, all the time.  And so we met, and he says--you know, and that was back in the day when you had to give people your phone number, and he said--he was asking.  I said, "Well, you know what?"  I said, "I'm listed."  I said, "I'm listed," and, you know, I said, "My name is--it's listed as S.D. Malone [HistoryMaker Dr. Sharon Malone].  You know, call information and get the number." And I said, "And if you can't remember my name between now and the time you get home, then, you know, don't bother."  You know, that was kind of how we laughed, and we laughed about it.  So he said, he went home, he wrote down real quick so he wouldn't remember--wouldn't forget (laughter).  And he had--and he--and we talked the next day, and, and he was leaving for Barbados, and I had this rotation.  And he said--and he was to go to Barbados because his mom [Miriam Yearwood Holder] had somebody that she was trying to fix him up with in Barbados.  So he and his best friend went down to Barbados on that Monday.  He was--wasn't that into it, because he was, like, why do I want to meet somebody in Barbados?  His friend ended up marrying her (laughter).
Speaker 1: His friend ended up marrying her (laughter)?
Speaker 2: So it didn't work out for Eric, you know.  And then Steve [ph.] and Paula [ph.] got married, and then, you know, they got married a little after we did.
Speaker 1: So you--it really, it clicked.  'Cause he would--you know, I read this whole thing he's coming to--he's bringing food to the hospital, and because it didn't take that long.  It's like a year and--
Speaker 2: We were married fourteen months after we met.  You know, and we were, you know, again, I was thirty-one.  I was thirty, and he was thirty-eight.  And, you know, it doesn't take, it doesn't take that long to figure things out, you know.
Speaker 1: So you--so what, what is your young life like, I mean, as newlyweds, or--'cause you're both--he's practicing, right?  He's a--
Speaker 2: He was a judge then.
Speaker 1: He was a judge, right.
Speaker 2: He was a judge then, and I was a resident, so, you know, we kind, as we say, we kind of eased into marriage because, you know, I wasn't really, you know, I was gone a lot and on call.  And so he would have very--he'd have time that he could, you know, he'd been a bachelor for a long time.  So now, you know, to go from that to having somebody around every day.  So we kind of worked into it, and by the time I finished residency, that was the first time.  Even then, you know, I still was on call when I took my job [at Foxhall OB/GYN Associates, Washington, D.C.].  So, you know, you, we worked, we worked through it.
Story_ID: 668674
Speaker 1: And how long did your residency last past the time--pa- you got married, how long is your residency?
Speaker 2: It was four years, so I actually met Eric [HistoryMaker Eric H. Holder, Jr.] in year one of my residency.
Speaker 1: So you had three more years?
Speaker 2: I had three more years.
Speaker 1: So, really, your, your--Maya [Maya Holder]--is it Maya?
Speaker 2: Maya, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Maya is born almost--
Speaker 2: After I'm done.  She, she was born--
Speaker 1: At the end of your residency?
Speaker 2: No, she was born after--she was my first year in private practice [at Foxhall OB/GYN Associates, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Okay.  So now how do you decide what your--who you're going to join with the practice.  I mean, how does that--are you recruited in, or--
Speaker 2: Fortunately, see I--being a resident at G.W. [George Washington University Medical Center; George Washington University Hospital, Washington, D.C.], and then you interact with the attending groups who bring patients to the hospital, so I--the group that I ended up joining, I actually knew them, had worked with them over the years.  So they knew what they were getting, and I knew what I was getting into.  And so we were--I took the job right out of residency, and I've been there now for twenty-two years, you know.  So they're, you know, they're my other family.
Speaker 1: Wow.  So what does life become, because you are--you're--so what is, what is your practice like, though?  That's what I'm saying, in those early years you're having to--what is it, 'cause you're delivering at this point, too (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.  Um-hm.  It was a little difficult, because, you know, because Eric and I got married, you know, again, it's not late by today's standards, but still I was thirty-one, and I didn't have my first child until we were--I was thirty-four, and so we weren't, you know, we kind of had an idea about how many children we were going to have, so you didn't have a whole lot of time to be dilly dallying on that.  So my kids were born pretty quickly.  They were every two years.  Our two daughters and a son [Eric H. Holder III], and they're born two years and two months apart.  So--and it was just at that time.  Just when our first daughter was born, that life took a turn for the--let's just say more interesting as far as Eric's career.  Because I thought, you know, when I met him, he was a judge and that's fairly--
Speaker 1: Steady.
Speaker 2: Stable life.  You know, you go to work, you come home.  And then when Maya [Maya Holder] was literally born--I think it was right after Maya was born, Eric was nominated to be U.S. attorney, and then his life took a different turn.  And then I had, you know, a baby, and I was on call.  So it was difficult.  It was, it was pretty difficult, and we had, you know, two more kids, and it kept--his job kept getting more demanding, because he was a U.S. attorney, and then was deputy.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Deputy.  And this is under--this is when things, because he was the first deputy.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: And it's under Janet Reno?
Speaker 2: Right.  And he was--and, again, his--
Speaker 1: Because those, those jobs are demanding.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Government service at that level--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --almost 24/7, you know.  I mean, you know, they demand a lot, so how are you, how are you, how are you handling that, because your--you have to be--and he even--he says in an inter- you know, that you were keeping everything together.
Speaker 2: Yeah, as we--we, we fondly refer to those years as the dark years (laughter).  It was, you know, I mean, three kids and call, and juggling.  You know, trying to figure out who's where (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know, because people--
Story_ID: 668675
Speaker 1: I've heard many--I don't have children, of course.  But I've heard many people say that it's--they're maybe okay with two, but the third one seems like it's six.
Speaker 2: Over the edge.  It takes you right over the edge.  And it, you know, we--it was, you know, again, it was, it was very challenging.  You know, because he [Malone's husband, HistoryMaker Eric H. Holder, Jr.] couldn't always predict when he was going to be able to come home, and I couldn't always predict when I had to leave.  So there was always this tension between when are you coming, you know.  I can't, you know, they're too little.  You can't leave them, and that, that whole juggling act (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, who was helping you out?
Speaker 2: I had a babysitter, and I still have the same babysitter.  I've had the same babysitter for twenty-one years.
Speaker 1: That's a blessing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And she was--but, you know, there's a part of me that--in particular in those years, she had a son.  So there was always that desire I couldn't keep her, because I'm, like, you've got to get to your son.  And that, you know, kind of wasn't fair, so there's an extra element in there where we couldn't, you know, I couldn't just say, "Well, you know, why don't you stay late today?"  Well, you know, you can't do that to people.  So that was how it worked.  But I, you know, loved her, trusted her.  My kids [Maya Holder, Brooke Holder and Eric H. Holder III] loved her, so, you know, even though a live in arrangement might have been better.  It just, you know, we worked it out.
Speaker 1: So you--so but any other support systems?
Speaker 2: No.  When we go--sometimes Eric's mom [Miriam Yearwood Holder] would come down, you know, and stay, and stay with the kids.  But, you know, a week here, a week there if we were going to do something.  But, now, it was just kind of cobbled together, because you don't have family.  You know, you don't have--
Speaker 1: And that's why I'm saying people with that family support (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Right.
Speaker 1: And no au pairs or anything--
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: --because some people did it with au pairs.  So what about schooling and things like that for the kids?  What are you--'cause this is--are they attending private school, or they--
Speaker 2: No, they went to a private preschool, but then when they started elementary school, they all went to our neighborhood public school, and they didn't switch over to private school until they were middle school age.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, that's smart.  Okay.  Yeah, because it's competitive here [Washington, D.C.], too.  That's the whole--so what, what are you--are you, Sharon [HistoryMaker Dr. Sharon Malone], I'm wanting to understand your development, because at this point when he starts rising up in that way, you have, you have obligations as his wife.  Even though you're, you know, have that professional career going on yourself.  So how are you handling all of that?
Speaker 2: You know what, it's, it's actually not as bad as one would think.  And the reason why I say that, it's a huge advantage having lived here, you know, before, you know, a lot of this stuff happened because, you know, I have a sense now of the things you should do, the things you think you need to do but you really don't.  You know, so I can sort of prioritize, you know, which things to do and you don't have to do everything, and, you know, when you're new to town, you don't know that.
Story_ID: 668676
Speaker 1: But how--when do you become part of D.C. [Washington, D.C.] society?  Is it immediately, because D.C. has--okay.  So--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So when do you, when do you (laughter)--okay.
Speaker 2: Are we?  Are we now (laughter)?
Speaker 1: You know what I'm saying.  You know, this, this, this town has its--
Speaker 2: You know, see, and I never really--you know, the reason I never really think of it that way, Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson], is because, you know what, I still have my same friends that I had when I first got here, you know.  So there's this core group of people that, you know, and like I said, Toni [Antoinette Cook Bush], you know.  We met Toni and Dwight [HistoryMaker Dwight Bush, Sr.] when our kids were one, you know.  We met their first birthday.  So, you know, the people who have always been meaningful to me, been part of my life, you know, were there from the very beginning.  And they're still there, you know.  So that, I think, helps more than anything to kind of stay grounded.  And you understand, you know, you understand you have temporary friends, you have, you know--
Speaker 1: New friends.
Speaker 2: --social friends who were, you know.  And, and, again, it's not good or bad.  It's just that you un- as long as you understand what it is, and you keep--and you have that core group of people that you can go back to when you're saying, you know.  My feelings will never be hurt when this is all over and I never hear from some of these people again, 'cause you know, I understand that.  You know, that that's how it works.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  It does.  That's true, but I don't know if that'll happen, but that is true.  So when you--what I want under- okay.  Is that the second tap or the first?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 668677
Speaker 1: So the dark years.  Are the dark years from '93 [1993] to 2000?
Speaker 2: What day is today?  No (laughter).  The dark years were from '93 [1993] when Maya [Maya Holder] was born until 2004.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When was--no, 2000, 2000, because that was when Bush [President George Walker Bush] was elected, and we had a brief period there where things were okay.
Speaker 1: Because he [Malone's husband, HistoryMaker Eric H. Holder, Jr.] was in--
Speaker 2: He was in private practice.
Speaker 1: He moved into private practice.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so--actually, then he's also starting to serve on some corporate boards now.  Are you--you're having to--you went like this, what does that mean?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Because I would call you.  I'll call you at home, and you would say, "Well, you know."  I don't know what you--or I would reach you--like I was reaching you at the doctor's office (laughter) okay.  "Hi, Sharon [HistoryMaker Dr. Sharon Malone]."  But at this point in time, though, you're really raising your kids and you're practicing?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Your practice [at Foxhall OB/GYN Associates, Washington, D.C.].  And do you--let me ask you this, do you become part of a community?  Now, your practice area, is it--it's a mixed group of people, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Are there any other African Americans in your--
Speaker 2: There's one other.  There's one woman.
Story_ID: 668678
Speaker 1: --Take care of your mother, take care of your daughter, you know.  And we have, you know, that's sort of, you know, how we work.  So it's a, it's a good community and continuity, I should say (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 1: --of care.
Speaker 2: --and, and this is the whole thing.  This is, I mean, doctors of all ilks sort of, but especially when you deliver, you know, or you're dealing with female problems, you're getting to know your patients a lot.  And so in many ways you almost are a therapist.
Speaker 1: (Nods head).
Speaker 2: You know, and that, you know, 'cause there are a lot of issues that are very important to people, you know.  And so what--do you find yourself good at that, you know, that are naturally gifted, maybe, in that area; and what are you--how does the practice differ from what you thought it would be in that way, and what are you learning about yourself, and how are you growing?
Speaker 1: You know what, I, I think the practice, you know, I--the good news is that, you know, I knew the people that I was going to work with [at Foxhall OB/GYN Associates, Washington, D.C.], you know.  I mean, I had worked with them for years.  So I had a very good sense of who they were, of, you know, the integrity with which they practice medicine, and I had a mentor and a role model who is the senior woman in our practice; Marilyn Jerome [Marilyn C. Jerome], who was fantastic.  And I looked at how she treated her patients.  I saw how her patients interacted with her, and that was someone that I always, you know, wanted to model my behavior after, because, you know, technically a lot of people can, you know, what you do is what you do.  But you're right.  This is a very personal experience, and you know what, you, you do, you develop relationships.  And I hope that I have become the kind of doctor that people feel that they can talk to.  I'm listening.  I'm not trying to hurry up and get out of the room, and because you're right.  There's a lot of it that's just--that's psychological stuff, you know.  You're dealing with women through not only good times but very difficult times, you know.  Some through loss, through menopause, through disappointments, and, you know, and that's, that's sort of my job.  And that's more important, and I think what--I think, you know, may be getting lost a little bit in the next generation, is that you have to understand the value of a therapeutic relationship.  You know, and laying on of hands and how it's important.  It's, you know, sometimes it's more important that I sit there and listen to you for five minutes than do a pap smear.  And, you know, so that's sort of how I've always started practice.  And I'm happy now that I've finally gotten to the point in my career where I can afford to do a little less.  I'm not trying to see forty patients in a day, because I want my patients to be able to have, you know, again the experience that I would want to have if I were going to see my doctor.
Speaker 2: I just--I'm sorry.  That's a lot of patients in a day.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Is that the normal scheduling of patients?
Speaker 1: You know, some practices, I mean, they are rolling, you know.  I don't.  I see, I see what I see, you know.  But, like I said, I don't want anyone to feel like they're rushed out the door.
Speaker 2: Okay.  But there are practices like that, but that is--that's like how many an hour?
Speaker 1: Oh, you see.  You know, you can see--some people see five an hour, you know.  They're slotted in and double booked in some, and it's sort of--and you can't really.  You can, you can get through the minimum, but you can't really--you know, no chatting.
Story_ID: 668679
Speaker 1: Where are you now, and how has the practice changed?  I mean, 'cause you say, "This is a great group [at Foxhall OB/GYN Associates, Washington, D.C.].  You know, we're a family.  You know, I'm seeing now kids that I brought into the world," but how has the practice of medicine changed?
Speaker 2: Well, what has changed now in terms of how we are--we, we started--when I started, I was one of five.  Now, we're ten--we're nine doctors and a nurse practitioner, so, you know, the practice has basically doubled in size in the years that I've been there.  And the difference is, is that as we've pulled back from G.W. [George Washington University Medical Center; George Washington University Hospital, Washington, D.C.], you don't--we don't--we're hiring people, really, that we don't really know, you know, for I'd say, for about the past, you know, five or six doctors.  You know, it's--we're interviewing people like you would interview, you know, they come, you look at their credentials and everything, but we don't know them.  You know, we haven't had the luxury of having to work with them, and I'd say more often than not it's worked out.  You know, that we've made some good decisions and we're pleased.  But it is a different feel, you know, because you're--and that's a different work environment than, you know, from someone who, you know, we, we were--you know, we've all, in the older group, we all delivered each other's children.  You know, we've watched--and again, I spend more time with them than any of us spend with our respective spouses, you know, because, you know, that's just--that's where we spend our days.
Speaker 1: So why did you pull back from G.W.?  Was that a business decision?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it--it came--we are now at Sibley, and that's a little bit more manageable, and our office is right next door to Sibley Hospital [Sibley Memorial Hospital, Washington, D.C.].
Story_ID: 668680
Speaker 1: So are you--so would you go back to medi- if you were staring your career again, would you--with medical school [Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York] and the practice [Foxhall OB/GYN Associates, Washington, D.C.] you've had, would you do exactly the same thing at this point?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Absolutely.  And I really feel sorry for people that, you know, that feel otherwise and there are a lot of doctors who were disaffected, and, you know, and, you know, complained a lot about it.  But, you know, at the end of the day, I love what I do.  You know, I think, you know, all you can ask of a job is that you get up and you do something that at the end of the day you feel like--you feel a sense of accomplishment, you know.  And I think I'm good at what I do, and the difference is, you know, as we say, the grass is always greener and I would almost make it a requirement that med- before you go to medical school, you should definitely take some time off, because for kids who have been on that treadmill, you know, they have been going at it since, you know, and it's worse now in terms of the level of competitiveness that sets in earlier and earlier.  I mean, you know, I was competing against myself, you know, when I was in junior high [Beecher Hills Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia] or high school [W.P. Davidson High School, Mobile, Alabama].  I, I didn't feel all that external pressure that kids feel.  And sometimes you just need to stop for a moment, and really ask yourself is this really what I want to do versus is this just the next thing in the list of things that I've got to get through.  Because if you get--you know, you approach it that way and you get to the end, and then you're, like, you know, you've worked so hard all your life and then it's not what you, you know, exactly what you thought it was going to be and you realize--again, imagine you made this decision when you were in the third grade, and you haven't reexamined it.  And then you're, you know, then you're unhappy.  I'm, you know, like I said, those, those three years I wouldn't go back and trade those for anything in the world.  So an answer to your question, yes, I'd do it again (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 668681
Speaker 1: So the, the changes, because in that period of time there have been changes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the practice of medicine and even the payment structure--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know.  And then you know, we've had all this whole debate on, you know, Obamacare [Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010], you know, and all of that.  I want to--how is, how did technology, how has it affected or what kind of technological advances have affected your career in the time period?  Have there been?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean, the way we practice obstetrics and gynecology, the gynecology piece of it is--has changed tremendously.  There is, I would say, by an order of, you know, magnitude of, you know, three or four, that, when I say we're due, probably, a quarter of the surgeries that used to be done, you know, twenty years ago.  Because, you know, we've gotten, you know, between the laparoscopic things you can do and alternatives, you know, that are short of, you know, hysterectomies; you do them so, so infrequently.  And that used to be your go to.  So, you know, the, the practice of gynecology has really become less a surgical field and more a primary care field.  You know, the gynecological piece of it, because, you know, like I said again, and some of that may have to do with having women in the field that you're not as likely to say, you know, to take someone's uterus out just because it's there.  I shouldn't say that.  That sounds sexist, but you know what I mean, there's a level that you understand things in a way that, perhaps, you wouldn't.  And if you have some alternatives, you know, you don't get there.  So it's changed, but I think it's changed for the better.  That may not be the case for obstetrics, because I think that in this, you know, litigious environment, you know, you're doing more and more and more.  You know, you really have reached the law of diminishing returns, in terms of the testing and the certainty, and the people.  You know, everybody wants to have a perfect baby, and we want you to have a perfect baby, but the reality is there are certain things that, you know, I don't have any control over.  And if you have a less than perfect baby, it's not necessarily because it's someone's fault that--or it's not even your fault.  Something you did or didn't do, or if I had done this.  And that's why I said, we have reached the point where it's gotten a little bit out of hand, because we spend more and more and more and more, and we're getting less and less and less benefit from the extra dollars that we spend (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Well, because people want to be able to predict--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --what their child will have.  There's also the whole thing of genetic testing, and, you know, can I, you know, thwart things or know if my baby is going to have, you know, some issues.  So those types of things is what, but--
Speaker 2: Which makes it stressful, you know.  You know, at the end of the day, every time something doesn't go perfectly, you know, you have to live with that cloud of suspicion.  Like, you know, well, then what happened?  What did you do?  What didn't you do?  And that's the immediate go to position instead of, you know, generations ago where, you know, you understood that hey things happen, you know.  You know, that, that people understood that not everything is going to come out perfectly and like I said it's sometimes it's because that's just the way it is.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, the other thing is the group that you're deal- you have a more educated population if you had that.  You know, they may not be thinking about (laughter).  They have other issues that they may not be, you know, thinking about those things.
Story_ID: 668682
Speaker 1: What about the economics, though, of, of medical practice, 'cause that's why some of the younger people weren't, and the--there there's also focus now, and I don't know if it affects your area so much on, you know, specialization.  You know, so I'd like you to comment about those.  What is the economics of, of practice and has that changed?  Because in the old days people were--I mean, in the black community, they were--if you were a doctor, you were, like, up here in stratosphere.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and economically, let's just say that I don't think the practice of medicine, you don't go into it because you think you're going to make a lot of money, you know.  Because--and you do okay, you know, I'm not belly aching about, you know, what doctors make, but it's not relatively speaking what it was a generation ago.  And I think those are people who are, like, those people who are caught in that transition are the ones that are most unhappy, because they used to make a lot of money and now they make just, you know, a little bit.  I shouldn't say little bit, but they make less.  And you, you do find that you have to work harder to even make the same amount.  And for a lot of people that is frustrating.  And that's how you get into this, you know, I got to see forty patients a day where I used to be able to see thirty.  Because the--everything in your practice goes up.  All of your expenses go up; your personnel, your rent, your electricity.  Everything goes up every year, and the reimbursements have been flat.  So you got two choices; you're either going to say well I'll just make less next year, or I'm going to see more patients and make up the difference; and that's what people are trying to do.  And that's why I think they're frustrated, because they're just overworked and trying to do too much in a too short a period of time.  But, you know, again if you approach it with the attitude, and fortunately I'm--I can do that.  I can say, "Well, this is how I want to practice."  Now, when it sorts out at the end, what I make is what I make.  I'm not mad at, about it, I'm not going to--but that's not my goal to say that I need to make X amount of dollars.  It's like, this is how I like my life to be, and how it sorts out is how it sorts out.  And like--and if you are, you know, again you understand how you're going to be very unhappy if you do it the other way around, because you're going to constantly worry about it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Plus, you're never going to catch up--
Speaker 2: Right
Speaker 1: --right now, 'cause it's not--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --things are not stable.
Story_ID: 668683
Speaker 1: The, the other question I had was, you know, you hear this whole thing about the medical malpractice.  Is that, you know, has, have you had those issues where people have sued you and you've had to, you know--
Speaker 2: You know, I am, I am very, very, very fortunate in the total now of twenty-six years I've been in the field of medicine, I've only been sued once unsuccessfully, and it was a case that was dismissed before it even got to court.  So it's traumatic, because I, you know, some of my associates have been.  I mean, it's, it's really traumatic.  And I think I've been, you know, I've been lucky, yes.  But I think it also matters too in terms of--you know, because I can't say that I've had situations where everything has gone perfectly.  I mean, ultimately, you know, everything's turned out.  But that's where, again, that relationship matters, you know.  That you know--if you know me, you know that I would do everything humanly possible to make the outcome good for you, and if it didn't, you have to trust that I didn't, you know, it wasn't because of carelessness, or error, or lack of any--.  And, again, that's what you get for, you know, for being in one place for that long.  My partner, the, the woman, the senior partner in our group [Foxhall OB/GYN Associates, Washington, D.C.]--now, I've been there for twenty-two years.  She's been there for thirty-two years.  She's never been sued in thirty-two years, and that's not an accident that she has not been sued in thirty-two years (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And her name?
Speaker 2: Marilyn Jerome [Marilyn C. Jerome].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Wow.  Okay.  So let's go to--I was just sort of wondering about that.  Okay.  Because, you know, there have been a lot of changes with, with--okay.
Story_ID: 668684
Speaker 1: So 2000--well, Eric's [HistoryMaker Eric. H. Holder, Jr.] in practice 'til he, he--you said 2000, but 2000 to 2008, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Those, you're saying your life is more--
Speaker 2: Little better.
Speaker 1: --you know, is better.  You know, he's, he's getting used to private practice, you know, 'cause he was with the law firm [Covington and Burling LLP, Washington, D.C.], and that's after, you know, being a judge and also being on the--I mean, being on the bench [Superior Court of the District of Columbia] and then, you know, being in government service.  So when, when does the discussion start occurring about him, you know, being--I mean, being the first (laughter) black U.S. attorney general?  When does that discussion come into--?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's a--that, that decision didn't come until the very, very end of the, the whole election cycle in 2008, because, you know, there was, there were a lot of improbabilities before that.  So it's certainly not anything that you could plan for or even aspire to.  I think Eric was drawn to Barak Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] because he believed in who he was and his message.  And he saw something, because, you know, supporting Barak Obama when Eric supported him, and he was pretty early on in the process, was not--that wasn't the safe bet to make at that point.  But, you know, you know Eric says, "Well, you know, you know, I like this guy.  You know, I think he's got something here and whatever."  And when he signed on and so I say that to say at the very beginning, I don't--I wasn't totally sure that this was ever going to work out.  You know, you do what you do--
Speaker 1: Well, it's mostly--even the people.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: You know, you just say, you know, you do, you go with what your heart and your gut tells you, and however it works out, is how it works out.  So I say that to say, we weren't--we were nowhere thinking about, you know, what is this going to mean for you in terms of your future in government, because Eric had made me a promise when he left the last time.  You know, that he was, he was done.  I said, "Really, we're done?"  He said, "I'm done."  So, you know, that was not really anything that I was thinking about even if, you know, Barak Obama were to win, I was not thinking about Eric going back into government.  So that was a little bit of a surprise.  So--but it wasn't until--you know, and again, and you can't start counting chickens anyway before they hatch, and, and even after the president was elected, you know, there was no, you know, I mean who knew that then President elect Obama would even pick him, you know, or that he was being considered.  So some of that that is sort of, you know, it's just how it falls out.  And I remember there, there was a running joke.  I used to always get blamed for everything that Eric didn't want to do.  You know, he would say, "Oh, my wife won't let me.  Oh, my wife won't let me."  I said, "Oh, if that were true."  But that was the--there was always a lot of conversation before that about Eric running for mayor, and on that, I can honestly say, I said, "No.  That, you know, I will not.  You know, or you can run."  And that was a running joke, you can run as a single guy.  How about that.  So when the president offered--he was considering, you know, and offered Eric the job as attorney general, because that was the running narrative that, you know, you got to ask my wife, which is the big joke.  President Obama said--you know, he spoke to Eric and then he said, "Well, can I speak to Sharon [HistoryMaker Dr. Sharon Malone]?"  So he says, yeah.  So he gets on.  It was just a, you know, funny aside.  He was saying, "I just want to know is it okay with you, and I said, you know, 'Of course.'"  What can I say, you know.  This is an opportunity of a lifetime in, you know, in an administration of a lifetime.  You'd be crazy not to do it.
Story_ID: 668685
Speaker 1: And it's been--I mean, he really is the, I want to say, in terms of--I don't know if this is right to say, but he is the highest--I think of him as the highest ranking, you know.  I mean, it's a very significant position to have, and it's a historic position to have.  And, you know, his predecessor, Janet Reno, that that was--there was a lot of focus on her, and he was her deputy and now he's not coming into a, an organization he doesn't know, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, that's what I--that's also, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, he's eminently qualified, you know, for the position.  So that puts both of you on a new playing field, and, and so can you--how have the last five, five and a half years, you know, been?  Because there was some--you know, he's had I wouldn't say missteps but there's been controversy, you know, Guantanamo Bay [Cuba].  I mean, you know, the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Been all kinds of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wish I could say all of it was, like, smooth sailing but it hasn't been.  But I've learned, and I'm a little better at it this time around than even the last time around, because--I mean, it will, it will wear you down if you, if you took everything to heart.  And what I've learned over the years in having--even having weathered the, the experiences when he was deputy and the criticisms that came about after that.  I really have learned that no matter how difficult whatever it is you're going through, it will be over and people forget it.  And they forget it here [Washington, D.C.], you know, more quickly than you would think.  Because when you're in the middle of it, you think, oh, my god this is awful.  How do you even get your head--you know, get your head around this, and how, you know, I'll never be able to walk out the door, and then it's, it's just a miracle.  It just goes away, and--so I've not allowed myself to, to get as worked up about things this time.  You know, at the end of the day, as long as--and I think that's what kept Eric [HistoryMaker Eric H. Holder, Jr.] through this.  As long as he's continued to have the confidence of the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], who is his boss, there are certain people who are--that's their job to criticize, and I don't think that there's been ever any point in which he did not feel as if he had the confidence of the president, and the support of the president.  And so it made it a little more bearable.
Story_ID: 668686
Speaker 1: But your role also had to change, though, this time around, right?  At--
Speaker 2: A little (laughter), a little.
Speaker 1: Well, I mean, he's [Malone's husband, HistoryMaker Eric H. Holder, Jr.] head of a major department [U.S. Department of Justice], and so there--aren't there--what are the new obligations that came with it?  Sharon [HistoryMaker Dr. Sharon Malone], why are you looking (laughter)?  Did I ask a wrong question?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No.  No.  No.  No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Again, it's--I, I wish I could tell you that there was anything in particular that was specific.  I'm so, you know, I'm a little bit (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean, we see you on TV, you know, behind, you know, at important events and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  You know, and some of it it's fun, you know.  I mean, again, some of its fun.  Some of it's, you know, I'd probably rather be doing something else on a Tuesday night, but there's a--and that's what I have--that's what I take from this experience is that, you know what, I'm that little girl from 760 St. Anthony Street [Mobile, Alabama], and I get to do some things and be some places that I could not have even imagined.  And, you know what, and when I sit there and I say, you know, I'll look around.  I look at the company I'm in, and, you know, I feel like for the few things that I have to do that I really don't want to do, I have no right to complain.  I'm, you know, I'm good.  There's, there's a lot of stuff that, you know, that comes with the territory.  You smile, you, you keep going, and like I said, at the end of the day you just say, I'm really, really blessed to be here.
Speaker 1: So what, what of the last five and a half years, what has concerned that happened or, you know, was an issue that concerned you the most?
Speaker 2: You know, I think the whole, the whole Fast and Furious episode that, that led up to the contempt vote.  That was difficult, because I think one of those things, unlike usual Washington [D.C.], you know, tempest in a tea pot.  That one went on for a long time.  You know, a long time.  And, you know, and just when you would think it was dying down it would come back up again.  And that was, you know--that's, that's tough, you know.  And when you have kids, your kids know what's going on.  They see it, and, you know, and as a matter of fact, that, that day that that contempt vote, we were taking our daughter [Maya Holder] to New Orleans [Louisiana] for, you know, her college orientation [at Tulane University].  And, you know, and I'm sitting there thinking, you know, you get this sick feeling in the pit of your stomach, because, you know, I know that when I'm sitting there trying to listen to somebody talk about, you know, resident housing or something like that, that the vote was going on.  And I just had to see it, and it was just one of those days where, you know, was, wasn't exactly, you know, a bright day.  And I felt like it marred something that should have been a happy day.  You know, for us and our first daughter is, you know, getting ready to go to college and, you know, and we're having to deal with this.  And if I had to say anything that would be difficult, it's trying to get to the point in life where you realize that it--as a wife, as a mother, you realize that there are things that are going on in the world that supersede whatever your issue is for the day.  So you've got to learn and some days I'm better at it than others.  That some days, I want to say, I just needed to be about this, or the trash, or the whatever.  Whatever is going on, and, you know, and you've got to learn to--that, you know, the events of the day may affect your day, you know.  And not always in a good way.
Story_ID: 668687
Speaker 1: 'Cause it's just a higher playing field on a lot of different issues (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what you do and say.  Were y- had you been good about that?  You know, like, you're under more a microscope, what you do--why are you looking at me?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What you do and say can affect him.  You have to be really--way more careful.  I think, you know, and maybe you had that before, but, you know, this is--this is more, you know, because it's more of a contentious situation than before.  There were other issues, but he wasn't in the--you know, I'm talking about this administration [of HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] versus the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] administration.  This is a more contentious (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: --situation.
Speaker 2: Right.  It's a lot of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It looks like it's going to be, maybe, I don't know.  It looks like it's going to continue to the end.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  You know what, I have always been by nature a relatively private person, so it's not very hard for me to not--what should I say?  To not--
Speaker 1: Disclose it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Because that's not, you know.  And in a lot of respects, that's what I do for a living.  I listen to things all day, and I hear things, and I say things, or whatever that when I leave, it's done.  It's not be discussed again.  So, you know what, I think that hearing sometimes some of the things that I hear, you know, and just in the course of, you know, of Eric [HistoryMaker Eric H. Holder, Jr.] coming home and I know the things that he's dealing with.  You know, I, I pretty much have got that part, you know, figured out.  And I think it does help, too, to know who the people are that you could trust.  Even if I had to say something.  You know, if I had--you know, the reason why it doesn't, you know, you say, well, you know, you know, it doesn't get out of how I'm feeling or what I said, or anything.  You know, I have that same core group of friends and confidences that I've had for thirty years.  So, you know, that's why I said I think it makes it a little easier.  I think it's a lonely existence if you come to this town [Washington, D.C.] and you don't have that.
Speaker 1: It can be very lonely.  Well, you already knew the town.  See that's the other thing.  You knew the town.  The Chicagoans were learning the town.  I mean, that's the other part of it, and you probably have been able to be helpful in some way.  That's all I'm saying.  Okay.
Story_ID: 668688
Speaker 1: Everybody needs a vacation right about now.  Let me tell you.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  It's 'cause it's big issues, big people.  I mean, it's a worldly thing.  I mean, it's--
Speaker 1: And there--and there's more scrutiny.  I mean, and I say that it's more scrutiny because of who's in this administration, and there's also more scrutiny because there's just more scrutiny for everybody.  I mean, you know, you've got, you know, between, you know, bloggers, and news cycles, and cable, and whatever, and people with an iPhone.  I mean, there's just a lot.  There're many, many more opportunities (laughter), you know, for someone to catch a mishap than before.  You know, and I feel terrible.  I'm, like, you know, back in the old days it just used to be your word against mine.  Now, they're like let's go to the videotape every time somebody says something, you know.  So, yes, so it's a--you know, it's a, it's a relatively difficult balancing act.  But, you know, we've got it.
Speaker 2: I think you got it, Sharon [HistoryMaker Dr. Sharon Malone].  Okay.  But during this time, the thing that I wanted to--let me ask you before I go, because I just have--is there anything else about this period that you would like to talk about at all?  And that--because I want to--what I want to go to is 'Slavery by Another Name' ['Slavery by Another Name: The Re-Enslavement of Black Americans from the Civil War to World War II,' Douglas A. Blackmon].  And your work, you know, and, and genealogy that is sort of come in at another dimension, and knowledge about one's self, but is there anything else that you would like to, to say?
Speaker 1: You know, I guess, what I would, you know, like for, I guess, to be known is, like, I understand--I have a particular vantage point, you know.  In that I've seen, you know, even though I can't say, you know, whether or not I've participated in history.  I've seen a lot of history around, happen around me, and that--and, the, the--again, the ironies of, of how things play out, you know, even as we tie together, you know, my sister [Vivian Malone Jones] and Eric [HistoryMaker Eric H. Holder, Jr.].  I mean, just the, you know, fifty years ago, you know, it took the attorney general [Robert F. Kennedy] and the president of the United States [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] to get my sister to school [University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, Alabama].  It took, you know, the president and the attorney general to intervene on issue of voting rights that were, you know, that were being assaulted and had been assaulted for a hundred years.  And we've come forward fifty years, and now we have an African American president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], African American attorney general who are, in a lot of ways, still confronting those same issues.  And, you know, and you--I look at that and I, I look at those two book ends, you know, of those fifty years, and, you know, in some ways, you know, things have changed tremendously and in some ways as the French say, "Plus ca change."  There are some of the same issues we're still grappling with.
Story_ID: 668689
Speaker 1: During this time period, you know, there was your--how, how did your involvement with 'Slavery by Another Name' ['Slavery by Another Name: The Re-Enslavement of Black Americans from the Civil War to World War II,' Douglas A. Blackmon] come, come into being?  You know, because, you know, before this interview began you were showing me your family chart, and there's just--I mean, there are a lot of things that are, you know, are very profound from a discovery of one's background and roots in the African American experience.  You know, that you were showing me, and so, you know, during this period we're seeing more and more things, you know, happening.  There'll be a black museum [National Museum of African American History and Culture] opening up around the Mall [National Mall, Washington, D.C.].  You know, it's part of the Smithsonian [Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.] which seems, you know, that seems even odd that it would be in this administration.  You know, because no one could have seen that.  He may not have won a second term.  (Laughter) (Unclear).  So that's what, but we talked about that.  How did, how did your, how did that involvement happen?  Who, you know, Blackmon had written the book.
Speaker 2: Do you mind if we take just a break.  I just want to go to the bathroom.
Speaker 1: Sure.  Okay.
Speaker 2: I will be right back, and then I'll come--
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: --we'll come say for another how did I get involved.  'Slavery by Another Name' is one of those books when I read it, it changed my life, you know.  I had the, I had the privilege of hearing Doug Blackmon [Douglas A. Blackmon] speak.  Dear friend of mine, [HistoryMaker] Janet Langhart Cohen had this--she had a race reconciliation conference which was amazing.  She had speakers come and talk about various issues, and--
Speaker 1: What year is this?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: This would have been 2007.  And I'm--the reason why I'm pretty sure it was 2007, because it was before the president [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] was elected, and she, you know, was--she and her husband, Secretary Cohen [William Cohen], had these conferences and they would bring together people.  And it's all about fostering dialogue, you know, on issues of race.  Doug Blackmon had just written his book, 'Slavery by Another Name.'  I had never heard of it, but he was one of the speakers.  And he spoke for about fifteen, twenty minutes or whatever, and I was fascinated.  And being a child of the South, and not particularly, you know, strong on history, because I was--that wasn't my thing.  To hear the story about, you know, post--the post-Reconstruction era in the South and what happened to people, and, you know, because no one really understood.  You kind of--you got slavery.  Okay.  That happened.  Even though you didn't understand it in its full horror, but you knew slavery happened.  You knew there were elected officials after re- you know, right at Reconstruction.  And then you figure, how--all right.  How did that happen?  Like how did we lose our right to vote?  You know, how did the, you know, how did we end up in the position that we're in a hundred years after emancipation.  And his book sort of gives you the groundwork for what happened in the South, and how people were able to--their, their rights were taken away.  And it--when I say it was life changing.  It was life changing.  It was, like, who--you know, I can't believe I didn't know this.  And, again, it falls into that category of things that my parents [Bertha Davis Malone and Willie Malone] lived through, but had never spoken to me about.  So that's also one of things that sort of, you know, fueled my passion for the genealogy, and then I got a chance to meet Doug.  I told Janet afterward.  I said, "I've got to meet him."  I said, "This is just amazing, you know."  And Doug and I struck up a friendship throughout the years.  His book ended up winning the Pulitzer [Pulitzer Prize], and I was very proud.  And I--you know, and I always tease everybody I know.  I said, "If anybody I know--if you--if anybody I know ever writes a book," I said, "I will do everything."  I said, "That will--that's my new Christmas present for the next hundred people."  I'm like, you know.  So I was, I was very proud of him, and, and everybody who read the book, they kind of had the same, you know, reaction.  "Wow, how did I not know this?  How did I not know this?"  So in the process of working with him, and, and it happened at a time when I was actually doing the genealogy for my family, and then I came, came upon this story about my uncle [Henry Malone].  Because very--a lot of what he writes about happens in Alabama, and you say to yourself, I couldn't have possibl- you know, my family couldn't have possibly grown up where they did in the black belt.  And to either--even if they weren't personally involved, they had to know someone that was, that was caught up in the system.  And so that's how I unearthed the story.
Story_ID: 668690
Speaker 1: But how did you unearth the story?  That's what--okay.  So I understa- is it through genea- so you, you described that, you know, you knew your uncle.  He was crotchety or--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But how do you unearth the story?
Speaker 2: Because, you know, it, it requires a little detective work, and my uncle, you know--this is my dad's older brother.  So there was this family story about Uncle Henry [Henry Malone], and you know, how you--you always hear it, but you--it doesn't make any sense to you.  Uncle Henry--so when you're talking about now, it can't be any more than the 1920s, early 1920s.  And Uncle Henry used to always tell his grandkids and talk about--he said, that he had, that he had to serve a year and a day; a year and a day.  And, you know, and we never understood.  It was, like, that was a story I didn't hear probably until, you know, ten years ago.  And it never dawned on me.  When you serve a year and a day, and it's 1920 and you're black in Alabama.  Where do you go?  You know, there is no, there is no prison.  There were no long term prison facilities for anybody to be put away.  You have jail, and then from jail, from there you were parceled out to, you know, work.  You were on a farm, you're on a chain gang.  You were doing something, but you were not sitting around lifting weights in prison.  And that's when the first time, you know, I had that aha moment.  It's like, that explains a lot of Uncle Henry's behavior.  You know, the fact that, you know, that he drank.  That he was churlish and he was whatever.  And he was just a, you know, and that's the only man I knew.  Now, if you can imagine.  I only knew my dad [Willie Malone] as an old man.  I knew my dad's older brother as a very old man, and I, I never understood him.  Never understood him.  And, you know, when I found that story, I--it made a little bit more sense to me.
Speaker 1: So you were actually interviewed (cough), you know, for--so after Doug [Douglas A. Blackmon]--I'm sorry, did the book ['Slavery by Another Name: The Re-Enslavement of Black Americans from the Civil War to World War II'] and then you were actually--then there was the documentary ['Slavery by Another Name'].
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: And so can you talk about that then?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The documentary actually came up, probably three years--three or four years after the--after he wrote the book.  So he and I had been in contact, you know, for all that time.  And every time I would find something out about my family history, you know, Doug and I would talk about it.  He's a fascinating guy.  So, and again, that's how we were in lockstep.  And then when he was going back to try to find people, he said, "Would you mind telling your story, you know, about your uncle?"  And that's how I got into that.  But that was a good--a good three years after we'd established contact, and I read his book.
Story_ID: 668691
Speaker 1: But can you talk about the significance of 'Slavery by Another Name' ['Slavery by Another Name: The Re-Enslavement of Black Americans from the Civil War to World War II,' Douglas A. Blackmon].  I mean, just for people who may be listening to the interview, because this was--people, really this is a period of history that had not been looked at.  And where the National Archives [National Archives and Records Administration] played a big role in Doug's [Douglas A. Blackmon], you know, research.  I don't know--I don't know if I remember how he had come to it, because he's a reporter, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  He was, actually, a reporter for The Wall Street Journal.  And he said initially it started out as a story he was doing, and basically it was sort of a story about reparations, because he was saying, you know, what are the ties of various business entities and corporations, or whatever and how they made their money during this period in the post-Reconstruction era.  So there were things like looking at U.S. Steel [United States Steel Corporation], I forget that was one of the companies, and some of the--and that's how when he started doing that just as an investigative reporter, he found these stories about how they used what was really slave labor.  These were free people who were caught up in the system, and basically sold into peonage in the State of Alabama, Mississippi, Florida, Georgia.  Alabama did it the longest and had the most extensive system, but this is how these corporations were able to fight unions, because, you know, they had a steady supply of cheap to free labor in the South.  So coal mines, iron--the, the iron, iron ore places.  All these places the iron--the steel mills.  That's what I was trying to say.  The steel mills in Birmingham [Alabama] and all of that were--and then the more he got into it, the more he uncovered about what was going on.  And, and the fascinating thing to me, and again, it's the assumption that we make: because we don't know it, it's unknowable.  Is that there's tons of documentation about what they did.  About court cases, you know, court records.  You know, you know, you don't have to sort of draw conclusions about, you know, from well, this is what it looks like.  Maybe this happened.  You have actual testimony.  You have actual documents about, you know, what went on in these places.  So, you know, and it grew from that.  That's how he started and then from that, as he did his investigation, it grew into the whole book about how basically slavery existed in the South from, you know, until the 1940s.  It went, you know, straight through from, you know, right after the slaves were freed.  The enactment of the Black Codes until--and the pig laws, which were the other ones that governed every aspect of black behavior.  And any infraction whatsoever could result in you being captured and sold again into servitude for major corporations and, and agriculture.
Speaker 1: So that, that really and a lot of the people were writing letters to the government.  That's what he brought out--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --the--you know, this was not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --like people were not sitting still, but they were, like, you know, no one's listening.  I can't get any answer, person is got, you know.  Please--
Speaker 2: They wrote to the president, they wrote to the attorney general.  I mean, they were, there were actual court cases, people testifying and, and nothing happened.  That's the, that's the unfortunate thing about it.  And I think, again, it, it speaks to why America needs to understand that you, you say, "Well, why aren't black people farther along?"  And you are, "Oh, that was a long time ago.  That was a hundred years ago."  Well, the reality, it wasn't a hundred years ago.  And in many instances, it wasn't even fifty years ago about what was going on in the South.  And, and, you know, if you understand that, the nearness of it all to our history, then you can, you know, you look at events of today and understand, you know, why issues like affirmative action matter and, no, that wasn't generations ago.  And you had a hundred years to catch up, what's your problem?  You know, you understand it.  Now, whether you agree with it or not, you know, in terms of what the outcome or what the remedy ought to be.  You need to at least understand what the facts are--
Speaker 1: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) before you decide.
Speaker 1: And the other thing I think is important is that there was action.  People were really doing whatever they could to be heard, which is in some part people think we're doc- you know, they're--there was that comment that came out where the guy said, "Well I never,"  Cohen [Richard Cohen] in The Washington Post.  "I didn't know that blacks were not happy."  You know, that they didn't mind being slaves or, you know, things (laughter) okay recently, last year.  But I'm saying that this is--these are things are important for-and, and the fact that there is documents that just maybe need to be explored so (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So that, so that--
Story_ID: 668692
Speaker 1: I wanted you to talk about your discovery of genealogy and what is at this point in your life, you know, you are discovering things about your family.  Now, you had come from a historic family, but Vivian [Vivian Malone Jones] was--you knew her as someone celebrated and all of that.  I mean, she, [HistoryMaker] Charlayne Hunter-Gault.  You know, the people, the Little Rock Nine.  You know, she was in that area of people who, you know, integrated.  But she was your oldest, older sister, right?  And--so I'm just trying to understand where you--where, where you are right now in this, because you've taken on the research for your family in sort of a major way.  And had some major finds.
Speaker 2: Right.  You know, in, in a lot of respects, all of us, I, I think that, you know, innately so and some of us are just more in tune with that feeling than others.  Everybody wants to know who they are and where they came from.  And you know, and just that ability to be able to connect to those people who came before, because we--and, it sounds trite but it's true.  We owe them an enormous debt of gratitude, because it is unimaginable to me to live a life and never have any expectation of being free.  But to raise children and to see that these were--it, it was comforting not to believe the narrative about slaves and how they were, you know, torn apart and, you know, and this one went here and that one there, whatever.  But to know that I come from a legacy of six generations of intact families of mothers, and fathers, and children, and people who grew up around their grandparents and their--I mean, that was, that's very comforting to me, you know.  And it also belies this notion that, you know, again, that the, that the black family was something that was an illusion.  It didn't exist, and it did.  And, you know, and like I said, and I, I think this is, you know, and that's what fuels me really forward is to give some voice and to pay homage to those people who managed to keep the faith and have hope, and raise children that wanted to aspire to be a little bit better and hope that something might one day change.  I mean, to me that's truly courageous, you know.  That you can't even see your way clear and you believe it.  So that's why I do what I do.
Story_ID: 668693
Speaker 1: So, you know, and I was just thinking and then I want to go on to our, our legacy question.  But, you know, the thing that's striking about the statement you just made and the--your narrative.  Your own narrative is that there were times when you were lonely and felt, you know, you were almost singular and here you have found this, like, six generations of strong family, historic family, you know, history all around; major history.  That is--I mean, anyway, sorry.  Yes.  That's, you know, 'cause it was.  So given that I want to ask you what you want your legacy to be, that's what I want.  I want to ask you that.
Speaker 2: You know what, I think I would like to leave with my children [Maya Holder, Brooke Holder and Eric H. Holder III] and hopefully my grandchildren, I want them to continue this, this quest.  And for them to know their people and know their history.  I want them to understand the amazing people from which we've come--from all of us.  Because to me the remarkable thing is that, you know, that more people, more African Americans didn't fall into despair, you know.  And when you understand that, you know, and like I said for my kids and for their kids, and to think, you know, you are not a fluke, you were not, you know, someone who is inconsequential in this world.  Look at the people from which you've come.  And everybody that I can, you know, that I can bring along and get them to understand that, and not just about my family but the same is true about their families.  And, you know, and that's why I say, I encourage people all the time.  I say, "If you've got anybody.  If you've got an uncle, a grandmother, someone," I say, "go make them tell you their stories, because, again, in a minute it's going to be lost."  And, you know what, and you'd be surprised what little bit here, and there, and whatever you can connect and, and get this rich history.
Speaker 1: So, Sharon [HistoryMaker Dr. Sharon Malone], the other thing is what--now, Vivian [Vivian Malone Jones], she died in 19--two thousand--
Speaker 2: Five [2005].
Speaker 1: Five [2005].  So she did--did she know the history you found?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So--oh, my--can you imagine how she would have felt?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean, to--for her to--I mean, none of us knew anything beyond our grandparents, you know.  You know, again, it just even, you know, why it makes sense to me this, going down this blind alley about looking or this slave owning Malones when I--imagine, when I found out that there were none.  My grandfather [Bill Malone] just made it up.  I'm glad he did, actually, because I kind of like Malone, but, but there was no--for, for her to have known that and to know my mother's [Bertha Davis Malone] people and who they were and what--because it's easier to explain Vivian.  Because the same thing, she's not a one off, she's not someone who just, isn't that amazing that she had that much courage.  She came from the entire line of people who were that courageous.
Speaker 1: That courage played a major role in educating black people from Alabama.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, that they were the leaders, and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in making that happen as people were aspiring to escape the vestiges of slavery in that way.  So that's--
Story_ID: 668694
Speaker 1: I want to ask you then what do you see as the legacy of our generation, and what do you think at the end of the day, people are going to say about this generation of African Americans at the end of the day.  Because, you know, the generation--Vivian [Malone's sister, Vivian Malone Jones] was a different generation.
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, that's a difficult question, because you know what it does worry me in terms of what are we, you know, what are we leaving?  I, I say this when I look at my children [Maya Holder, Brooke Holder and Eric H. Holder III], and (pause) maybe they will grow up and they will be like all of us.  You'll see the world a little bit differently at forty than you see it at twenty.  But I, you know, the reason why I, I worry and I want them to know this, and whether they take it in now or take it in later, is to understand the sense of belonging, you know.  And you--again, you are not just an individual, you know, that collectively we, you know, we move forward or we move back.  And I'm not sure that that, that's sense or that message is, is being brought forward.  And for--in order for that to happen, then we've got to do a better job.  And I say we, in terms of educating our children.  So that's, you know, that's really what I hope.  I mean, I think that they don't think of the world as, as with the limitations that we thought of it, you know.  But I want them to understand what it took for you to get to that point to have that perspective on the world, you know.  And, you know, and that's why we got to continue to fight the fight, you know, for them to be aware.  I, you know, I want them to be aware, and I want the general population to be aware.  That's why I love, you know, 'Slavery by Another Name' ['Slavery by Another Name: The Re-Enslavement of Black Americans from the Civil War to World War II,' Douglas A. Blackmon].  I love '12 Years a Slave' because it's not just some history that we have to learn, you know.  Our legacy ought to be that we are the people who bring these stories to light and have our children take them forward.
Speaker 1: I don't have any--any other things you want to say? Otherwise, we're okay.
Speaker 2: I'm good.
Speaker 1: Thank you. Wow (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Thank you.
Story_ID: 668695
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is a picture that was taken in the summer of 2011.  This was taken at the vice president's residence, and to the left is vice president, Joe Biden.  I am next to him; my husband, Eric Holder [HistoryMaker Eric H. Holder, Jr.]; and Dr. Jill Biden is to the right.
Speaker 2: This picture was taken in the, I think, it was called the book room at the White House [Washington, D.C.].  This was the state dinner for the British prime minister.
Speaker 1: That's a beautiful dress.  That's what Eric is saying, too.  You look stunning there (unclear).
Speaker 2: Okay.  This picture is probably circa 1920s.  This is my father on the left, Willie Malone; and on the right, is his older brother, Henry Malone; and you can see from this picture, that was about indicative of their personalities.  That was my dad, always in a suit and tie, and that would be rough and tumble, Uncle Henry, on the right.
Speaker 1: So where did you find this picture?
Speaker 2: That picture?  It's at the LBJ Library [Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum, Austin, Texas].
Speaker 1: No, this one.
Speaker 2: Oh, that.  My--one of my cousins had that picture.
Speaker 1: Wow.  So wait a minute, this--
Speaker 2: That's Uncle Henry.  That's, that's my dad.
Speaker 1: That's your dad, and this is Uncle--
Speaker 2: That's Uncle Henry.
Speaker 1: A year and a day.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Yeah, I don't know everybody on the picture, but I can tell you.  Okay.  This picture was in August of 1965, and this is the signing ceremony for the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965].  And this is in the [U.S.] Capitol Rotunda.  That's President Johnson to the left; in the center, would be Reverend Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]; to the right, the woman would be Patricia Harris [Patricia Roberts Harris].  I don't know the next lady, but on the far right would be my sister, Vivian Malone.
Speaker 1: And this is a different view of that same picture.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is August 1965 at the signing ceremony of the Voting Rights Act, and to the left is President Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson]; to the far right will be my sister, Vivian Malone.
Speaker 1: This picture was taken at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame [Cleveland, Ohio] induction ceremony for Aretha Franklin.  To the left is my husband, Eric Holder; to his right would be Aretha Franklin--sorry that's to his left; isn't it?  Aretha Franklin, [HistoryMaker] Cissy Houston, and that's me, Sharon Malone [HistoryMaker Dr. Sharon Malone].
Speaker 2: This is a photograph that was taken on June 11th, 1963.  It was taken just after the successful enrollment of Vivian Malone and James Hood at the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama], and this picture was taken by Chris McNair of Birmingham, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This picture was taken in the week before the integration of the University of Alabama; there's James Hood and my sister, Vivian Malone; and again, this is a photograph that was taken and was in the office of Mr. Chris McNair.
Speaker 2: Now, which--I would like to get this even though--okay.  Oops, sorry.  So you were in the presidential--you were in the jet?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: You were in the jet.
Speaker 1: Well, you know what, I have something to show you that I was in the jet--
Speaker 2: Wait, which one, Sharon?
Speaker 1: --the jet.
Speaker 2: Which--should I show this one?  Or which one?
Speaker 1: No, show the one of Vivian--
Speaker 2: Right.  This one in front.
Speaker 1: --that one.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Just that one.  Okay.
Speaker 2: You want to narrate?
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is the summer of 1977, and this is the ceremony for the Presidential Scholar medal [U.S. Presidential Scholars Program].  This is in the Old Executive Office Building [Eisenhower Executive Office Building] in Washington, D.C., and I am in the forefront, and in the background, is my sister, Vivian Malone Jones.
Speaker 2: So what your--this is in your last year of high school [W.P. Davidson High School, Mobile, Alabama]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  This was my summer after high school, yeah.
Speaker 2: So--and so--but you're living at--so Vivian comes?
Speaker 1: Vivian was living in D.C. at that time.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: She was, she was here on special assignment, so I came up and spent the summer with her.  So it just so happens, she was living here, so she came to all the stuff.
Speaker 2: Oh, that is--so she was proud of you at that point, right?  Do you have any of your mother?
Speaker 1: Picture of my mother?  There's one right there.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is my mother.  This picture was taken about 19--I'd say, '70 [1970], and her name is Bertha Davis Malone.
Story_ID: 668696
Speaker 1: Because these were my--this sister and this sister, she lived in Mobile [Alabama].  She eventually moved to Sacramento [California].  So these two were in Sacramento.
Speaker 2: I see.  And that's what you were saying.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Your mother never (laughter)--she couldn't.
Speaker 1: He lived next door.  Uncle Pat stayed with us, and then Uncle Floyd went to Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: --and my aunt Mildred went to Cincinnati [Ohio].
Speaker 2: That's what you were--okay.  That's what you were talking about.
Speaker 1: My mother had two brothers in Chicago, actually.
Speaker 2: I see.  So are there offsprings in Chicago now?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Um-hm.  I have cousins in Chicago.
Speaker 2: This is--I'm probably about eight, nine months old, and this is my baby picture.  The one and only baby picture that I have.
Speaker 1: Okay.  These are my mother's siblings, and from left to right, it would Ola Davis Vernon; and then my aunt Mildred Haines [ph.] of Cincinnati; in the middle, my uncle Floyd Davis who lived in Chicago; and then Patrick Davis [ph.]; and then my aunt Gertrude Davis Hicks; and in the middle is my aunt by marriage, my aunt Minette Davis.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This picture was taken on the day of Eric's swearing in, and I believe this is February 5th of 2009.  To the left is [HistoryMaker] Valerie Jarrett, Joe--Vice President Joe Biden, Senator Patrick Leahy, Eric Holder [HistoryMaker Eric H. Holder, Jr.], Sharon Malone [HistoryMaker Dr. Sharon Malone], Eric's mother, Miriam Holder [Miriam Yearwood Holder] and my daughter, Maya Holder; and in the front row; my daughter, Brooke Elise Holder, and my son, Eric Holder III [Eric H. Holder III].
Speaker 1: This is a picture from the Jet magazine in July 4th, 1963, and this was the Jet that came out right after the integration of the University of Alabama [Tuscaloosa, Alabama].  On the picture; on the sofa to the left would be four year old me; my dad, Willie Malone; my mother, Bertha Davis Malone; and my oldest brother, Elvin Malone [Elvin Malone, Sr.].  And this is at our house on St. Anthony Street.
Speaker 2: Like me, school pictures.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: You're in high school [W.P. Davidson High School, Mobile, Alabama]?
Speaker 1: I'm in high school.  That was my first year back in Mobile.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And in that little picture to the right is--yeah, the black and white, that's the black and white and the one with me in the green dress, those are the two that were from St. Joseph's [St. Joseph's School, Mobile, Alabama] when I was in the first and second grade.  Then on the bottom, that would be--I was going to say, no this one.
Speaker 2: This one.
Speaker 1: No, this one down here.  That's fourth grade, and this Sharon, third grade.
Speaker 2: You don't have--up there, is there a wedding picture up there?
Speaker 1: I have a wedding picture.  You want a wedding picture (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think it's one, but it's got, it's got everybody in it.  I don't think it's one--I'm not sure--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is there one just me?  That's--is that everybody.  I forgot what's out.
Speaker 2: Yep.  Here it is.
Speaker 1: Is that just the two of us?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  This is our wedding day.  This is April 7th, 1990.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And that's your wedding.  Okay.
Speaker 1: It's not a great picture, because I got them cropped off the--people cropped off.  That's Dana.  You know Dana Divins Rice.
Speaker 2: Where's Dana?
Speaker 1: She's cropped out of there.  Well, she's on that pink, that pink jacket.
Speaker 2: Oh, it is her.  Yes.  I sure do know Dana Divins.  That's her maiden--see, I don't know her as Divins.  God, it's a small world.  Okay.
Speaker 1: We're good?
Speaker 2: Well, here.  Wait.  Let's trying.  Hold on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this picture was taken, I'd say, about 2000, and this is the National Gallery [National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.] Christmas party, and to the left is me, Sharon Malone.  In the back row; my daughter, Maya Holder; my husband, Eric Holder; and on the front row, Brooke Holder and Eric Holder III.
Speaker 2: So Maya and Brooke; they're in school now?
Speaker 1: Maya is at Tulane [Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana] now, and Brooke is a senior.  So--
Speaker 2: And Brooke is a senior, where?
Speaker 1: At Madeira [Madeira School, McLean, Virginia].  She's here.
Speaker 2: Oh, so she's--okay.  I see.
Speaker 1: She's here.  She'll be--she's going to the University of Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Oh, she is.  Okay.  So she's, so she's--next year, she'll--or the fall, she'll (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --start it. Okay.
