Story_ID: 10665
Speaker 1: Lester McKeever, L-e-s-t-e-r M-c-K-e-e-ver.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Can you state your birthday?
Speaker 1: June 15, 1934.
Speaker 2: You're a Gemini, like me.
Speaker 1: What is yours?
Speaker 2: June 10th.
Speaker 1: My wife's June 8th and my son's June 18th.
Story_ID: 10666
Speaker 1: What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Anything that's edible, no, but in the meat class, I really prefer chicken now then beef and I like vegetables and I really enjoy fruits.
Speaker 1: And, vacation destinations?
Speaker 2: I haven't been to too many places I haven't really enjoyed so I just look forward to the next travel location and we've done pretty extensive travelling.  I think we've been to Europe and to Africa.  I'm going with the governor next week on his mission to South Africa,  been to the Caribbean and many places in the United States.  I guess I've travelled fewer places in the United States than I have abroad.  I mean, I've never been to Mt. Rushmore, been to the traditional places, Yellowstone and those kind of things but there are a lot of places here in the United States that I think I would still like to visit.
Story_ID: 10667
Speaker 1: What about your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color, I guess, in terms of dress would be blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of year is the summertime.
Speaker 1: Phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Phrase or saying, I guess I pick it up from--[ref. to Oscar ?] Brown when his play flopped, "Experience is a drag" (laughs)
Story_ID: 10668
Speaker 1: Were you born here in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was born in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me about, I'd like to know about your parents.
Speaker 2: Well, my parents, father was from [Nutley] New Jersey and my mother was from Georgia, Columbus, Georgia.  They both came here as young teenagers.  They both went to the same high school.  Neither one of them finished high school and very wonderful people and amazing what they could do on so little.  My mother worked in a factory as a piece worker.  My father worked in a laundry and he was attributed as being the inventor of some bleach product that really helped them tremendously and I think that was my first job, working with my father, sweeping the plant that he worked at.  Both are now deceased.  I had two brothers, one died early on and I have one brother that's living.
Speaker 1: Now, where do you fit in the equation?  Were you the oldest?
Speaker 2: I was the oldest child.
Speaker 1: You were the older child.  You said both of your parents came here, you said, well, they got married, you said, in their teens.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Mother was about seventeen or so when she got married.
Speaker 1: Where did they--do you know where they came--where did you say they came from?
Speaker 2: My mother was from Columbus, Georgia and my father was from Nutley, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Do they have--do you know what brought them here?
Speaker 2: You know, honestly I don't really know.  I know her mother and her father, my mother's mother and father came from the south because they felt that the opportunities were much greater here in Chicago than they were--I don't think there was any stopping off point.  I think they came straight from the south here to Chicago.  My father, we've been trying to really trace that lineage because it's a little different to have someone come from the East as opposed to the South at the time that I was born, but we haven't been able to go back too far with that one, although his mother lived here in Chicago with him and I don't remember the father.  My mother's mother and grandmother and my father's mother and mother were all living, so at one point, I did have all four of my grandmothers but I don't remember my grandfathers.
Story_ID: 10669
Speaker 1: How would you describe your father?  What kind of man was he?
Speaker 2: I think I would say he was a very proud man, one who really wanted a lot more out of life than he had and was really frustrated because he wasn't able to get any more than he had, but he was always trying, always wanted the finest things and he did the best he could in that regard.  When I say frustrated, I think he led somewhat of a troubled life because of his frustration my mother and father divorced when I was a teenager and so he was always a part of my life but not directly in my life on a day-to-day basis.  We lived with him for quite some time and his mother and we didn't live at all the times with my mother, so we had a split relationship as we grew up.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: Very, very consistent, very much wanting to provide the best that she could not knowing really how to do it herself, always worked to find a way to help the situation along and I think she had a great deal of pride in her children because although we didn't have a lot, we were always kind of immaculate.  She would always make sure that we had the little clothes and always looked nice and so I think that helped us.
Story_ID: 10670
Speaker 1: It was kind of unfortunate because we lived with our two cousins, whose both mother and father died. And I look back on that now, and sometimes reflect on the fact that we often times got things that they didn't get and living in the same household must have created some kind of problems for them.  They probably didn't even realize it, but as I've thought back on the situation, I can see how that might have been something not the most desirable environment for them to be in.
Speaker 2: I often ask people to sort of share memories of growing up.  I'd like you to select maybe some memory growing up, or maybe some of your earliest memories of the family or your cousins or--.
Speaker 1: I guess the things that I remember, I lived on 31st and Rhodes [in Chicago, Illinois] and that was in the heart of gangland at the time and it wasn't a real thing, so trying to stay out of trouble was really kind of a big issue and I remember running--I was a patrol boy.  I tried to do all of the things that were expected of a little kid going to school and I would get chased off of my post at the corner sometimes by some of the fellows there but--my memory is that I had a wonderful childhood and I'm really amazed and impressed that I was able to stay out of trouble so far and that I had a great time.  I think we played football, baseball, lot of the little sports, run lots with glass and would otherwise be considered too dangerous to play on, but I remember playing on things like that and still having a great time.
Speaker 2: What would you describe your family life like at that time?
Speaker 1: I would think I was fortunate in having all four of my grandparents.  I was fortunate that I had a mother and father that, even though they separated, I always thought were going to get back together, so that was something that kept us going.  I think the family was nurturing.  I think they did the best that they could to try and help us along.  Being uneducated, I don't think they really truly realized the value of an education.  I think my mother less so than my father, but having going on to school and going on to college and everything, she really appreciated that but if I had not gone to college, I don't think it would have been a big deal for her.
Story_ID: 10671
Speaker 1: You went to where for elementary school?
Speaker 2: I went to--started at [Daniel] Webster Elementary School [Chicago, Illinois] and then graduated from (tape skips) Douglas [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Was that because the family moved?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Because we moved.  On Webster, I was living with my mother and her mother and when I went to Douglas I was living with my father and his mother.
Speaker 1: Do you have any memories of going to school at that time for elementary school?
Speaker 2: Some memories, I think that early on I received a lot of gold stars on my report card and things like that and I was even class monitor in kindergarten.  For some reason I remember that because my cousin and I were in the class together.  I remember thinking about girls early in grammar school (laugh) and then I went to [Wendell] Phillips [High School Chicago, Illinois], that's a high school.
Story_ID: 10672
Speaker 1: By the time that--how would you describe yourself as a young person?  Were you a dreamer, were you--I can't imagine you were obnoxious.  You were probably well behaved, but how would you describe yourself?  You know, people are--were you precocious, were you--?
Speaker 2: I guess I've always been blessed because people have responded to me fairly positively so I guess that's been an incentive in my life.  I try to be obedient.  I know I did devilish things.  I picked up--my cousins and I, we used to pick up cigarette butts on the street and smoke those, so I've done some of the bad things along the way, but for the most part I think I was kind of disciplined and tried to do what was required.  I've always been fortunate to do fairly well in school, grammar school and high school.  I got some double promotions in grammar school so I was moved ahead a little bit, so I graduated a little ahead of my class from both grammar school [daniel Webster Elementary School, Douglas Elementary School, Wendell Phillips High School, Chicago, Illinois] and high school, so education and school has been rewarding to me and I've always looked forward to that educational opportunity.
Story_ID: 10673
Speaker 1: Who was influencing the young, Lester McKeever, you know, who was influencing you, especially in your teenage years?  Were you involved in any clubs?  Were you, in school, were you--
Speaker 2: Well, in school, really, it was almost after [Wendell Phillips] high school [Chicago, Illinois] that I really got some nurturing, because, you know, I mean, my family was always there.  I wasn't a real joiner.  I didn't have too many outside clubs, but I did have some real close friends in grammar school and high school, so it's just a small group of us that just kind of hung together, but just before I graduated from high school, not knowing I was going to college, Mr. and Mrs. [Allen & Frances] Beasley came along and they gave me a scholarship, and so they played an important part in my life right at the end of high school and into my early years in college.
Story_ID: 10674
Speaker 1: Wendell Phillips [High School, Chicago, Illinois], are they people that we would know now who were you were your classmates or names you would know at Wendell Phillips, didn't--?
Speaker 2: Frances Kress, the psychologist who has written some rather significant works, particularly dealing with the African American.  Her name is Frances Welsey--Kress Wesley now I think. [Dr.] Audrey Forbes [Manley] who is a--went on to medical school [Meharry College of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee] and headed up the Cook County Hospital of Pediatrics [Chicago, Illinois] position and then married the husband--married the president [president, Dr. Albert E. Manley] or [sic] chairman of Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia].  One of my closest friends, but I've lost contact with him, was Benny Booker, at the time, so I don't know really where he is now. We have--had a wonderful class and I think that quite a few of the people went on to do fairly well, perhaps not extraordinarily well, but we still have our class reunions and so we're stay in touch with pretty much that class.
Story_ID: 10675
Speaker 1: So, let's talk about the Beasley's.  The Beasley's, how did you find--to talk about who Mr. Beasley was.  He's not around still.
Speaker 2: No, he died and that's really an interesting story to be truthful, because the day before I graduated, at least I had applied for a scholarship at Roosevelt [University, Chicago, Illinois] and I was one of the two finalists for that scholarship but then I think I misinterpreted that question that they ask at the interview for that scholarship so I didn't get the scholarship, so the day before I graduated, someone advised me that I had gotten a scholarship from the ________ Abbott Student Foundation which was founded by Allen J. and Francis Beasley.  Now, Allen Beasley was just a painter, you know, a house decorator, but he was devoted to try and help and educate young people, and he did that until the end and so he and his wife--I took the scholarship and I went the University of Illinois at Navy Pier [Chicago, Illinois, now Univeristy of Illinois-Chicago], so I had to report to them with my grades and everything, thought I was doing pretty good, but they really gave me a hard time all the time, so I appreciate that because they kept nudging me to try and do better and better.  Just ironic there was a period when our relationship collapsed.  Francis died, and Mr. Beasley was on his own, and something happened that caused us to get in touch with each other again, and so our relationship was rekindled, and my wife's father had died, and so he and my wife's mother started a relationship and they ultimately got married, so that's an interesting aspect that someone gave me the real genesis of so much of this happened to me positively that he wound up marrying my wife's mother and becoming a real, true part of the family.
Speaker 1: I read that.  That's (laughs)--It's all in the family.
Speaker 2: You know, even after he got married, or just before he got married, he gave a substantial amount of money to Chicago State [University, Chicago, Illinois] and he's originally from Cincinnati [Ohio] and I know he gave a substantial amount of money to the university there.  Now, when I say substantial, say twenty or forty thousand dollars, for someone of his stature, was a lot of money but every penny, virtually, that he had, he was going to give to some child, and the most memorable thing was a little certificate that he gave me which I got for graduation was a poem that he had written called, The Certificate of Encouragement, and whenever I give remarks or speeches I often just quote that because it's quite a powerful message for young people.
Speaker 1: What is the message?  What does it say?
Speaker 2: It just tells you that as you go through life that they're going to be things that happen, perhaps adversely.  You might find yourself in the gutter, but raise your wings like the eagle and continue to flutter, and it's just something, and if I can find it, I'll share it with you and I'll let you read it, because it just shows a kid that you have, no matter what your circumstances are, you have every opportunity.  God gave you the four seasons like everyone else and the opportunities are there and you may have clipped and falled but just don't let that get in your way, just continue to move forward.
Speaker 1: Now, what do you think--did you know a lot about Mr. Beasley?  I mean, as time went on, did you learn about what his motivation was, you know, what motivated him to do what he did?
Speaker 2: I think it was--I mean, he really picked up on it, but I think it was for his wife may have been highly instrumental in influencing him to do that, but once he got involved with the young people and saw the response that he had gotten and how he had helped, he just never wanted to give that up, so the motivation, I don't think, was anything in his background--(inaudible)  You know, he wrote a book on his own life, a little booklet on, a little book on his life.  And my wife took the responsibility of trying to have it published, but it just told about him as an individual who, I think was a very responsible person to society, a very religious person who believed that whatever one could do to help particularly the young people, that's what they should do.
Speaker 1: How many people do you think he actually ended up helping?
Speaker 2: I would think the number is, because I was not the first and I'm not sure that--the scholarship was not a huge one, it was two hundred and fifty dollars, but that made a difference to so many people, at that time.  He's never had a reunion or really sited the number of people that he helped, but some of the statistics are better available now because Chicago State keeps a record of benefits from the scholarship fund he established there.  I guess the University in Cincinnati is also keeping that kind of record, but individually, I know just through the foundation there were a number of people that he helped before he even got to me and he continued to do so after he helped me.
Speaker 1: Now, this may seem somewhat of a naive question, but how did he know--did he know you or know of you?
Speaker 2: It must have been the school.  I mean, I was the top ranking boy in my class and so whether he was trying to help boys as opposed to girls and maybe the top girls, because the top girl in my class was Audrey Forbes, and she probably had already had a scholarship, and Alfreda Duster ?  was the number two person in our class and she was from the Duster family, the historical family ___________Wells and all of that and I'm pretty sure she had a scholarship, so whether or not I was the top boy or the fact that the other two may have had scholarships that caused them to seek me out and help me, I'm not really sure, and I've never really, truly gotten the answer on that question.
Speaker 1: What do you--so, you met he and his wife, they mentored you.  For how long of a period of time did that mentoring last and what sticks with you about--besides the poem, you know, about things that they said to you that sort of stuck with you?
Speaker 2: I went to a fairly competitive school and even though you were a pretty good student in high school, it was a different ballgame in college, and so, I know what the average grades and things were in college and when I'd get an A and a B and then a C, even though when I looked at the rest of the folks in my class, I was pretty good results, they were very adamant about not getting C's and things like that so they continued to impress upon you that you didn't want to be average and that's what I think the  motivation was a result from them.
Story_ID: 10676
Speaker 1: What was the whole, besides what you just described, what was the college experience [University of Illinois- Navy Pier, Chicago, Illinois,  now University of Illinois Chicago] like, because you, up until that point, you were--what circumference, I mean, what area do you think your life existed of until that point?  What square mile area?
Speaker 2: Oh, very, very close.  Well, I did have one outstanding teacher in grammar school, Esther Jackson, who really made the young man stand up when a girl came in, when a girl was leaving a room, she would make them open a door. And she would take the class downtown to have an experience with eating in a restaurant and the proper utensils and everything, so that was very important. But that was about the exposure and I make people laugh when I tell them that when I left the Pier, which was University Illinois, first two years and they told me--I was going downstate [University of Illinois, Champaign-Urbana] and they told me I had to catch the IC [Illinois Central] train, I thought they meant this little electric train that ran up and down the lake so I was really disappointed because I didn't think I was going anywhere, but that was really the first time that I got outside the city of Chicago.
Speaker 1: So, tell me how that experience was and how you felt.
Speaker 2: I think the whole college experience was kind of extraordinary because I went to the Pier for two years, majored in accounting.  I got into accounting because I had won the Rensler Math and Science award when I graduated from high school, so my counselor thought that accounting would be a good fit thinking that there was a lot of math. But that was not the case at all, so unfortunately, with that kind of advice, I wound up in a field that I have come to thoroughly enjoy, but at the Pier I knew I had to go on to further my education and the scholarship was for two years and it paid my books and tuition was fairly reasonable at the time, so I really worked forty hours a week while I was at the Pier for the entire two years, part time at Dell Farm Foods. And then my teacher in my practice sets for accounting really appreciated what I was doing in (unclear) so she got me a job as a bookkeeper for a screw manufacturing company. And so between Dell Farm Foods and running to a manufacturing company, I was working forty hours a week to really try and save the money to go on to my last two years downstate.
Speaker 1: And what, what--what, what was the makeup of the student body at the Pier and--the whole thing around that time was a lot of blacks were going to Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois], right?
Speaker 2: Right.  Black, as far as colleges are concerned, Roosevelt  had the most liberal approach or the most attractive approach for minorities and they were going to Roosevelt.  That was not necessarily the case at the University of Illinois or the Pier.  It was a representative group.  The Pier had a sink or swim policy and so they didn't give too much support to you, so it was not considered the easier experience.  I thought that down state was easier than the Pier and that may have been because I had two years experience by the time I got there, so it may have been the same there, but some of the people that I started out with didn't really finish there but they all finished college, they went elsewhere to finish school.  I don't remember that much of my undergraduate work at the pier because, like I say, I was for going home, studying, doing my work and then going back to school, so it was not a fun time, party time.  That changed a little bit when I went downstate.  I joined a fraternity and had a good time.
Story_ID: 10677
Speaker 1: [off camera]--the Delta's [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] probably had twenty years, so the Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity] had an equal number and then there were some that were non-fraternity, the athletes and things like that. [on camera] I know in the College of Commerce [University of Illinois, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], in my graduating class, there was just one other, myself and another fellow and I think we were the only two in the College of Commerce the entire time that were there, so it was  not a lot in the business school, although there had been some that preceded us, like [Frederick C.] Fred Ford graduated from the University of Illinois and the Business School and there have been some since then. But there were not too many majors and I don't know if there was too much encouragement at that time to really go into accounting.  Now, Ms. Washington founded the firm.  I guess we'll talk about that a little later. But she went to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] and she said she had to go to school as a white person because they told her that there was no opportunity at all for blacks in accounting.  So the experience even though it was different, I really enjoyed myself downstate.  I was able to do reasonably well, but still have a nice balanced life.
Speaker 2: So, that's what I want to know.  You go down there and you've been working sort of around the clock and going to school and you've really not been out of Chicago [Illinois] that much, I guess, so, what was Lester McKeever like at that time, I mean, you know, was it a whole new world?
Speaker 1: Oh, I was just a little, a naive little kid that saved up and bought some clothes to take down there and couldn't wait to put them on, even though, I had put me a--I remember this real heavy winter jacket that I was going to wear to the football game, and it was so nice--and it must have been seventy, eighty degrees but I still put on my jacket so I could wear it and show it off, so, you know.  So some of those silly things that you do like that, but I met some of the fellows down there and started relationships there--pledging and that changed everything because then it created a whole new bunch of friends that have become lifelong friends.
Speaker 2: Did you--you pledged Kappa  [Kappa Alpha Psi fraternity]?
Speaker 1: Kappa, yes.
Speaker 2: I never pledged, but every fraternity and sorority has its own (laughs), its own thing.
Speaker 1: So--let me ask you about your whole fraternity experience.  What do you think you gained out of that besides lifelong friendship?  Why do you think that was a valuable experience?
Speaker 2: The fraternities downstate, you know, being a very competitive school, they would have access to some of the exams or past exams where you could sit around and try and use those as a tool to help you in the classes and sometimes I would--you would engage each other in courses that you were involved in and see if you couldn't benefit from what someone else's experiences were or some of the things that they had learned, so I think it was kind of a total approach.  I mean, we didn't always do so well as a group in school, but we were trying to emulate all the other fraternities by trying to get past exams and trying to offer as much help as we could there and then the social life, I think, as far as college is concerned, serves a very important purpose.  I mean, it's so that you have a social outlet and that's what that was.
Speaker 1: So, you are pretty much in an accounting program at that time, or business.
Speaker 2: I was in--I majored in accounting, so I was in accounting, but I was in the business school.
Speaker 1: Isn't the accounting program usually a year longer or something like that?
Speaker 2: Well, not now.  They've just changed the law where it's a mandatory year before you can even sit for the CPA [Certified Public Accountant] exam, but at the time I was going through, it wasn't a year longer, sometimes people made it a year longer because of the rigorous program that we had, but you could go through and graduate in four years and that would be the norm.
Speaker 1: How many blacks did you say were in your class?  Was it just you in there?
Speaker 2: There was just one other.
Speaker 1: Okay.  One other.
Speaker 2: James Fields, who, we both graduated together and I think that was a rarity.  I mean, no one had experienced that.  He went on to get a masters in accounting at the University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa], came back here, but he had a premature death.  He had a heart attack early on, quite some time ago, so--and having someone else in school, in the class with you made a difference, so we had developed a nice little relationship and so that was helpful.
Story_ID: 10678
Speaker 1: When you graduated, were your parents at your graduation?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, both of them were there and they were very proud and the University of Illinois [Champaign-Urbana, Illinois], its a huge place and graduation was at the football field so they were not close because they had to sit from a distance to be at the proceedings. But that was a very proud moment for all of us in--I mean it was a real kind of a breakthrough although they didn't have perhaps a true appreciation going in, they really had appreciation by the time that I graduated from college and they were absolutely as supportive as they could possibly be throughout the entire experience.  I mean, what they couldn't give much, they had menial jobs and everything so we had to eat, so that wasn't a problem once we got down there.  Coming up with extra money was not the easiest task all the time, but whatever they could they certainly tried to do.
Speaker 1: So, here you've graduated, so what are your thoughts at that point about what you wanted to do when (off camera discussion) you know, what, what you wanted to do and what you wanted to see for yourself at that point?
Speaker 2: Well, being in accounting, you want to go into public accounting if you could, and that was a real discouraging situation because they would not even interview blacks, and I do appreciate the University of Illinois, because they insisted that they at least give me the courtesy of an interview. And I remember being interviewed by Arthur Anderson [accounting firm] and they told me that they couldn't hire me because they couldn't send me to their clients because their clients wouldn't want me, so I really had--at that time, it was a Big Eight firm so I really had a lot of animosity toward all of the CPA firms because after if each one of them had just hired one then that would end that vicious cycle or circle and would remove the excuse that  a client wouldn't accept them because they couldn't go anywhere else without having one other black. In one interview I remember clearly was at General Motors, their Remy Delco [sic, Delco Remy] division and they said that they had never had a black person in the office working, but they had black people in the factory and they wanted me to tell me why that circumstance existed, so I just thought that was ironic. But that was one of the depressing things and then once I graduated, I couldn't get a job and so I worked with Mr. [Allen] Beasley as a painter and decorator until I found a job. And he kept working with me to let me take off, to go explore job opportunities and the first job I got was with Saveday (ph.) Chemicals, or Barton (ph.) Chemical Company, they were a bleach manufacturing company and I got a job there as a bookkeeper but it was not the image I wanted.  It was a small company and they didn't want me to wear my suit and tie and things like that to work and I thought I'd worked hard enough to be privileged to wear a suit and tie to work and so that didn't work out and then I  wound up going to Unity Mutual Life Insurance Company which was a black African American insurance company, and I talked to them there and I was willing to virtually work for nothing just to get an opportunity and some experience.  I started with very little pay but it was very rewarding I think that my work ethnic and my skills were very appreciated and really developed a nice solid relationship with everyone there.  Miss Woods was the comptroller at Unity Mutual and she was a good friend of Miss Washington and founded this firm and so she got me to work with her during the tax season on a part time basis, so after I went to the Army and came back then I just came back here on a full time basis.
Speaker 1: Let's talk about some dates.  You graduated in what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-five [1955].
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-five, and then you worked for--as a painter for Mr. Beasley for like for how long?
Speaker 2: I would say until October or November of that year and then, because I graduated in June, and then I went with that Barton Chemical and I must have stayed there just a few months before I got the job at Unity, so it was in the early 1956 that I got the job in Unity, and I stayed with them until I got drafted into the Army in 1957.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what--the one company, the Barton, that company, were you the only professional black person?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I was the only black person there, black professional.  I don't remember--it wasn't a big company so I'm sure they had some few blacks in the plant but they weren't that--it was a very small office staff so I was the only black there.
Speaker 1: So, what, I'm just sort of trying to understand mind set and everything.  Where was it located?
Speaker 2: If I remember correctly it was like on West Pershing Road [Chicago, Illinois], somewhere in that area.
Speaker 1: Did they--do you know why they ended up hiring you?  Was it a case like they just needed someone, they were a small company and--
Speaker 2: I think that was it.  I don't--I think that--
Speaker 1: Who were the own--
Speaker 2: I think ethnic was Jewish and so sometimes they would give you an opportunity so I think that's what happened there.
Speaker 1: You know, because a lot of times, historically, I know, my parents are from the Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] area and there's always been a lot of intersection between blacks and Jews, sometimes not all that positive.
Speaker 2: Then the screw manufacturing company that I worked at was Jewish as well and that worked out real well, so they would give you an opportunity, may not pay you as much as anybody else but they would give you a job.
Story_ID: 10679
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your [Army] service experience.  Were you in more than two years?
Speaker 2: About two years.  I tried to get out early but I couldn't accomplish it.  I did, going in, did well enough on the test for me to go to OCS [Officer Candidate School] and they really tried to convince me to go to OCS but that would have added another year and I thought I had flat feet, so I never anticipated really going into the service and so I wound up going in anyway. And then I chose not to go to OCS because I didn't want the extra year.  I did well enough on the exam and everything and I got a scientific and professional rating, so they sent me out to Dugway, Utah, Dugway Proving Grounds and I was in charge of the payroll there and got the only '0/0' error rating in the history of the installation, but it was just like a job, because everybody out there. I mean, it was all chemists because it was a chemical proving grounds so they had a lot of college graduates out there. And so then they had the ear of Congress, so it was kind of removed.  I mean they would have to put in the newsletters, when you see the officers, please salute them.  It was just that rag-tag of a unit where there was not the kind of respect for military and I was in ROTC [Reserve Officers Training Corps] in high school and I really loved it, but when I got to college to the Pier [University of Illinois-Navy Pier, Chicago, Illinois] and saw how sloppy they were, I didn't want to be a part of that. And so I was disappointed when I went to the Army and got into a group that really didn't care that much about the traditional Army experiences.  I got married while I was in the Army, lived there on the post so it was a great experience considering that I had to be in the Army, and I don't ever think that's two years wasted.  I think that that was an important time in my life.  I met a different group of people and had different kinds of experiences and all of them were positive so I don't regret that at all.
Story_ID: 10680
Speaker 1: Your wife, Nancy [C. McKeever], is she from here?
Speaker 2: No, she's originally from St. Louis [Missouri].
Speaker 1: She's from--so how did you guys meet?
Speaker 2: No, but they moved here while she was in high school, so--
Speaker 1: okay. So, you met  here?
Speaker 2: We met here, met here at a Delta [Sigma Theta sorority] party.  I was in school [University of Illinois, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] and someone gave me two names to call for a blind date and I just called the other girl first and took her and Nancy's name was the other name, but she swears it wasn't her, she was just trying to fix up someone else, because she had a date for that night, but anyway, that night we did meet and we talked about the fact that I had her name and so we started seeing each other after that and it's been all up hill since then.
Speaker 1: Wonderful.  She was at teacher's college, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, she went to teachers college and she graduated and she taught school until our first child was born and then she went back, taught school again and our second child was born, so she hasn't taught in a long time, but she's always a teacher as you might now.
Story_ID: 10681
Speaker 1: You had said you had a different set of experiences in Utah where you were stationed and you had a different set of friends and I'm just wondering what you really meant by that?  What was different about the experience and what did you learn?
Speaker 2: If you think there were few blacks in Champaign [Illinois], then there were zero blacks that I can recall in Salt Lake [City, Utah].  I mean there was--going into town and everything, I mean, there was just no--very difficult to establish relationships.  I had my first real demonstration of discrimination when I was in the Army.  Me and several white military friends went to Jackson Hole, Wyoming to a Silver Dollar Bar and they wouldn't let me come into the bar, so I was really appreciative of the fact that the white guys that I was with left at the same time.  That was the first overt time that I can really remember in that I was told that I couldn't do something because of my race.  I've always been suspicious sometimes, but that's the first time I was absolutely prevented from not doing anything. So the experiences with college and the job interviews, of course, I've told you about those, but in terms of, you know, social place where I went there.  So, being a scientific and a professional and being in the military pay section, I was in with, you know, accountants with similar backgrounds, some who had different work experiences, so it was that kind of camaraderie that developed. And then the fact that I was able to get married there and just--then they gave me an alarm clock so I could be sure to get to work on time, you know, those kinds of things, it made it less military, but just made it kind of a nice experience.
Story_ID: 10682
Speaker 1: So your two years were up and you come back to Chicago and you--was it always understood that you would come back and work for Unity [Mutual Life Insurance Company, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No.  I never did go back.
Speaker 1: Oh, you didn't go back.
Speaker 2: No, I didn't go back.  When I was working part time here, Mr. Pittman?  and Mary Washington, they tried real hard to get an early release for me so that I could come back and work here during the tax season but I wanted to become a CPA [Certified Public Accountant] and I know that you had to have public accounting experience in order to get licensed, so my choice was to come back and work with her full time, with she and Mr. Pittman full time so that I could then be fortunate enough to pass the exam and get a license to be a CPA, so I chose to come straight back here rather than go.  Unity was really disappointed and they tried very hard to keep me, but in terms of where my own life, where I want to go with my own life, I just felt that being here in public accounting was better for me.
Speaker 1: Describe what Mary Washington was like.  You said that--she must have been very fair skinned.
Speaker 2: She was real fair and she's still living.
Speaker 1: Oh, she is.  How old is she?
Speaker 2: She has to be close to a hundred.  She's suffering from Alzheimer's so she really doesn't--
Speaker 1: No, so you can't do anything.
Speaker 2: But she was the first female African American CPA in the United States, and so that's quite a bit of history and she was really a tickler for neatness and precision.  She was an excellent person to work with.
Story_ID: 10683
Speaker 1: How old is the profession of public accounting to begin with?
Speaker 2: It's as old as time, almost, but at the time that I passed the exam, you could count the  number of black CPAs on both hands here in Illinois, probably around the country.  The number of blacks, although we had Mary Washington, Ted Jones and Arthur J.  Wilson was the first African American CPA in the state [of Illinois] and then I think there was another gentleman who moved to Denver [Colorado], but Mr. [Hiram L.] Pittman, Arthur Macklin, had passed the exam at that time but there were very few African American CPAs and so we had a celebration of the first one hundred fairly recently.  Now I can't--accounting is a profession, and I'm embarrassed that I can't really tell you exactly when the public accounting law was passed.  That's something I really need to know, when did that go into effect and how long did it take for us to get involved in the profession. But like I said, when I graduated in '55 [1955], there was not a black in any of the major public accounting firms.  I guess in the '60s [1960s], there were some and there were a couple of partners, but that's been reversed.  I mean, I think that Arthur Andersen [accounting firm] had two partners, two black partners but they don't have any now.  I know Ernst Young [accounting firm] had two.  They still have one but he's out in California.  I think KMPG [Klynveld, Peat, Marwick, Goerdeler] [accounting firm] has one that they've imported, but really the number in the profession at the top of the public accounting firms is still really, really slim.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm going to ask some--once again I have questions, but if--I mean, blacks have been in business for longer than the early 20s [1920s], which, you know, the one publication that was developed that showed the history and only the first person was back in 1921, John Cromwell.
Speaker 2: John [W.] Cromwell [Jr.].
Speaker 1: From New Hampshire, it says this date of certification was from New Hampshire, so what did people do up to that point?  I mean, did they just, you know, you didn't necessarily, you know, you could keep your own books.
Speaker 2: Yes.  You could keep your own books and you could work with others but you just weren't a CPA.  CPA is a special license that's granted by the state so you pass a test that demonstrates your capabilities as a an accountant or professional accountant and then you become--you have to have--even though you pass the exam, you have to have a years experience with someone in public accounting before you, yourself can become licensed, so there are a lot of what they call public accountants that were not CPAs, people that were working in the area that didn't meet the qualifications but still provide the services but they couldn't provide opinions what the fairness of the financial statements.
Speaker 1: And, that's what a CPA does?
Speaker 2: Yes.  A CPA does that.
Speaker 1: So, you sat for the exam after--
Speaker 2: After the Army.  Right.
Speaker 1: After the Army.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Describe what kind of person Mary [T.] Washington was.  I mean there are several questions I have.  You know, you said she was a stickler and she was very neat, but why do you think she was a good mentor?
Speaker 1: Because she really took a personal interest in everyone that was there.  She's very much family oriented, so even though there was a lot of hours involved in public accounting, she never overlooked the fact of her family and her husband and her children, so, consequently, she wasn't as public a person, but she was very inward toward those that were around her, and much like Mrs. [Frances] Beasley wanted to make sure that you did the right thing and didn't want to tolerate anything less than the best that you could give.  So, she was really a bright woman.  Had gone off to New York and gotten some specialization in taxes so you had an opportunity to really learn from her and you had to work if you're going to be around her, but I think she was really always attempted to be very fair.
Speaker 2: Where was the firm located at that point?
Speaker 1: Started off on like the 2300 block at Wabash [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois] when I was there, then we moved to 50 East 26th Street which was Mr. [S.B.] Fuller's Boyer (ph.) International Building and then we moved to 2400 South Michigan at the [Chicago] Defender Building, but the building on Wabash was also a building owned by Mr. Fuller.  She was the accountant for Mr. Fuller and so she was always having her office space in space that was owned by Mr. Fuller.
Speaker 2: You said that she basically passed [for white] to go to Northwestern University--
Speaker 1: Yes, that's the story that she tells us.
Speaker 2: Does she tell you any more about that whole story?
Speaker 1: She did say that she didn't hide the fact after graduating, that she got involved in the Illinois CPA Society and they had a meeting in Texas or something and when they told her she couldn't really go, she really just didn't stay involved in the professional societies that much. But she said that she had to do that (pause) if she wanted to get through the school because otherwise they were just going to absolutely discourage her from even majoring in accounting because they just said that there were no opportunities for her.
Speaker 2: So, do you think she boarded there?  Did she board at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] and see I'm just, I want to ask about this because a lot of times people who were light enough to pass, some of them refused to do that because they said that they had to cut off contact with their family.  Then even people who decide to come back.
Speaker 1: No, I don't think so. In her family what I saw that were also fair but not like she was.  I think that she really could have passed.  The rest of her family would have been not of the same ilk, but I don't think that she lived--it's not my understanding that lived at Northwestern while she was going to school but that she did come back and forth.
Speaker 2: Now, and--[Hiram L.] Pittman, what was he like?
Speaker 1: He was a very detailed person.  I mean, he's originally from Omaha [Nebraska] and came here.  He's a CPA.  Very detailed in terms of his approach to accounting and dealt with the least minor detail in making sure that everything was right and he would spend a lot of time in that area so it made you appreciate the need to be as accurate as you possibly can in doing what you were doing.  Sometimes you would get a little too involved sometimes in terms of that area but he was a wonderful person.  I used to think he was a genius when I first met him.  You know, he always read a lot, and he was always going to the library or going here, going there, so I just saw him as a real wonderful source for me as a young person to be around.
Story_ID: 10684
Speaker 1: You and your wife are big collectors, and I want to know where that came from and why you think--I'd like to ask that question first.
Speaker 2: Well, surprising, I've always appreciated art.  Never thought that I could afford art and although my wife says we didn't pay very much for our first painting, when I first went to look at it, I thought it was really expensive and although I loved it, I didn't want to buy it.  So, lo and behold, what do I get for Christmas as a present was that painting, so that's the one I consider the most precious piece in our collection.  Since then I've just tried to better understand art and particularly African/American art.  I love African art but I don't know that much about it.  I don't know how you got about valuing those things but I look at art in the same way I look at traditional art by other artists that, you know, if you find the old masters, the older painters that did great works that may not still be here, that was the emphasis that I wanted to place on how early were blacks into painting and what kind of works that they do early on.  So, that was a main thrust that drove me into trying to get--then I met Margaret Burrows who as you know, founded the DuSable Museum and was very knowledgeable about the African American artist and everything at the time and found sources where I could start trying to acquire some of those things.  So, it's just been a love affair since then.  I'm not nearly as knowledgeable as I'd like to be still in the old African American art scene, but I think we do have some really wonderful pieces now so that I feel proud about that.
Speaker 1: (Inaudible) you have pretty significant collection.  Why do you think that art is an important part of siding, especially to the African American (unclear)?  Why is that important?
Speaker 2: You know, the African American image is so tarnished by our enslavement that there's so many beautiful things that we, as a people, have done that have not always been recognized that I think is so important to perpetuate.  I think like the theater, the ETA for example and my wife is working so hard in, the (unclear) art and the paintings depicting some of our circumstances not even necessarily depicting our circumstances, some of the art pieces I have are just landscapes or may be of a white subject, but they were done by African American at a time where very few people knew there were African Americans doing these kinds of things, so I think that anything that connects the African/American community to creativity and to good positive works in our society is important for all of us to try and perpetuate.
Story_ID: 10685
Speaker 1: I'd like to ask about your family and I'd like to ask about your wife and how your marriage has played a role in your life.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think it would be the same without her and so we've been married, what is that, forty-two years this year.  I'd like to say we've never had an argument but we have an argument every day (laughter).  I mean, that's one where we really support and balance each other very well and have very similar interests, although they may be diverse, they really converge, and I think the good fortune that we've had, the children that resulted from that marriage and the way that they've turned out, the real happiness that they've brought.  Now, the grandchildren on the way with two of those.  I think that the whole lineage of things just made the relationship just a great one.
Speaker 1: I want to ask a question about family and why you think--you know, because a lot of times in our communities, and you came from a family where your mother and father ultimately broke up, what do you attribute the success of your marriage?
Speaker 2: Well, I think marriage is partnership in the true sense, there's got to be some give and take.  I think that the fact that both of us graduated from college, that didn't always work, but we started off on a real good relationship and we just haven't got anything to get in the way.  Nancy's family, they were married until her father died, so they had a long marriage so she had an example of that.  My mother's sister and her husband, they stayed married and are still living and still married, and they've been together a lot years, so there were examples around us where you really felt impelled to try and make the marriage work and make sure that you stayed together, because you've seen too  many instances where the opposite is just unfortunate and not very positive and that's kind of destructive, so I think that we've just been fortunate to have things work out the way that they have.
Speaker 1: With your children, both of them are lawyers?
Speaker 2: Neither one of them are accountants, unfortunately.  I had my son work down here one summer, and I think that ended his interest in accounting (laughter).  I think now that he kind of regrets that he didn't pursue that a little bit because he's in business for himself, and now you appreciate what an accounting background can do for you, so I think that right now, he has a higher interest in accounting than he did when he coming along.  He just thought that I work too hard, I was too dull, you know, those kinds of things that you typically associate with being an accountant which discouraged.  My daughter, as you know, when she graduated from college, we went to the graduation and she told me she was going to New York to become a dancer and that was the first time we had heard of that (laugh), so she went to New York for seven years or so and then she came back and said she hadn't factored in the economics and then went back to law school.  But, our children, my son, you know, he's borderline musician, so I never knew whether he was going to go on to school.  When he was in high school, I'd say, "Where's your homework," and he'd reach in his backpack and roll out this crumpled piece of paper, but he went to University of Illinois.  He said he knew exactly what he wanted to do and the only way he could get into Harvard Law School was through an independent plan, a study coming from there.  He has scholarships from a bunch of the colleges to begin with, but he said, why waste that money, let some other black person take it.  He went down there and I think it was because I had gone there, did real well there, went on to Harvard Law School, said he was going to be in charge of the speakers (unclear) even before he got there.  He got there, got in charge of the speakers (unclear), brought in Stevie Wonder, one of the speakers, developed that relationship and that moved him because he always wanted to be in entertainment, so I thought he was going to be a musician before he got out of law school, so I am so grateful that he got his degree and now he can do whatever he wants.  He never wanted to be a lawyer.  He always wanted to be on the entertainment side of business, so I knew that that was not going to be a long experience, although he did start off in the entertainment law, but they put him in movies, so he left and went with the boutique that was in music and then he went with Polygram?  And then he went with Motown and then Polygram winded up acquiring Motown so then he left and started his own business, so my daughter went to law school and graduated from Northwestern, after getting a baby while in law school, after having a baby in law school and still finishing with her class and then worked with (unclear) and Austin but it was just too difficult with a child and the demands of going out of town on the spur of the moment, because she was in mergers and acquisitions, so it was a real high time, so she just stayed off with the second child for a long time and then she decided that she was not going to go back, so she hasn't gone back.  But, we had a source of pride for both of us, Nancy and I, you know, still very, very excited about them and what they're trying to do.  My son is having a launch party for his new label [Hidden Beach Recordings] June 1st, out in California, so we're going to fly out there for that.
Speaker 1: What are your hopes for, you know, from this point on?  For you, for yourself?
Speaker 2: I know we're close but I'd like to get the firm on a more solid for succession.  Like to find a way to take off as much as I want to and not be committed to an early morning, late evening and that Nancy and I kind of relax and enjoy things a little bit more.
Story_ID: 10686
Speaker 1: What are your hopes for the black community?
Speaker 2: Although it's troubled and I was at a meeting yesterday morning about the education system in the public schools and the statistics that were presented at that meeting are really rather dismal in terms of where we are.  I think that there's enough interest now across the board in both the black and white community to make some positive changes, particularly in the education area.  We've got a lot of family, to do, parent family that can be a strength or a weakness.  I think that a lot of things that we as a black people are just going to have to roll up our sleeves and continue to address and work hard at.  I have to be optimistic.  I think that we've got a lot of young people coming out now that have all the kind of skills to create job opportunities and I think that's where it all is, that a lot of families don't stay together because it's no economic base in that family, so we've got to find a way to improve the economics of everyone if we expect normalcy.  If we don't improve that economic base, it's going to be just extremely difficult but we can't give up.  We have to just keep trying.
Story_ID: 10687
Speaker 1: What do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: Sounds like my obituary.  (Laughter)  No, I don't know, I'd just like to think that I get involved in many of the issues in the community and work fairly hard at most of them and hope that I've helped a little bit, because I know I've gotten a lot from everything that I've been involved in, so I hope that I'm perceived as being someone who has contributed.
Story_ID: 10688
Speaker 1: I should ask this one question about community involvement.  Why do you think volunteerism is important and how does it help your life?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, and I encourage everyone to volunteer.  Some people think it's a burden, and if you look at it that way, it can be because it's going to take some time that you otherwise have for yourself personally, but you, invariably are going to get something out of that as you give.  I mean, even if you're an accountant and they ask you to be treasurer, you're going to find some little nuance in (unclear) or something that you've learned something from as you try and help them, so first of all, I think that if you're doing anything, it's expected of you to try and give back, and so I think you're obligated to do as much as you can to help wherever you can and as you go through trying to help, you're going to benefit from it, because you're going to learn something yourself that's going to help your life.
Story_ID: 10689
Speaker 1: How did you get involved in the racing industry?
Speaker 2: Well, in 1976, they passed an affirmative action law in the state legislation that the race tracks at the moment interpreted as being, that there should be some blacks involved in racing, so there was a black woman that worked at the racing board who brought this to John Swain's?  attention, and John Swain came to me and so then we started pursuing this opportunity, going out to Washington Park--Arlington Park and they had Washington Park and we, then sought a lease from them.  They wanted to give us an experimental lease with thoroughbred racing in the wintertime.  There's no thoroughbred racing in the wintertime, so they went to the racing board and they had given us a lease for this and the racing board liked us as a group, liked our credentials and asked Arlington Park wouldn't they give us a harness lease for some summer dates out at Washington Park, so they were over the barrel.  That's not where they had expected to be and so then they agreed with the racing board that they would do this and so that's how we got started.  I think we're the first African American group in the United States that ever operated at the race track and from that, Washington Park, because we had a favorable lease thinking that it was thoroughbred racing, wanted to change our lease the second year and they just kept holding off and holding off and making us sweat as to whether or not we were going to get a lease and they burned down.  So, we had gone to Maywood just as an alternative before Washington Park burned down and they agreed to give us a ten year lease.  I always thank the (unclear) for that because they really older people, very wealthy people and so very socially conscious people and so they did that and gave us that opportunity, so they gave us some longevity, so we weren't worried on a year to year basis as we would have, otherwise, been.  Then, the (unclear) sold the track in 1979, so I had an opportunity, I was asked by the buyers whether or not I wanted to participate, so I joined in and got a small ownership interest in the track, so that's led to a little small interest in Balmoral, so it's now Maywood and Balmoral.  But, I've always been active, didn't want anyone to think that we were getting, just getting something so I--in that business I've been very active.  I got on the board of the (unclear) Insurance Company, have been the chairman of harness tracks of America which is the international harness owners and tracks association for United States and Canada, so I've stayed in there.  I'm still active with that so I have gotten a lot that I've tried to contribute again, because whenever you do that, you've got to get something back and you aren't in it for that, but that invariably is what happens. (Unclear) just grateful about the whole experience, that people of that--my mother was a little nervous when I first went into racing thinking that there was an element there that's unsavory, but I have met the most wonderful group of people that you can imagine in the racing business on both sides of the track, that's either thoroughbred and harness.  It's really been a great experience.
Story_ID: 10690
Speaker 1: Is your father still alive?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: What do you think he would say if he saw you now?
Speaker 2: He'd be excited.  I think he'd reflect on his own life, because I think he saw pretty much what has happened to me happening to him and it just didn't work out, so I think that he would be happy but, at the same time, think I feel sad that he didn't have that same opportunities that I had.
Speaker 1: When you look at from where your parents came to where your kids are and where you and your wife are, what are your thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: An amazing story.  I  think we're just truly blessed.
Story_ID: 10691
Speaker 1: You came here and what, what was the nature of the practice here?
Speaker 2: It was really very small businesses, a lot of brown bags, a lot of boxes (laughs). And basically, a neighborhood type practice. So, but it--for someone who really wanted to be an accountant,  it was the--kind of greatest environment because you had to almost start from scratch and it's not having any real sophisticated systems, or--you had to really take the minutaie and try and make it into something. And then the thing that was, you know, sometimes disappointing was that you would work to do this and you would try and go over with the client and they weren't always appreciative of it because the main reason that they were doing this was so that they could get their income tax done. So they didn't--not always appreciate it as a business management tool, so it took a long time to really evolve into that, you know.
Story_ID: 10692
Speaker 1: Let's then talk about the whole evolution of this firm and how, you know, and how your role has sort of increased over time. And when you became--I'd just like you to talk about sort of that history.
Speaker 2: Well when I came to Smith Washington, Mr. Pittman and I worked closely with them and we had some decent clients. She had S.B. Fuller. I remember early on our getting Illinois Service Federal and I was given the responsibility for that 'cause Mr. Pittman left town and that was really an exciting thing, because when he came back he couldn't--we had a Sanford Perkins who was a CPA and a professor somewhere who was working with me on that and they were amazed that we could do that job the way we had gotten it done and so I had--we had Rosa Morgan--well, she was related to S.B. Fuller so I had to go to New York one time to work on records there in New York for her--that aspect of it. But then I went--I've worked along, and worked--things were going reasonably well, but not at the pace that I had wanted them to go. So I went to law school in 1967 because I was somewhat frustrated with accounting. But while I was in law school, things started to break, you know, where we could get a different level of clients and everything so I was never able to make the transition after graduating from law school, so I just stayed here, but in 1971 we got my first major non-minority client ,Commonwealth Edison, and they gave us their employee benefit plan and then the next year they gave us their railroad subsidiary and every year they tried to give a little bit more. And so from that we developed some expertise in the employee benefit plan area so we were able to provide services to a large, larger corporation so--you know like Quaker Oats and First Chicago so we have a pretty good representative of clients in that area now. And then Clark Burris who is city comptoller and Erwin France who is in the Model Cities program and so they helped us get into the governmental side of things. So we started doing audits of all of the federal funded programs from the city of Chicago and that gave us that exposure. So they--in 1976 they made me the managing partner for whatever reason--I don't really remember--a partner I guess. And, and so I've been really kind of in charge since then. M. Pittman, he retired--oh, time goes by so fast--probably ten years. Ms. Washington retired much before him. But we had a consulting group within the firm. We spun off a year ago August. This will be two years this August. And we named that Advanced Data Concepts so it's an affiliate of Washington, Pittman and McKeever. And it's strictly technology consulting and so--and it's housed here in the same office. We try and market and develop things together. And that's been working fairly well.
Story_ID: 10693
Speaker 1: How did the Commonwealth Edison account come to be and was it--and what was happening in Chicago that that would happen, or who was in place that could have made that possible?
Speaker 2: Now, Chicago United. It was, it was instrumental in having the--it was, it was, you know, it resulted out of the riots, the burning on the West Side. Billy Berry--they got together and they formed Chicago United which was the CEOs of the major corporations and the African American businesses. And out of that relationship they started trying to find ways to help minority businesses, and so out of that relationship is how we first got that start.
Speaker 1: And--did, from that point to doing other clients was there a large gap of time? I'm just trying to understand, you know, so it was really out of the 60s and the unrest of the 60s that, that, that really started.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right. That, that really started.
Speaker 1: And, do you think, 'cause I remember in something that I read that you said that if you--or, I mean, you were speaking on behalf of the firm--but you wished that maybe you had started earlier concentrating on majority businesses to do business with as a firm.
Speaker 2: See, life's experiences slows you down sometimes 'cause at the time I was coming along, there was little hope that you could do that, and so you probably carried that attitude much longer than you should--you never retried. And so we really didn't really retry until this opportunity came along and then that's opened our eyes, said maybe attitudes have changed and so let's try and get back into that market.
Story_ID: 10694
Speaker 1: Now--looking back on. I mean you, you, you're a very modest man so, you know, you said, "I don't know, they made me managing partner, I'm not exactly sure why." But is that true that you're not exactly sure why?
Speaker 2: I think I've made a nice (laughs)--I think I've made some nice relationships in the city and I've done a job--nice job. I really didn't want to have my name associated with the firm at the locations that we had before we went to to the Defender Bill and because they just weren't representative of what I thought, you know, the conditions should be. So--then that happened. I--sometimes in the course of things, I thought I might leave, but, I'm just so happy that that didn't happen and things worked out the way they have, so--.
Story_ID: 10695
Speaker 1: So when you became part of, you know, the management, how--were there, were there struggles in that because you had come in, you know, as a junior person and, you know, and people had started the firm, were there any of those issues or--you know, sometimes it's hard to let go when you've started something.
Speaker 2: No that's, that's, you know, that's obviously true. But I've always respected that, that she was the founder of the firm. So that should never and could never be challenged, so I wasn't about to do anything like that. Mr. Pittman had--he just would not interfere with anything and so he would just let you take a lead as to where one might be going and so I've--I didn't have any real obstacles, or any real struggles, or any of those things that I really thought seriously about, so--. No, I think that it worked well.
Story_ID: 10696
Speaker 1: Now, what--with your--once you became managing partner, you know, and the time, you know, so--that's around the time, no that's a few years after though that--let's see 1967--that's probably what ten years after, you know, the whole thing with first getting ComEd and the Bill Berry incident. Am I right about time? You said 19--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I came in after that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right. So what were your, you know, your sort of thoughts and plans and how you played a significant role here in terms of building, building this firm.
Speaker 2: Well I was kind of the representative at Chicago United and, and I'd always been--tried--active in the community. I've tried to involve myself in those things we thought that the community would think would be important and so--that meant a lot of different arenas--both white and black and so--from that I've been able to help the firm too.
Speaker 1: Now the Chicago United experience, that had to be a new experience for you, right? In a lot of ways.
Speaker 2: In a lot of ways. And it was, you know, we--the blacks really thought that was a new experience for most of them and even though they were a lot older than me they felt that it was really something to be able to sit around the table with the CEOs of these major corporations in town. But, you know, they always have a white and a black co-chairman of Chicago United--at least they have historically. And I ultimately became one of the co-chairman of Chicago United.  and then that led me into the chairman of FAC which they call the Financial Advisory Council which does consulting with the city or helps the city in terms of their economics. So that has led to a lot of other relationships that I've benefitted from as a firm and both personally.
Speaker 1: And so we're talking about--you said you became partner in--.
Speaker 2: '76, I think.
Speaker 1: '76?
Speaker 2: It may have been earlier. Maybe--I'll have to look it up, it's been so long.
Story_ID: 10697
Speaker 1: So you're talking about really over like twenty--well twenty-four years that this has--you know, you've had your name on this firm and you've played a significant role. And, I guess I would just ask, you know, a reflective question and that is, you know, how do you feel about the career that you've built and the firm you've helped build.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, you can always do better. I think that we've had some turnover over the years of some bright people. And I'm not so sure I've always been better off by leaving, but if we could have ever stayed together and built a mass, we could have been a lot further along than we are, so I'm still disappointed where we are as a firm. At the same time, I feel just absolutely wonderful at--from where we came. And we're able to have the kind of employees that we have now and pay the kind of salaries that we pay. Being really somewhat competitive in every area. I mean, that's really truly gratifying to me, but, you know for us to say that we're the largest firm in the city that--you know, largest minority firm that doesn't mean very much to me because we're still so very small. So we really need to try and develop some real mass, some real number of people to really create a huge firm that can really offer services across the board and in every respect.
Speaker 1: So how do you think that can be done? You know, what, I mean, right now, you know, we're here in a Chicago where the oldest black law firm was just, you know, recently dissolved. And, and, you know, even the other firms are doing--I'm talking about the legal side--are doing okay, but people are, you know, jumping ship like [?!?!?!?!??!] goes back to practice. And what do you believe is the, you know--what would be necessary--or what do you feel would be necessary to make things sort of stand on their own, or do you think that's even important?
Speaker 2: Personally, I think it's important. But for me to do it, I don't think it's important. I think that right now I want to be retired as soon as I can and I think there would be more of a challenge than I would really want to take, 'cause I don't want to commit myself to that kind of effort anymore. But I think that some young person, the right young person come along try and get some capital together, consolidate the firms that are here in the city. And then really build an entity--and I think we have the respect in the community where we can do the work, but I just don't think that we have the mass of people to offer the kind of services that every business needs today. We could build a bigger firm in a niche market. I'm not sure that that's not one alternative that shouldn't be considered. But I think we need something bigger than what we are right now.
Speaker 1: Have you planned for succession planning here in this firm? And--as a--what will happen to the firm when you go?
Speaker 2: No, well. We have a plan somewhat in place. It was disrupted a little bit a couple of years ago 'cause one person left. But on the consulting side that's well handled. On the audit side, I think we continue to work on that. If I left, we would be okay, but it's not exactly where I'd want it to be right now, so.
Story_ID: 10698
Speaker 1: Blacks in accounting, can you tell me what your feeling--I mean you started, still in this area where you were sort of one of very, very few. And what are your hopes for the future in this whole arena?
Speaker 2: I'm encouraged because I think that, you know, black people now would like to work for black people. You've got to become competitive in order for that to really happen. So we've got to have the kind of firm that has the kind of clients and the same kind of experiences that they would get in some other firm. So, at first I think that people would have been a little nervous about working for an African American company. I don't think that that's the case anymore, so I'm encouraged by that. So I think that if we could really build a firm and get the people to market the way there are--you never know about the subtleties that are out there that might get in the way of what you're trying to do, but I think that it's really possible and I don't want to give up hope. I don't even want to give up hope about blacks going to the big firms. I think that there's going to ultimately be some breakthroughs where there's going to be some significant accomplishments by African Americans in the larger firms. I see some of that in the private sector--I see some, you know, some elevation of African Americans to key and top spots. Not necessarily in accounting, but generally. And I think that if generally--and I think that if you see a general pattern occurring than that bodes well for everybody, I think.
Speaker 1: Do you have--so it sounds like you feel pretty positive about the future in terms of let's say blacks in accounting or blacks in business, period.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I have to be positive about that. And I think that there are a lot of blacks that are doing well that people do not really hear about. I think there's going to be more of that. I think that there are going to be more and bigger and better black business. I think capitalization now is being formed and being offered. I mean something that has not always been the case, so--we've gotten a lot more educated African Americans with MBAs and things like that that are not going to just sit still, but are entrepreneurial--they're going to try. So I just feel like there's going to be some very positive times in this whole arena.
Story_ID: 10699
Speaker 1: Do you have any thoughts about--I mean, you know, with your positive thoughts, do you think that there are things that your generation had that let's say my generation or other generations lack and that are sort of critical for things moving in the right direction.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think the young people want to work the way we do. And I don't know if we should expect them to--that's the dilemma--I don't think that the education even though they come from good schools is as broad as it was for us as we came along. 'Cause I see, you know, real deficiencies. Particularly in someone who's supposed to be an accounting major, starting in the field of accounting. But--the disciplines, the desire, I think the whole lifestyle now--because opportunities are so much greater--I mean we,  anyone from here can leave and get them a job in a heartbeat, so I mean, the loyalties that used to be there--even among the majority firms is no longer there. So there's a whole--I had one girl leave just a couple of months ago and she had been here a couple of years ago--a couple of years. And I really thought highly of her and I was really  down because she was leaving. And she said, "Don't feel badly." I can't think of anyone in her--she couldn't think of anyone in her graduation class who was still with the same company that they started out with. So it's just a general attitude and feeling among young people now that they're just going to skip and rotate and they're not going to work as hard as--so it's a different, different generation, I think.
Story_ID: 10700
Speaker 1: I know you had talked about Mr. Beasley and his, you know, role in your life. And are there other people in your adult professional life that had influence on you. They may be in accounting, they may not be. And I'd like to know who they are and why?
Speaker 2: Well, that's probably several in my adult life. Clark Burris who was a comptroller of the city of Chicago who has always tried to be helpful. Erwin France he was with Model Cities--always tried to be helpful. Fred Ford who used to work for the forum here now is vice chairman of the Drape and Kramer estate and good contact with him. Chris Howard--he has since passed, but he was with Mr. [S.B.] Fuller in some of his operations and really took a liking to me and always nurtured and encouraged me. You hate to start mentioning names 'cause then you're gonna, you know, omit some that are important. Earl Neal, he's, you know, one of the top lawyers in the city who has always been supportive. James Montgomery who I went to high school and college with, he was a little ahead of me, so I don't remember him from those days, but I really have come--become close to him at this point, he's always been. You know, [Illinois Circuit Court judge] Ellis Reid, you know, my own classmates. Ellis Reid who's now a judge. Roscoe Mitchell who has since died, but was really a wonderful person. Just--I mean the list goes on and on and on. And if I have omitted someone, I apologize, but, there are a lot of--a lot of people that have helped--in the black and white community, really. I didn't mention any white names, but I can mention a classmate of mine, Stewart Levine, who has always been good. James O'Connor, who is president of Commonwealth Edison--I have always found a real connection with him. So it's just across the board.
Speaker 1: And, just one question about Clark Burris. Why do you think Clark Burris played such a role here, what, you know, what is special about him?
Speaker 2: I think he's truly special because he's intellectually solid. He's a stand up guy. And--I mean, he just pushes for the right thing. And he's not afraid. You know, sometimes we get in positions where we're afraid to help each other. That has never been one of his problems. I think he's always been forthright, analyzes things quite appropriately. And has just been generally helpful.
Story_ID: 10701
Speaker 1: I know you've been very civically involved and you were, but--two years, three years ago--made chairman of the--or you got involved in the Federal Reserve Bank. And then--when did you become chairman?
Speaker 2: I became chairman in my third year. I was on the board for one year and then I was deputy chairman the second year and then I was chairman the third, fourth and fifth year. This is my sixth year and this is the maximum I can serve, so I'll be coming off the board at the end of this year.
Speaker 1: I'd like you to recount, you know, that you were--how you were invited to these luncheons. And sort had an idea that maybe something was up, but how, how did this whole thing even with you being invited to be part--how did that come about?
Speaker 2: Now that you'd never know--at, now I have some experience now 'cause I see what the process is, but someone internally submitted my name to Washington, someone at the Federal Reserve Bank and I would suspect it was the president at the time who submitted my name to the Federal Reserve Board of Governors in Washington [D.C.] because I'm in a class of director that has to be appointed by the Board of Governors so that nine members of the board, three are Class-C directors and I'm one of those Class-C directors, who--those are the only three than can become chairman of a district bank. And so I was one of those three that are appointed by the Board of Governors.
Speaker 1: And so, okay, that whole experience, can you just tell me, I mean, were there things you learned? Was it--has it been an interesting experience?
Speaker 2: It's, you know, it's been an unbelievable experience. I mean, it started from the very first visit--well, first visit to the branch bank after they told me that I was going to be on the board. And so I went down and visited with the president of the Federal Reserve Bank here. And then after being selected, or appointed, I was invited to Washington and at that time, there was an introductory meeting with all of the governors. (Pauses) Will all of the governors in a--what they call an orientation. And so you have dinner with the governors the night before. And then you have a day session where you are introduced into the Federal Reserve System and the responsibilities of a director. And then you have one-on-one meeting with each of the Board of Governors, including the Chairman to let them express their views and you, in turn, express your views to them because you operate a lot on anecdotal information when you're on the board. So me I'm kind of naive and don't have a lot of experience, but when I see people coming in that are heads of major corporations, heads of the largest banks in the city, coming on the board, going through that same orientation where you think they would know everything--everyone comes back with a sense that they have learned something. So that experience of sitting around--by law you have to vote on the discount rate every fourteen days. So you have a telephone meeting every fourteen days, if not a meeting in person. So just to discuss what does the economy look like and what kind of recommendation would you make relative to interest rates. The people that you meet, not only at your own interest bank, but being chairman and going through the chairman meetings and meeting other chairmans of all the other banks around the country and you're talking about the, the really true corporate leadership in the United States when you talk about that. And then to have the opportunity to sit at the table with Alan Greenspan and just like anyone else. So as a kid from 31st Street, I mean, this is really quite something for him. You know, so I've--I mean, it's been an experience that I'll always remember. One that--to say six years have gone by, I can't believe it. Time just goes by so rapidly. To say that I've contributed, I like to think that I have. And at the same time, I know I've learned a lot. So it's been a give and go, give and get, so--. I can't say anything bad about the experience. Unfortunately we did have a suit to come under while I was chairman, a discrimination suit that goes back quite a few years. But it just happened on my watch, that's unfortunate. But I know things have been put in place to try and change that attitude. I can't say much more than that because it is a pending case, but, I know that the bank itself in terms of--since I've been there--and Mike [Michael H.] Moskow, the president of the bank have gone to undo lengths to make sure that we try and change the attitude of everyone there. Create the opportunity for everyone there, regardless of race, color or creed.
