Story_ID: 78595
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Calvin Sylvester Morris, C-A-L-V-I-N, S-Y-L-V-E-S-T-E-R, M-O-R-R-I-S.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania in 1941, March 16th.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a minister, organizational administrator.  I've spent most of my life being a teacher, a professor in theological seminaries.  And I was--before coming to Community Renewal Society, Executive Vice President and Academic Dean at Interdenominational Theological Center in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: All right, now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date, I do believe, is Friday, March the 21st, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time.
Speaker 2: We are in my residence, which is a co-op apartment at 6901 South Oglesby Avenue, Number 7D, Chicago, Illinois 60649.
Story_ID: 78596
Speaker 1: All right, sir.  Now, before we go into depth, there are like, five "People Magazine-ish" type questions--
Speaker 2: Oh, oh (unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --that I am compelled to ask you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: For the beautiful people cover, I'm sure.  Go ahead (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) All right.  And they just require a short answer.  And the first one is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Food.  My favorite food?  Now, that's an interesting question.  Probably collard greens.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I don't know exactly what you call it.  It's sort of a cross between maroon and pink.
Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Late Spring.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Cape Town, South Africa.
Speaker 1: All right, and, sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "Hold fast to dreams for when dreams die, life is a broken-winged bird that cannot fly"--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --by Langston Hughes.
Story_ID: 78597
Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell me about the origin of your family, what you know?  Not--I don't mean your whole family history, right now 'cause I'm gonna ask some specific questions as we go along about specific people, your mother and father.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: But do you know the order--how far can you go back in terms of family history?
Speaker 2: I know a little bit about my great, great grandmother and my great, great grandfather.  So probably 1850s, 1860s.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what do you know about them?  Are there stories that are associated with them?
Speaker 2: I don't know a great deal.  I knew--I have pictures of my grandmother's mother.  And we have gone back to the, what do you call them?  The census.  We've gone back to the census of 1870 and found her and her siblings.  And then the 1890 census, found my, my grandmother.  I know that the maternal side of the family came from Maryland, the Eastern shore of Maryland.  I think one or both of my great, great grandparents, I believe, were slaves, though that's--I'm not sure about that because the, the, my grandfather's side of the family were Philadelphians.  And they had been in Philadelphia since the middle of the nineteenth century.  Now, it doesn't mean they weren't slaves, but it meant that they, as far as we know, they came from Virginia to Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. Now, do you know their names?
Speaker 2: My great grandfather's name was Jeremiah, Rev. Jeremiah Morris.  He was an AME [African Methodist Episcopal] minister.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, that's something we didn't know.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That tells us something about--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and my great grandmother's name was Ida Turner.  My grandmother was named after her.
Speaker 1: Now, is this the Philadelphia side of the family?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, the Philadelphia side was the Jeremiah Morris, Rev. Jeremiah Morris. The Eastern shore side was Ida Turner--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because my grandmother's maiden name was Turner.
Speaker 1: Now, my father's family, about whom I know very little, came from North Carolina.  But those two grandparents and the two great grandparents I'm talking were related to my mother.
Speaker 2: All right, but your father's side, you know little about?
Speaker 1: I don't know very much about the, about the side there.  I, I did meet my grandfather one time.  And what I remembered was he looked just like my father or my father looked just like him.  And of the siblings, I look just like my father now.  But I do know that they are, they're from North Carolina.
Speaker 2: Okay, you know what part of North Carolina?
Speaker 1: Yes, they are from a little town called Mount Olive, which is close to Rocky Mount.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And their names are Williams.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: My maternal name is Morris.
Story_ID: 78598
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about your mother [Dorothy Lee Morris].  Can you give us her full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Before I do that, there was an uncle on my grandmother's side of the family, who was a Methodist bishop, African United Methodist bishop.
Speaker 1: African United Methodist?
Speaker 2: Methodist bishop, yeah, AUMP [African Union First Colored Methodist Protestant Church and Connection] Church.  And--
Speaker 1: Did that become the Black United Methodist at some point?
Speaker 2: It was, it was a--it was an offshoot, we think, of the AME [African Methodist Episcopal] church.  There were some blacks who didn't stay in the--the Methodist church was the white denomination.  There were some who went in the AME church.  Of course, there were some who went in the AME Zion church.  And then there were, after the Civil War, the CME [Christian Methodist Episcopal] church.  But there was a small group called the African United Methodist Protestant church.  And that was black.  And his name was Ruley, R-U-L-E-Y, Bishop Ruley.  So that's, there were some other ministerial stuff in the, in our history as well, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I found him in a book, a history of the AUMP church.  They have a listing of the bishops in the back of the book.  And his name is there.
Speaker 1: Now, do you know where the--this is first time I've ever heard this, so do you know where the AUMP church predominately--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Primarily was Wilmington, Delaware area.  There is a little AUMP congregation or at least a historic building that is adjacent to the Memorial Arts at Lincoln University, [Oxford] Pennsylvania, my undergraduate college.  And it's on Old Route 1.  So it was in, it was sort of Pennsylvania.  I think Southwestern part, and the Wilmington, Delaware area.  My uncle, my grandmother's Uncle Ruley had a house in Wilmington.  'Cause my grandmother and her sisters when they were young girls, they would go to visit their uncle there.
Speaker 1: Now, this is all on your mother's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: On my mother's side.
Speaker 1: So you had reverends in two denominations?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 78599
Speaker 1: And still nothing comes to mind about your father's side?
Speaker 2: What I've learned about my father's side is that, it was a family of entrepreneurs, that they all had little stores, little restaurants, little speakeasies or whatever--that's what.  They wouldn't call 'em speakeasies.  They would have called them, pejoratively, I suspect they would have called them juke joints.  But, but they were business-type people.  And my dad [Abner Williams] even had a little store in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] for a while, a little candy store.  And one of his brothers also had a store.  And it was only during the aftermath of my father's funeral services, which just occurred in October of 2002, he was 87 when he died, that I began to hear these stories of that side of the family.  My, my younger brother has visited there, the homestead, many, many times.  But I never have.
Story_ID: 78600
Speaker 1: Okay, now let me continue about your mother.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My mother's name was Dorothy, D-O-R-O-T-H-Y.  Her middle name was Lee, L-E-E, Morris.  And her un-married name was Harvey.  But my mother married when I was in my, probably twelve or thirty.  She was a little lady, 4'10", always petite, a very pretty woman.  She was a cross between a great--she had a great sense of humor, and--on one side.  But on another side, she was very serious and, and I think, in some respects, sad.  I don't think my mother's personal and romantic life was as she might have had it, wished it.  She was fiercely committed to me.  I was her only child and did all those things that, that single moms do.  I lived, I grew up living with my mother, my grandmother [Ida Lydia Turner Morris] and my grandfather.
Speaker 1: In the same household?
Speaker 2: Same household, yes.  And my mom contacted or is it contracted--I can't, I never could think--rheumatic fever when she was a senior in high school.  And so for all of my life, she was ill off and on, in and out of the doctor's office, in and out of the hospital.  She could not work long stretches of time.  And so I recall my own childhood anxiety when my mother would be ill, and she died at a relatively young age.  She was forty-eight years old.  And I was in my last year of seminary at Boston University School of Theology.  She was very committed to my success and achievement.
Story_ID: 78601
Speaker 1: And I learned as a child two things primarily; one from my family with whom I was reared, my mother [Dorothy Lee Morris], my grandmother [Ida Lydia Turner Morris] and my grandfather, that I was expected always to do my best.  I did not have to be the top student, but I had to achieve at my level of potential.  And that was their expectation of me, and it was imprinted on my mind and on my heart.  And, and the way that I would cause them most pain would be to do something that was injurious or was antithetical to their own sense of my possibilities and potentialities.  What I learned from my dad [Abner Williams] was that while I was no better than anybody else, nobody else was any better than me.  And I had those two kinds of things going on all the time as I grew up.  My mother and father, in their youth in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], were activists.  There was a big boycott of the trolley cars in Philadelphia in the '40's [1940s], and my--both my mother and father participated in those actions.  And they wouldn't ride the bus and they demonstrated, etc., and so forth.  But I learned about that many, many years later.
Story_ID: 78602
Speaker 1: Now, what was your mother's [Dorothy Lee Morris] background?  I mean you said that there were quite a few reverends in the family.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, did--I mean did she have a chance to go to school and--
Speaker 2: My mother and my father [Abner Williams] both graduated from high school.  But no farther than that.  My grandmother [Ida Lydia Turner Morris] was the church person.  And so I went to church with my grandmother.  And since I was the only one of the twenty-six grandchildren in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] at the time who lived with her, I was considered her favorite as was my mother considered the favorite of her twelve children because we both lived with her and my grandfather.  My grandmother came from a family of sixteen, and she then had, with my grandfather, twelve children.
Story_ID: 78603
Speaker 1: So my mother [Dorothy Lee Morris], when she could work, was a chambermaid in a hotel, in a black hotel in North Philadelphia.
Speaker 2: What was the name of that hotel?
Speaker 1: Ingersol Hotel.
Speaker 2: Ingersol is a black hotel?
Speaker 1: I-N-G-E-R-S-O-L.  It was owned by two black men, and she worked there as a chambermaid.  Her older sister, Evelyn, whom we called "Sister", worked there behind the desk.  And one of my aunts, Florence and my Aunt Betty, they all worked there at different times in the hotel.  But my mother's shift was from 12:00 to 8:00.  And so she would come to church, but she was never very excited about the preaching.  She loved the music.  And so she would stay until near 12:00.  Church began at 11:00, and the Ingersol Hotel was only two blocks from our church.  And she would then go from, from church to work.
Speaker 2: After the choir's big number?
Speaker 1: After the choir, my mom would slip out.  And she always had the excuse, legitimate excuse, that she had to go to work, which she was.  But I, I don't think she would have wanted to stay after the singing anyhow.  She was a singer.  She had a beautiful alto voice.  My grandmother was, sang.  I sing.  My daughter, my daughter--I had two daughters.  One was killed in an automobile accident in 1994, but my remaining daughter is a singer, Chicago Symphony Chorus, Grant Park Chorus, His Majesty's Clerks, Chicago A'capella.  She, she is a classically trained singer, so that music flows in our family.  So one of the favorite things my mother and I liked to do was to listen to Ella Fitzgerald and Billie Holliday, and all of those--Ruth Brown and all of those, Mahalia Jackson, all those kinds of people.
Story_ID: 78604
Speaker 1: My mother [Dorothy Lee Morris] was a very public-spirited person.  She was interested in what was going on in the community, and while I grew up in a household that did not have books--and I'll tell you why I have all these books.  I collect books now.  And there's no room in this house that doesn't have bookcases.  But we were a family of newspapers.  And so we, we had, we got the Philadelphia morning paper which was called the "Enquirer".  We got the evening paper which is called the "Philadelphia Bulletin".  The "Enquirer" is still existence.  I think the "Bulletin" is not.  We got two black newspapers, weekly newspapers in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], one called "The Philadelphia Tribune", which is one of the oldest black newspapers in the country.  "The Philadelphia Independent" and we got a black newspaper called "The Pittsburgh Courier".  And we read the newspaper after dinner.  And then we discussed what we read in the newspaper.  And so I had my time to talk about what I read--
Speaker 2: So this was organized?
Speaker 1: It was organized.  Now, I did not understand the process at the time, but later on, as I would go to high school--and I went to a Quaker school in downtown Philadelphia, where I was exposed to passivism and nonviolence and all that kind of stuff long before I joined SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] and got to know Martin Luther King, Jr.  So we, we did all that kind of discussing of current events, what was going on in the world.  I remember the "Pittsburgh Courier" had a column by Benjamin E. Mays, the President of Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], who was the Dean of the School of Religion at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] where I would go to be on the faculty for sixteen years and actually Dr. Mays suggested that I go to Howard because he was the chair of the Board of Trustees of the Martin Luther King Center for Nonviolent Social Change during the three years I was executive director down there.  And Langston Hughes who I would meet three years before his death, also had the simple column.  And so Lester Grainger of the Urban League and you learned about, you know, Mary McLeod Bethune and Mary Church Terrell and all these significant African American people who were very much involved in the world of politics and Civil Rights and things of that type.  That was a part of my upbringing as a little boy in North Philadelphia.
Speaker 2: Did you ever read J. A. Rogers' column, "Your History"?
Speaker 1: Yes, I do.  I remember J. A. Rogers [Joel Augustus Rogers], and I know I remember, I think Lester Granger may have had a column for a while.  I remember reading about W.E.B DuBois and Roy Wilkins, James Farmer, later, Bayard Rustin who I met, and I knew.  So, yeah.
Story_ID: 78605
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: So my mother, so that is sort of that kind of background.  My grandmother [Ida Lydia Turner Morris] was the religious person, and I went to church with her.  And in those days, of course, you went to church all day.  Not only did you have morning service.  You'd then go to have lunch, usually at my aunt's house, around the corner from the church, and then you go back to afternoon service and sometimes evening service.  Because I was a singer, and I accompanied my grandmother everywhere, she was always volunteering me for church teas.  And so I sang in Methodist, Presbyterian, Baptist, Holiness, all kinds of churches, was a very ecumenical young person because in those days, like they have the big gospel concerts now in the afternoon and evenings at churches, that wasn't the case then.  You went to teas, and there you would have--there'd be a donation, and people would come, and there would be a program.  And there would be people who sang like I did, others who recited poems.  We had a lady in our church who taught us the poems of, of "When Malindy Sings"--
Speaker 1: [Paul Laurence] Dunbar.
Speaker 2: Dunbar, and we learned James Weldon Johnson's "Life Every Voice", and usually, that was part of the program of the afternoon church teas.  You had music, you had poetry readings.  You might have both quartets or solos, things of that type.
Story_ID: 78606
Speaker 1: Okay, I wanna backtrack a bit--
Speaker 2: Please.
Speaker 1: --and ask you about your father.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us his full name and spell it for us,--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Abner, A-B-N-E-R, Williams, W-I-L-L-I-A-M-S.  My dad was born, he was 87 when he died.  So 1916, probably.  And he was born in North Carolina.  He left North Carolina under some rather strange circumstances.  And I've never, I've--we never--he wouldn't talk very much about it.  But from what we gather, his mother was close friends with the town sheriff.  And, and the sheriff came to her and said, your boy had better get out of town, and he'd better get out of town quickly.  And so my father, I think his mother gave him $2.00, and he left, late at night, after midnight.  And he had to walk a certain destination, and then he hopped trains.  And he made his way to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  Now, he may have stopped off some place for a while, but he eventually ended up in Philadelphia.
Story_ID: 78607
Speaker 1: Okay. We're rolling again.
Speaker 2: Okay. Good.
Speaker 1: I'm just gonna pick up with your father [Abner Williams] then arrived in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: About how old is he when he gets there?
Speaker 2: My dad was twenty six when I was born.  And I was born in 1941.  And I think he'd been in the city for five or six years.  So he probably came late teens, very early twenties.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My dad was a very entrepreneurial person.  He was a kind of guy who was very street savvy.  And so, in those days, he would have been, I guess, what you'd call a "Numbers Runner", I guess.  He, and he was very successful with the cards.  And he was such a successful numbers runner, I think for a while there, he had people working for him.  He also became in some later years, he worked for the city in the trash and garbage collecting department.
Speaker 1: Streets and sanitation?
Speaker 2: Streets and sanitation.  As I said, he owned a store.  He, he was very--he had a real capability to do a lot of things.  He was a leader, and both a leader in the streets and then when he married our mom, our step mom--and they were married forty-seven years, she was from North Carolina, and a very active member of a Baptist church.  My, my father's side are Baptist, and my mother's side, we're basically Methodist, AME's [African Methodist Episcopal] and United Methodists.  He became the chairman of the Trustee Board at the church and held that position fourteen years.  He became a deacon.  He chaired the prayer band that visited people in the hospitals and homes.  He was the chairperson of a daycare center in North Philadelphia near the church.  He was the president of the block club where they lived in West Philadelphia.  And according to the people who spoke at his funeral, he mentored many of the young men in the church as they became trustee members and deacons and all the rest.  So, he was quite a colorful character, and our, my siblings and I, their--our mothers all died early.  And so our father was really the kind of bedrock presence in our lives the last thirty-five years.  So he was quite a, he was quite a man.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 78608
Speaker 1: Now, tell me how did your mother [Dorothy Lee Morris] and father [Abner Williams] meet?  Is there a story about that?
Speaker 2: I really have no idea how they met.  They would have all been living in North Philadelphia at the time.  My grandmother [Ida Lydia Turner Morris] was not terribly taken with my father because he was such a man of the world and streets and stuff.  And so I am sure that she, while she was fond of him and was always very respectful of him, and she appreciated the fact that he was a good father, my sense is that she was not saddened when my mom decided not to marry him.  My mother had a number of siblings who were older, and it may have been that she met my father through one of her siblings.
Speaker 1: So she was young when she (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, she was not that young.  My, when I was born, my mother was twenty-two.
Speaker 1: Okay, I mean he was a bit older?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was twenty-six.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's not that--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --big a difference.
Story_ID: 78609
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you see your father [Abner Williams] quite a bit when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yeah.  We all lived in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  Yeah, I just didn't live in the house with him.  When my grandmother [Ida Lydia Turner Morris] died, during my 11th year in high school, I went to live with my father, and that was the first time because my father's house in West Philadelphia was much larger than my mother and her husband's house.  They lived in a little apartment, actually a one-bedroom apartment.  And so I went to live with my dad.  It was not a, it was not a wonderful year because after--we had never lived together.  And, and he had some assumptions about me because when he would come to see me, I was always at home.  I always studying, and when I went to live with him, I would come in after 12:00 on the weekends.  And he thought that I was taking advantage of him and doing some things in his house that I never did in my grandmother and my mother and grandfather's house.  And so we, we had some, some difficulties.  And I left before graduating from high school.  And those last several months, I went to stay with my mother and her husband in those rather cramped quarters.  And then I went off to college, and I really didn't spend much time in Philadelphia after that.
Speaker 1: So you lived with your father from age 11 to about--
Speaker 2: No, I lived with my father from age 16 to age 17 or age 17 to age 18.  I lived with my father from--I went to live with him when I was in the 11th grade of high school.
Speaker 1: Oh, all right, not 11 years old.
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: All right.  (Unclear) I'm losing it here (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Story_ID: 78610
Speaker 1: Okay, well, now, I want you to reflect back and let me know something about what the atmosphere was like when you grew up.  You've talked about a lot of things--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --and give me some of the sights, and sounds, and smells of growing up in West Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: It was an, it was a neighborhood of primarily, almost overwhelmingly African Americans, people from different parts of the country, mainly the South.  There were people who, when one would go to their homes, there would be collard greens and rice and a particular kind of cuisine which was quite different from our cuisine.  We didn't eat rice as a staple food.  We ate white potatoes, and, and broccoli and string beans and things of that type.  My, my grandmother [Ida Lydia Turner Morris] didn't cook greens.  It was only when my father [Abner Williams] married my stepmom--I was 12 years old when that happened, that I really learned how delicious collard greens were and cornbread, and particularly the kind of cornbread that would be made from meal in a frying pan.  And so the, the meal would be put in frying pan, and then it would be turned over.  And, but the inside would be succulent.  But the outside would be very crisp and hard.  And my stepmom also made barbeque pork.  I had never had chopped barbeque pork that way.  And there were friends of mine in my neighborhood whose parents cooks in that variety.  And I remember how much I liked the food, not that I didn't enjoy my grandmother's food because she cooked chicken and dumplings, and she would do this pot pie of, with all the ingredients of leftover foods.  And we usually had pot pie when we were pretty low in terms of our funds and things of that type, but with a huge, wonderful crust.
Story_ID: 78611
Speaker 1: It was, it was the kind of neighborhood where the, some of the older women who didn't work would sit and lean on the, the windowsills because where I lived, there were three-story brick buildings, all together.
Speaker 2: Row houses?
Speaker 1: Not row houses.  The row houses were in other parts of North Philadelphia and where my father lived in West Philadelphia.  And those row houses had little porches and a little backyard.  Where I lived in North Philadelphia, we had a big backyard.  Now, it was mostly dirt.  It wasn't a whole lot of grass back there, but the homes were all together and they were three-story brick house.
Speaker 2: So they were houses close together but not joined--
Speaker 1: No, they were joined.
Speaker 2: They were joined.  Okay.
Speaker 1: You--that is, they were all joined together, but you, you couldn't go from one house to the other house inside.  But they were all together.  And these ladies would sit out and they would just watch the street.  And they would know when you came in.   And they'd know when you left.  And if you were a child, and you did anything that you weren't supposed to do, they would tell.  And by the time your mother, your parents got home, they would have the information.  So they--we called them "nose boxes" or we said they were nosy people.  But they were the kind of folks who could tell you if you were doing something you weren't supposed to do, they could tell you to stop.  If you didn't, and then they told your parents, you only--not only got whipped for doing what you were doing, you got an extra whipping because you were disrespectful to those ladies who were leaning out of the windows, oftentimes with rather big bosoms, as I recall. But it was, it was a neighborhood where people knew one another.  It was not unusual for the kids to be in and out of different friends' houses.  Some of the houses were cut up in apartments.  And then there were a few homes on the block that were owned by the people who lived in them.  So they were, they were full residences.  They were not cut up in apartments.  But most of them were, were apartment buildings.
Story_ID: 78612
Speaker 1: We played a lot of pinochle.  Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], you play a lot of pinochle.  Up in Harrisburg [Pennsylvania] and Pittsburg was [bid] whist.  We played pinochle.  We played--we pitched pennies.  We shot marbles.  We made our own scooters from, from wood, two pieces of wood, one that stood vertically, the other horizontal.  And we would take the rollers from the roller skates and put them under the board.  And we would, we would have our own scooters, hand-made scooters.  We did a lot of softball in the afternoons--early mornings in the summer before the sun got too high in the sky, and it got really hot.  And then we'd go back later in the afternoon and finish those games.  We went to the movies.  We played touch football in the street.  We would, we would have to stop the game often because the cars and the trolley cars or the buses were, were coming.  We went to the movies.  I had wonderful friends when I grew up.  There were five or six of us who hung out together.  And even I left to go downtown to the Quaker School, and I didn't have as much time to spend with my friends in the neighborhood, particularly, because the work was so onerous.  There was so much of it.  My friends did not turn me away.  They continued to be my friends, and they were very open when I could come out to play, which wasn't often.  And I've always appreciated that, that they understood the fact that, that I had to do that work.
Story_ID: 78613
Speaker 1: And, and, of course, there was church.  And I sang in all the choirs and participated in the youth fellowship, was president of the youth fellowship, the Methodist Youth Fellowship.  And then there was family, my cousins, my aunts, my uncles.  And as long as my grandmother [Ida Lydia Turner Morris] was alive, we had the big family dinners.  And so everybody came to where mama was.  We called her "mama", and we called my grandfather "daddy".  After her death, the different units of the family would sort of split off in the sense that the big family dinners, the different nuclear family groups, had their own dinners.
Speaker 2: She was the nucleus.
Speaker 1: She was the nucleus--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --of the family.  And because of my identification with her, when I return to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], everybody will gather when I come to town because I really think, unconsciously, they identify me with her in the sense of being that, that one who kind of brings all of the kind of nuclear units of our family together.
Story_ID: 78614
Speaker 1: I had a, I had a very positive upbringing with a lot of encouragement from the people in the church, certainly, the encouragement of my mother [Dorothy Lee Morris] and father [Abner Williams] and grandfather.  And my father certainly had always communicated to me a, an expectation that, that I would do the very best that I could.  My father was very proud of me, I'm told by other people.  He was not very generous with compliments.  If you did something well, his response was pretty much, well, you were supposed to do that well.  I mean should you get brownie points for that?  No.  But I learned from my stepmom that whenever there was an article in the paper or there was something in "JET Magazine" or "Ebony" or any of that, he would go out, and he would buy up the store.  And then he'd take the paper and give copies to all of his friends.  And so when she told me that, what I decided to do, and I did this for more than twenty five years, I would gather the accumulation of places where I went to speak, the programs, churches, colleges, universities, and I put them in a big envelope.  And I send them to my father without any kind of commentary.  I'd just send them to him.  And my, my stepmom said, he would then take those and he'd walk them to his friends and say, this is what Calvin is doing, etc., and so forth.
Story_ID: 78615
Speaker 1: My mother [Dorothy Lee Morris] was like that too.  My mother kept all of my awards from elementary school through college, and I found them all in a shopping bag after her death.  And going through those and just having a sense of how much she, she valued and treasured my little achievements, I began to cry.  And I cried all day long because I hadn't really, I hadn't really cried when I heard about her death because she died of a heart attack.  And since I was the only child, I had to do all of the arrangements and the funeral and the service.  And I didn't do the service, but I did put the service together.  And--
Speaker 2: Now that's interesting that--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I did everything--actually, I have the, I wrote a statement for the funeral program, which I still have.  I've framed it.  I don't have it out now, but I have it.  I chose all the songs.  I chose the scriptures, and everything.  So I didn't have a lot of time for, for grieving, and, but when I went back--I was in Boston at the time.  When I went back to Boston, and I took some things from the house, and going through those things, I found all of the, of my little awards from beginning in elementary school.
Speaker 2: That's a powerful story.
Speaker 1: Um-hum [Nodding head, yes].
Story_ID: 78616
Speaker 1: Now, how--I take it that you were a big achiever in school, I guess with--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --with this (unclear) (simultaneous).  What did you like most about school and what are the highlights of school for you?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think I just liked school.  I liked, I was an avid speller.  I loved words.
Speaker 1: What grade school did you go to?
Speaker 2: I went to George E. Meade, M-E-A-D-E, Elementary School.
Speaker 1: In memory of the General.
Speaker 2: General, General George Meade, Civil War, Union general.  I went to Meade School, grades one through sixth.  And I was president of my class several times.  I sang, I acted in dramatic presentations.  And I did very well.  I graduated with some honors and stuff like that.  And I particularly liked words, and I loved spelling.  And in, my kids, my daughters used to kid me a lot because I've always, I always have dictionaries 'cause I love words.  And I love the etymology of words.  I, and I love to spell words.  And so I was always good in the spelling bees and all that kind of stuff.  And social studies, I loved history, and I would eventually get a PhD in history some years later.  And I enjoyed everything until sixth grade.  And then I started not having a great facility for math, and that is something that has dogged me all of my life.  And when I got to high school, I had to--I struggled with it, and that's a whole 'nother story.  But, but, yes, I enjoyed, I enjoyed school.
Story_ID: 78617
Speaker 1: I had two very important teachers in elementary school. One, a fifth grade teacher whose name was Mr. Bass, B-A-S-S, who is still alive in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And I have talked to him.  He was the teacher who took some of us out and we, we went to some affair.  I can't imagine--I can't remember where.  But then he took us back to his house.  And it was a little house, two stoops that--two-story house, I remember.  And we went in that house, and he had a bookcase that covered one wall.  And I remember going home and saying to my grandmother [Ida Lydia Turner Morris], "Mama, Mr. Bass has more books than I've ever seen before.  And when I grow up, I'm gonna have a big wall bookcase, just like Mr. Bass."  And, and I do have a big, wall bookcase, even in this very room.  And I have had that bookcase now since 1976.  It's a collapsible, and I have taken that with me to four different homes since that time.  And my other favorite teacher was my sixth grade teacher, and his name was Mr. Rider, and I believe Mr. Rider spelled his name R-I-D-E-R.  Both of those young, African American guys would go on to be principals of schools.  And Mr. Bass would, would end up being a principal of a high school in, in Philadelphia.  I also did not know at the time that Mr. Bass was among that group of African American soldiers who helped liberate one of the concentration camps--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --in Germany.
Speaker 2: --the 761st Tank.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.  And he has since become very popular--well, well known, particularly among certain groups, certain Jewish groups, and he speaks all over the country about that.  But I did not know that at the time.
Story_ID: 78618
Speaker 1: I went to Vaux Junior High School, V-A-U-X High School in North Philadelphia.  And I was there a year.  And during that year, I was in what we would call now, I think, an academically enriched class.  There were twenty-five of us in that class.  We had most of our classes together, and the only classes that we did not have together were gym classes.
Story_ID: 79632
Speaker 1: But I went to Vaux--
Speaker 2: We're ready to roll.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Vaux Junior High--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: --V-A-U-X.  And we were in this, what they called special class.  And it was based on our records from elementary school.  And I remember we sat, we sat in a circle, and we sat with these desks that have the chairs with the little tables.  And that was very unique because all the other students, they sat in these desks in rows, with people behind and in front of each other.  And this was a kind of experimental class.  And we sat in a circle, and as a teacher, many years later, I would have, I would teach my classes in a circle.  I didn't have that kind of old-fashioned thing.  And I was president of that class, my seventh grade class.  And I also, we had a big Christmas play.  And I was Santa Claus, and I sang--I also sang, I was the soloist at our sixth grade graduation luncheon, and big head.
Story_ID: 79633
Speaker 1: And one day when I was at school, I got a word that one of the school counselors, Mrs. Marjorie Tucker, T-U-C-K-E-R, marvelous, marvelous lady.  She was not my counselor, but she asked to see me.  And I went downstairs to her office, and when I arrived there and she invited me to have a seat, she said, there's an opportunity for a Negro student--in those days, "Negro", at Friends Select School, which is a Quaker school, a private school downtown, 17th and the Parkway, right by City Hall.  And we were contacted to see if we could recommend a student, a Negro boy.  And you're our first choice.  Are you interested?  And I said, well, yes, but if it's a boarding school, I'm not interested.  And she said, no--I probably didn't say boarding school.  I probably said, is it a school where they stay overnight?  And she said, no.  It's, you go in the day just like here.  And I said, well, yeah, I think I would, I think I would like something like that.  And I said, but I need to go home and talk to my mother [Dorothy Lee Morris] and my grandmother [Ida Lydia Turner Morris] and my grandfather and my dad [Abner Williams].  And I did.  And my, my mother and my grandmother said to me, well, my nickname is "Mousey", M-O-U-S-E-Y or M-O-U-S-I-E, however people spell it.  And they said, well, Mousey, if you want to go there, it's fine, but we're not gonna be able to help you with your homework.  But if it's something you wanna do, yes.  Even though it was a challenge for my mother, and for the family because the school charged tuition, and they were only offering half tuition.  And at the time, tuition was around $700.00.  And this was, I was going into the seventh grade, middle of the year.
Speaker 2: This is like late '50's [1950s]--
Speaker 1: This was '55' [1955] or '56' [1956].  And so, my family had to come up with $350.00 which was huge.  My mother was making $30.00 a week as a chambermaid.  And but my mother said, this is something, we're willing to sacrifice for this if you want to do it.  But, now, if you wanna do it, you've gotta do your best because we don't wanna waste money.  And so I said, okay.
Story_ID: 79634
Speaker 1: And so I went there [Friends Select School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in the seventh grade.  I graduated in the 12th grade from there.  The eighth, ninth, tenth and eleventh grades, I was president of my class each year.  And senior year, I had to decide whether I wanted to be president of the class or student council president.  And I chose to run for student council president and was elected president of the student council.  When I arrived at Friends Select in seventh grade, there was a young African American girl, Lorene Douglas, L-O-R-E-N-E, D-O-U-G-L-A-S, whose father was a medical doctor, who had graduated from Lincoln University in [Oxford] Pennsylvania, where I would later go.  And she and I were the two young people of color, not only in the seventh grade, but we were the only people of color in the upper school.  So eighth, ninth, tenth and eleventh and twelfth grades had no black people at all.  And that would change a little bit during my five years at Friends Select.  But there were no black teachers at all.  And we referred to our teachers by their first name.  And so if you were a female teacher and your name was Helen Johnson, you were called Teacher Helen, and if your name was Joseph Johnson, you were called Master Joe, which was very interesting.  And then the principal of the school was Head Master, and his name at the time was Master Ted, Theodore Peters.  That was such an experience for me because I was in an environment--it was completely academic.  Everybody was expected to go on to college.  It was a very rigorous place academically, and my first two or three years there were very difficult years for me because while I did excellently in public school, I was still behind when I went to Friends Select School.  I never studied as hard as I did when I was in secondary school.  College was a breeze.  Graduate school was a breeze.  The doc--the PhD was a breeze.  The only thing difficult about the PhD was the fact that it takes so long, and you've gotta write a dissertation and all that kind of stuff.  But it was, it was never as challenging.  None of my education after high school was as challenging as my high school education.
Story_ID: 79635
Speaker 1: I had a favorite person at Friends Select School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], who was the custodian, Mr. Matthew McIntyre, African American man.  And Mr. Matt, as I called him--the other students called him Matthew, but I could never call a senior by their first name, ever.  My grandmother would have rolled over in her grave if I did something like that.  And he was the man who was my mentor and tutor while I was there.  And he allowed me to accompany him on the rounds when he cleaned up the rooms.  He would let me help him, wash the blackboards, empty the trash, put the chairs in order, but mostly what he let me do was to talk.  And he let me talk about anything.  He let me ask him any kind of questions that I wanted to ask him.  And he treated me with such care and such respect.  Later when Friends Select would celebrate its 350th anniversary, I would be asked to write a--an article for the 350th Anniversary booklet.
Speaker 2: Three hundred and fiftieth anniversary?
Speaker 1: Yes, Friends Select was founded in 1689.  I wrote about Mr. Matt for that 350th anniversary because he was, he was my teacher in ways that some of the other teachers--and I had some fine teachers there.  But, but I really appreciated Mr. Matt.
Story_ID: 79636
Speaker 1: So I graduated, decided I wanted to go to a black college because my mentor growing up was a minister, a Methodist minister, Rev. Dennis Fletcher whose picture is in this house, but I'm sorry I didn't show it to you.  But I'll show it to you afterwards.  And he was always in my life.  I, I don't remember a time when Rev. Fletcher wasn't calling, stopping by to visit, checking on me.  And he took me to his undergraduate school, Lincoln University in Pennsylvania.  And Rev. Fletcher was at the funeral of my grandmother.  He spoke.  He was at the funeral of my mother.  He co-officiated at my wedding.  When I finished Lincoln, and I didn't have any money to go to graduate school, he found a scholarship for me so I could begin my Masters.  And he died a couple of years ago, around 92 or 93 years old, just a marvelous, marvelous, marvelous man, yeah.
Story_ID: 79637
Speaker 1: All right, now, how did you find Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania]?  Was it what you expected there?
Speaker 2: It was, it was even more than I expected.  There was some controversy in my family about my going to Lincoln.  There were family members who, looking at the experience at Friends Select School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], could not understand why I didn't go to University of Penn [University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] or Penn State [University, State College, Pennsylvania] or some larger, white college or university.  And, but again, my mother [Dorothy Lee Morris], as always--and not so much came to my rescue, but my mother always believed in me.  And she always believed that I had the capacity to make right decisions.  And so she said, well, Mousey, if you wanna go to Lincoln, go to Lincoln, go.  And so I did.  And I think I understood, I knew I understood that my experience at Friends Select was wonderful.  It was diverse.  I met all kinds of different people, white people and Asian people and everybody, most everybody.  And I understood that I could compete.  I wasn't the brightest student at Friends Select, but I was by far, not the dullest one either, sharpest or dull.  And so I appreciated the fact that while there were some white students who did better than I did academically, that most of them didn't do as well as I did.  So I had a sense, a growing sense of confidence in relationship to that.  I mean I think I always had the confidence.  I didn't have to get the confidence to go to Friends Select, but I did have that confidence confirmed in that setting.  But after that wonderful experience, I knew that I needed to have an experience with peers, African American peers to round out my education.  And I would go from Lincoln to Boston University and graduate school and seminary and PhD and all that kind of stuff.  But, but I really, I wanted to have the experience of a black college.  And my mama said, fine.  My mother said, fine.  I loved Lincoln.  I serve now on the Board of Trustees of Lincoln.  I'm secretary of the Board.  Over the years, I've spoken at Lincoln ten times at least.
Story_ID: 79638
Speaker 1: Now, is what they say that Lincoln's the--it's either Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania] or Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] is the oldest black college?
Speaker 2: We say Lincoln.  There is some debate.  But Lincoln was founded in 1854.  Lincoln will be celebrating its 150th anniversary next year.  The campus I love.  The chapel, it's called the Mary Dodd Brown Memorial Chapel.  I sang in the chapel choir, so I was there every Sunday.  I sang in the Glee Club, was a student senator, played soccer, ran track, varsity letters, fraternity person.  That's how I met Jesse Jackson [Rev. Jesse Jackson, Sr., HM].  Jesse and I are the same fraternity, Omega Psi Phi Fraternity.  And I would meet him a few years after I arrived at Lincoln.  And I loved the smallness of it, the--at the time, there were less than 500 students.  And ninety seven, ninety eight percent were male, even though the school had gone coed a few years before.  But there were few females, and they lived in faculty homes because there were no dormitories for females at the time.  And I loved, I loved the camaraderie, I liked, I liked the campus on the weekends because a lot of times people would leave, a lot of the students would leave.  And the campus would be quiet.  And in the Spring, it would be gorgeous.  And I would sit under one of my favorite trees, and I'd read.  And I'd study.  And those years, I was on the Dean's list most semesters.  And if you were on the Dean's list, you had free access to the library stacks.  You didn't have to ask permission.  You--the people didn't--if you weren't on the Dean's list, you went to the library desk to ask for books.  They would then go get the books and bring them to you.  If you were on the Dean's list, you had a pass, and you could just wander in the stacks.  And my sophomore year, I took a class taught by my, the Chaplain, "Negro in the New World" which was like a Black History class is now.  And it was the class that, it just blew me away because in that class, I was learning about Dr. [Benjamin] Mays and DuBois and Mary Church Terrell and Mary McLeod Bethune and all of these people.  And I had read about them when I was a little boy in the newspapers.  But I didn't know their backgrounds and the struggles that they went through.  And I got so excited about that class that I read every book in the syllabus, and I read every book that was--[cell phone ringing].
Story_ID: 79639
Speaker 1: I read every book on the, the required reading list and the auxiliary reading list.  And Reverend Stevens, who was the teacher, the Chaplain of the school, paid me a compliment that I have never, ever forgotten.  He said to me that I was the kind of student that a teacher dreams about having because he said all that a good teacher can do is expose the student to the wealth of the material.  The student then has to take that and delve into it.  And he told me, he said, you are one of the few students that I've ever had that did just that.  And, and the other favorite professor at Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania] for me, was my history professor, my major professor, Richard Winchester.  Now, Reverend Stevens is a black man, grew up in Georgia, I think Augusta, Georgia.  So he knew about segregation.  He knew--he was a Presbyterian minister.  Dr. Winchester, who was an all but dissertation person when I met him, from the University of Rochester [Rochester, New York].  He didn't have his PhD, but he was working on his dissertation.  He's a white guy, a Presbyterian guy as well 'cause Lincoln was, used to be called the black Princeton because it was founded by a Princeton seminary graduate who was the pastor of the Oxford Presbyterian Church, which is the little town four miles from Lincoln.  So we had all those Presbyterians.  And Lincoln had a seminary for many years, which was closed in 1959, the year I started out as a freshman.  Dr. Winchester was my other favorite professor.  And what I liked about Dr. Winchester was, he was never condescending to us as black students.  That is, he expected that we would do excellently, and he would not take anything less than that.  And so he didn't play this thing, well, you know, they're just black students and, you know, you give 'em a break because they really can't do it and all that kind of stuff.  No, no, no, no, no, no.  He expected of us our very, very best.  And in that way, he was like my parents.  And, and he did so with, with an affection and a regard for us that I have always appreciated.  Reverend Stevens died of cancer some many years ago now.  And Dr. Winchester is, is still alive, but he has--what's the disease?  Multiple sclerosis now, but a wonderful, wonderful, wonderful man.
Story_ID: 79640
Speaker 1: I loved Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania], loved it, loved it, loved it, loved it.  I've never had four better years, ever.  And the friendships that I made at Lincoln, rival but surpass the friendships I made at Friends Select [School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  But both of those schools, we, our classmates, we stay in touch, and both of the schools have five-year reunions.  And I will be celebrating my fortieth reunion at Lincoln this June--this May, 2003.  And next year, I'll be celebrating my forty-fifth reunion from Friends Select.  And I'll be at both schools.  I have been a financial contributor to those schools since I left them and appreciate very much what those schools provided me in terms of my own education and formation.
Speaker 2: Okay, you graduated from Lincoln in '63' [1963]--
Speaker 1: Three [1963].
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Sixty-three [1963].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: '63' [1963], yes.
Story_ID: 79641
Speaker 1: Now, towards the, had you been like--well, I suppose you were keeping up with the Civil Rights Movement during those days--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --of high school [Friends Select School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and your days of college [Lincoln University, Oxford, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I remember being, a group of students who raised some funds for the Montgomery Bus Boycott.  And we were also, a group of us did work at the Friends warehouse packing boxes of clothes and other things for the persons who were involved in the Hungarian Revolution of 1956.  And the, of course, the Montgomery Bus Boycott was '55' [1955].  So even as, as young students, we were involved.  I was involved.  I remember the first Democratic run for president of Adlai Stevenson in 1952.  I sported a "Adlai Stevenson for President" button.  This was quite unique because my grandmother [Ida Lydia Turner Morris] never voted Democratic.  She was a Republican all of her life, and so she was supporting [Dwight D.] Eisenhower.  And I was supporting Stevenson.  Friends Select [School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] was a kind of place where that kind of current events, being aware of what was going on in the world, it was expected of us.  And our social studies class, from the seventh grade on--the seventh and eighth grade social studies class, each of us were required, was required to purchase the Sunday "New York Times".  And we had to read the news of the "Week in Review" section of "The Times" over the weekend.  And on Monday, we would be quizzed on that whole section.  And so, again, that really--for me, it was an extension of the newspapers in our house when I was a younger kid growing up.  But, but we had week-long work camps.  We had people from the American Friends Service Committee--the national office is just a block down the street from the school, who would come and talk to us about events and about issues and all of that.  So that was certainly an environment, both at my home in North Philadelphia, but it was also an environment at school, at Friends Select School where one's awareness and participation in social movements was expected.  Now, that's not to say that most of my classmates at Friends Select were that involved, but there were a group of us who were.
Story_ID: 79642
Speaker 1: It sounds like a, with the American Friends Service Committee and all the, I mean with such a background in social change with the Quakers, did--was Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania] as conscious of social change as Friends Select [School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Some of us.  Two of, of my freshmen colleagues, the three of us reorganized the campus chapter of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], which had been dormant for a number of years.  And, of course, you have to remember that the '50's [1950s] was the, was a period of McCarthy, and it was a period when different organizations--certainly in the South after the Montgomery Bus Boycott, but were, where the NAACP was actually outlawed.  And it was illegal to be a member.  Well, there was some of that at Lincoln, and so that the, the chapter, the NAACP chapter had fallen on rather rough days.  And it was still some fear about being identified.  But when you're a young student, a college student, first year at that, what do you know about fear and, and apprehension.  We didn't, we could have cared less.  And so we organized, reorganized the chapter at Lincoln.  The Oxford Hotel--and I have a picture here.  I don't know whether, you probably didn't see it, a little picture, the Oxford Hotel would not allow our parents to stay there when they would come to campus for weekends or during commencements activities.  And so a group of us with placards in hand and all the rest, picketed the Oxford Hotel.
Speaker 1: It seems incredible to think that a hotel in Pennsylvania?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, indeed.  Yes, because that part of Pennsylvania is close to the Delaware--it's midway between Philadelphia and Baltimore [Maryland].  There was some Klan [Ku Klux Klan] activity in that area, oh, yes.
Story_ID: 78807
Speaker 1: Well, Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania] was an interesting place because I remember as students our debating such august questions as whether or not there would ever be a black mayor, and there would be people on either side.  And there would be people who'd say, oh, yes, there will be.  And other people said, oh, no, that'll never happen.
Speaker 2: Now, you're talking about a black mayor of anywhere?
Speaker 1: Yes, anywhere.  There were no black mayors.
Speaker 2: I'm just trying to be clear because for anybody watching this will wonder, what city is this--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, this is 1959 to 1963.
Speaker 2: In those days, it was anywhere, right?
Speaker 1: It was anywhere.  There were no black mayors.  And, and while in that Negro History class I mentioned, we did learn about the Congressman and the Senators during Reconstruction.  But that was, been many years since that time.  And then the nation went from, from affirming kind of black participation to the years of segregation and Jim Crowe and, and all of that.  So when I was in seminary, I was in, in college, there were no black mayors.  Well, we would argue about that.  We'd argue about whether there would be black mayors and whether there would be black Senators and all that kind of stuff.  We, we would have these debates there on campus.  And, and we, we talked about all those kinds of things.  Now, what did happen when I was, during my years at Lincoln, were the years that some of the African nations gained their independence from Colonial rule, European Colonial rule.  And Lincoln had always had a long history from the first class of African students.  And so Kwame Nkrumah, the first president of independent Ghana, graduated from Lincoln.  And then Nnamdi Azikiwe, first president of Nigeria, graduated from Lincoln.  Of course, Thurgood Marshall graduated, Langston Hughes, da, da, da.  So, we had that history.  And, and I can remember celebrating the, the independence of African countries around the world in Africa--during those times.  And, and we would lament, and we would say to ourselves, oh, I wonder when we'll get our freedom in the United States.  So it was, it was a time of ferment, and then, of course, we, we heard about the sit-ins, the Greensboro [North Carolina] students at A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina].  And so, it was a time of a growing student activism in black colleges as had been the case actually during the 1920s.  There was a lot of student activism in the 1920s in black colleges.  And it was at that time that black students began to demand, one, that there be black faculty at the black colleges because they were always white.  They began to demand that there be black presidents of those institutions.  And so forty years later, you had another form of, of student activism on black colleges.  And, and we were a part of that, though removed from the SNCC, Student Nonviolent Coordinating [Committee] people frontline in, in the South.
Speaker 2: Now, did you finish the story about the hotel?
Speaker 1: Well, the hotel did not, the Oxford Hotel was still a segregated hotel when we left in 1963.  It did not remain segregated much longer after that.
Speaker 2: That's incredible because you think that, you know, '63' [1963], Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was in Birmingham trying to desegregate Birmingham, Alabama when Bull Conner was--
Speaker 1: Um-hum, um-hum.
Speaker 2: And '64' [1964], you had SNCC in Mississippi trying to, over--and here in Oxford, Pennsylvania (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Um-hum.  Yes.
Speaker 2: --where a black college is.
Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 2: That's (unclear).  That's another strange country story.
Speaker 1: Well, it is a very strange country story.
Story_ID: 78808
Speaker 1: While I was in Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania], at Lincoln, I had my first overt experience of, of exclusion.  A good friend of mine who has since deceased, Charlie Ballard, Charles Ballard.  Charlie and I drove from Pennsylvania to North Carolina to visit friends.  And on the way, we stopped at a Holiday Inn in Virginia.  And we were college students, and we were, we were dressed in our suit and ties and all those kinds of things.  And we, we were hungry, and so we stopped in this Holiday Inn along the way.  And we walked in the place, and it was a pretty nice place.  And we were met by a waitress who was quite apologetic, but she said, I'm sorry.  We can't seat you.  We can't serve you.  We don't serve Negros.  And Charlie and I were just non-plussed.  I mean we were--and we said, what do you mean you don't serve?  What do you, you know, what do you--and she said, no, I'm sorry, I'm sorry.  We have this policy.  And we tried to see if we couldn't--we were great debaters and orators, and we thought we could persuade this lady to see the foolishness of what she was talking about.  And, and then she finally said to us, if you don't leave, I'm sorry, but I will have to call the police.  And so we left, and were livid, just absolutely livid over that experience.  But that was in Virginia.  But we knew about the Oxford Hotel, so, but we were still surprised.
Story_ID: 78809
Speaker 1: Now, you were a history major in college?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: And, now, when you were on the verge of graduation, were you thinking about pursuing a higher degree in history?
Speaker 2: Well, my intention when I went to college was to be a lawyer.  And I majored in history because the Political Science Department at Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania] at the time was fairly weak.  We--I think it only had one professor in it.  And so I decided to major in history since I've always loved history, but with the intention of going to law school when I finished college.  In my junior year, I began to send away for law school catalogs.  And I received several.  Reading through them, I was not excited about any of the course descriptions I was looking at, at all.  And I decided that I wouldn't go to law school, but that I would go to graduate school in history, and I would be, become a history professor.  And so that's what I decided to do.  I was admitted to seven graduate schools, but none of them offered me money, which was rejection essentially.  And I went all summer long.  I applied to the John Hay Whitney Fellowship.  I, I applied to all these fellowships, but was turned down at all of them.  And I had not applied to the Philadelphia Public Schools to be a teacher, and it was late August.  And all of my possibilities dried up like that Langston Hughes' poem, "Like a raisin in the sun".
Story_ID: 78810
Speaker 1: And that's when I got a call from Reverend [Dennis] Fletcher, my mentor.
Speaker 2: So you're coming back (laughter).
Speaker 1: Who told me, no, he said, there's--the United Methodist Church has a scholarship program called "The Crusade Scholarships".  And they are actually for foreign nationals who come to this country to study, and then they go back home to serve.  He said, but I have persuaded the, the board of the scholarship that African Americans are domestic natives and they need to support you.  And so I got, I received a Crusades scholarship which provided the monies for me to, to my Masters degree in history.  And then I decided to go to seminary, and that's a long story, which I might share with you if you have time.  And the first year of my seminary, the Crusades funded that.
Story_ID: 78811
Speaker 1: And then my second year, I got a "Fund for Theological Education fellowship, and I got that the next two years of my seminary career.  But I decided that I was gonna go to graduate school.  I was gonna be a professor, a college professor, following after Dr. Winchester.  And--
Speaker 2: What made you decide to become, to go to seminary right after you get a Master's in history?
Speaker 1: I lived in the School of Theology dormitory.  And that was right next door to the chapel where I would be married a few years later.  And that was right next door to the College of Liberal Arts and graduate school.  So, I lived in the School of Theology dormitory because I didn't have that much money, and it was very cheap.  My roommate was a law student from Boston University Law School, white guy from New Hampshire.  He's probably a judge now 'cause his daddy had been a judge.  And during the Spring of the, that year, 1964, I got a letter from a fraternity brother from Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania], who had graduate din my class.  He was non-religious, A-religious.  He never went to chapel or anything like that.  He sent me a letter, thanking me for being his pastor and the pastor of the fraternity, and he said, "of the campus".  And in that note he sent me a $5.00 bill.  It was a kind of epiphany for me because I had been struggling with this whole issue of ministry most of my life.  And here it was in my face again.  And I thought since God uses all kinds of people and all kinds of things, the bible says "even the rocks will cry out", that my fellow students may have been God's voice speaking to me through that letter.  And I decided that I would not continue toward the PhD, but that I would go to seminary.  And immediately following that, I would seek entrance into a PhD program.  And that's exactly what I did.  And I was admitted to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] and to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] for a PhD.
Story_ID: 78812
Speaker 1: Okay, so-
Speaker 2: And I decided to come to Chicago, and that's where the Breadbasket [Operation Breadbasket], SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] saga begins.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, how did you get--well, those were exciting times for--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the Southern Christian Leadership Conference.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: When you came to Chicago in '67' [1967]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Dr. King was still alive.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So that's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He had been here the year before, '66' [1966], yes.  Breadbasket had been started soon thereafter.  It was not a year old when I arrived.  I met Jesse Jackson [Rev. Jesse Jackson] during a Glee Club trip to Southern black colleges.  And the Glee Club--it was a Glee Club trip, in the Glee Club, there was a quartet, and it was made, it was all one fraternity.  We were all Omegas [Omega Psi Phi].  And we sang several songs during the concert.  We had a special little section of the concert.  And the word went out that we were singing.  And so a group of Ques, as we are called, came from A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] to the concert.  And after the concert, they had a big party for us.  And that's when I met Jesse, and we became very, very close friends.  And this would have probably been in 1961.  And we began to correspond, letters, calls.  I invited Jesse [Reverend Jesse Jackson, Sr., HM] to be a speaker for the fraternity at Lincoln.  I was the head of the fraternity at Lincoln, and he came, and we became very close friends.  When I decided that I was going to come to the University of Chicago because John Hope Franklin [HM], the great black historian, was teaching here at the time, I called Jesse, told him I was coming.  And, and he essentially--that is Jesse, set a trap for me, in the sense that as soon as I arrived, he began to take me around and introduce me to people and give me an idea of what Breadbasket was doing and talking to me about his dreams for the organization and the fact that he really thought that I could contribute to its growth and development.  And I'd been in school quite a number of years, and had always been a great admirer of Dr. King and when Dr. King came to Boston during my seminary years, I went to the rallies and to the Marches, etc., and so forth and went to Selma [Alabama], met Jesse in Selma.  We were there together.
Speaker 1: Did you march from Selma to Montgomery?
Speaker 2: I marched from Selma to Montgomery.  There was a bus, two busloads, I think, of seminarians from Boston University School of Theology [Boston, Massachusetts].  So I never, I never enrolled in the University of Chicago.  And for the next four years, I was a part of Breadbasket.
Story_ID: 78813
Speaker 1: Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] appointed me associate director of [Operation] Breadbasket in February of 1968, just a couple of months before his death.  He had been here, late '67' [1967].  We'd had a big staff retreat in Frogmore, South Carolina at a Quaker Retreat Center there.  And, and he was scheduled to return to Chicago [Illinois].  He'd been here early '68' [1968], I think.  And then he was, he was scheduled to be back a couple weeks after the assassination.  We had a staff retreat here at the Divinity, at the Divinity School.  And so I was pulled in, sucked in, in the most wonderfully, positive way in terms of the vortex of that time in, in our nation's history and particularly, here in Chicago.  This was--because we were middle, right in the middle of the country, people from the East and the West and the South always they came to Chicago.  And this was a, it was a city of ferment to be sure.  We had the mayor and the elder Daley was the mayor at the time [Richard J. Daley].  And you had the kind of machine--it wasn't a kind of machine.  It was a machine, and you had the black folk who were part of that machine epitomized primarily by Congressman [William L.] Dawson and then Alderman Metcalf.  Harold Washington was in the State legislature.  But these were in the Democratic machine, and you had other people who were striving to challenge that machine, and challenge Daley.  And you mentioned having interviewed Clay Evans [Reverend Clay Evans, HM].  Well, Clay got caught in that because Clay had been one of the invitees to Dr. King and had welcomed him, and, and was penalized for that for a number of years because he was trying to build a new church, but he couldn't.  So you had, but it was, it was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--
Speaker 1: --it was an alive time.  And Breadbasket, which was growing anyhow, in the aftermath of Dr. King's assassination, you had all of these people, I think, who felt, well, we may not have been supporting Dr. King the way we should have when he was alive, but we're gonna do our part now.  And Breadbasket was the, was the magnet for that.  And so the weeks after his death, the numbers of people coming to the Saturday morning meetings grew exponentially.  And there were so, there were so many people wanting to get to the meetings that folks would--at the Parkway Ballroom on King Drive now, which was South Park, would begin to come 4:00, 5:00 o'clock in the morning.  And they'd bring chairs, folding chairs.  And they'd sit there in order to be able to get in and get a seat.  And everybody came.  I hope in one of my books, you saw [phone ringing]--.
Story_ID: 78814
Speaker 1: So it was not unusual for Muhammad Ali to come, Clay Evans [Rev. Clay Evans, HM].  There's a picture that I'll show you.  You'll see with Bishop Brazier, Muhammad Ali, Clay Evans, at a Breadbasket meeting, Bill Cosby, Robert Culp, during the "I Spy Time", Odetta [Gordon, HM], the great folk singer who was here recently, Billy Eckstein, Carl Stokes, the first black mayor of Cleveland [Ohio], the first black mayor of Newark, New Jersey.  I'm trying to think of his name.
Speaker 2: Gibson.
Speaker 1: Gibson, Ken Gibson.  Medgar Evers--Charlie Evers, Medgar Evers' brother, Senator [Paul] Simon, when he was Lieutenant Governor, Julian Bond [HM], name 'em.  They were all, they call came here.  And Sammy Davis, and they were all at Breadbasket.  They would, they would visit us on Saturdays.  If the, if the artists were in town to, for a gig, they would, they would come by, Nat Atterly and, and they'd play.
Speaker 2: Cannonball.
Speaker 1: Cannonball Atterly and his brother, Nat.
Story_ID: 78815
Speaker 1: So, it was, it was an amazing time in Chicago [Illinois].  We had, we had political education.  We had a Political Education Division of [Operation] Breadbasket.  And what we did then was a wonderful lady, who's still here, by the name of Alice Tregay, and Alice was--T-R-E-G-A-Y.  Alice was the director of the Political Education Division.  And what we did there was to teach people about the political process, everything from how you fundraise for a campaign, how you develop a door-to-door campaign, how you developed issues, all of that.  Now, this is pre-Harold Washington time.  Roland Burris [HM] came, and they had a big black, political convention at Breadbasket.  And this was before his successful runs for Lieutenant Governor, etc., and so forth, whatever he (unclear).  So that it was a very, very exciting period in the life this city and, and of the nation.  And it was a privilege to be a part of that.
Story_ID: 78816
Speaker 1: And as associate director, I was really responsible for the day-to-day runnings of the, of the organization.  After Dr. King's [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination, Jesse's [Reverend Jesse Jackson, Sr., HM] star shot with just--it shot off into the firmament, and he was less and less here because of speaking and all kinds of things.  And so my responsibility was to, was to run this Chicago operation.  That's one of the reasons why I wasn't in Memphis at the time of the assassination because Jesse was in Memphis, and another one of our staff persons, David Wallace, and when Jesse graduated from Chicago Theological Seminary [Chicago, Illinois] recently, there's a picture of Jesse and myself, David Wallace and Gary Masonni (ph.).  They were classmates of his at Chicago Theological Seminary.  And we were all staffers at Operation Breadbasket here, and so we had a kind of mini-reunion at that time.
Story_ID: 78640
Speaker 1: --have different congregations bring their choirs and bring their people, and Jesse [Rev. Jesse Jackson, Sr., HM] will have a number of--it was a catalyst for this kind of eruption of participation because there was already--Breadbasket [Operation Breadbasket] was here.  Dr. King had come several times to speak at Breadbasket.  But there were people who, you know, they were not, you know, they liked Dr. King.  And as long as he was around and stop like that, but they didn't, they weren't committed to the Movement.  And when he died, when he was killed, that jolted a number of people.  And, and it, it I think it made some guilt, it touched some of their guilt, that they really hadn't been involved when he was a live.   And, but we will be now.  We will honor his memory.  The Dreamer is dead, but the dream will go on.  And so for Breadbasket, it was, it was a, it was a catalyst for the organization just, just growing.  It was, it was incredible.  There were so many people coming so frequently that it was hard for us to find all of the kinds of things to keep them busy, to get them involved and to keep them involved because there was just so many people coming.  And as I said, in terms, I think of Jesse's own stature, you had the articles in "Harper's Magazine" and in the different other--"Time" and "Newsweek", talking about was he heir apparent, etc., and so forth.  And so I think in that sense, both for the organization as a whole, Breadbasket, that is, and for Jesse as an individual and, and budding leader, it was a time of tremendous opportunity.
Story_ID: 78641
Speaker 1: Now, for SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] itself, though, it was, it was a time of great, of pain and sorrow, and I think a time where people were not as sure about what the direction of the organization would be.  There were those who felt that Dr. [Ralph] Abernathy, though considered to have been Dr. King's choice, was perhaps not the most effective person.  There were some who did think Jesse [Reverend Jesse Jackson, Sr., HM] was the best person.  Others thought that Andy Young, Andrew Young [HM], Congressman, U.N. [United Nations] Ambassador later and all that kind of stuff--
Speaker 2: Mayor of--(unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Mayor, that Andy [Andrew Young] would be interested in the post.  But he was not, and would, would move the political roof.  He would run for Congress later, Fifth Congressional District in Georgia.  Jesse, in fact, may have been interested, had the board offered it to him, but, but that was not going to be the case.  Jesse was always perceived by SCLC and the Atlanta [Georgia] staff particularly, as not quite in the camp.  People felt that he was like Yon Cassius in Shakespeare's play, "Julius Caesar", that he had a "lean and hungry look", that he was very ambitious, and that he really was into promoting himself, and Breadbasket.
Speaker 2: Well he looked different (unclear).  He was younger and he dressed differently.
Speaker 1: Yes, well, he had the whole thing--
Speaker 2: More hair.
Speaker 1: --going on.  And so it was not going to be offered to him.  And it wasn't.  And Dr. Abernathy became president of SCLC.
Story_ID: 78642
Speaker 1: I remember a session with [William H.] Greer and [Price M.] Cobb, the two black psychologists, authors of "Black Rage".  They had a kind of therapy session with the staff of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] at Pasqual's Hotel in Atlanta, Georgia, a famous place where so many of the Civil Rights leaders met.  And we were in that hotel room a full day, and it was, it was excruciating because there was such grief and tears and rage and anger and a sense of Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] having abandoned us even though he was assassinated.  So I think for the, for SCLC itself, it, it found itself without its signal leader.  And while many people may not have known very much about it, the Southern Christian Leadership Conference itself, everybody knew Dr. King.  And the question was, well, where do we go from here in terms of his last book, in terms of the organization?
Story_ID: 78643
Speaker 1: There were people in Chicago and elsewhere, but particularly in Chicago, who felt that [Operation] Breadbasket was really the strongest program of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference].  And we certainly raised more money than any of the other chapters or programs.  But the way things were set up, we raised the money here.  It was sent to National headquarters in Atlanta, and then they sent the money back in terms of salaries, etc., and so forth.  There were people here who felt that we could just as well raise--keep all the money here.  There were some who questioned Dr. Abernathy's leadership capabilities and who felt that Jesse [Reverend Jesse Jackson, Sr., HM] should be [phone ringing] the leader.  Then there were--we, we started what we'd call it, we started Black Expo.  And Expo was the big thing at this big place that's now torn down, the Amphitheatre?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the International Amphitheatre.
Speaker 1: Interna--yes.  And, you know, Bill Cosby came, Nina Simone, I mean all kinds of people.  And it was huge.  And that made a lot of money.  And there was some controversy about who would keep the money, whether the money would stay here, whether it would go to Atlanta.  And so there was some concern about that.  There were people--even when Dr. King was alive, who cautioned Dr. King that Jesse was a kind of "wild horse" and needed to be reined in.  And so there were efforts by Dr. King to get Jesse to go organize other places because he was so committed to Chicago and Jesse would never really do that.  But we would organize Breadbasket chapters, and I became the coordinator for that for a while, organizing chapters in Brooklyn, etc., and so forth.  It was in Brooklyn that I met the young Al Sharpton [HM] who was the youth president of Breadbasket's chapter in Brooklyn many, many years ago.  Well, the, the--so that tension grew between the Atlanta office of SCLC and Breadbasket of SCLC here in Chicago.  And though I left to return to Boston in late August or early September of 1971, the, the potential for the break had begun even then.  And a couple months later, a few months later in December of '71' [1971], there would be, there would be the break.  And Breadbasket would become Operation PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity].
Story_ID: 78644
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went on to Boston [University, Boston, Massachusetts] to work on your PhD?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir, I returned to Boston [Massachusetts] to work on the PhD and to teach in the history department at Simmons College [Boston, Massachusetts] and become the first director of African American Studies at Simmons.
Speaker 1: Okay, and shortly thereafter, though, you got involved with the Martin Luther King Center [The Martin Luther King Center for Nonviolent Social Change].
Speaker 2: Two years later.
Speaker 1: Two years later.
Speaker 2: What had happened, when I arrived in Boston in 1971, I got a call from Andy [Andrew] Young [HM] who said that the position at the King Center was available and was I interested?  And I said, well, I certainly wouldn't mind coming down and talking to people.  And I went down, and I talked to--my wife and I went down, and, and the position was offered.  But I had to make a decision whether or not I would yet another time, put on hold my PhD, my doctoral studies.  And I decided that I wouldn't.  And so we turned down the offer.  And we went back to Boston.  A year later I got another call.  The position is still open--from Andy again.  Can you come?  And I decided to consider it again because by that time, our marriage had disintegrated to a place where it was, it was pretty clear that we would separate.  The children and their mother would eventually return to Chicago [Illinois], and they offered me the position in Atlanta [Georgia], and I went to the, to the King Center in early summer, 1973, as Executive Director of the King Center.  I had been interviewed by Dr. Mays, Benjamin E. Mays, who was the Chair of the Trustee Board of the Center, Martin Luther King, Sr., Mrs. King, Dr. King's mother, Mrs. Alberta Williams King, Mrs. Coretta King and several other people--Andy Young, about the position.  And they offered it to me, and I went to be Executive Director.  And I was, I was there for three years from 1973 to 1976.
Story_ID: 78645
Speaker 1: When I arrived at the King Center [The Martin Luther King Center for Nonviolent Social Change], because there had been a serious split between Mrs. King and Dr. Vincent Harding, who had been the first Executive Director of the King Center, but when I arrived, the King Center was without staff because Dr. Harding--the staff had left with Dr. Harding.  And they would form the Institute of the Black World.
Speaker 2: At [Clark] Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: At, right, yeah, right down the street from the King Center.  The King Center was officed in Interdenominational Theological Center, where I would return sixteen years later to be Academic Dean.  That's where the headquarters was because the, the complex on Auburn Avenue, next to Ebenezer Church had not been built at the time.  So we were in that building.  There was no staff, and so I had to go about building a staff.  There was no program.  I had to go about building a program.  Mrs. King was officed in the basement of the King home.  And I lived right next door to the King home.  And the first several months took my dinner, I ate it at the King home.  And the kids were very small.  Three of them, Yolanda, the eldest daughter, had gone off to Smith College [Northampton, Massachusetts] when I, the time that I was arriving.  And the brick home, we wanted to have that restored, and that happened during my time.  We started a program with college students around the country who would come to the King Center to learn about nonviolence and commit themselves to nonviolent social change.  And we also began the Atlanta fundraising effort to build the center on Auburn Avenue.  And during the time I was there, Henry Ford II, I guess it was, Mrs. King got him to agree to be the National chairperson for the National fundraising campaign for the Martin Luther King, Jr. Center for Nonviolent Social Change.
Story_ID: 78646
Speaker 1: I became one of the associate pastors at Ebenezer [Baptist] Church under Daddy King [Martin Luther King, Sr.] and preached there and was very much involved in that congregation and was scheduled to preach, was in the pulpit the day that Mrs. [Alberta Williams] King and the deacon and several other people were shot by Wayne Chenault.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Marcus Chenault.
Speaker 1: Marcus, was it Marcus Wayne?
Speaker 2: No, Wayne was the Atlanta child murderer.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  I get 'em mixed up.  Marcus Chenault.
Speaker 2: He was from Dayton [Ohio]--(unclear), (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's right.  And testified at the trial, and Daddy King asked me to preach the funeral of the deacon who was killed, Deacon Boykin, and I did at Ebenezer Church.  And, of course, was the primary coordinator for the funeral for Mama King.
Speaker 2: Now, what a tragedy. Chenault was basically insane--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --as I recall.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, very much so.  Very, very troubled young man, but he shot a number of people, four or five people and two people were killed, Mama King and the deacon, Deacon Boykin.  And that was a terrible, terrible, terrible time in the, in our lives down there.
Speaker 2: Did people try to make--I was just wondered if anybody tried to make sense out of such a crazy, tragic thing?
Speaker 1: There was no sense to make of it.  I mean it's kind of that, kind of irrational thing.  And the, the, you know, the family, besides the death of Dr. King, Jr., had also experienced the drowning of the younger brother, A.D. Williams King, and then, of course, the assassination of his, of the mother, and later, one of the grandchildren, a young woman--young man was running and fell dead.  And it's, it's rather tragic.
Story_ID: 78647
Speaker 1: You have the Kennedy's, you've got the King's.  You've got these families that--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But you know why I ask this question because--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --because pastors are always asked to console people--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --who ask them, why would God let this happen or what have I done to deserve this, and all those kinds of questions.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And here you all are, in the church--this is a family around the church of Dr. King, one of the most revered figures in this century, if not the most--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --revered figure, and this kind of senseless violence.
Speaker 1: What is this, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, for people of faith, you see, one, there is this, a sense for some of us who are Christians and Daddy King [Martin Luther King, Sr.] was certainly out of that kind of genre of people, that what one has is a loving and caring and just God.  But it is, but God does not orchestrate.  God does not make us puppets.  We're not automatons.  There is free will.  People make decisions and sometimes very evil and heinous decisions.  But that's on humans.  That's not on God.  God does not will the death of Mama King [Alberta Williams King] and, and natural disasters and all that kind of stuff, but there is a part of--that in life, there is life and death, and there's tragedy.  There's triumph.  What we sense is that whether it is triumph or tragedy, life or death, God is present with us.  He does not leave us alone.  He does not forsake us and will be with us to the end.  And so in that kind of sense, you look at life, you look at death in life, and you understand that part of the human condition is to, if you live long enough, you experience death.  Sometimes you experience senseless death.  My daughter was killed at twenty three, one year out of college.  You have to face these things, but not because one believes that God has either engineered it or turned a death ear or blind eye.
Speaker 1: I mean, now, conversely though, people would congratulate--well, not congratulate, but they thank God for victories for the simple-minded thing as football--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughter).
Speaker 1: --sort of, (unclear) God did it, help us win a Super Bowl or whatever, you know, and, but it seems as though--I just wondered how, you know, this, you know, deeply religious family and the people surrounding it, would handle this kind of a--
Speaker 2: They would handle it just the way I said.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's how, and that's how it was handled.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Story_ID: 78648
Speaker 1: Why did you come to leave The [Martin Luther King] Center for Nonviolent Social Change?
Speaker 2: I, I left the Center for some of the same reasons I left [Operation] Breadbasket.  I had worked both as associate director of Breadbasket and Executive Director of the King Center assiduously.  Yeah, I mean I really--I worked my tail off in both places.  And, and while I think I was certainly appreciated at some level, when you work in movement-type things, because you have to be committed to the movement, to the mission, people take for granted--you have what Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] called, "can't help it's".  And the way he would say it, in the colloquial way was the "can't hep [sic] it's.  You can't hep yourself."  And my personal life, my marriage was in some tatters.  And we felt that if we returned to Boston [Massachusetts], to that venture where we had met one another and gotten married and all that kind of stuff, that that would give us the kind of time together that we didn't have here because I was just engrossed in everything that was going on here.  And my wife was, had these two little babies, and she was, Master's degree and seminary graduate herself, and--two Master's degrees for that matter.  And, and she was stuck home.  And we were in a more traditional marriage than can happen today, where women are far more out there working and all that kind of stuff.  Well, she stayed home with the kids, and I was out meeting the famous people of the world.  And, and it was hard on her.  And, and also I felt that my work with Breadbasket was probably over.  We were moving into another kind sphere.  Jesse [Reverend Jesse Jackson, Sr., HM] was becoming a kind of--he was becoming a national, and soon to become, international figure.  And a lot of the emphases seemed to be more and more related to his person and what he did.  And I felt that it was time for me to essentially focus again on some of my own personal agenda and not just the Movement, etc., and so forth.
Story_ID: 78649
Speaker 1: Similarly, after three years at the King Center [The Martin Luther King Center for Nonviolent Social Change], I began to yearn again for, for another place.  My life at the King Center was very difficult.  It, Mrs. King was a very wonderful person and devoted to that Center.  But I, I didn't feel that I had the flexibility that I had, even when I was here with [Operation] Breadbasket.  And, and there were some things I wanted to do in terms of the Center, that I couldn't move her to do.  And, and she and I had some disagreements about that.  And eventually, she decided--I was on, I was on leave, on a six-month leave to seek a dissertation topic because during my years at, at--in Atlanta [Georgia], I had finished my language requirements, and I had also done my preliminary examination.  But I was looking for a dissertation topic, a subject.  And we decided that I would take six months off, and I moved to D.C., Washington, D.C., for a while because actually, I wanted to, to study the life of Arthur Spingarn of the Spingarn-Meadow family, Arthur Spingarn who had been the head of the legal defense fund of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] for years and years and years.  So I wanted to work in the Library of Congress where his papers were and all of that.  But I found out that after his death, he had ordered his papers destroyed because of the lawyer-client thing.  He didn't think that was, he didn't want that in the public.  And I, you know, for a historian, it's one of the most regretful things in the world when that happens.  So there wasn't a kind of, there wasn't the data there to do him, to frame the dissertation around him.  Mrs. King and I had made an agreement together that either one of us at the end of the six-month period, could decide to stay or not.  She made her decision before I made mine (laughter) and, and decided that my time at the Center had run its course.  And from there, I had an opportunity to join the faculty of the Candler School of Theology, which is a part of Emory University [Atlanta, Georgia] or Howard University School of Religion [Washington].  I called Dr. [Benjamin] Mays and I asked him about it.  And I had signed--I had sent a letter to Emory saying I was gonna come.  And I asked him about the ethics of not following through on that letter.  And he, he said, had you signed the contract?  I said, no.  He said, well, if you haven't signed a contract, send them another letter and tell 'em you're thinking about it.  And, of course, he had been the Dean as Howard.  And, his advice to me was, you need to go to Howard, and that's what I did.
Story_ID: 78650
Speaker 1: Okay, we're ready again.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm just gonna ask you this question I asked off-camera about the--what were some of your concerns about the direction of the King Center [The Martin Luther King Center for Nonviolent Social Change] at that time?  And what would you have rathered seen take place rather, as opposed to what was taking place?
Speaker 2: Well, the King Center at that time was in a neighborhood of some challenge.  And I, I wanted us to have more of a kind of hands-on approach and to use the center as not only a place for college students coming from around the world to learn about nonviolence, but also to use it for high school students, and particularly, high school students who were at some risks.  It was felt that, you know, that the Center really was not--we were not organized.  We didn't have the kind of staff and all to accommodate those kinds of kids.  And the, that was one issue for me.  I think the other issue was around the Martin Luther King birthday celebration.  It, it began to grow in such a fashion that we were spending more and more of our time.  One birthday event would be over, and we'd start planning for the next one.  And while I thought those events were significant, and, you know, and all the rest, I really didn't think that--I didn't wanna spend all of my time working for the one event during the year.  And so there was some, there were some issues around that.
Story_ID: 78651
Speaker 1: And I think the other thing for me personally, which really didn't have a whole lot to do with Mrs. King, was the fact that I felt that I was carrying a lot of the weight of the organization, but really wasn't given the kind of freedom to, to really be the Executive Director.  And, and maybe, in retrospect, you know, I should have known better because, unlike where I am now as Executive Director, I'm really--the buck stops with me.  But at the King Center [The Martin Luther King Center for Nonviolent Social Change], the buck stopped with Mrs. King.  And her management style was much more circumscribing than I had been accustomed to because even with all of my challenges with, with Jesse [Reverend Jesse Jackson, Sr., HM] at [Operation] Breadbasket, I had a lot of ability to do a lot of things.
Speaker 2: He wasn't gonna be concerned about some of the things that--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, let me put it this way.  I could do a lot.  If Jesse came off the road and what had been done was too successful, then he'd mess it up because that was his way of keeping control.  But at least I got a chance to do those things.  And some of them, by the time he got back, he couldn't mess up because they'd already been done.  But that sort of hit Jesse's, at the time, Machiavellian understanding of leadership and how you keep control 'cause he grew up in the Baptist tradition.  And in the Baptist tradition, you always had to be concerned that somebody will run away with your church.  And, and he, he trusted me with dear friends and all that kind of stuff, but I do think there were time when he, he felt that he had to reassert his control and that he was the, the leader.  He was the head, which he was.  And I never had any doubt or problem with that.  But at least I had some opportunity.  With Mrs. King, I really didn't feel that I even had the opportunity to have the thing shot down.  And so those were some of the reasons.  And I think that she, she felt that, you know, she sensed that there was some--that I was not as happy as I might have been.  And she moved to, to end the relationship.
Story_ID: 78652
Speaker 1: Okay, it's all, you know, it all makes sense, really, when you think about it.  Well, now, so you go on to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] to teach.  You take a position teaching.  And were you teaching history or theology?
Speaker 2: No, I started out actually as Director of Field Education.  And that was a position--I was called there to build the relationship between the seminary and the local congregations and pastors because we wanted to have, have those places where our students could learn ministry, where they would have a kind of, not experiment--that's not the word, a laboratory for learning ministry.  And so what we did was we built a program that the churches would bring, would take students on as seminary interns, would stipend them, at least the cost of their tuition and fees and pay that to the university or pay it to the student.  And then the student would get a chance to learn what ministry was like, to be a part of a church, to follow the minister around, to learn how you pray, to learn how you counsel, etc., and so forth.  And that's what I started out doing.  And actually, I was director of that program my entire six years--sixteen years there.
Story_ID: 78653
Speaker 1: After I received my PhD which was five years after arriving at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], then I began to teach African American church history.  I taught a course in images of the church in black literature because I'm a literature buff and basically did a thing on the major authors of the Harlem Renaissance and how they depicted church in their, in their writings.  I taught a course on Martin Luther King and the Civil Rights Movement.  And I taught a course on urban church history, along with my courses in the pastoral theology area.  And that really is the arts of ministry, counseling, preaching, etc., etc.
Story_ID: 78654
Speaker 1: Now, I know you have been, from what I've read, you've been profoundly influenced by the writings of Howard Thurman.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: He taught at Howard [University] for many, many years.
Speaker 2: Yes, he was the Dean of Chapel at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  And he was Dean of Chapel at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] in the years just before my arrival.  When I arrived at Boston University, Dr. Thurman was on a year's travel around the world.  He returned to preach his final sermon at Marsh Chapel.  I was there for that, and there was a big banquet honoring him, and I attended that banquet.  The late sociologist, scholar, C. Eric Lincoln, was the main speaker at that banquet.  My ex-wife, while a student at Mount Holyoke College [St. Hadley, Massachusetts] had met Dr. Thurman, and they became fast friends and so were in correspondence with each other.  He had a voluminous correspondence with people all over the country and all over the world.  And so I met Dr. Thurman through my wife.  And, and then he would come to Howard every other year around Easter to preach.  He did not fly.  He only took the trains.  And he was in California by that time, and he would take the train across country to preach at the Rankin Chapel at Howard.  And so we would meet up there.  But, yes, deeply influenced by him, by his writings, his preaching, his, his profound awareness of, of the power of the spirit that drives us and motivates and empowers us.
Story_ID: 78655
Speaker 1: There are two little books.  One book was a book I read of Dr. Thurman when I was a Lincoln University [Oxford, Pennsylvania] during the class I took in "Negro in the New World" with Reverend Stevens.  It is called the "Negro Spiritual Speaks of Life and Death".  He gave the Ingersoll lectures--I forget at what college, and those lectures became the "Negro Spiritual Speaks of Life and Death".  And what he does is he talks about how the slave understood life and understood death.  And there's always been a struggle within me about being aggressive, being dynamic, willing to confront injustice and evil, but also doing so from the perspective of a Christian.  And, and recognizing that for some critics of Christianity among black people, the criticism has been that Christianity has not helped us in our struggle for justice but has impeded us because, "turn the other cheek", "think about heaven", etc., and so forth.  And what, what the "Negro Spiritual Speaks of Life and Death" did for me was to open me to how the slave forbearers took the religion of the slave master and refashioned that religion for their own survival and for their own protests and for their ability to live through the dark nights of slavery.  It was liberating for me.  And it's just a little, tiny, little book.  And then his other book, which I read when I was in seminary is called "Jesus and the Disinherited".  And this was a book that he was challenged to write many years before by Mahatma Gandhi.  When Dr. Thurman went to India and, and Mahatma Gandhi said to him, "You know, I am a student of Jesus, and I understand--I really am trying to understand Jesus."  He said, but how can American black people be followers of Jesus when the followers of Jesus who are white enslaved and keeps black people in segregation?  And that question gnawed at Thurman for many years.  And out of that gnawing, that discomfort, he wrote "Jesus and the Disinherited".  And what he does there, is he shows how--he has this wonderful statement about Jesus being a Jew in Rome, under Roman rule.  And he said, "For the Romans, Jesus was just another Jew in the ditch, not unlike black folk for whom some whites, every Negro is a nigger".  So it's another way of, of his reflecting on the relationship between religion and faith and Jesus and the racial situation.  So, yes, Thurman--but Thurman influenced Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.].  Thurman influenced most of the leaders of Vernon Jordan [HM], in his book, "Can Vernon read?"  Vernon talks about Howard Thurman and how significant a person he was, just a marvelous man.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Reverend Gardner Taylor.
Speaker 1: Gardner Taylor, oh, yeah.
Story_ID: 78656
Speaker 1: People have called, I always see it written that Howard Thurman was a mystic.  What do they mean by that?
Speaker 2: They mean that he, he was one of those persons whose encounter with the divine was so powerful, that Dr. Thurman did not need doctrine to mediate his relationship and apprehension of the divine.  He believed, as the mystics do, that there is a relationship that one can have with the divine that supersedes religion.  So Dr. Thurman was criticized by some because they didn't think he was Christological enough.  They didn't think he had that--he talked a lot about Jesus.  He didn't talk a lot about Jesus the Christ.  And that upset some people.  It upset some Christian people.  He referred to Jesus to more as the Son of Man.
Speaker 1: Not the Son of God?
Speaker 2: He spoke of Jesus much as the Son of Man.  Now, what he would say was that Jesus had the kind of God consciousness that opened himself to the direction of God in his life and, and that Jesus felt himself to be the Son of God.  But he talked about him more as the Son of Man.  And so that there were--even when Dr. Thurman was on the faculty of the School of Theology at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], there were people who sniped at him because they felt he was not as traditionally Christian as they thought he might have been.  He was influenced by Rufus Jones who was a Quaker mystic.  And you see the founder of Quakerism, [George] Fox, Fox said that there is in every man, everyone, that center which the divine spark can touch.  There is in every man God.  That's very mystical.  And Thurman was influenced.  And then he was influenced by the mystic, Meister Eckhart, and a number of other people.  So.
Story_ID: 78657
Speaker 1: Now, do you--I tend to think that you concur this assessment of--is that your view of religion?  I mean or your personal theology or philosophy?
Speaker 2: I think I'm more Christocentric than Thurman, yeah.  But there have been, there have been great debates.  Albert Schweitzer, in his book "Quest for the Historical Jesus" pretty much comes up, comes out with the same--comes out, I think closer to Thurman than he does, than the kind of historic Christological creeds of the church.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is interesting 'cause you're a historian and of a certain, you know, history is--well, it's a science, but some have said it's as much art as science.  But, I mean--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Social science.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So what--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah, so what is your personal theology?  I mean how do you really--
Speaker 2: My theology tends to be very incarnational.  It is the, what Daniel Grafton Hill, who was the Dean of the School of Religion at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] when I graduated from Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania] in 1963.  Dean Hill was our baccalaureate speaker during my graduation day.  And Dean Hill talked about, his sermon title was "The Living Witness of the Deed".  And it was the familiar Good Samaritan story.  And he stressed, as would Dr. King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] later, that one's faith and one's commitment to a loving and caring and just God, is not primarily a verbal affirmation, which is the doctrinal creeds of the church and all of that, but rather it is lived out in our encounter.  And in the Samaritan story, it is lived out in the encounter with those who are in need, that, that faith is shown as we encounter a world and, and people in that world who are in need of our care, in need of our concern, in need of our solidarity with them.  And for me, the Jesus that appeals most to me is the Jesus who heals and who touches the Leper.  Since he could heal the Leper without the touch, but he, in one of the stories, he reaches out his hand and he touches the Leper.  So, it is the living out of, of our faith.  It's very much related to the Matthew--what is it, Matthew twenty-five.  "If you have done this to the least of these, my brothers and sisters, you've done it onto me."  When did I see you hungry?  When did I see you thirty?  I didn't know it was you.  And Jesus says, well, as you do this onto the least of these, you have done it to me."  That, that's my theology.  I mean that's my, my--it's an incarnational way of looking at theology.  It's the God who comes down and visits us.  It's the God who is present with us.  It is the God in Christ who loved the world so much that God would give God's self to us.
Story_ID: 78658
Speaker 1: Okay, now tell me about your dissertation, or dissertation, for the PhD.  What did you write about?
Speaker 2: I wrote about an AME [African Methodist Epsicopal] minister who--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  We're gonna start that again.  He was moving around too much.
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Yeah, just start.
Speaker 2: Okay, I did my dissertation on an AME minister, Reverdy Cassius Ransom, who was--I--
Speaker 1: Could you spell that 'cause I've seen that (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, Reverdy, R-E-V-E-R-D-Y, Cassius, C-A-S-S-I-U-S, Ransom, R-A-N-S-O-M.
Speaker 1: And when did he live basically?
Speaker 2: Reverend Ransom was born in 1861, and he lived until 1959.  He was ninety-eight years old when he died.  I studied him as an exemplar of the Social Gospel Movement.  That movement that began in the late 19th Century when America was changing from a rural to an urban nation, a time of industrialization and immigration, and the church felt that it was important to respond to the needs of the emerging urban dwellers.  And so you had settlement houses.  You had churches working with the early Labor Movement, advocating for working conditions.  You had the churches working for child labor laws, etc., and so forth.  It was a time when the church said that we have to be concerned, not only with the afterlife.  We have to be not only the individual salvation.  We have to be concerned about social salvation, not just individual souls, but people who live in societies, live in structures are impacted by institutions, and the church has to respond to that in new and different ways.  Reverdy Ransom from the perspective of African American religion, I think, was a primary advocate of the Social Gospel Movement.  And I studied him from that perspective.  And I studied his life from 1884 when he began his ministry until 1924 when he became a bishop in the AME church.  He pastored in several urban centers, Cleveland [Ohio], Boston [Massachusetts], Chicago [Illinois] and New York [City, New York].  And his most famous effort was the Institutional Church and Social Settlement Center which he patterned after Jane Adams' Hull House and the Grant Taylor Social Settlement Movement that grew out of the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  And he had, he worked with prostitutes in Hell's Kitchen [New York City, New York] when he pastored a church in New York.  While he was here in Chicago, he had a kindergarten program.  He had programs for working mothers.  He had employment service.  He had a number of very innovative activities.  And from 1912 to 1924, he was the editor of the "AME Review", which was the Nation church journal.  And in that he advocated for Civil Rights.  He was one of the early members of [W.E.B.] DuBois' Niagara Movement and spoke at the second Niagara meeting in Niagara, New York, Canada, on the Canada--Canadian side.  He was a, he was a very farseeing religion man, the religionist.  He ran for public office.  He didn't win, but he ran for public office while he was in New York in the late teens, 1916 and 1918.  He started the Fraternal Council of Negro Churches which was patterned off of the old federal council which is now the National Council of Churches.  He was, he was quite a man.
Story_ID: 78817
Speaker 1: And so, you taught at Howard [Howard University School of Divinity, Washington, D.C.] from '76' [1976] to '92' [1992]?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: Okay, and are there any outstanding experiences there you wanna share with us?
Speaker 2: Oh, many.  Jesse [Reverend Jesse Jackson, Sr., HM] came to speak.  And that was, it's very, very powerful.  We had been trying to get him, the alumni of Howard, and we had a guy from Baltimore, a minister, who assured us that he could get him.  And so nothing came of it.  And then somebody else said, well, I know somebody.  I'll get a (unclear).  So--
Speaker 1: All the while you were watching these people do this--(laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, 'cause they said, they said, you know, we know him and dah, dah, dah, dah.  And, and nobody, they knew, some of the people there knew, but they, you know.  So I said, fine.  And so finally, just having a terrible time.  And I was in the Dean's office, and the report was made, we just can't get through.  And the time for the convocation was coming up.  It's an annual convocation.  And so I said, sort of offhandedly, well, I might be able to get in touch with him.  So they said, okay.  And I did.  And he responded immediately, "Oh, yes, I'll be glad to come."  And so he came, and that was fun.  And then Reverend Willie Barrow [HM] who is his longtime associate and--
Speaker 1: The "Little Warrior"--
Speaker 2: --was my close associate when I was at [Operation] Breadbasket and is the godmother for my daughters.  Willie also came.  And so it was just a special time for me and for the three of us to be together.  Of course, Jesse was mesmerizing as he often is when he speaks.
Story_ID: 78818
Speaker 1: Also remember an opportunity to meet the dean of the kind of black writers.
Speaker 2: Killens?
Speaker 1: No, not Killens, not John Oliver Killens.  No, he is--
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: His father--I can't think of the man's name right now.  He was a part, the end part of the Harlem Renaissance.  He taught at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] for many, many years.  I see his face, and I know where his book, but I can't think of it right now.  Desmond Tutu came to speak to the [Howard University] School of Divinity.  We got a student who had an old, broken-down car to go pick him up.  He came and he spoke.  The chapel was half full.  It wasn't overflowing at all.  And he spoke in the middle of the day, 11:00 o'clock when chapel was.  And we invited him back.  Before he returned, he received the Nobel Peace Prize.  We got a call from the president of the University, James Cheek.  And they wanted to have a special convocation, award him an honorary degree, etc., and so forth.  So the next time he came, he's picked up with a limousine, with all kinds of escorts.  And the Cramton Auditorium was packed to the rafters.  I was always fascinated by that, just in the sense that notoriety as the old folk would say, being known, being seen as a significant person can alter how institutions and people respond to you.  When he came the first time, he was the moral voice against Apartheid in South Africa.  He was no more nor less that when, after he'd received the Nobel Peace Prize.  But, but that's the way life is.  A young woman at the school came as a young professor, is a good friend of Bishop Tutu.  And I co-officiated at her wedding in Dayton, Ohio.  Reverend Dr. Kelly Brown Douglas is her name.  Her son, Desmond is named after Bishop Tutu, and Bishop Tutu and I are godfathers of Desmond.  So during my first visit to South Africa, I took Bishop Tutu pictures of Desmond, and so we've, we've kept that relationship as co-godfathers.
Story_ID: 78819
Speaker 1: I remember Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] because it was there that I really had an opportunity to engage students and three or four of whom, were the best students I've ever had.  And they were those kinds of students who, not only would they take an assignment and do it, but would go far beyond the assignment you gave them and come back with all kinds of material.   That's just, (unclear) marvelous.  It was during that period of time that my daughters went away to college and graduated.  I was able to see their growth and chart their development.  I learned to love Washington, D.C. and appreciate the nation's capital in some rather, I think, unique ways.  It was a good time.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Good time.
Story_ID: 78820
Speaker 1: Now, in '92' [1992], you take a position at Interdenominational Theological Center?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.  It's ITC, Interdenominational Theological Center, is a consortium of six schools, United Methodist, Christian Methodist Episcopal and African Methodist Episcopal, three historic--well, two historic, black Methodist denominations.  The United Methodist institution is a black United Methodist institution, but United Methodistism is a bigger, white denomination with black people in it.  The Church of God in Christ and the Baptist and Presbyterian.  And it was a marvelous opportunity to be in a place where you have that kind of ecumenism.  You've got, you've got those institutions but the students study from a singular curriculum.  And you have the mix of those traditions and the different styles of preaching and of worship and, and it was a, it was an opportunity for me to be supportive of faculty, and support their efforts, their research, their study, their writings, but also to be an advocate for students.  And I enjoyed my six years at ITC or I might say my first five years at ITC.  My sixth year wasn't such a wonderful time because we changed presidents, and with that change, my--the role that the new president wanted me to play actually was to step down as dean and so the opportunity to come to Chicago [Illinois] again and be Executive Director of the Community Renewal Society was a wonderful opportunity.  And then my, my living daughter resides here and so I was here for her marriage three years ago, and I was here for the birth of my first grandchild, granddaughter, Miranda Rachel Morris Whitaker, seven months ago in August of 2003.  So.
Story_ID: 78821
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what is the Community Renewal Society and your role?  What is your role?
Speaker 2: I'm Executive Director of the Community Renewal Society.  The Society is a faith-based justice advocacy organization, founded here in the City of Chicago in 1882.  So we celebrated our--we are celebrating our 121st anniversary this year.
Speaker 1: Now, there's a story about the founding of the, the founder, and I'm trying to--can you tell us something about him?
Speaker 2: Well, we--there were several founders.  The mostly, what was then the Congregational Church, now the United Church of Christ, Kaleb Gates was one of the founders.  He was a businessman.  And there were, it was a minister in that group.  And they were concerned about the life of religion in the city and were very much concerned again, at that time, with the urbanization and the immigration, industrialization.  And they wanted to make sure that the church responded to the needs.  And so they were--we started churches, settlement centers, centers for children, publications and all the rest.  In the 1920s, Victor Lawson, who was a newspaper publisher died and left money to many--to several institutions in the City of Chicago.  And one of them was the Society, at the time, called the Chicago City Missionary Society.  And, and the, that bequest has enabled the Society to continue far beyond the other city missionary societies because for a number of years, the first half of this century, most of your large cities had city missionary societies.  But most of those organizations no longer exist.  And when they do, they are very small.  The Society has, had many identities over 121 years.  During the Depression, the Society was very much involved with direct service to people in need.  Over these many years, we've started churches and community organizations.  Casa Central, the largest Hispanic social service organization in the United States which is located here, was founded at the Society.  The Kenwood Oakland [Oakwood] Community Organization, KOCO, was founded by the Society.  The now defunct, but wonderfully lamented Westside Organization, WSO was founded by the Society.
Speaker 1: And that was founded during the Dr. King--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That was founded during the Don Benedict era, during the '50's [1950s] and '60's [1960s].  So, it has a rich, a rich history.
Story_ID: 78822
Speaker 1: We continue to be concerned that the, the moral voice be applied to issues that face our communities.  We are committed to fighting racism and poverty.  That's a part of our mission statement.  And we do so several ways, education and information.  We have two publications.  "The Chicago Reporter", which is an investigative journal around issues of racism and poverty and "Catalyst, Voices of Chicago's School Reform" that looks at the whole issue of education.  And we recognize that education in our culture and in this city is very much related to black and Hispanic, Latino youngsters.  We also have an interfaith network of ministers that has worked recently, the last four or five years around the issues of public housing and we have fought to assure that the transformation plan that CHA has with the federal government and the city will, in fact, provide the 25,000 new or rehabbed units for CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] residents.  We have co-convened the Justice Coalition of Greater Chicago.  And we look at issues of criminal justice system and justice reform, where the death penalty issues or whether expungement legislation with some of our legislatures, particularly, Constance Howard [HM] and Danny Davis [HM] are looking at those kind of issues.  And we involve ourselves with efforts to help strengthen community-based organizations so that they can be self-determining, and they can work to enhance the local communities in the City of Chicago.  We are a staff of about 40 with a budget of $4 million.  And I'm the tenth Executive Director of the Society and the first non-UCC [United Church of Christ] Executive Director, although I have, since I've arrived done what we call dual standing in the church.  So I am considered a bona fide UCC minister who happens to be initially ordained as a United Methodist.  And we, it's a wonderful organization with all kinds of roots in the community.  And those roots allow me an opportunity to be involved in a lot of issues, most recently, of course, a lot of work around the anti-war effort.  Although the war has begun, we have felt that it's important to continue to say that we ought to be advocates for peace instead of war.
Story_ID: 78823
Speaker 1: The Community Renewal Society and the various programs of the Community Renewal Society, the action programs actually put people in the street and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --they, they have meetings where people cut issues and, you know, people in the Community Renewal society and under the sponsorship of the organization knock on doors and get people out to do something.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we are concerned that one of the ways you make for change is by empowering people to recognize that they have the wherewithal, and so we do a lot of organizing training with secular organizations as well as religious organizations.  And we have spent the last year attending every public meeting of the Chicago Housing Authority.  And for some, it's been very irritating.  We have, from time to time, when we felt it necessary, disrupted the meetings and--because we're trying to get their attention.  And we're trying to say that the eyes of truth are all in what you do.  And you and the rest of us have to be accountable for that.  And we're talking about the lives of families, primarily children, who make up the great bulk of public housing residents and a structure that has been known to be very cavalier and callous when it comes to poor people.
Story_ID: 78824
Speaker 1: Yeah, similarly, with justice issues, the Justice Coalition is a coalition of legal aid societies and lawyers and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --activists and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, we have everything--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --policing advocates.
Speaker 2: From the CANS, community organization, Neighborhood Safety, American Civil Liberties Union, American Friends Service Committee, the McArthur Justice Center, the Illinois Campaign Against the Death Penalty, all kinds of groups, Jewish Council on Urban Affairs, the--it's a coalition of about 80 member institutions.  And all of those institutions at one level or the other are involved in some aspect of the criminal justice system.  And what each of the organizations has sought to do on their own, we have found that working together, we're able to do much more.  And we're able to empower the organizational agendas of our fellow coalition members, and we have lawyers, ministers, ex-offenders, people from the suburbs, people from the city, all racial groups because we're all affected by a system that is not as fair and just as it might be.
Story_ID: 78825
Speaker 1: Okay, now, the publications "Catalyst [Chicago]" and "Chicago Reporter", are respected publications of the community--I'm just trying to emphasize this as a (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: They're a respected publications that provide research, you know, that people use to cut issues (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well, we have sought to enable those publications, first of all to have top-flight staff.  The editors, wonderful people, and to provide the kind of editorial independence so that the staff people can do what they want to do, choose the stories that they want to investigate and we sought to provide those publications to the broader community, but particularly to legislatures, to business leaders, to religious leaders so that the kinds of things, issues we cover give those people, as well as community activists the kind of data that they need to move an issue, to change different things that are going on.  And the publications have been award-winning ones for many, many years, and the--they are highly valued because they do what journalists do, and that's they ask questions, and they frame the issue in ways that people are able to see what is going on and in a depth that the local newspapers just don't have a willingness to do.  So we're very proud of the publications.  "The Reporter" has been the Society since its founding by John McDermott, thirty-two years ago or so.  And the, and "Catalyst" has been with the Community Renewal Society since its founding now about twelve, thirteen years ago.
Story_ID: 78826
Speaker 1: Now, the--well, as we speak here, the country is engaged in a war against Iraq.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you've been at the forefront, personally, and the organization has been in the forefront of protesting the war.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, how is that going and can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that, there're several things.  I think that we have to be aware that any time the nation is at war, there is certainly an effort to close ranks and be supportive of the Commander in Chief and the troops, wherever they are fighting.  And there is a tendency to equate opposition to the struggle as being unpatriotic and being somehow lacking in love and support of the country.  I think we have to work very hard to communicate, one, that opposition to this war is in the best spirit of the country, that a democracy allows for points of view.  And perhaps, one of the basic reasons for the president's assertion that we had to go to war with Iraq was because the Iraqi people don't have that.  In that effort, if one agrees with it--and I don't--I do not, but if one was to take that at face value, then the nation who is the proponent of democracy does not in its effort to bring democracy to someplace else, hinder its applicability in its own land.  I think that we are patriotic.  We have concern for the boys and the women, the boys and the girls, men and women of the Armed Services.  And one of the reasons we are supportive of them is because we really want to bring them home and get them out of that war and get 'em out of harm's way.  We don't know what the implications are gonna be for this nation and we had a president at one time, Lyndon Johnson, who believed that he could conduct a war with guns and butter, with guns and butter and found out that that was not possible.  We have many issues facing this country, domestic issues, health care, poverty, education, a corporate system right now that seems to reek of corruption.  There's a lot of work that needs to be done at home.  And I think we need to be aware of that.  We also have an obligation as the greatest power in the world right now to use that power to bring the world community together.  And so I'm very concerned that the actions of our government right now have done much to fragment and divide that world community, and while I hope it has not dealt a death nail to the U.N. [United Nations]. I don't think it has, but it certainly has weakened the U.N. by this preemptive strike.  Our partnership on the European continent right now is certainly divided.  So we have--there are a number of issues, and I think it's incumbent upon us as citizens to continue to raise our voice and to work not only for peace at home, but I think we need to work for reconciliation in the broader international community.
Story_ID: 78827
Speaker 1: So, sir, tell me, we were just talking about the national scene.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: Well, my hopes and concerns sort of merge.  My concerns rests primarily around three areas, and there are many more.  I've spent most of my life, the last 25 or 30 years of my life, acting as a mentor for young people, particularly, young men, young African American males--some females, but mainly men.  And we continue, I think, even with the successes, to lose far too many of our young people.  They give up, they drop out of school, and sometimes they get in drugs.  They get caught up in the criminal justice system.  And I think it's one of the signals, features of abiding racism that is allowed to happen.  I went to a luncheon yesterday at the Commercial Club, I think it's called.  And Scott Turow was talking about the death penalty.  And we work very, very hard for reform in the criminal justice system, but also for both the moratorium and the abolition.  And we were talking about people who are on death row, and people who are in line to be executed.  And Scot Turow said, the fascinating about the death penalty is how it's given.  And he said, if the person killed is white, it is three and a half times more likely that the person will receive the death penalty.  And he said, when you look at it, since most crime is committed by people who know each other or who are related to each other or look like each other, and you look at the inmates on death row, you have to wonder why there is a higher valuing of certain lives and the devaluing of others.  To have the number of young people who fall between the cracks in our society, who are African American, is an indication that this society does not value the lives or the life prospects of our young people.
Story_ID: 78828
Speaker 1: And we've gotta work really hard--and churches, some ministers have to be on the cutting edge of this, because if we're not careful in our revulsion against crime, we will join those voices that say our young people's lives are not as valuable.  And so we'll become proponents of law and order and throw away the key and all this kind of stuff.
Speaker 2: Sweeps (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yes, and anti-loitering ordinances and all this kind of stuff, without recognizing that what we're talking about, what we're--what we are aiding and abetting is a growth industry in this nation, and particularly, in this state where new prisons are being built, where people get jobs in communities where there are no jobs.  And you have people lobbying, you have people lobbying to have prisons constructed in their areas of the state.  So it become to our economic advantage to keep people in jail.  And even if we let them out, not to have any kind of structures available to support them when they get out to help them with training, with rehabilitation, with housing, with health care, with jobs, so they go right back.  Some of that, I think, will only occur when the communities that are most affected recognize the relationship between their own vulnerability and the vulnerability of, of the persons who commit the crimes.  We, we have got to work to change our system to the extent that we spend our resources for preventative measures.  We spend our resources to work with kids when they are in their early years, that we understand the relationship between head start and work with kids in the elementary schools early on.  I have really, I have deep concerns about, about a nation that is willing to sacrifice a significant number of its young people and, and communities that are indifferent or are so burdened themselves that there's no ability to intervene.  I think the whole issue of our young people and criminal justice, education--without an education, without access, there is little possibility for our kids.  And without that, I think for some people, our kids become expendable.  They're not necessary for the economy, and, and they are left to their own devices.
Story_ID: 78829
Speaker 1: I am also concerned, both at a micro and a macro level about participation in the body politic.  I think that it is, it's very unsettling that more and more Americans--whatever their racial (unclear), find it less and less important to participate in the political process.  We just had a mayoral election here in the City of Chicago, overwhelmingly won by our mayor, of course, but with one of the lowest voter turnouts in the history of the city.  Similarly, in our national elections, it's happening more and more and more.  What does it say about a system of government that prides itself on the participation and involvement of the citizens to have citizens not participating?  That's very, very unsettling.  And we see it in our communities, African American and some Hispanic communities, and we recognize that some of the issues that we face, particularly issues of our young people, educational access, job training and all the rest, that without that kind of vigilance and people being involved and people demanding that the structures of society and the, the policies that govern the distributions of funds and resources, that they come to our communities as well.  That's not going to happen as long as politicians believe that there's not gonna be any kind of ripple, no kind of response.  We can pretty much do what we wanna do there because, you know, we're asleep, they're asleep, etc., and so forth.  I have, I have some real concerns about that.  So you get education.  You get, the criminal justice system, you get health care access.  There are a whole number of issues that particularly impact poor and minority communities.
Story_ID: 78830
Speaker 1: Now, tell me, having served so long, trying to connect the moral to action, more indignation to action, what do you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: When I was at Operation Breadbasket, I, we all had songs, and when we got up to speak or whatever, Ben Branch and the orchestra would play our songs.  And my song, my theme song was, "If I can help somebody as I pass along.  If I can cheer somebody with a word of song. . . "
Speaker 1: You can sing a little bit of it, if you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --as I'm traveling along, then my living will not be in vain."  One does--I don't know what my legacy will be at all.  And I can't say that I'm very much concerned about it.  The--there's another song we used to sing, "Oh, when I come to the end of my journey, weary of life and the battle is done, bearing the cross--bearing the staff, and the cross of redemption, He'll understand and say, well done."  It's up to, it's up to our God, I think, to judge what piddling kinds of things we try to do.  I still think we're compelled and expected to do those piddling things.  And you hope that some lives are touched.  You hope that you work around public policy issues enough that as those policy issues are addressed and changed, that they will affect a broad scope of people.  In my life, I have tried to be aware of the micro and the macro issues.  And so my work in the local congregations, my work as a teacher, training people to be ministers, my efforts as a mentor, when you--to touch kids directly, are ways of trying to both, not only look at the big picture but also to be engaged in the small picture as well and to balance my concern for institutions and structures with my concern for men and women and boys and girls.
Story_ID: 78831
Speaker 1: The danger for all of us, I think, who are very active in communities and societies, is to become wed to one focus.  And so you have people who are really concerned about the large picture and people in the aggregate.  And they work for people, the broad people.  But they don't have much concern about individual people.  Then you have others who are terribly involved, one-on-one with individual people.  But they don't have much of a concern about the larger picture and many of the people.  I've tried to live my life in such a way that I give honor to both realities.  How successful that is, who is to tell?  And you don't put your trust in what you do.  You put your trust in the one, the God who compels you to do what you do.  And that's what, I think that's what we'll--that's what we're called to do and to be.  And if we're successful--whatever that means, fine.  The Dean of Howard University School of Divinity [Washington, D.C] for many years, Dean Lawrence Jones, who's still alive, and I still talk to him often, Dean Jones used to say that we really are not called--as ministers and as Christians and people of faith, we really are not called to be successful.  We are called to be faithful.  And if at my end, somebody can say, both on this earthly side and on the heavenly side, that Calvin tried to be faithful over a few things, that will be enough.
Story_ID: 78832
Speaker 1: Now, this is slightly different, but this question, we always ask.  How would you like to be remembered, sir?
Speaker 2: He tried to love others, genuinely and caringly and he tried to love others and he tried to make a difference for good.
Speaker 1: Thank you so much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 78833
Speaker 1: Our group of Lincoln University [Oxford, Pennsylvania] students protesting outside of the Oxford Hotel in Oxford, Pennsylvania, some four miles south of the campus.  And that picture would be, would have been taken in 1962, '61' [1961] or '62' [1962].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: And I am in--I'm the one with the, holding whatever that was, what kind of paper that was.  Maybe that was my speech.  I don't know.
Speaker 2: Okay, you're right in front here.
Speaker 1: Yes, that's me.
Speaker 2: All right, okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a picture taken in Greenville, South Carolina in 1964.  And I am on the left with my arms folded.  Jesse Jackson, Sr. [Rev. Jesse Jackson, Sr., HM]] is in the middle, and his brother, Charles Jackson, his half-brother, Charles Jackson is on the right.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This is a picture, this is a picture taken here in the City of Chicago in Hyde Park following Jesse Jackson's graduation from Chicago Theological Seminary.  And the four people represented are, all worked, were all staffers at Operation Breadbasket.  On the left is Reverend Gary Massoni, M-A-S-S-O-N-I.  I'm in the middle, the second from the left, Jesse and the Reverend David Wallace.  The three of them were students at Chicago Theological Seminary, and they began Breadbasket together.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: This is a meeting which would have been held either in 1974 or 1975 at the College of Urban Development, Michigan State University.  It is a retreat of the staff and members of the Martin Luther King Center for Nonviolent Social Change.  Starting from the left with the ladies seated, I don't remember the first two ladies' names.  They are from Detroit involved in the Labor Movement.  One of them, I think the younger woman was probably the woman who took care of, accompanied Mrs. Parks [Rosa Parks].  Mrs. Rosa Parks is the third person from the left seated.  Next to her is Stoney Cooks who was a long-time SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] staff member and for many years, was top aide to Andrew Young [HM].  Sitting next to Stoney is Mrs. Coretta Scott King.  Sitting next to Mrs. King is Dora McDonald, who was Dr. King's private secretary for many, many years, and sitting next to Dora McDonald is Christine King-Farris, Dr. King's older sister.  Standing from the left, I don't remember the gentleman's name, but he a labor leader.  And I don't remember the name of the woman next to him.  Standing next to her is Robert Green, Dr. Robert Green.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes, who was the dean of the College of Urban Development at Michigan State [University] at the time, and who had been, had worked with SCLC during Dr. King's years.  Standing next to him is Mrs. Bonita Bennett who was the special assistant to Coretta King.  Bonita's husband, Fred Bennett, was the Southern director of Operation Breadbasket.  Standing next to Bonita is Harry Wachtel, W-A-C-H-T-E-L, a lawyer, very close to Dr. King in the Movement, very wealthy man, Jewish man, from New York City.  The guy standing behind Harry, I don't remember his name, but I think he was in the Labor Movement.  Standing in front of him is Andrew Young, and standing next to Andrew Young is probably Dr. King's closest advisor, a very controversial man because the FBI warned President Kennedy [President John F. Kennedy] that he was a member of the Communist party, and his name was Stanley Levison, L-E-V-I-S-O-N.  I am standing next to Stanley with the Afro, and standing next to me is Dorothy Cotton who was the highest ranking woman in SCLC, a long-time activist and fighter.  And standing next to Dorothy is Stanley Levison's son, and I'm not quite, I can't remember his first name.  But he is a Levison.  He's the son of the man that's standing to my left.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is a picture taken here in Chicago, probably 1969 or '70' [1970].  It is the occasion of the showing, premier showing of the Landau, L-A-N-D-A-U, film on Dr. King called "From Montgomery to Memphis".  And this is a gathering of folks, kneeling in front is Cirilo McSween, a long-time Chicago businessman, New York Life agent, owner of many McDonald and other restaurants now--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and kneeling beside him is yours truly.  To the left, standing in the front is the Reverend Claude Wyatt, the pastor of Vernon Park Church of God, yes, now retired.  Actually, Claude has Alzheimer's now, the husband of Addie Wyatt, the labor leader.  Standing next to Claude is Alice Tregay.  That's the young woman I was telling you about who directed our citizens--our political education division of Breadbasket.  Standing next to Alice is Bernard Scott Lee who was Dr. King's--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: Assistant, traveling companion for many, many, many years, Bernard Lee.  In front of Bernard is a young man whose name I do not remember.  Standing next to her is Reverend Willie Barrow [HM], yes.  And then standing next to Willie Barrow is a minister.  His son is pastoring that church down on the South side of Chicago.
Speaker 1: Thurston?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: It looks like his son.  That's why--
Speaker 2: No, that's Thurston.  That's the daddy.
Speaker 1: Stephen Thurston.
Speaker 2: Not Stephen Thurston.  His name--
Speaker 1: Stephen Thurston's daddy.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  That's Reverend John Thurston, [correct] I don't know.  But it's Thurston.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, Reverend Thurston.
Speaker 2: And then standing next to him is a young lady.  I can't remember her name, and the young woman in front of her is, her name is Avery.  I don't remember her first name.  The man here is Dr. Abernathy.
Speaker 1: Ralph David Abernathy.
Speaker 2: Ralph David Abernathy, Dr. King's close associate and friend, and the one who would succeed him as president of SCLC.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Would you point out Abernathy, Larry?
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  No, that's okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, yes, that's Dr. Abernathy.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: Okay, and the man whose head is slightly hidden is Reverend Ed Riddick who was a long-time staff member and director of research for Breadbasket and Rainbow PUSH.
Speaker 1: Right here? [phone ringing]
Speaker 2: No, the other one, standing next to him.  See the man with the glasses.  Then there's a man standing next to him.
Speaker 1: Okay, on this side?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  [Phone ringing] To the far right, there's a man with the glasses--
Speaker 1: Oh, here.
Speaker 2: And the man standing next to him whose face is hidden.
Speaker 1: Is Riddick.
Speaker 2: That's Riddick.  That's Ed Riddick
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Story_ID: 78676
Speaker 1: All right, now, this is a photo, as far as I can gather, of my grandmother and her siblings.  My grandmother would be the third from the left, the--she would be holding the little baby.
Speaker 2: Here?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And that picture was probably taken in 1898 or 1900.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And just, I know early in the interview you already covered this, but if you could restate your grandmother's name?
Speaker 1: Ida Lydia Turner Morris.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Fantastic.
Speaker 1: And these are two pictures of my grandmother and my mother.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Starting with--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: My grandmother is on the left, and my mother, Dorothy Lee Morris, married name Harvey, but she really went Dorothy Lee Morris is on the right.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Very good, moving on.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my father, Abner Williams.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  About what year.
Speaker 1: Oh, my goodness.  That picture was probably taken early '70's [1970s].
Speaker 2: My grandfather, Jeremiah Morris.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 2: Jeremiah Morris, probably taken outside of a tavern called "The Old Folks Home", and that picture was probably taken in the--he died in 1956.  That picture was probably taken in the early '50's [1950s] or late '40's [1940s].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is my great grandmother, Ida Turner, taken outside of the ancestral home in Cecilton, Maryland, C-E-C-I-L-T-O-N, one word, Maryland.  And that picture was probably taken in the late '30's [1930s], very early '40's [1940s].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, great.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my daughters and myself.  The daughter to the left is Dorothy Rebecca Morris Whitaker, her married name is Whitaker.  And she survives, and the daughter to the left, is Rachel Elaine Morris-- (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  To the right.
Speaker 1: I mean to the right, I'm sorry, in the white, Rachel Elaine Morris, R-A-C-H-E-L.  And Rachel was killed in an automobile accident, July 1st, 1994 at the age of 23.  That picture was taken at Oberlin College [Oberlin, Ohio] where they both attended and to which they both graduated, at my daughter, Dodie's (ph.) junior recital.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear)
Speaker 1: These are my daughters, Rachel on the left and Dodie on the right, their graduation pictures from college.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: A picture of my daughters and myself and my father.  Rachel is on the left.  I stand next to Rachel.  Dodie, D-O-D-I-E--that's how she likes her name, is next and my father is on the far right.  That picture would have been taken--let me see, Dodie looks like she's around 12, 14.  That picture would have been taken around 1980.
Speaker 2: This is a picture taken here in the City of Chicago.  It was at a benefit, a fundraising benefit for Rainbow PUSH.  To the left is Reverend Willie Barrow [HM], W-I-L-L-I-E, B-A-R-R-O-W.  To Willie's left is yours truly.  And centered in the picture, kneeling is Bill Cosby.  The other persons in the picture, names I do not recall.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right, next photo.
Speaker 2: This picture is taken a Lincoln University in [Oxford] Pennsylvania, my undergraduate school, and it is taken in May of 1992.  The gentleman holding something to the left with the kente--I don't--he's a state legislator.  He's either a state senator in Pennsylvania or a representative, but I can't remember his name.  The person next to the left is Governor Wilder--what is Wilder's first name?
Speaker 1: Douglas.
Speaker 2: Douglas Wilder [HM], Governor of Virginia.  Standing next to him is Rosa Parks, Ms. Rosa Parks.  Standing behind Ms. Parks and next to Governor Wilder is myself and standing to the far right is Reverend Dr. Youtha, Y-O-U-T-H-A, Hardman, H-A-R-D-M-A-N--Cromwell, C-R-O-M-W-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: All right, this is a picture taken outside of Ebenezer Baptist Church, Auburn Avenue, Atlanta, Georgia, January 15, 1974.  We have just finished the Martin Luther King, Jr. birthday service, worship service.  On your far left is a young student from Morehouse College.  I do not remember his name.  The little kids in the foreground, the little girl whose head is--
Speaker 2: Turned away?
Speaker 1: Turned away is the younger daughter of Christine King Farris [HM].  I don't remember the little girl's name, but she's the--Dr. King's niece.  And the little boy in front, I believe is the son of Dr. Robert Green [HM], who was the Dean of the School of Urban Development at Michigan State [University, East Lansing, Michigan].  The, like I said, the far fellow to the left is a young man.  He was a marshal.  We were getting ready to march. He was a marshal and standing next to him is Dr. Benjamin E. Mays, Dr. Benjamin Elijah Mays.  Standing next to him is the Episcopal priest whose name I cannot remember.  Standing to him, locked arms is myself.  Standing next to me is Caesar Chavez of the United Farmworkers, the president or the head of the United Farmworkers.  He was honored that day with the King Medal.  Locked arms with him is Coretta Scott King, Dr. King's wife.  Standing next to her is Mrs. Alberta Williams King, Dr. King's mother.  And standing next to her is her daughter, Christine King Farris, F-A-R-R-I-S.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right, what have we got next?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Yep, that's me.  That would have been, oh my goodness, at Breadbasket [Operation Breadbasket], probably 1969, '68' [1968], '69' [1969] at a Breadbasket, Saturday morning meeting.  It looks like I was on, at a podium.  It may have been at Tabernacle Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That is at the Parkway Ballroom.  And standing next to me is Reverend Neal, N-E-A-L.  I forget Reverend Neal's first name.  He's a United Methodist minister.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, date for that one?
Speaker 2: Approximately, 1968.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Jesse, now, this gentleman is the present mayor of Jersey City--of Newark [New Jersey].  His name is Sharp James.  He was a councilman at that time.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's me in the middle, and Jesse [Rev. Jesse Jackson] on the right.  We were, we were in Newark [New Jersey], supporting the election run of Ken Gibson, the first black mayor of Newark.
Speaker 2: Did you go to the Black Power conferences?
Speaker 1: No, I went to one in, probably '68' [1968] or '70' [1970]--'69' [1969].
Story_ID: 78677
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Breadbasket?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, Operation Breadbasket.
Speaker 1: Okay, the gentleman in the front is St. Clair Booker.  He was Jesse's [Reverend Jesse Jackson, Sr., HM] traveling companion and assistant for many years.
Speaker 2: Right here?
Speaker 1: No, the guy in the front (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, immediate front.
Speaker 1: Immediate front, I'm sorry, yeah.  And then to the left, this guy--I don't remember his name, but he was a city councilman.
Speaker 2: This one here?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and that's me with my mouth open 'cause I'm singing probably or shouting or doing something.  Jesse with his fist and the Sharp James.  And I don't know who that person is with his face.
Speaker 2: Let's go to the bottom one.
Speaker 1: Now, the bottom picture, again, this is in Newark.  It would have been late '60's [1960s].  I am on the left, sitting down.  Sitting next to me is Fannie Lou Hamer, famous Civil Rights leader from Mississippi, great, great, great soul.  Sitting next to her is Jesse [Rev. Jesse Jackson, HM].  Sitting next to Jesse is Ken Gibson, running for mayor.  Sitting next to Ken Gibson is Harry Belafonte [HM], sitting next to Harry Belafonte is James Earl Jones.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: And then--well, the people in the back, I don't know any of them except Sharpe James, but I think they were all Newark city councilmen or they were running for City Council.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Fair enough.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is a Breadbasket meeting.  And this would have been in '69' [1969] or '70' [1970].  And this was at the theater at 79th and Halsted.  I forget the name of the theater.  It was where, just before they moved to the site where they are now.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Something out there, what's the name of it?  Capitol, Capitol Theater.
Speaker 2: Capitol, 'cause they used to have a sign that said the white buffalo (unclear).  It showed the (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Oh, is that right?
Speaker 2: (Unclear) Twelve years, the white buffalo (unclear).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I'm sorry, sir.  But the picture was out of position so I'll have to ask you to repeat that.  I wasn't rolling.
Speaker 2: Okay, yes, this is Variety Club camp in Wooster County, Pennsylvania, probably 1961, and I was the senior counselor, and it's a camp for physically handicapped children.  In those days it was called Variety Club Camp for Handicapped Children.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, which one are you (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's hard to tell.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, the picture at the bottom--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --the bottom.
Speaker 1: Oh, this?
Speaker 2: Not that one.
Speaker 1: This one?
Speaker 2: That one--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --is at Lincoln University, 1964, and that's a group of fraternity brothers, Omega Psi Phi, and the, the second from the right is Jesse Jackson [Sr., HM], and the last person on the right is myself.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right, next.
Speaker 2: The next picture, right there--stay there, the last one on the right, leaning is Jesse.  In the middle is Lottie Wilson, Sister Lottie Wilson we called her.  She was our fraternity mother, the only woman Omega, and knelling next to Sis on the right is myself.  Standing are other fraternity members, and the middle, the person standing in the middle is the poet, Langston Hughes.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  With the glasses?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's Langston Hughes.
Speaker 1: And now, the last picture on the right, the little one down at the bottom, that--the up top picture is a singing group I was in called "The Blues Brothers".  And I'm in the middle.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, and we did an album, and the album is right there on the floor.
Speaker 2: You guys made a movie [teasingly].
Speaker 1: I know.  That picture to the, the young man standing to the left is Lyndors Grey, L-Y-N-D-O-R-S, G-R-E-Y.  Standing next to him is my favorite cousin, Barbara--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  He's on the big picture, "The Blues Brothers".
Speaker 1: Oh, really, yeah.
Speaker 2: Who are they from left to right?
Speaker 1: From left to right is Reverend Anthony Campbell, Anthony C. Campbell, C-A-M-P-B-E-L-L.  I'm in the middle, and the guitarist for the group was Hank Davis.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Tony just died, and Hank is teaching in the University of Guelph.  The standing, the young man standing to the left is Lyndors Grey.  He was a fraternity brother and classmate at Lincoln [University, Oxford, Pennsylvania].  Standing next to him is my cousin, Barbara Hewland (ph.)--her married name is Wood, W-O-O-D.  Standing next to Barbara is Jesse.  Standing next to Jesse is my mother, Dorothy Lee Morris.  Standing next to her is Jayne--my girlfriend at the time, Jane Jones, J-A-Y-N-E, Jones, and standing next to her is yours truly.  And that was at Lincoln University, 1964.  [phone ringing]
Speaker 2: Well, see, on the left I'm to the back of you, on the bottom picture.  And that's one of the--we were--
Speaker 1: Oh, you're here.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were picketing at National Food Stores.  And that's Willie Barrow talking to me.  Up top on the right is myself and the singer "Odetta".  That's Odetta.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's Odetta, and that would have been taken in '68' [1968] or nine [1969].
Speaker 1: The middle picture, to the left is Jesse--I mean to the left is myself, Jesse, Dr. Abernathy, and C. T. Vivian [HM].
Speaker 2: C. T. Vivian, okay.
Speaker 1: C. T. Vivian, V-I-V-I-A-N.
Speaker 2: That's the one that got hit in the mouth in front of that church.
Speaker 1: That's right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Very good.  Is he still alive?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, he was here for Archie's funeral.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The bottom picture on the left, taken in either late '67' [1967] or early '68' [1968].  I'm on the left.  The gentleman next to me is Vance Henry.  The guy behind Vance Henry is the Don Cornelius of "Soul Train" fame.
Speaker 2: Right here.
Speaker 1: Right, that's Don Cornelius.  Standing next to him is Nelson Rockefeller, Jesse and Reverend Willie Barrow.
Speaker 2: Is that when he was running for president in '68' [1968].
Speaker 1: Exactly.  He was here on a campaign swing.
Speaker 2: A lot of black support too.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Jackie Robinson, all those kind of people.  But he just never--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: The next picture at the bottom is Charles Evers, the brother of Medgar Evers.  He's speaking at the microphone.  Willie [Barrow] is sitting down.  I'm sitting next to Willie.  Jesse is sitting next to me, and the Reverend Jessie, J-E-S-S-I-E, "Ma" Houston is sitting next to Jessie.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know her daughter and her daughter.
Speaker 1: Oh, yes, and then the picture above--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Amita Newman and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --is, I am kneeling talking to Dr. Abernathy, and the young people above are members of the Breadbasket choir.
Speaker 2: He didn't make everybody kneel (laughter) (unclear)--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: The one on the right top is the same picture we actually shot in the frame.  It's just a different (unclear).  That's Jesse and me at the top on the left, and below is that movie that we had--they had come to see, the King movie.  And--
Speaker 1: It starred a tall guy, did he star in that (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Not that Stokes, first black mayor of Cleveland.  In the middle is Billy Eckstine, the singer.
Speaker 1: It sure is.
Speaker 2: And to his right is myself.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And what was this occasion?
Speaker 2: This would have been at a Breadbasket, Saturday morning meeting.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 1: And the middle picture, Reverend Addie Wyatt [HM], my wife, Judith, and myself.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Reverend [Willie] Barrow [HM].  The person in the middle, her name was Willa, Willa Jones, W-I-L-L-A.  She was the founder and originator of the, of the play--was it black--not "Black Nativity".  But it was a play that, a religious play that they took around to the churches.  And I'm sitting next to her, and sitting next to me is Reverend Clay Evans [HM].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, good.
Speaker 1: And then the bottom picture is--
Speaker 2: Julian--
Speaker 1: Julian Bond [HM] and myself.  And that would have been during the, probably the presidential primary of 1968.  Julian was--who did Julian support?
Speaker 2: Probably Bobby Kennedy [Robert Kennedy], right?
Speaker 1: Either Bobby--Rayford Johnson.  I think he was probably--Rayford was one of his front men as well, but I think it was probably Bobby Kennedy, yeah.
Speaker 2: Eugene McCarthy had been--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now, we want to hold this picture because, from elementary school.
Speaker 2: Meade, George Meade.
Speaker 1: George Meade School, and I am second row from the top, fourth from the right.  That's me (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Unclear) I can't tell anybody (unclear).
Speaker 1: That's me.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's you.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and the teacher that I talked about, the two teachers, one I said was Mr. Ryder.  Well, Mr. Ryder is on the third row, second from the right.
Speaker 2: Oh, this is--
Speaker 1: That's Mr. Ryder.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And the bottom picture is my high school graduation picture from Friend Select School, and I am fairly easily recognizable.  Then the young woman I was seeing, who was the other black student in the school, Loren Douglas, is sitting on the far right.  And my friend, Jimmy Quo, the Chinese boy is on the far right.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Great, we have a roll change.
Story_ID: 78678
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE): Which one are we on?
Speaker 2: Alright. We're gonna use the one down at the bottom, on the left.  Don't know the gentleman's name to the far left.  I am second from the left.  The person sort of behind, shadowed is Gus Savage [HM].  You see him there, where I'm talking about.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's Gus Savage.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).  That's not Dirksen, is it?
Speaker 2: No, no, he's a black man, but he's just very--he was a fair, freckle-faced man, and I just can't remember what his name is.  Jesse [Rev. Jesse Jackson, Sr., HM], standing next to Jesse is Sammy Rayner, R-A-Y-N-E-R.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, not Claude Holman.
Speaker 2: Claude Holman, that's it, that's it.  He was an alderman at the time, right?
Speaker 1: Give me ten guesses (laughter), I'll get--
Speaker 2: Isn't that right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Claude Holman, H-O-L-M-A-N, C-A-L-U--A-U-D-E.
Speaker 1: That's Jesse.
Speaker 2: Jesse, well, and--
Speaker 1: Rayner.
Speaker 2: Well, we pointed out Gus Savage, and then Sammy Rayner, R-A-Y-N-E-R, and Ralph Metcalfe is the far right.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  What particular event or occasion is this?
Speaker 2: This may, in fact, have been when Jesse was talking about running for mayor or something like that.  It could have been.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, we are--the guy sitting there was an African guy.  What was his name?
Speaker 2: It looks like (unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No, but I can't think of his name now.  Oh, gosh.  Ben Branch is playing the sax and I am standing at the podium.
Speaker 2: That's the famous Operation Breadbasket band.
Speaker 1: Um-hum, Ben Branch and the Operation Breadbasket band.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: The big picture at the top is a picture taken soon after I graduated from college [Lincoln University, Oxford, Pennsylvania], probably 1964.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: We can off, on the left, Congressman now, Danny Davis [HM] and myself.
Speaker 2: Okay, we can keep going.  The left Junius Griffith--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Junius Griffin, J-U-N-I-U-S, was a top official in Columbia Records at the time, Dr. Abernathy.  To the left, or the right of Dr. Abernathy is C. T. Vivian [HM].  To the left of or the right of C. T. is Arthur Brazier, Bishop Brazier, and I am talking to Dr. Abernathy in the front.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: All right.  We can go on, down at the bottom at one of the Breadbasket expos.  To the left is Jesse, in the middle is myself and playing on the guitar is B. B. King [HM].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: The Capitol.
Speaker 1: That is the Capitol Theater where we met.  At the bottom is Daddy-O Daylie [HM] who just died.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) Blues Daddy-O Daylie, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a disc jockey and myself.  And that is during one of the Expos at the Amphitheater.  And the middle picture, the little picture--okay--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: --is Willie Barrow [HM] is on the left.  Probably the owner of, I don't know if it was "Jewel Company" or one of those companies.  Standing behind him is, standing behind the white guy is Reverend Henry Hardy.  Almost out of sight, with his head down is Sammy Davis.  You see that.
Speaker 2: Sammy Davis, Jr.?
Speaker 1: Yes, where is your pen.  That's Sammy Davis, yes, and I am signing the agreement in the front.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, we can go on.  Yeah, that's Attorney General Ramsey Clark, and--
Speaker 2: Is that when he was doing "Common Cause"?
Speaker 1: No, he was probably, that was probably around Vietnam.
Speaker 2: He was Attorney General?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and he spoke out against--well, he had been Attorney General.  By that time, he probably wasn't--myself, Jesse and Lilly.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: The upper picture, the only picture there, behind the microphone--you can't see him, is Al Samson, and--
Speaker 2: Where is he standing?
Speaker 1: Up at top.  That's Al.  And then there's Jesse holding, and behind Jesse is Father George Clements [HM] and myself.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Just with Father Clements in Washington.
Speaker 1: Yeah, is that right?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 1: And you know who's down at the bottom--you don't have to shoot it is James Montgomery [HM], Attorney Montgomery who's now the, he heads the office of Johnnie Cochran here in Chicago.
Speaker 2: This is James Montgomery?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And myself.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I'll go ahead and shoot that.
Speaker 1: We're all young.  That's what happens.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: Well, we've got sort of that picture, of '65' [1965], is myself and Father James Groppi who was the kind of militant leader in Milwaukee.
Speaker 1: I remember him.
Speaker 2: He was sort of a--yeah, Father James Groppi, G-R-O-P-P-I.  He was sort like, a little bit like Father Pfleger is today, but not much.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And the upper picture, that's Jesse and Dr. Abernathy, Dr. Ralph Metcalfe.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: And the guy who was the first president of Malcolm X College.  I think his name was Hurst--
Speaker 1: Charles Hurst.
Speaker 2: --Charles Hurst is the guy to my left, a short guy.
Speaker 1: I thought he was taller than that on (unclear)--
Speaker 2: No, he's a little man.
Speaker 1: I saw him on the Phil Donahue Show, years ago.
Speaker 2: Years ago, yeah.  Charles Hurst, yep, okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: I thought he was the smartest guy I ever heard on television.  I really--(unclear), genius.
Speaker 1: We can go on.  These were labor leaders, and the first four guys--
Speaker 2: I know who that is.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the first four guys are labor leaders.  I can't, I knew the guy, the second from the left, but I can't think of his name.  He was Charlie Hayes' top assistant, along with Addie Wyatt [HM].  So beginning with the fifth person from the left, that's Clay Evans (Reverend Clay Evans, HM), Charlie Hayes, and myself.
Speaker 2: Ex-Congressman, Charles Hayes [HM].
Speaker 1: Yeah, the late Congressman Charles Hayes.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's, that was taken in Atlanta, Georgia, probably in 1973 or four [1974].  Mrs. King was killed in '74' [1974], in March or April.  And to the left standing is Christine King-Farris [HM], Dr. King's sister, his aunt, Dr. King, Sr.'s sister, and I don't remember her name.  And then Mrs. Alberta Williams King, Dr. King's mama, standing with Dr. King, Sr.  Next to him is Coretta King, and next to him is the wife of A.D. Williams King, Dr. King's brother.  And I can't remember what her name is.  Gosh.
Speaker 2: And then the picture down on the bottom is a big picture of ministers.  That was a part of the Breadbasket, ministerial division, and seated, I don't remember the nun's name on the far left.  Seated next to her is Willie Barrow [HM].  Seated next to Willie is myself at the microphone.  Another Catholic priest--I cannot remember his name.  Sitting next to him, Reverend Jessie "Ma" Houston and in the back row standing directly behind me, standing directly behind me is Clay Evans.  Standing next to him is Earl Simmons.  Standing behind Earl Simmons is Reverend Henry Hardy.  Yes.  Standing next to Reverend Simmons is a Father George Clement--see George?
Speaker 1: Yeah, right there.
Speaker 2: Okay, and then standing behind George is Reverend Philip Harley.  See the man standing in the back, short man.
Speaker 1: This one?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Reverend Philip Harley.  He was, H-A-R-L-E-Y, and standing next to him is Reverend Claude Wyatt. Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay?
Story_ID: 78679
Speaker 1: Picture to your left at the bottom is the wife of Charles Hurst.  I don't remember her name.
Speaker 2: And Charles Hurst.
Speaker 1: And Charles Hurst and Betty Shabazz, the widow of Malcom X and myself.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear)
Speaker 1: Was that commemorating Malcolm X or something?
Speaker 2: It was a big affair.  I'm not sure--I don't think it was at Malcolm X College, but I don't remember the exact--up top, no on the up top on that same side, is Gus Savage [HM] is on the left, Rosa Parks, next to Gus, the Reverend D. E. King, next to Mrs. Parks.  Next to D. E. is Congressman John Conyers [HM], next to John Conyers is Jesse [Reverend Jesse Jackson, Sr., HM].  At the microphone, Senator Charles Percy.  Behind Charles Percy on the right is myself and next to me is Odetta.
Speaker 1: And at the top is Bill Cosby--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: --Jesse, and myself.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: All right, let's keep going.  At the bottom of 76 [page] are pictures of me when I was a little boy.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: When I was a real little boy, and then when I was a little boy with the glasses.
Speaker 2: How old were you there, you'd say?
Speaker 1: Oh, I was probably four or five.
Speaker 2: And here (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Probably six or seven or seven or eight or something like that.
Speaker 2: You look similar to the way you (unclear) do now (laughter), glasses and--
Speaker 1: And then the picture above is my wife, myself and our oldest daughter, Dodie.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Just to let everybody know, we've got about twelve minutes of tape left.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Down at the bottom on 77 [page], on the left, the person on the left is Reverend John Scott.  He was head of the chapter in--no he wasn't head of the chapter in Brooklyn, but he was an official, Reverend Barrow, Reverend Abernathy, myself and Andrew Young [HM].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Down on the left, on the--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that's--
Speaker 1: --standing to the left, in the front is Reverend Claude Young, C-L-A-U-D-E, long-time SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] board member and may be still president of SCLC.  In the middle, Ben Hooks [HM], who was, who was a minister and judge and Republican and member of the FCC [Federal Trade Commission], and head of the NAACP.  He followed Roy Wilkins [HM], I believe.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And standing next to him is a minister whose name I do not recall.  I am the second from the left on the--standing, and behind Reverend Hooks is Dr. Joseph Lowery [HM] who at the time was the president of the board of SCLC and is just the retired president of SCLC.  He helped in the coup de tat that removed--
Speaker 2: Abernathy?
Speaker 1: Abernathy, yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  A picture of black elected officials from around the country.
Speaker 2: Right here?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Are you in that one?
Speaker 1: I'm in that one.  I'm--
Speaker 2: Oh, I see you, right here.
Speaker 1: Standing, yes.  One, two, three, four, five, six, seventh from the left.  Clay [Reverend Clay Evans, HM] is standing near me, James Bevel [HM] is standing next to Clay.  Looks like Reverend John Porter [HM], who would be third from the left.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, sure is, Reverend John Porter.
Speaker 1: And then Jesse is, of course--one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, 10, from the left.  And standing with him is Reverend Barrett--
Speaker 2: T. L. Barrett?
Speaker 1: T. L. Barrett [HM] is standing next to him.  And then I don't know who's--I can't see who's standing next to Barrett, but Thomas Todd [HM], attorney, Thomas Todd is standing fourth from the right.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's Tom Todd.
Speaker 1: That's Tom Todd.
Speaker 2: And at the far right is Ed Riddick, staff, and sitting to the, to the left, second from the left is Jack O'Dell, who was very--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, Jack was a very key strategist and editor of "Freedom Ways Magazine" for many years.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's (unclear), okay.
Speaker 2: And Willie Barrow.  Willie is sitting next to him.  The lady is Ms. Goshay (ph.) from California.  She just died recently.  And sitting next to her is Carl Stokes, I believe.  And the last, the two women to the far right, the first is Anna Langford [HM], who was an Alderwoman here, and sitting next to Anna is Jackie Jackson, Jesse's wife.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: They had gone to take in his petitions for mayor.
Speaker 1: And that's Thomas Todd.
Speaker 2: And that's Thomas Todd, and I'm on the right.
Speaker 1: Now, who is it back here?
Speaker 2: That was one of Jesse's bodyguards.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a policeman--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and was with him many, many, many years.  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: We interviewed Tom Todd.
Speaker 2: Oh, you did?  Yeah, that's Thomas Todd.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)  TLT.
Speaker 2: T, T, TLT.  That's the late Senator Newhouse at the top on the left.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's--that's him, and I'm in the middle.
Speaker 1: At one time was the most popular politician, black politician in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Oh, he was, he was very popular.
Speaker 1: They were talking about him seriously becoming mayor.
Speaker 2: Yeah, at one time.  Yeah, he was, he lived in Hyde Park.
Speaker 1: When I got here, his popularity had kind of fallen off.  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 1: Willie Barrow on the left, myself in the middle, and Mahalia [Mahalia Jackson] on the right.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And that would have been probably in Memphis or New Orleans at the SCLC convention.  And that would have been in '69' [1969], '68' [1968], '69' [1969], '70' [1970].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: A march.  On the left is Jessie "Ma" Houston, Reverend Jesse "Ma" Houston.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 1: And I'm in the middle and Jesse is on the right with a little child on his shoulders.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, good.  That was 54 [page]?
Speaker 1: Fifty four.
Speaker 2: Jesse, of course, is at the mic.  This is in the Parkway Ballroom, and this would have been in '68' [1968], probably not too long after Dr. King's death probably.  I am sitting to his right, looking up at him, and in the foreground is Willie Barrow.  The gentleman standing up, I'm trying to think of his name.
Speaker 1: Is that Hannibal Afrik, Harold Charles?
Speaker 2: No?
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No, he's a minister, and he was killed very mysteriously.  They found him in a car.  I can't think of his name.  Next to him is Reverend Clay Evans, and next to Clay Evans is Muhammad Ali or in those days, Cassius Clay.  I don't think he had changed his name at the time.
Speaker 1: Like '64' [1964]?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, it's--well, maybe he had changed his name 'cause this would be '68' [1968].
Speaker 1: Yeah, he had changed his name.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, Cassius--Muhammad Ali.  Sitting next to Muhammad Ali is Bishop Brazier.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, we got that one.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  We've got a couple of minutes left.
Speaker 2: Chicago Theological Seminary in the seminary's dining room.  That's where were met.  And I'm standing in the black suit by the blackboard to your far right almost.  That's me.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 2: And the people sitting next to me were the Breadbasket band and everything, yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: All right, is there anything else you need?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Unless you can think of anything?
Speaker 2: Okay, anything--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: All right, the picture to your right, the young woman in the black is Evelyn--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: --the lady on the left in the black dress is Evelyn Hall, and that's me next to Evelyn, with the Afro.  Mrs. King [Coretta Scott King] is next to me.  To Mrs. King's right is Harry Belafonte in the back.  Standing next to Mrs. King is Mrs. Otis Redding and standing next to Mrs. Redding, a side shot is Marvin Gaye.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And what was this occasion?
Speaker 2: This would have been a birthday celebration for Martin Luther King, January, probably 1974 or five [1975].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Can we get Rosa Parks?
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And around, at the same time, at the same event, would have been Mrs. Parks [Rosa Parks] in the middle and myself.  And that's the, and that young woman with her is the--I can't remember her name, but she was Mrs. Parks'--she accompanied Mrs. Parks.
Speaker 2: Is she still with her?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  Mrs. Parks, I think is--
