Story_ID: 32942
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers archives.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My full name is Norman Alexander McDaniel.  And that's N-O-R-M-A-N, A-L-E-X-A-N-D-E-R, M-C-D-A-N-I-E-L.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is 27 July, 1937.  Place of birth, Cumberland County, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you say Cumberland County because it was a rural area?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's considered county.  But Fayetteville, North Carolina is the largest city within the county.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: At the present time, I'm a retired military officer, a retired civil servant, um, and I do motivational speaking on my own.  I have a company called Motivation Assistance Corporation.  And then I also do part-time work with a company called Inverness Technologies in McClain, Virginia where I facilitate the transitional assistance program for all military men and women from all the services who are retiring and separating from the military.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the 8th of March, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in Washington, D.C. at 700 14th Street, Northwest, Washington, and I'm at the interview location here this morning.
Story_ID: 32943
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as a warm-up.
Speaker 2: Good.
Speaker 1: --and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes I do.  If you call dessert food, yes, ice cream.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I love brown, even though my wife says it's drab.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of the year--oh, all times are great, but I would say springtime is probably most exhilarating and most rewarding and renewing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Not in particular.  I like to travel, I like to learn, I like to see things, but I would say probably Florida would be nice.  The beaches, and sometimes the mountain in the summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Ah, I would have to think about that a little because I have a number of favorite phrases and sayings.  But above all, my thing is saying, "Make the best of today, because today is all you have."
Story_ID: 32944
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but I want to keep them separated first and then I'll bring them together.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Fannie Marie McDaniel.  That's F-A-N-N-I-E, M-A-R-I-E, Mc-D-A-N-I-E-L.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And uh, what was her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Her maiden name was McDaniel, last name.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, okay.  And what was her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth was 17 April, 1916.
Speaker 1: And was she born in Fayetteville?
Speaker 2: She was born in Cumberland County, North Carolina, which is in the environs of Fayetteville.
Speaker 1: Okay, Cumberland County.  Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side, and were they always in North Carolina?
Speaker 2: My mother grew up in North Carolina.  And to the best of my knowledge her father and her mother were born and reared in North Carolina.   Uh, my grandfather, William McDaniel, was a minister.  I don't know if he was ordained, but he married my mother's mother as a second wife.  Um, Grandpa Will's first wife was named Mary Evans.  And he and Mary Evans had a number of children, five of whom I recall, or at least have heard of.  And then after Mary Evans died, Grandpa Will married my grandmother, Ida Crumpler.  And Grandma Ida had a number of children, probably fifteen or sixteen in all, about ten of which survived.  A number of the children died at birth or as babies.  And in fact, my Grandma Ida died while giving childbirth to twins.  One of the twins survived, my youngest uncle on my mother's side, Uncle George, but the other child died and so did my grandmother Ida.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what, are there any stories on that side of the family that go back to the Emancipation or--
Speaker 2: Well, in 1991--in 1992, when my brother, my oldest brother died in 1991, I did some investigation and talked to some of the older relatives.  Most of the information I gathered was by word of mouth, because I wanted to start a family reunion for my mother's benefit on her side of the family, in fact on both sides of the family.  And so, I talked to a number of people, and even though I don't have official authentication of this, to the best of my knowledge, my ancestors came from Kenya as slaves.  Now, there were three sisters, I think, Winnie, Rachel, and there was one other one.  There were three of them, that came over as slaves in the 1840s, to the best of what I've been able to gather.  And Grandpa Will was one of those sister's son, because he was an old man when he married my grandmother.  And then we trace it down from there through those three sisters.  And one of those sisters, her descendants were my mother's ancestors.  And on the other side, some of those sisters were my father's ancestors.  Ah, I understand my father and mother might have been second, third, fourth cousins somewhere in there, because they were both McDaniel.
Story_ID: 32945
Speaker 1: Uh, I'm curious as to why Kenya, I mean, why do you think it was Kenya?
Speaker 2: Because I understand from what I have learned--we're talking about, you know--after Alex Haley did his 'Roots,' a lot of us African-Americans, blacks and negroes, however you want to term it-- I'm not high on particular titles, I mean the main thing is the person.  We're individuals, unique and special in the sight of God, so you know, what someone calls you shouldn't hurt you, it's what you think of yourself that matters most.  Um, but I understand most of the slaves that were brought to America were from, I guess, the main part of Africa, but not from Kenya.  And when you tell someone that you can trace your ancestors back to Kenya, they kind of do a double take, because they say, "Negroes, or slaves, weren't brought from Kenya," in general, but I'm sure some were.
Speaker 1: Okay, but does that--I mean, but why do you think it is Kenya?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, oh, oh, uh, because that is the information that I received from one of my cousins, one of my mother's [Fannie Marie McDaniel] cousins who was much older than she.  And he was one who really delved in his family's history.  Most of it was word of mouth.  But I was able, before he passed away, I had returned from Vietnam and we were digging in the family history.  And he and I had a lot of good, long conversations, and he had a very, very clear mind.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that was his idea of--
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right.  That was his, that was his--
Speaker 1: Out of his--
Speaker 2: --that was his story, his recollection, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Uh, so now, what did your mother's side of the family do for a living, primarily?
Speaker 2: Uh, they primarily sharecropped, uh, farmed.  And my father, my grandfather [William McDaniel], uh, he owned his own land, a little plot of land, and he did farming and farmed some land for some of the surrounding people.  Um, and that was the way he made his living.  And they grew most of their food, etc.--gardens and vegetables and animals.
Speaker 1: So, he owned his land, but a small amount of land?
Speaker 2: A small amount--
Speaker 1: He could live off of that--
Speaker 2: That's right.  And then he did work for others.
Speaker 1: Hires.
Speaker 2: Yes.  In fact, I understand the way he died was he--he was an older man and some of what he would do in the wintertime would be--since you couldn't farm the land much in the winter, he would do cleaning of wooded areas and dig ditches or clean out ditches, and I understand he caught pneumonia and died from digging the ditches.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 32946
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Fannie Marie McDaniel] have the opportunity to finish school?
Speaker 2: No, my mother did not finish school because when my grandmother Ida [Crumpler] passed away, my grandfather [William McDaniel] and some of the older children tried to keep the family together.  But then after a few years, my grandfather, Grandpa Will, passed away.  And when he died, then a few of the older sisters tried to keep the family together for awhile, but it was almost impossible.  And what happened, one of my mother's half sisters, one of Grandpa Will and Miss Mary Evans' daughters, she worked, she was a nanny for a white family that lived not far from the property that my grandfather owned.  And she, through the lady who she worked for, arranged for the younger children to go to an orphanage.  And the orphanage--I guess my mother must have been about eight or ten years old at the time.  But the orphanage was in Oxford, North Carolina.  And so, the younger children, I think there were about five of them:  my mother Marie, her slightly older sister Henrietta, and her twin Annie, her younger brother Thomas, younger sister Mildred and baby brother George.  They went, they were sent to the orphanage in Oxford, North Carolina.  And that's where they lived until each one became sixteen years old.  And when they became sixteen then they were released from the orphanage and came back to Fayetteville [North Carolina].  So, my mother grew up from around ten to sixteen at the orphanage in Oxford, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Now, did she talk about that experience much?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yeah, she talked about it a lot.  I think the children were able to stay in touch with each other, even though I'm sure the boys didn't live in the same place as the girls.  But they were able to interact with each other, and she had a lot of stories to tell about how they sometimes they would want extra food after the food was served and they would sneak out of the housing room area and sneak to the kitchen and pilfer food, and what not.  And then I think she told a couple of stories about the one just older than she, Aunt Henrietta, running away from the orphanage, and of course she didn't get far.  But she had a lot of stories to tell about her life at the orphanage, and to me it was very, very motivating in terms of wanting to be somebody, wanting to have a significant life, wanting to better myself, wanting to increase my education.  My mother was very, very supportive and very encouraging about the children, her children, getting an education, because she felt that getting an education, a good education, was the way to progress in life and to better yourself.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, she was able to go to school at the orphanage, I guess?
Speaker 2: She went to school at the orphanage.  And so when she, I think she finished grade school there.  And when she came home at age about fifteen or sixteen, um, there was no county school where she lived, where she came back to, her home place, for her to go to school.  One of her half-brothers lived in Fayetteville [North Carolina], and she was going to go to Fayetteville and live because he was going to help her to go to high school.  But that didn't work out, and so she ended up getting married at a fairly early age.
Story_ID: 32947
Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side of the family.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Father's name, Clyde Oliver McDaniel.  That's C-L-Y-D-E and then O-L-I-V-E-R, then capital M-c, capital D-A-N-I-E-L.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born on April 1, 1912.
Speaker 1: Okay, now your mother and father have the same last name?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in going back up the line toward those three sisters, Wennie, Rachel and Mamie or something like that--but I was able to trace my father's line up from one of those sisters and my mother's [Fannie Marie McDaniel] line from one of the others.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, he was born in the same area, then, right?
Speaker 2: Uh, he was born in Cumberland County in the environs of Fayetteville, North Carolina.  Uh, but about, I would guess about five or seven miles, five to ten miles away from where my mother was born and reared.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Now, what can you tell us about his side of the family?  How, what's their story?
Speaker 2: Well, his story--
Speaker 1: I know they share a story, but--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  His father, my grandpa, Dockery McDaniel--his name was Dockery, D-O-C-K-E-R-Y McDaniel--and I understand that he was a common laborer as well.  Uh, and in fact, I think he died from a hernia that he developed from working.   He was a relatively young man.  In fact, to the best of my knowledge, he died before my father was actually born.  My father was the baby of the family:  Grandpa Doc and Quilly Cogdell, Q-U-I-L-L-Y, was Grandma Quilly's name, Q-U-I-L-L-Y, Quilly Cogdell.  She was-C-O-G-D-E-L-L.  I understand that her family line came from the Florida/Alabama area and then moved on into North Carolina, but that was through slave trade and what not, years and years ago.  So, I could only go back as far as my--I think my father's mother, my grandfather's mother was a woman named Caroline, but I don't have anything about her last name or anything.  But anyway, Mama Quilly and Grandpa Doc, they had a number of children, and again, my father was the youngest one of seven or eight children.
Story_ID: 32948
Speaker 1: Are there any other stories on that side of the family about maybe Emancipation or Reconstruction or any of that?
Speaker 2: Uh, not on my father's [Clyde Oliver McDaniel] side, but on my mother's [Fannie Marie McDaniel] side.  Grandpa Will--again, my mother's father [William McDaniel], as I said earlier, he was an old man when he married Grandma Ida.  And according to my mom, Grandpa Will said that he was a little nine year old boy--I don't know how true this is--said he was sitting on the side of the street in Fayetteville, North Carolina at the old courthouse building when the Union soldiers passed through.  Now, in Fayetteville, North Carolina, it still might be there--but in the center of town that divides north, south, east, and west--Deperson (sp.) Street, Hay Street, Blessford Street, Green Street--there's a building, and it kind of reminded you of a church but it wasn't really a church.  It had some upstairs room, but the bottom room had arches in and out--arches in and out--and you could see through it.  And supposedly that was a place where slaves were traded.  And so, accordingly to Grandpa Will, from my mother's account, he was sitting on the side of the street when the Union soldiers passed through.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's a good story.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Some of these stories are out here.  We just don't, you know, you don't hear as many--
Speaker 2: Well, that's right, you don't.
Speaker 1: People don't pass them along.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  And then as time, as time passes--see, I'm seventy-four, and as time passes, you know, those timeframes, you move in that timeframe, and people who had knowledge and experience of that, you know, lots of times it's not passed on the younger folk, because in this day and age most of the young people aren't even that interested in it.  And so, it's lost.
Story_ID: 32949
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, now, uh, now, did your father [Clyde Oliver McDaniel] have a chance to finish school?
Speaker 2: No, my father did not finish school.  He (laughter) stayed in school while he was growing up, but I guess he was not the most studious type.  My mother was very smart.  She was the bright one.  Now, my father was smart, but he had more common street sense than academic.  And so, also being the baby, I guess he went to school for awhile.  But then, during those times he wanted to get out and work and make some money, even though you weren't making that much during those days.  And so, um, he didn't finish school.  In fact, I don't even think he finished the seventh grade, I'm not sure.  My mom finished the seventh.  She was going to go into high school, but I don't think my father did.  He started working and he became a common laborer over the years.  He worked on the railroad, um, for a number of years.  In fact, when I was born, he was working on the railroad then in Fayetteville, North Carolina.  We lived in town at the time, and he would crew up with the railroad crews and those old jerkers that you manually push the thing up and down the railroad track--
Speaker 1: Hanging cars?
Speaker 2: Yes, and he would repair and drive those spikes into the railroad tires and what not.  But he did that until I guess I was about three or four years old.  And I have two brothers older than I.  So--and then one brother younger, and then a sister.  So, by the time the two just younger than I were born, he decided to move and start farming.  And so, we farmed from that point until I was a sophomore in high school, and then we left the farm.  We would sharecrop.  And when you sharecrop, that means you don't own the land, you don't own the equipment, you don't own the seeds or fertilizer.  You just own yourself.  And you work an arrangement with the landowner that either at the end of the crop year you split 50-50--the landowner gets fifty percent and you get fifty percent, or you get one-third and the landowner gets two-thirds.  Now, the 50-50 split is an arrangement where you pay for half the fertilizer, half the seeds and all that.  You do it on credit, and you work during the summer.  And when the crop comes in and you get the proceeds of the money from the crop, then you pay the landowner back.  The two-thirds, one-third arrangement is where you just provide the labor and the landowner provides everything else, and at the end of the crop year, you get one-third of the proceeds of whatever comes in and the landowner gets two-thirds.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you think that your father was treated fairly, for the most part?
Speaker 2: Well, (laughter) I'm not, I don't know exactly if I can give an accurate answer to that, because we moved about every year, every other year.  And it was usually because, you know, at the end of the crop year maybe the landowner didn't give my father what he thought he should have been given.  See, what happens is during the crop year, spring and summer as the crop is growing, and you're, and you're getting ready to harvest it and sell it, you have to have food.  So, the arrangement usually was that each week, or every two weeks, the landowner would lend you a certain amount of money.  And they keep books on it, okay, they keep track of it.  So, at the end of the crop year when they started settling up and paying the debt back, in some cases I think my father felt like maybe there was some costs or some money added there that he was charged for that he really should not be paying.  So, we ended up--and it's really kind of comical as you look back on it.  It could be pathetic if you have a pessimistic view of life.  On the other hand, if you have an optimistic view of life, you say thank the Lord we made it through and we all survived and we're doing as well as we are today.  But, we moved about every year, every other year.  Now, some families--and my uncle and aunt, one of my father's older sisters and her husband--they only moved a couple of times.  They moved to a landowners place and stayed there for ten or twelve years.  So, it just depended on the landowner, the tenants, and what the chemistry was and what the arrangements were.  But we moved an awful lot.  And to answer your question about whether or not my father was treated fairly, I guess in some cases, yes, and in some cases, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, my thing, I'm not one to hold grudges, to be bitter about things.  My thing is to make the best of what you have.  I grew up in a segregated environment and, you know, if you don't have a whole loaf, you take the half and you make the best of it.  Um, and when you do that, you find yourself being much better off than complaining and griping about what you don't have and not taking advantage of what you do have.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you.  That's a good explanation of how that system works, and what can happen.
Story_ID: 32950
Speaker 1: So, uh, now, do you have--oh, can you give us--now, you have eight siblings, right?
Speaker 2: Ah, I had eight siblings.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Some of them are deceased.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, just kind of--give us their names and tell us where you fit in the order.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I'm the third oldest.  Ah, my oldest sibling, a brother, called Douglas McDaniel, he was born in 1934.  And he grew up, I'll just give a little quick account of him.  Ah, he was the oldest, so a lot of pressure was put on him for work and different things, and so he had kind of a hard time.  But he, in his senior year in high school, he was working for a truck stop in Fayetteville, North Carolina.  And he didn't have his driver's license, but they would send him out on the road with the pickup and do things.  And he was involved in an automobile accident, and he figured that they were going to send him to jail, so he left town.  Ah, my mother [Fannie Marie McDaniel] had a number of sisters and brothers in New York, so he went to New York.  And from there, he joined the Marine Corps, and spent some time.  He fought in the Korean War, ah, and came out and he worked in the insurance business for awhile, insurance salesman.  Then he went to school in New York, he and his, he married a woman from the Bronx and they had two children.  And so he went to school, got his degree and really moved on.  He got his Ph.D. out of the University of Pittsburgh and worked there and finally moved to Killeen, Texas where he was working.  And he had pancreas cancer, and he died of pancreas cancer in 1991.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, ah, the second brother, Clyde, Jr., he's still alive, C-L-Y-D-E, and then he was Oliver McDaniel, Jr.  But he was born in 1935, and again, we grew up sharecropping, moving from place to place.  He finished high school and wasn't able to go to college, but he decided to join the military so he could take advantage of the GI Bill, around 1957 somewhere there about.  He did, he became--joined the Army Airborne, 11th Division of the Airborne out at Fort Campbell, Kentucky and down at Fort Benning.  And then when he came out of the military he then went to college at Fayetteville State University and received his degree and then he went on to, I think it was, it was some school in Raleigh, North Carolina.  I don't think it was Shaw University, but it was some school in North Carolina, got his master's degree and then moved on to the University of Pittsburgh and got his Ph.D. degree.  So, he worked out there.  He was married to a young lady from down near Wilmington, North Carolina, Nettie Coston, and they had two children, two girls.  Ah, he then moved on to Houston, Texas where he worked at Prairie View, I believe for awhile, I believe it was Prairie View [A&M University].  And then, eventually he moved back to North Carolina, about forty-five miles inland from Wilmington, a little place called Warsaw, North Carolina, where he taught at the University of North Carolina, Wilmington for a number of years, and then he retired from there.
Story_ID: 32951
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, we have, two brothers have two Ph.D.s--
Speaker 2: Okay, that's my--
Speaker 1: What was your first brother's [Douglas McDaniel] Ph.D. in?
Speaker 2: Um, uh, social studies.
Speaker 1: And the second one [Clyde Oliver McDaniel, Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Uh, the same.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were both very much into um, social, the social studies, helping people and--
Speaker 1: Sociology?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, they were sociologists.
Speaker 2: Right, right, that's right, sociologists.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: Okay, then--
Speaker 1: You're next then, after--
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm next.  I was born in 1937 on July 20, 19--
Speaker 1: July 27, right?
Speaker 2: Ah, I'm sorry, July 27, 1937.  Um, and I grew up, um, again, I received my--well, when I was about five years old--yes, '42' [1942]--the war, Second World War--
Speaker 1: Well, we can skip you--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --for this, but then we go on to the next one.  Vernell--
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  Vernell Francis McDaniel.  Now, Vernell was born in 1939 and he was the fourth boy in a row in the family.  He finished high school, but he didn't go to college.  And he worked until--most of his life's work was in the, with the VA, working with the pharmacy and as a medical assistant helping people, an orderly, yeah, hospital orderly.  Um, he lived in New York for a number of years after we grew up, and then moved to Chicago [Illinois], and that's where he stayed and worked until he passed away I think around 2003.  I'm not exactly sure of that date, but it was around 2003.
Speaker 1: So, he worked at the Chicago VA Center?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right, sure was.
Speaker 1: I know where that is, too.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the next one is?
Speaker 2: The next one was a sister, my first sister, named Helen Jane.  Helen Jane died as a baby.  Um, she caught pneumonia.  And I think she was born in 1941, and she died as a baby.  And then in 1943, my sister Thelma was born, Thelma Grace McDaniel.  Uh, Thelma grew up and she finished high school.  My family left Fayetteville [North Carolina] in 1956 and moved to New York.  They stayed around Cumberland County, North Carolina until around 1956, then they moved to New York.  And so my sister and the younger children, the three or four younger children, they went with my mom to New York.  And so, Thelma, in New York, she married in New York to a guy named John Jones and had two children, one named Denise and one named Johnnie.  Um, and Johnnie died in college, while he was in college.  I think it was Virginia Union or one of the colleges.  But Denise lives near Richmond, Virginia now.  Thelma later divorced the first husband.  She married the second husband named James Halsey, H-A-L-S-E-Y, and they ended up moving out to California, but she and James separated.  But from that union was one son named James, Jr., and he's with her out in Valley Village, California now.   That's where my sister lives now.
Story_ID: 32952
Speaker 1: The next sister, Mildred Florence McDaniel, um, Mildred was born in 1945 and um, again, she finished high school and went to New York when the family moved there in 1956.  She married a young man named Matthew Johnson.  Matthew was drafted into the Army and went to Vietnam, and he was killed during the siege of Khe Sanh, Matthew was.  Mildred, it affected her to the extent that she never did recover from that, and in 1968, either in the Bronx or Brooklyn or somewhere, she was hit by a car, and was killed in 1968 by a car.  She had one daughter named Delphine, and the daughter is living in Fayetteville, North Carolina now.  The next brother, Edward Lee McDaniel, uh, he was born in 1948.  And he finished high school in New York and went into the Army, but had some adjustment problems and got an administrative discharge from the Army.  He later moved out to Helena, Arkansas, and that's where he and his family lived.  He married a lady named Coretta, and they have one son named Edward Lee, Jr.  He lived there, they lived there until he passed away in 2000--
Speaker 2: 2009?
Speaker 1: 2009, thank you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He passed away in 2009.  His widow and his son are still living in Arkansas.  They're in Memphis now.  The youngest brother is named Glen.  Uh, Glen was born around, I think around 1956, and he grew up in the New York area with my mom, but uh, my mom and the family lived in New York from 1956 to 1975.  From, after about a year in New York, my mom began to say that she wanted to-- Oops, my mike fell.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And we're in New York from 1956.  But from the time that they moved to New York, after about a year there, my mother [Fannie Marie McDaniel] constantly said I want to go back home, I want to go to Fayetteville, I want to go back to Fayetteville.  So, when I returned from Vietnam in 1973, one of my objectives was to help her to get back to Fayetteville.  So, uh, my wife [Enter name her] and I found a place for her in Fayetteville, out on Merkster Road near Fayetteville State University, going out toward Fort Bragg [North Carolina].  And we bought the home, and in 1975 we moved my mom, my cousin and I, moved my mom back to Fayetteville, and that's where she lived until she passed away in 2006.
Speaker 2: Now, did your brother Glen come back with her?
Speaker 1: Ah, that's right.  Ah, Glen came back with her, and my youngest sister's daughter Delphine came back with her, because once my sister Mildred died, Mom raised Delphine.  And so the two of them plus Mom came back, and they stayed there until my mom passed away in 2006.
Story_ID: 32953
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I didn't ask this question.  We need to go back and ask.  How did your parents [Fannie Marie McDaniel and Clyde Oliver McDaniel] get together?  Is there a story about how they met or how they got together?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Uh, my mom and dad went to the same school.  And--
Speaker 1: What was the name of the school, I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: It was, I'm pretty sure it was called Simpson Elementary School, Simpson Elementary School, S-I-M-P-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where my mom and my dad met.  My dad was a little older than my mom, um, but he repeated a grade or two as I understand.  And it was not unusual during those days for you to move from the first grade to the high first, and then to the second.  So, you ended up spending three years going through two years (laughter).  And then it was not unusual for a person to stay in the fourth or fifth grade two years.  Um, I remember there was somebody in my class that must have been at least fifteen or sixteen years old, and they were only, you know, in the third grade.  But, so, it was very fluid there.  But anyway, they met in school, and then when my mother went away to the orphanage and came back, then they started dating and got married, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I've been trying to understand the rural school system for the last ten years in the black community, you know--
Speaker 2: (laughter).
Speaker 1: --the segregated schools.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And correct me if I'm wrong, but we have a situation, I guess, where you go to school and, uh, there's a terminal grade of sixth grade, so you can't really graduate from elementary school--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: --or sixth or seventh grade.  So you can't go to eighth all the way through.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: It seems to be by design, I mean, that you can't do it--
Speaker 2: Well, now, now--
Speaker 1: --unless you go to another town.
Speaker 2: Well, during the 30s, 40s and 50s, especially during the 30s and 40s, uh, we had the segregated schools.  And a lot of the black schools were only two-room schools, two or three room schools.  The first school I went to had two rooms, uh, and two teachers.  One teacher taught the first through the third with the high first being part of it, and the other teacher taught the fourth through the seventh.  Uh, so it was not unusual to have small schools, and they kind of played around.  Now, at the time I was going, and I think at the time, I want to say the time my mom was going, they might have only gone to the sixth grade.  But at the time I was going, they had the seventh grade, but what you had is by the time some of the students got to the seventh grade, a lot of them had stopped school and started working, because you farm, and when you farm, the parents felt, you know, some of the parents had children just because it was going to add to the workforce, you know, and help them to earn a livelihood more, with children.  But a lot of the sixth and seventh grades were very small, and they were combined.  And in fact, I moved from the sixth grade to the eighth grade.  I never went through the seventh grade.  We were in the same room, and the instructor, the teacher who taught both classes--I was doing so well in math and spelling and reading and what not, that they let me take some of the seventh grade sessions.  So, at the end of my sixth grade year, they moved me to the eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, you did--during those times, I don't know how it is now.  Now they have elementary, middle and high.  There was no such thing as middle then.  It was just elementary school and high school.  So, you would go to elementary school for the first through the seventh, and then from the eighth and through the twelfth in the high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just wanted to establish that, because it seemed like a lot of people in these situations when they're farmers and that sort of thing--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --when a male, especially, gets to that age where he's big enough and strong enough to work, he just worked.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's exactly right, and you just, you just quit school.  A lot of the males back in the 30s, 40s and some of the 20s I know, but in the 30s and 40s, a lot of the males, as soon as they got big enough to work, they stopped school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 32954
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a, now, this is a question I always ask.  When you think about your parents' [Fannie Marie McDaniel and Clyde Oliver McDaniel] personalities and their talents, their dispositions, their character, their hobbies, their looks, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think I take after both of them.  My mother was very conscientious about taking care of the family.  She wanted her children to amount to something, she said.  She encouraged us.  She told us stories, she read to us.  Um, she told us about her family, and about, you know, different people who had had hard times and how they overcame adversity.  And she was always pushing and wanting us--not pushing to the point of it being a problem, but just encouraging.  And it instilled in me the desire to succeed, the desire to be successful.  Ah, and she would also show pride in her children.  My father, he was a hard-working man.  I really honor him even though he had a drinking problem, and that was probably a big part of our family's ups and downs and moving around every year, too.  But he was, he was, he would just work us, I mean, just a hard-working man, very conscientious, always wanted us to do well.  And he, too, was proud of his children, and he wanted us to do well, although sometimes alcohol got in the way.  And so, I honor him and I think some of my work ethic and my desire to help others comes from my dad.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: On my mother's side, it's more be successful, do your best, and hey, you are somebody.
Story_ID: 32955
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just noticed a pattern just looking at the list of your brothers and sisters that they--now, the first three of you--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --were high achievers--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and not to demean the rest of them, but the first three, and I guess, was that the most productive part of your parents', uh, life?
Speaker 2: Larry, that's a good observation.  And I think for those who are sensitive to black families or any family--family structures, and what helps a person get through life, etc.  Uh, and I agree with that, and you're not the first one who's made that observation.  Uh, when I was young, the first three, four of us or so, even though my dad [Clyde Oliver McDaniel] had a drinking problem, the family was relatively stable.  You had the male influence in the family along with the female influence.  When my, when I went away to school and my second oldest brother went into the military and everything, the family started kind of fracturing somewhat, and it was not that cohesion.  And in fact, my sister, the one that survived, Thelma, when my mother [Fannie Marie McDaniel] went to New York, she couldn't take the children.  So, they stayed with my aunt and uncle on my father's side for a year until they could go to New York.  So, that kind of thing tends to disrupt the family.  And I think if there's a case to be made, it is this.  That the family unit is key.  A family needs a mother and a father.  Ah, even if the mother and father are not role models, if they're not the paragons of virtue, just the fact that they're there, because it gives the children some sense of boundaries and guidance, and it helps to kind of keep them focused.  Whereas, if you miss either one of those parents in the family it can cause a distortion.  And then also you need stability.  And I think that was another thing.  But you're absolutely right.  And I, again, I have the greatest love and respect for my mom and dad, even though nobody's perfect, and they both did things that weren't the best for the children.  But the fact that they were there, and they did the best they could at the time, I feel I just honor them for that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 32956
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: (laughter).  It's kind of funny.  You would think that it would be a good one, a nice one.  But the earliest one I can remember is, I must have been a couple or three years old.  But we lived in Fayetteville [North Caolina] at the time, and my dad was working on the railroad.  There was an old, there was a cafe, a dance place across the railroad track.  We lived on one side of the railroad track, and it wasn't too far across the railroad where this cafe, restaurant, joint, we called it, was.  And invariably, you would, especially on the weekend, people would be fighting and raising sand and talking.   And so, I remember seeing the people over there fighting, and then one of the women coming out of the place and a man chasing her.  And to me, I don't know if it was traumatic or what, but it just created a memory in my mind that I remember.  And during those times, it was when they were singing some of the songs, [singing] "Get out of here, now bring back some money, too.  Just around, mess around", that kind of thing.   But it was back, it was back in the late 30s [1930s], yeah, the turn of the 40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, this joint was within distance of your house?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was within seeing distance and even hearing distance because it was across the railroad track.   It wasn't right on the same side as we were on, but it was across the railroad track, and you could see it and hear what was going on.
Speaker 1: So, this is actually in Fayetteville itself?
Speaker 2: Yes, this is in Fayetteville itself.  That's right, Fayetteville itself.  We had--
Speaker 1: So, you were born out in the rural county, but the family actually moved into Fayetteville?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was, what happened?  Where was I born?  I think I might have been born in Fayetteville.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um, I know my two older brothers [Douglas McDaniel and Clyde Oliver McDaniel, Jr.] were born in the county.  And I think about the time I was born, I think my father [Clyde Oliver McDaniel] had started working on the railroad and we moved.  We were in Fayetteville at that time.
Speaker 1: But then--
Speaker 2: But then after I was about five years old or so, four or five years old, we moved to the farm.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Now, this is a question we always ask, too.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Uh, I would say some of the sights, really, some of the sights were watching the train go by.  I loved to watch the train go by, the old engine going choo, choo, choo, and the smoke coming out in the caboose, the red caboose.  And then you see the old flagman out there waving the flag.  That was kind of interesting.  Um, I also remember when we did move to the farm, uh, the next door neighbor grew peanuts and we used to love to go over and get some of the peanuts.  They would dig them and have them drying out, but it was always good to get some peanuts.  I loved peanuts.  In fact, I still love peanuts.  Um, it's not my favorite food.  Ice cream is my favorite food.  But uh, and some of the sounds, I guess, were just the, the old sound of the train going by.  Yeah, we--on the tracks, going, yes.  My son loves trains.  Oh, he really loves trains.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Uh, was there a name for that particular train line?
Speaker 2: Uh, the Atlantic Coast Line.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Atlantic Coast Line, yes, indeed.
Speaker 1: Alright, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Atlantic Coast Line.
Story_ID: 32957
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now, did you, what was the, did you start school at the same school your parents [Fannie Marie McDaniel and Clyde Oliver McDaniel] went to?
Speaker 2: No.  What happened was, uh, when I was five years old, we moved, about 1942, the War [World War II] was going on.  And we moved about twelve miles outside of town.  We were down in a place called Cedar Creek, North Carolina, Blayden County.  We had, we even, we were right on the line of Blayden County and Cumberland County, so we were way out of town.  In fact, they had to pipe in sunshine (laughter).  But, so, when I started to school, it was at a two-room school.  And that was another thing.  We had to leave home early in the morning.  Now, down where we were at that time, bears had been reported down there.  And sometimes we would get up to go to the bus stop.  And you'd have to get up about 4:30 or 5:00 in the morning, because the bus would come by about 6:30, and we had to walk about a half-hour's walk to get to the bus stop.  And I remember one time that--and we in a lot of cases--we had a clock but sometimes the old clock wasn't working.  And one morning we got up, and because the moon was out, we thought it was time to get up.  We got up, thought it was time to go, got dressed and went out.  It was about 2:00 in the morning.  And once my father found out that it was so early, he actually left the house after we had left and came out and got us and brought us back because it was too early.  But we, it was very interesting, that many times when we would go to the bus stop, it would still be dark and the moon would be up, you know, and we'd be walking to the bus stop.  Um, so the two-room school that we went to, Miss Sherman and Miss Anderson were the two teachers, um, but one of the rooms housed the first through the third grade with the high first, called first high, first second and third, and then the other one fourth through seventh.  I went there for two years because they moved me from the first grade to the second grade.  And we moved after school had started and I was in the second grade.  But then when we moved to the next school, now this next school is the school that my mom and dad had attended.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, do you remember the name of the first one?
Speaker 2: Ah, I think it was called Savannah.  Savannah Elementary School.
Speaker 1: And then the second one was Simpson.
Speaker 2: Was Simpson Elementary School, that's right--Savannah, yeah, yeah.  And so, what happened was when we moved, they moved me not into the second grade at Simpson, they moved me into the high first.  And so, I ended up spending two years in the first grade when I should have been moving forward.  But I was doing so well in the fifth and sixth grade that they actually, the principal and the teachers, they moved me from the sixth grade to the eighth grade.  So, in terms of years and school grades, I'm with my peers.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, now your brothers have preceded you in the school.  Were they good students?
Speaker 2: Which ones?
Speaker 1: Your two brothers, the ones that got the Ph.D.s [Douglas McDaniel and Clyde Oliver McDaniel, Jr.].  Were they good students in school?
Speaker 2: Ah, yes, yes, yes.  In fact, um, the one just older than I, he was very sharp in school.  And, of course, the oldest brother, um, he was good, too.  I finished high school as the valedictorian of my high school even though the class size was not that large, thirty-something.  Um, my brother just older than I, he didn't get the valedictorian position, but he was high in the class.
Story_ID: 32958
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I notice everybody, you know, joined the Army or joined the service at some point.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: But, and one thing I didn't, I just noticed today when I looked at Fayetteville, Fort Bragg is a key feature of North Carolina.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes it is.
Speaker 1: So, was that very important growing up, the fort being there and the oldest--
Speaker 2: Well, (laughter) there's a little story about that.  The answer is yes.  But to talk about being in the military, uh, during those days, 30s, 40s, 50s, in that part of the country, North Carolina rural, usually the black children, families, they farmed.  Or, their dads worked at log mills, and they, you know, did summer work and stuff like that.  But, if you grew up on a farm, work was pretty hard and life was pretty tough.  One of your major objectives, one of your major objectives, was to get off the farm, okay.  And the big thing at that time was to go up the road, go up the road, okay.  So, if you're South Carolina, North Carolina, southern Virginia, you wanted to go up the road.  And when you go up the road that means you're going up to Washington, D.C., to Baltimore--"Balt-More"--or "Philly"--Philadelphia, or even New York, okay.  So, you want to get off the farm and go up the road where there were more opportunities and supposedly the living was better, blah, blah, blah, blah.  So, that was one of the main objectives of most of the young blacks as they grew up during that time period, because they weren't able to pay their way through college.  A few did, but that would have been one of the first objectives.  However, the main thing was to get off the farm and to better yourself, and so go up the road and you can get a better job, blah, blah, blah.  So, that was one of the things.  The other thing that was a real influence was that most of us, especially the males, you saw military service as your way to get out and to do better.  And as I said about the brother just older than I, as well as myself, you would go into the military so you could take advantage of the GI Bill.  You go and get out and then go to college.  And of course, that's what he did.  For me, that was my plan, initially.  Once I finished high school, I was going to go into the military and then take advantage of the GI Bill.  It turned out that my high school teacher, two of my high school teachers, my eighth grade homeroom teacher and my tenth grade homeroom teacher, they tracked me all the way through high school.  They felt that if I were to go into the military that I might not come out, that I might not make it.  And they really did want me to continue my education.  So, both of them, um, Miss Landry and Miss Blunt, they were alumnus, they were alumni of A&T, North Carolina A&T State University.  And so they made some calls, pulled some strings to see if they could get me a job at A&T so I wouldn't have to go into the service.  I could go straight from high school to college.  And that's what I did.
Story_ID: 32959
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, let me go back a little back.
Speaker 2: Right, okay.
Speaker 1: Now, what, when you, by the time you got to high school, I mean, how would you characterize yourself in terms of your development, what you were interested in and what your personality was like, and--
Speaker 2: When I started high school, I had moved from the sixth grade to the eighth grade, and I was very eager to learn.  I always, I have always had a thirst for knowledge.  I guess I got that from my mom [Fannie Marie McDaniel], and to some degree, my dad [Clyde Oliver McDaniel].  But, um, I wanted to do very well in whatever I did, and I would do it well enough in the eighth grade that my homeroom teacher considered moving me from the eighth grade to the tenth grade.  In fact, she started sending me to the ninth grade math class.  And after the principal and the teacher started discussing it somewhat, they felt well, even though mentally and academically he can do it, it may be better to move him through the grades just for the maturity and the socialization, because there is experience you get each year as you go through.  So, they chose not to move me from the eighth grade to the tenth grade.  But I always wanted to learn.  I always wanted to do good, a real love of nature.  Growing up on the farm in the rural, we had animals--pigs, chickens, cows.  I had a little pet dog named Skippy, uh, a little cocker spaniel.  I loved that dog.  And, um, we lived--as we moved around from year to year sharecropping, one of the places we lived was in a house beside a creek.  And the old creek, you could wade in the creek, sometimes up to your knees, up to your thighs and, you know, and sometimes you might be able to catch a little fish or something.  And then along the banks, and you walk through the woods, and you really get an appreciation for nature, of how great God is.  And so, I also was a church-goer, because my mom and dad, they had a strong faith in God, but they did not go to church every Sunday.  But my aunt and uncle, one of my father's older sisters, her husband and their family, they went to church every Sunday.  And my mom and dad made sure that we went every Sunday.  And so, we would walk about half a mile to pair with the other family, and then we would walk to church.  It was about a three-hour, I'm sorry, it was about a three or four mile walk.  But, we would go.  And so--
Speaker 1: What was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: Ah, Lock's Creek AME Zion Church, L-O-C-K's, Locks Creek, C-R-E-E-K.
Speaker 1: AME Zion?
Speaker 2: AME Zion Church.  And--
Speaker 1: Now, did one of your brothers go to--what's the AME Zion school there in--
Speaker 2: Ah, was it Shaw?
Speaker 1: No, it was near Shaw.  It's in North Carolina.  Livingstone.
Speaker 2: Livingston, Livingston.
Speaker 1: Is that the one where he taught at some point?
Speaker 2: Ah--
Speaker 1: Because you were trying to think of one.  It might not have been that one.
Speaker 2: No, no.  I think, no, I think it was Shaw where he went.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  I just--
Speaker 2: I think it was Shaw.
Speaker 1: It was AME Zion.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And so, we would go to church.  So, I learned at an early age to appreciate nature, um, to realize--and my mom and dad, they created a good strong work ethic in me and my brothers, especially the older ones of us.  And so, at the age of twelve, I--they had an annual revival meeting there at Lock's Creek each year during the summer, sometime in July, early August.  And so, I accepted Christ at the age of twelve, a definite change in my life.  I've never been the same since, and just realized that there is a God and that we come to God for Jesus Christ, and that he is the way to the truth and the life.  And--
Story_ID: 32960
Speaker 1: So, you did this at a revival meeting?
Speaker 2: Yes.  What happened, (laughter), it's interesting, Larry.  Back in those days, now we're talking about the 1940's, early 50's.  Back in those days, um, most of the churches, the Baptists and the Methodists, they had revival once a year, okay, during the summer.  And the revival would last from a Monday night to a Friday night.  So, those who are unsaved, each night you would come to church, and they had one pew at the front.  You would come up and kneel, and that was called the mourner's bench.  You would kneel there, and those who were saved would sing and pray over you, sing and pray over you, until the spirit of the Lord hit you.  And if it didn't hit you the Monday night, you'd be there Tuesday night.  If it didn't hit you Tuesday night, you'd be there Wednesday.  If it didn't hit you by Friday night, you'd come back the next year, okay.  It's not that bad now.  I mean, you can be saved anytime, you know, anytime you make that commitment.  At anytime you can come up to the minister on any given Sunday or what not.  But that's the way it was then.  And so, the annual revival, I was twelve years old, and usually during those days once you were twelve years old, you should be saved, okay.  Now, we know a child, depending on their awareness and how the Lord works with them, they might be saved at 6, 8, or 9, or so.  Ah, but--
Speaker 1: Well, you can be a kid in church--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: --but not necessarily be considered a Christian if you had, didn't formally make the--
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, that's right.  You have to formally--you can call yourself a Christian, okay, because we see on the outside and God sees on the inside.  There are people in the church now who call themselves a Christian, but they're not saved.  But I don't know who they are, and you don't know who they are.  You have to watch their actions.  You know, you know the tree by its fruit.  So, but anyway, yes, when the young children were growing up--see, that's why the parents were responsible for the child until that child became of an age of awareness and accountability.  Then, the parent would be responsible for it.  But at that age of accountability--and that was, back in those days, about twelve years old.  Then it would be their responsibility to come to the mourner's bench and be saved, okay.  So, for me it didn't happen that Monday night, but the Tuesday night the Lord touched my life.  They were praying and singing.  I was kneeling, "Lord, help me, save my soul."  And they were singing this song, "Holy ground, holy ground.  This ground I'm standing on is holy ground.  Lord, touch my heart, change my life."  I've never been the same since.  Now, with that in mind, as I grew up there in high school and what not, my thing was to serve the Lord and to try to be a good person.  And so, that colors today, that influences my actions today greatly.  Because my thing, Larry, is that life itself has it ups and downs.  Life itself has enough problems that I don't need to try to add to somebody else's problems and misery.  There are some people who get a kick out of making life miserable for somebody else.  There are some people who, if they feel like somebody has mistreated them, they'll hold that grudge forever and ever and ever.  Not me, because I know that it doesn't help me to hold grudges.  It doesn't help me to try to make life miserable for somebody else.  Because, see, it's the same thing with hate.  If you hate somebody, chances are you are worse off with that hate than the other person.  Sometimes you might hate somebody for something and they don't even know you have anything against them.  And it's eating you up, it's eating you up.  And so, lots of times the hate hurts the hurter more than it does the hated.  And so, my thing as I was growing up, I just wanted to be a good person.  I wanted to serve the Lord, I wanted to help other people.  And that's kind of what drove me.
Story_ID: 32961
Speaker 1: In fact, when I went to college, I decided to major in mechanical engineering.  And first of all, I like math and science and stuff like that, so that kind of led me.  But also at that time--an engineer--you'd get a good job, and you could make money, okay.  So that was another motivation.  But, um, when I was in college, one of my real aspirations and visions was that as I worked through in mechanical engineering, machine design and different things and physics and stuff, I could picture myself making a significant contribution to the country, to the nation, by inventing something very, very important.  And that was going to be my thing, in the engineering field.  But what happened is, I participated in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] program and ended up going into the service, and I never got back to the engineering thing.  But I still feel like there's an invention back there somewhere, and if I hang around long enough, I'm going to come up with.  But now, you were talking about the influence of the military there at Fort Bragg.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Um, what you found is that a lot of the young men especially, they were influenced by Fort Bragg [North Carolina].  They wanted to go in the Army, go in the Army.  Well, see, I wasn't all that particular about going in the Army.  Because see, you had Fort Bragg right there.  You had Pope Air Force base next door.  So, you got Army and you got Air Force.  You had the Navy down at Wilmington [North Carolina], and then you had the Marines at Camp Lejeune [North Carolina].  Now, when I got into high school and started contemplating, you know, which service I might want to go into, and got big enough to start noticing girls--on the weekend you could go to some of the clubs.  Now we didn't call them clubs, we called them joints, okay.  You could go to some of these clubs, and at the end of the month--okay, Army, Navy, Air Force, Marines there, okay.  And if you went into one of those clubs, called joints, okay, when you went in, you wanted to make sure, make sure when you went in there, that there was more than one way out.  Because some time during the night, some time during the night, each one of those servicemen, they wanted to prove who was the toughest, they wanted to prove their manhood.  And boy, I mean, something started, the bottles started flying, okay.  So, I learned during that time, I thought, which way do I want to go?  Do I want to go to the Army?  No, Army is out there digging foxholes all the time, they're in the woods all the time.  I don't want to go that way.  Do I want to go Marines?  Oh, Lord, no.  The Marines are on the water, they're here and there and everywhere.  No, not the Marines.  The Navy?  Same thing.  The Navy is on the water, they're never home.  Air Force?  Ummm.  These guys wear the uniforms, they wear ties, ummm, look like they have a pretty easy life, ummm.  So, I decided to go to the Air Force.  So, when I went to college at that time, all land grade colleges and universities that offered ROTC of any type, the males had to take it the first two years.  So, at A&T they had Army ROTC and Air Force ROTC.  So, I said, yeah, I'm going to take the Air Force ROTC.  So, I took the Air Force ROTC.  Now, at the end of your sophomore year, you could take what they call the officer's qualifying test, and you can, if you pass the test, then you can go into the advance program, and if you succeed at that, then you get your Commissioner 2nd Lieutenant at the end of your college or whenever you get your degree.  Well, at the end of my sophomore career, I took both the Air Force and the Army qualifying test.  I passed both of them.  I chose the Air Force.  But, let me say, and I'll say this to anybody.  Ah, I have the greatest respect for all the services.  I think the men and women who serve, who have served our nation, they're to be commended.  And, in fact, I called myself a purple suiter.  My last active assignment was with the Office of the Secretary of Defense.  And there you had Army, Navy, Air Force, all working together as civilians.  So, I called myself a purple suiter.  A purple suiter means that you're part of all of them, and I have the greatest respect for all the men and women who serve.
Story_ID: 32962
Speaker 1: Now, your dad [Clyde Oliver McDaniel] didn't, he didn't serve in the war?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.  He didn't serve.  At the time, uh, when the 2nd World War broke out, if you had a certain number of children, it might have been two or three or so, then you're exempt from the draft.  So, my dad had too many children to go.  Although my oldest uncle on my dad's side--he was ten years or more older than my dad, but he didn't have any children, so he served.  He was drafted.
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask you this.  Uh, and, because this is, I was wondering about this.  Now, in your dad's life, and I think in your grandfather's life, you know, when they get to a certain, that age when you go to work--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --they just had no choice--
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right--
Speaker 1: But now, in your family, your brother goes on to school, I mean to the service first--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And the second brother, the same thing.  And that's what you were thinking, too.
Speaker 2: Right, right, that's right.
Speaker 1: But you're the first one to go right on to college.
Speaker 2: Right, that's right.  That's right.
Speaker 1: So, um, what, the difference, I guess, in your brothers is that they went to the service, right--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and got a chance to get out of that pattern.
Speaker 2: Right, out of that pattern.  That's exactly right.  Because, see, back in the 40's and 50's, the big thing was to, you know, you're on the farm.  You're in a rural area.  You either worked on the farm, you worked at the log mill, you know, or something like that.  And so, the idea was to better yourself, to get away from that to do better.  And so, you looked for that avenue out.  Uh, in my case I would have, but my teachers got involved.  In my brother's case, both of my brothers [Douglas McDaniel and Clyde Oliver McDaniel, Jr.] you know, that was their best road forward.
Speaker 1: Now, what happened in the family?  Now, in high school, when you were in high school--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You graduated in '55' [1955]?
Speaker 2: 1955, that's right.
Speaker 1: But, from, what's the name of the school?
Speaker 2: Armstrong High School.
Speaker 1: Armstrong.  In Fayetteville?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Armstrong High.  At that time, Cumberland County and Fayetteville had three segregated black high schools.  One was Armstrong High.  Armstrong is about nine miles north of Fayetteville on 301, US 301 North.  And then the second one was called Chestnut.  Chestnut was on I think Highway 401 or 301 South.  It was south of Fayetteville.  And then E.E. Smith was the city high school.  It was right in Fayetteville.  But those were the three black high schools in Cumberland County at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, where I lived in Fayetteville, the logical place for me to go was Armstrong.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  And you said you were valedictorian of the class?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was valedictorian of my class.
Speaker 1: Alright.  So, what other things did you do in high school?
Speaker 2: Well, we didn't have a football team, and we didn't have a basketball team, but we played a little, you know, pickup basketball among the classes and things.  Ah, but most of what I did, you know, we played a little softball, sandlot stuff.  But my primary activities other than academics were Future Farmers of America.  At that time they had the FFA, Future Farmers of America.  And so, you learned how to raise animals and how to grow crops and things like that.  And that was the biggest part of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, that was the biggest club thing that you did?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 32963
Speaker 1: And did you still have to do, did you have a lot of work to do at home when you got home?
Speaker 2: Ah, we, when I was about a sophomore in high school, we began to move away from the farm, because see, the two older brothers [Douglas McDaniel and Clyde Oliver McDaniel, Jr.], they were out and gone.  And so, uh, my dad [Clyde Oliver McDaniel] didn't have the manpower in the children that he had before, and so he started back working at a mill.  And um, so during my junior and senior year, I got a part-time job working at a bowling alley setting pins to earn a little extra money.  And during my senior year, I drove a school bus to the elementary school, and working with my high school teachers, I intentionally saved what money I made driving a school bus in anticipation that I would be able to go to college directly from high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I guess when you were about a sophomore, did your parents [Fannie Marie McDaniel and Clyde Oliver McDaniel] like split up?  Is that what your mother--
Speaker 2: Well, what happened, what happened was that, again, I think the stability of the family with the two older brothers moving on, and looking like I'm going to get on, I think it started kind of affecting the stability of the family, and my father's drinking problem was not getting any better.  And so, that caused the family to begin to fracture, and my mom, she finally decided hey, you know I've had enough.  And I guess with the older children not there to help keep that stability, she just decided, hey, I'm better off heading up with my--that's where most of her sisters and brothers were, in the Bronx and Brooklyn, and so that's where she went.  And so, that kind of broke the family up.  But when my mom decided to do that, uh, my father, he felt like hey, you know, there's no need for me to hang around here you know, the family--.  And that's where my sister Thelma and Mildred--they lived with my aunt for a year when my mom left, and tried to get set up, up there so she could send for them.  They lived with my aunt, and so my father figured hey, there's no need for me to be hanging around here, you know, if the family's up there.  So, he ended up--my brother, the one just older than I, he had finished school and he was down in Atlanta, Georgia at the time working.  But he tried to get my father to come down and live with him.  And my father, I guess he did it for a few weeks, but you know, hey, you know that's not family.  So, he went to New York.  And so, my mom and my dad, they tried to make it there for awhile, but he was still having the drinking problem.  So, they kind of--
Speaker 1: In New York City?
Speaker 2: Yes, in New York City, the Bronx.  And so they kind of broke up.  And my dad, he was killed by a car accident in 1968.  I was in a prison camp in Vietnam at the time.  But my mom--then again, she was in the Bronx raising the other children and she continued to miss North Carolina, and that's why she said she always wanted to come back.
Story_ID: 32964
Speaker 1: Now, where did you live?  If all of this going on, and you're still in Fayetteville [North Carolina] in school, and you're doing well in school, what are you doing?
Speaker 2: (laughter).  Well, it made it a little bit of a challenge, but not a total challenge, because my dad's [Clyde Oliver McDaniel] oldest sister, Aunt Olivester Fowler, she was very stable.  Her husband had passed away.  But when my family went to New York, my brother, the one who had been in the army, in the airborne, when he came out the family was just breaking up, leaving then.  And so, he went to live with her in Fayetteville.  So, this brother just older than I, lived in Fayetteville.  The oldest brother was already in New York.  And what happened to me is I worked during the summer, so I was only around for about a week, you know.  And what happened is with my brother just older than I living with my Aunt Olivester, when I would come home, I would just come and spend a few days with her and then go on to college.  Because--
Speaker 1: Now, when you were--but they left when you were still in high school.  I was saying, what happened to you in high school?
Speaker 2: No, I was--no, no, I was ending my freshman year in college.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: See, they left North Carolina in 1956.  I graduated from Armstrong in 1955.  So, it was my first year in college.  See, that's another thing that--
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were with your father until '56' [1956], then?
Speaker 2: Ah, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Alright, okay.  That's what confused me, because they split up in '53' [1953], I mean when she [Fannie Marie McDaniel] went to New York--
Speaker 2: No, no, no no.  No, no.  It was '56' [1956] when they split up, see.
Speaker 1: Oh, '56' [1956].  Alright, so three years, those three years--
Speaker 2: The family stayed together.  The family basically stayed together when the older brother left.  When the next older brother left to go in the Army, and then see, when I left to go to college, it was near the end of my first year.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: That's when the family was, you know, they just, I guess my mom felt like hey, I've had enough, you know.  And so, this was--
Speaker 1: I was confused because I thought it was still--
Speaker 2: This was 1956.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I thought it was '53' [1953].  Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, good.  I understand now.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Alright.  So, you're in college now.  You're in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] and--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I participated in the ROTC.
Speaker 1: --passed the test?
Speaker 2: And, yeah, passed the test to go into the advanced program.  I again, did quite well in ROTC, and during my summer year, I became the cadet group commander, which was the highest position in the Air Force ROTC unit, ah, for that year.  They had a combined Corp of Army and Air Force, and every year the overall commander would come from one service and the next year it would come from the other.  So, the year that I was a senior, I was not eligible to be the overall commander of the Army and the Air Force Corp when we had joint marching and joint parades.  But I was the highest ranking in the Air Force, and I received a commission as a distinguished graduate in June of 1959.  And what happened, if you a DG, they called it, distinguished graduate--only a few of the cadets graduated as distinguished graduates, only two or three or maybe four out of the whole cadet senior class.  But if you graduated as a distinguished graduate in the Air Force ROTC, you would be tendered a regular commission upon passing a physical exam, which was a real, real nice thing then.  Because, you see, you had your regular officers and you had your reserve officers.  If you went on active duty as a reserve officer, you would only be guaranteed three or four years.  And then if the services decided to draw down their forces, the reserves are the first ones that they get rid of.  If you're a regular officer, you're good as long as you want to stay, as long as you meet the requirements.  So, I graduated a DG and after I took my physical after going on active duty, I passed the physical, so I was a regular officer, so that's a step up from being a reserve.
Story_ID: 32965
Speaker 1: Now, now, at North Carolina A&T [State University]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Who, were there any teachers or mentors or role models there that you remember?
Speaker 2: Ah, I would say I didn't have the mentors or role models in college like I had in high school.  Because see, in college you're pretty much on your own.  And today it's even worse than it was then.  But, depending on the major field you chose to pursue, lots of times there were advisors in those areas, and they would help you to stay on track, they would give you advice.  So, there was a mechanical engineering professor, Mr. Liston, they called him.  He was the mechanical engineering major advisor, major advisor, those who majored in mechanical engineering.  And he was a very good guy.  He would give you some sage advice.  He was really from the Washington, D.C. area here, but he was working down at A&T.  And he was a good person to talk to.  But I would say in terms of somebody kind of staying in close touch with you and kind of tracking you along, it was more in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps].  And so, you would have, we had a commander of the ROTC detachment, Colonel Allen.  No, I'm sorry--Major Allen, he was a major--A-L-L-E-N.  And then you had what you call commandant of cadets, commandant of cadets, and that was a Captain Turner.  And they were both very, very interested in your progress, you know, because they wanted you to do well.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, when you graduated from North Carolina A&T, now the civil rights movement was starting to boil up in the south.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes.  It was beginning to bubble, it was beginning to bubble.  And, of course, the desegregation thing in 1956.  But by the time I left college in 1959, the civil rights was bubbling.  Now, my wife [Jean Carol Breeze McDaniel], uh, she participated in the McCrory Store sit-ins, or Woolworth--I'm sorry, the Woolworth sit-ins in 1961.  She was, she was there with the original four guys, uh huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so she was very active in that.  In fact, she got arrested.  Her dad almost had a fit because (laughter), "Oh, you're going to get me in trouble, they know where I work."
Speaker 1: We were just there two weeks ago, and they call it Dudley [North Carolina].
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: It was a full statue.  I've got an old picture with ___________(inaudible).
Speaker 2: Very impressive, very impressive.  We were down there the year that they dedicated the museum, uh, where they took the old Woolworth stores and reconfigured it for the civil rights museum.  And it was a very, very impressive ceremony, a very impressive program, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, she was arrested with those--
Speaker 2: Uh huh, she was arrested with the sit-inners there in 1961.
Speaker 1: I couldn't help but think that the students were--
Speaker 2: Yeah and, you know, Jesse Jackson was involved in some of that stuff during about that time, too.  In fact, she was a classmate of Jesse's.  Jesse Jackson and she were in the same class.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: But it's impressive, you know, when you go back and look at some of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when you leave, you graduate in '59' [1959]?
Speaker 2: Ah, 1959.
Speaker 1: That's two years before the sit-ins.
Speaker 2: Uh, before the sit-ins.  That's exactly right, that's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Alright.  So, did you go--so you went right into active duty?
Speaker 2: Yes, I graduated on the 5th of June, from A&T, 1959.  And I started traveling for Lackman Air Force Base, San Antonio, Texas on the 7th of June.  So, I went straight from college right on to active duty.  I went to--what had happened was I qualified for navigator training when I took the Air Force officer's qualifying test.  Now, it's interesting, but all of the services have their pecking order of who's the highest in status and who's next, and who's next.  Well, I didn't realize it at the time.  When I took the Air Force officer qualifying test at the end of my sophomore year, I did quite well.  I did quite well on the navigator portion and the officer portion.  But I missed the pilot portion by a small amount.  And the Air Force officer, he said well, you can wait three or four months and re-take this, or you can just go into navigation.  So I said, navigation's fine.  If I had known then what I know now, I would have waited, because there is a pecking order.
Story_ID: 32966
Speaker 1: Alright, so when you were commissioned, uh, you went right to training and you went to California first?
Speaker 2: No, what happened was I, when I went on active duty, I went to, I was going to navigator training.  So, I went to Lackman Air Force Base, San Antonio, Texas for two weeks for what they call navigator pre-flight training.  And once I finished those two weeks at Lackman Air Force Base in San Antonio, I actually took my basic navigator training at James Connelly Air Force Base in Waco, Texas.  So, I went up to Waco, Texas and was up there for about ten months.  I completed navigator training there and this was then in the spring of 1960.  Now, once you complete basic navigator training, at that time you had a choice to either go into navigator work in the transport airplanes as a navigator, or you could go to radar intercept officer training at that time with the Air Defense Command, where you'd be the back-seater of the fighter interceptors that protected the United States at that time.  You know, Captain Chaney was the head of that for awhile there in the 70's.  Um, or you could go into what they called bombardier upgrade training.  That is, you would go to Mather Air Force Base in Sacramento, California and upgrade to the B-52's and those kinds, where you would be the bombardier.  Or, the fourth choice was you could go to electronic warfare officer training at Keesler Air Force Base in Biloxi, Mississippi.  Because I had a mechanical engineering background, technical background, I chose to go into electronic warfare.  So, in the spring of 1960 I left James Connelly Air Force Base in Waco, Texas and moved to Keesler Air Force Base in Biloxi, Mississippi where I stayed for almost a year, well, about nine months going through electronic warfare training.  Now, once you completed electronic officer warfare training, you would be assigned to fly in the B-52's and the B-58's, I guess--the B-58's, or the B-47's.  They had some B-47's at that time.  And depending on where you graduated in the class, they had a certain number of assignments available, but you could get your pick depending on how high you ranked in the class.  And I wanted B-52's, so I chose the B-52's.  And so, in the spring of 1961, uh, I was assigned to Travis Air Force Base [Fairfield, California] in the B-52-G aircraft.  But, by way of going to Travis, we went through about three months of what they call combat crew training at Castle Air Force Base in Merced, California.  And after completing that combat crew training in the B-52's, then I moved on to Travis Air Force Base, where I performed as an electronics warfare officer in the B-52-G's, from the summer of 1961 until the summer of 1964.  Now, in the B-52's, you had a pilot and a co-pilot up front.  You had a navigator, a regular navigator, and a radar bombardier in the back downstairs.  And then you had an electronic warfare officer and a gunner position we set up top behind the pilots.  And so, that's how I performed.  We went on training missions.  We, at that time had to pull nuclear alert, because at that time we were afraid that the Soviet Union might try something.  And we would spend about ten to twelve days a month--we would be sitting on nuclear alert.  And that is where you're in a position, if you've got an emergency war order to launch, you had to launch and be off the ground in two or three minutes.  And we had designated targets to hit.  Um, we, the plan was to re-fuel while you were in flight, but we had designated targets in the Soviet Union to hit, and you would hit those targets.  Now, they told us that we would have enough fuel after we hit our targets to go to a safe landing, but I'm not sure that was the case.  I think they just wanted us to hit the targets, because I think we probably would have run out of fuel somewhere along the way.  But, um, that was part of our responsibility.  And we also flew something we call nuclear alert missions about twice a month, called chrome domes.  Those were 24-hour nuclear alert missions, where you'd go up and you would stay airborne, because see, we didn't want the Soviet Union to catch us with all of our planes and weapons and bombs and ammunition on the ground.  So, we would fly.  And our route, we'd take off from Travis Air Force Base about 5:00 in the afternoon.  We'd fly from the west coast to the east coast, fly up the east coast up over Iceland, up across Alaska, back over to the west coast, and fly back down the west coast from Washington State on down, and it was 24-hour missions.  That was interesting.  One other quick thing about that is that I was sitting on nuclear alert when the late President [John F.] Kennedy was assassinated in 1963.
Story_ID: 32967
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now that, well tell us about that before I ask you about the, I want to ask you about the planes, but tell us about the assassination of President Kennedy and what it meant to you in those days and how you viewed that.
Speaker 2: Well, it was, it was, it was a total surprise because President Kennedy and his wife, they were in Texas there, and all of a sudden we were sitting on alert and this emergency news flashed.  The TV was interrupted and they come on with this, the President's been shot.  And so, because they didn't know, you know, it was fatal right at that moment.  And, boy, everybody was glued to the television.  And then when we found out that he didn't survive, it was really sad.  Uh, most of us couldn't believe something like that could happen in the United States, but it happened.  And it was a real shock, because President Kennedy had brought such hope and uplift, you know, to the country.  "Ask not what your country can do for you, but ask what you can do for your country"-- I mean, in his inaugural address.  Incidentally, my wife [Enter name here] and I were married the day after the late President Kennedy was inaugurated.  So, I don't have any trouble remembering our anniversary.  So, I'm safe there.  You know, lots of times if you don't remember your wife's birthday or anniversary, you're in trouble.  But all I have to do is say, "Ah, when was President Kennedy inaugurated." (laughter).  So, I know the answer.
Speaker 1: Now this is--
Speaker 2: It should be the other way around.
Speaker 1: --January of '61' [1961] you all were married.
Speaker 2: Ah, January 21, 1961.  The inauguration address was January 20, 1961.  Yes, indeed, a great day.
Story_ID: 32968
Speaker 1: You met your wife in school I guess, I mean, in--
Speaker 2: How I met my wife?
Speaker 1: --at North Carolina A&T?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.  What happened is an interesting little story about that.  Um, I was a senior, she was a freshman.  So, if you're an upper classman at A&T, the freshmen would come in two or three days early to register, because they had to go through a process.  Now, the upper classmen came in two or three days later.  But if you were a student leader--I was president of my senior class at A&T--so, if you're a student leader or if you worked in the dining hall or something like that, you could come in and register early.  So, when the upper classmen would come in to register early, they didn't have to stand in line.  They could just go straight up to the registration desk, but all the little freshmen, you know, they stand in line.  So, you know, I'm an Omega, Omega Psi Phi fraternity, I'm an Omega man.  [singing]:  "Omega man, across the burning sand."  And so, we, what we did was, uh, me and a few of my frat brothers, you know, we went up to the table to register.  Then we decided to what we call troop the line.  "Let's troop the line and see how these little freshmen look here this year."  So we, so we kind of made our way on down the line.  We came upon a group of about six young ladies, nice looking, most of them.  And, so we stopped, you know, and starting talking, had on our frat sweaters, you know.  So, I saw one that kind of caught my eye.  I said, hey, I think I'd like to talk to this young lady.  So, she seemed be interested.  Lo and behold, I started talking to the young lady, and about three weeks later, one of the other ones--see, the one I was looking at first wasn't my wife, okay.  That was one of the others.  And so about three weeks later, somebody said, "You know, Carol's interested in you."  And so I started looking at her.  "Ummmm."  And so, I kind of weaned away from the other young lady and, hey, Carol and I got in touch.  And we got real tight.  She was a freshman, I'm a senior.  Now, at [North Carolina] A&T [University] at that time, Larry, at that time there were about three males to every female that went to A&T, okay.  It was mostly men.  Now across the track, across the track at Bennett University, I mean, there were some women, and a lot of guys went across the track to see the girls.  But at A&T, there were about three guys to every girl.  Now, Carol and I started getting tight, I mean and, hey, I started appreciating her more and more.   And we'd go into the movies on Saturday night.  They'd had free movies on Saturday night, and we're sitting in the back so we could smooch and all.  And as we head toward the end of school, now it's getting into spring.  Now, when I made Omega I said, "No girl will ever get my frat pin."  If you didn't have money to buy an engagement ring, you gave the girl your frat ring, okay, which I didn't have any money.  So, it's getting close to the end of the year.  I'm thinking, um, this is, I really don't want to leave her here by herself.  I don't want to leave her here unobligated, because if I don't do something to obligate her, somebody else might sneak in here, and she's too special for that.  So, I told Carol that.  It was about three weeks before school, yes.  I said, "Look", I said, "I'm going to give you my frat pin."  You know, I asked her if she would marry me.  She said yes.  And I said, "I'm going to give you my frat pin as a token, you know, as my pledge."  I said, "But let's keep this a secret.  Now, don't you tell everybody that I gave you my frat pin."  That was at the library, about 8:30 or 9:00 that night.  The next morning at breakfast, 7:00 in the morning, everybody in the dining hall knew that Carol had my frat pin.  Oh, they were just ribbing me.  Oh, they were giving me a hard time.  Boy, she let the whole world know.  But it was a good thing, and I've never been sorry about that.  But it's great now.  The plan was that--she was a freshman, I'm a senior--so I'm going to go ahead and go into the service for a few years, because I wanted to help my family because I knew that they, you know, could use some help.  And so, I said "Now, we'll stay engaged to let you finish school.  And then after you graduate, then we'll get married, okay, and I'll spend that time helping my family financially."  [She says] "Well, absence makes the heart grow fonder."  By halfway in her sophomore year, which is the first year away, I'm kind of missing her and she's missing me, and we're writing letters everyday, two or three times a day sometime.  And I'm thinking, hey, I don't know if this is going to work.  So, what I did, we decided to go ahead and get married.  So, we got married at the end of her sophomore year.  And she left college in 1961, so she left college not having finished.  And what happened was when I got orders to go to Vietnam in 1965 and left in 1966, we were stationed at Kessler Air Force Base.  But we moved back, moved her back to Burlington, North Carolina which is near her folks, where she could go to A&T and finish up while I was overseas, and that's what she did.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Alright, so, that's good.  I'm glad you gave me all the background.
Speaker 2: (laughter).
Speaker 1: This makes, this, I think enriches the story, because you know, that's what I hate about movies.  They don't give the back story.
Speaker 2: Ahhh.
Speaker 1: They show us usually what black folks are doing, but they don't have a past.
Speaker 2: Yeah, have a--
Speaker 1: A past.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right, good point, good point.
Speaker 1: So, you've got this background.
Story_ID: 32969
Speaker 1: So, um, now, what, for those who don't know--I knew up in Bakersfield [California], right where you were stationed.  We'd look up in the sky and we'd see B-52's and B-58's, all those.
Speaker 2: (laughter).
Speaker 1: We used to make them, and we had big models of them.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Tell people what--you were assigned to the B-52's?
Speaker 2: Right, B-52's.
Speaker 1: What does a B-52, what does it look like?  What is it?
Speaker 2: A B-52 is a bomber.  Now, in the Air Force they have transport planes, they have fighter planes, they have bomber planes, uh, and they have re-fueling planes, tankers.  So, you have some planes that can load up with a lot of fuel, and they go up and they hook up with planes that need to stay in the air.  And they'll off-load fuel, give them fuel, so those planes can keep flying, okay.  Um, some planes were the bombers.  Now, during the 2nd World War, you had the old B-36--the B-24's and the B-36.  Those were the big bombers, um, that did our heavy bombing in Europe.  What you have to do with your plane, airplane inventory, you have to replenish those and upgrade those and renew those every so often, because eventually those planes wear out, okay.  And so, normally what the Air Force does is it plans ahead.  If it has a particular type of plane that's operational, doing its job flying now, they're looking ahead five or ten years to see when are we going to have to replace this?  And of course, that's the way we do this.  We call that the acquisition.  But, they had the B-36 and the B-24, and the B-36 in the Second World War.  As those planes got old, and they had to start mothballing them and stop flying them, they came along with the B-47.  Now, the B-47 was a strategic bomber.  These are strategic bombers, they called them, that didn't have the size of the B-36, but it could carry the payload around the world, you know, with re-fueling.  Well, as the B-47 began to age, and especially the B-36's, the B-52 replaced the B-36.  They decided we need another big bomber to replace the B-36.  So, the B-52 is a strategic bomber.  They call it a "stratofortress".  The thing spans a football field--
Speaker 1: The wingspan.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the wingspan, a football field.  It can carry nuclear weapons, it can carry conventional regular ammunition weapons, it can carry air lots cruise missiles, and so on.  And it carried a crew of six, and you could carry an extra person in there.  If you're going to go on a long mission, you need to swap out the pilots and navigators and let one rest while the other two are flying.  But that's what the B-52 was.  And the B-52, we had them stationed around the country at what they called strategic air command bases.  Travis Air Force Base was one of those places they were stationed--um, Minot, North Dakota; Fairchild Air Force Base up in Washington State; up in Massachusetts; West Dove Air Force Base down in Florida, you know, places like that.  We had them stationed and they had missions, first of all, training missions to keep the people current and qualified.  But they also had national defense missions such that if an enemy struck us, we could take off and go hit him.  And you had the B-52's that would do that.  Now, during those years, we had what is called the triad.  That is, we had strategic nuclear weapons in the air--those are B-52's, we had them on the ground.  We had the big atlas missions and the titan missiles and things that could hit them from ground to ground.  And we also had sea launch ballistic missiles, but that was to keep our country safe and to let any adversary know that if they attacked us, you know, they would not go unscathed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, B-52's were part of the strategic air command--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: It was called SAC in those days.
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh huh, the Strategic Air Command, that's right, headquartered in Offutt Air Force Base in Omaha, Nebraska at that time--okay, SAC Headquarters.
Story_ID: 32970
Speaker 1: And you were assigned to Dayton, Ohio to Wright Patterson Air Force Base?
Speaker 2: Well, now, I was assigned, at that time I was assigned to the B-52, the 23rd Bomb Wing, which was a B-52 unit at Travis Air Force Base, Fairfield, California. That's about half-way between San Francisco and Sacramento, California.  But that was from 1961 until 1964.  Then what happened in the spring of 1964, the Air Force was running short of engineers in what they call the support command.  Now, you have what you call, uh, you have your operational commands and you have your support commands.  At that time we had air defense commands.  These are your operational commands, air defense commands, responsible for protecting the country itself.  We had strategic air commands that could lock out--then we had, um, support commands, air force systems command and air force logistics command.  Air Force logistics command was responsible for keeping those operational fighters and bombers and transport planes, keeping them flying--modifying, renovation, and what not.  Then your Air Force systems command, that was what you call the acquisition command.  Their job was to look ahead to see what's going to replace these systems and to help to develop these.  And in some cases we were doing experimentation in laboratories and doing things ourselves to further technology and to make sure that whatever techniques and concepts we were proving out, we could actually build and put into the field as operational systems.  But, systems command was the one who developed the follow-on aircraft and what not.  Now, in a lot of cases the military itself, the people in uniform, they didn't develop these things.  What they did is they looked at the concept and they had defense contractors to actually--like McDonnell Douglas--and what's a couple of the others?  McDonnell Douglas, Boeing, and Norththrop, and some of these.  They would be the defense companies that would actually do these things, but the military, both uniform people and civilian service, they had to make sure that the contractors were building these things the way they were supposed to build, and make sure that when they got these systems and planes and things developed and built, that they would do the job that the people who had to fly them and use them, needed to have done.  So, at that time in 1964 the Air Force realized it was running short of engineers and overseer people in the systems command and the logistics command.  So what they did is they looked across the operational commands to see what people they had in those jobs that had engineering degrees that they could pull into those jobs.  I happened to be one of them.  I had a mechanical engineering degree, and knew stuff about how to develop things.  So, in the summer of 1964 I was re-assigned from strategic air command at Travis Air Force Base to Wright Patterson Air Force Base in Dayton, Ohio as part of their full systems command, aeronautical systems division, part of the Air Force systems command.  And at that time I was assigned to help work on the development of the F-111 airplane.  Now the F-111 airplane was a plane that at that time the Secretary of Defense, Robert S. McNamara, said that he wanted it to be a joint plane between the Air Force and the Navy.  He wanted the plane to be what he said, common.  It had to have 80% of its systems and parts common to both the Air Force and the Navy, because he thought that there was an economy and that there was money to be saved in having one plane that could serve both services.  So, I was assigned to that joint development, and my job was to manage the development of the radar cross section reduction.  So, when the enemy is looking at you, he can't see you because you have some things on the plane, and materials or what not, that will keep him from being able to see where you are: radar cross section reduction, the electronic track breaker.  That is, if their radar picked you up, you could do something to them to get away from them.  And the mechanical shaft dispenser--where you could throw out some stuff that would confuse them and they wouldn't be able to pick you out from all this other junk.  So, that was my job.
Story_ID: 32971
Speaker 1: And I was in that job doing quite well, enjoying it, um, for about 18 months.  I was there going on a year and a half.  And in late 1965, late 1965, the Vietnam War was building up.  The late President [Lyndon B.] Johnson had decided that, hey, we're going to go in there in force, and we're going to, you know, hit North Vietnam.  So, again, they went back through the support command, the Air Force logistic command, Air Force system command, looking for flyers, people who were rated, who had flying qualifications but were in non-flying jobs.  So, that job that I had, the Air Force F-111 program model, was a non-flying job.  So, I was one.  They looked at about eleven hundred flyers and pulled about 775 of us back into flying jobs.  So, I received word in late 1965 that I was going to be assigned to South East Asia to participate in the War.  Now, when I received that notice, it didn't bother me.  I figured well, hey, um, so what, it's an assignment, usually a year assignment, and you're good to go.  But my wife, Carol, when she heard the news, she cried.  And I don't know, I guess it was just a sixth sense of hers that, you know, things weren't going to work out too well.
Speaker 2: By this time you had some children, too, right?
Speaker 1: We had--yes, indeed.  We were married in 1961 and about a year later our son was born.  He was born in April, 1962.  And in fact, I was at Travis [Air Force Base] in the strategic bomb wing, the 23rd Bomb Wing, when he was born.  And then in 1965, our daughter was born, Crystal.  And so, here we had the two small children.  And so maybe that was another reason why she felt it.  But when I was assigned to South East Asia, we moved, I moved the family from Wright Patterson Air Force Base back to Burlington, North Carolina, which is near Greensboro, North Carolina.  My wife's family is in the Burlington area up near Reidsville, North Carolina.  And so, we moved back so she would be close to family while I was away, and also because she had not finished college, and it would give her a chance to go back to school.  And so that was the plan.  And in fact, when I left to go to South East Asia in February 1966, we had to celebrate our daughter's first birthday a week early so I could make my port call to go to South East Asia.  And our son was not quite four when I left.  So, when I came back here, we were celebrating our daughter's eighth birthday and our son was going on eleven.  So that was a big change.  One other quick thing--I'll jump ahead and then we'll come back to it--but it was interesting--now, I expected to be over there for a year.  But when I would fly those missions, ah--I was assigned to Takhli Air Base, Thailand.  We were flying combat missions over in North Vietnam--
Story_ID: 32972
Speaker 1: Now, was this your first time over in South East Asia?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, indeed, my first time in Southeast Asia.  And at that time it was not official U.S. policy to admit that we were flying combat missions over in North Vietnam out of Thailand.  So, I hadn't told my wife I was flying combat missions, I'm telling you.  But it was interesting.  Whenever we would take off at Takhli Air Base, the EB-66C--now, I flew there in the EB-66C.  The EB-66C is a medium-sized bomber where they had closed off the bomb bay, instead of carrying bombs, and had reconfigured that compartment for four electronic warfare officers.  And one would sit forward left, forward right, rear left, rear right.  And that's the way we flew.  But the B-66 was grossly under-powered.  What happened when the B66 was developed, they had some pretty powerful engines that they were developing for it.  But it turned out that they had a need for those engines in fighters, and they diverted the engines that were supposed to have gone into the B-66's, they converted them to the fighters, and therefore the engines that they put in the B-66 were smaller and underpowered.  So, when we would take off, we'd go down there, and good Lord, we used every inch of that runway.  And man, you'd just be trying to help it along, just wondering if it's going to get off the ground.  Finally, when it did break ground, and you know, you hadn't crashed, whew, you'd breathe a sigh of relief.  But the thing is, whenever we would take off, I would always pray.  I would say, "Lord, if anything should happen to me, please take care of my family."  Now, at the time I didn't really think about it.  But that seems like a strange prayer.  You would think you would be saying "Lord, get me, on this mission, get me back safely, you know, so I can get back to my family."  But that prayer was, "Lord--" and it was just about every time, "Lord, if anything should happen to me, please take care of my family."  See, as a Christian, with some faith in God, the scripture tells us that lots of times the Holy Spirit intercedes for us, makes groaning for us that we aren't even aware of.  If our heart is right and we're trying to do right thing, the Holy Spirit indwells us and actually intercedes for us.  And, in retrospect, looking back on that, that was the Holy Spirit interceding there.  Because He knew, God knew that I wasn't going to get back to my family any time soon.
Story_ID: 32973
Speaker 1: So, uh, what were your impressions of--now, you were stationed in Thailand, right?
Speaker 2: Uh, I was stationed in Thailand, that's right, Takhli Air Base, Thailand.
Speaker 1: They didn't want to let anybody know that we were doing that over there, right?
Speaker 2: Um, well, now, we knew, but it was not official U.S. policy to admit or state that we were flying a combat mission over North Vietnam.  Um, and, but, I'm sure that just about everybody knew it.  But it was not official policy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what were your impressions of Thailand?
Speaker 2: Well, I, (laughter) Thailand was a very interesting place.  Um, very, very busy, very crowded--and again, the way their traffic and stuff--cars and things going every which way, and bicycles and things.  So, it was a little bit different for me because I had not been stationed overseas before.   And over the way over to Thailand we spent a week in the Philippines, which got you a little bit into that mode, with some of the music and the food and things of that nature.  But Thailand, I liked Thailand.  It was a pretty nice place, but just busy and all.  Um, but I found that flying over North Vietnam--I always felt the war was kind of dragging on and on and on, and I just wanted to get my missions out of the way and to get back.  Now, at that time, the policy of the Wing and Theatre was that you would stay there for a one year tour and fly missions, or you would complete 100 combat missions and then return to the States.  And the thing was whichever one you completed first, then that's what would happen.  Most of the people in the organization that I was in, the 61st, uh, the 41st Tactical Reconnaissance Squadron, most of the people in that squadron were completing their 100 missions in eight or nine months, okay, the 41st TRS, Tactical Recognizance Squad.  And so, um, I figured that I'd be there for about eight or nine months and finish my missions and of course I'd be back home, I'd be on my way back.  So, that's kind of the way we looked at it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I enjoyed Thailand.  I enjoyed the people.  I didn't learn the Thai language, just a few phrases here and there, but the people were very friendly and very pleasant, and I think it would be a nice place to live.  Now, we were in Takhli, north of Bangkok.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Takhli?
Speaker 2: T-A-K-H-L-I.  Um, I, now, the town, the little town of Takhli there, and then the base was called Takhli Air Force Base.  Uh, but we went down to Bangkok a few times and Bangkok was really, I mean, it's really thriving.  Have you ever been there?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But it's an interesting place.  Again, all kinds of congestion, and you'll find all the way from vehicles to bicycles and tricycles to people just walking.  I mean, it's just--and I guess they know what they're doing.  I don't think anybody gets hurt that often in wrecks or what not.
Story_ID: 32974
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were you the only black male in your crew, or were there--
Speaker 2: Yes, I was the only black person on my crew.  We carried a crew of six: a pilot, navigator, and four electronic warfare officers.  Now, the B-66, as a bomber it had a position for pilot, navigator and a gunner.  But when they modified the B-66 to be what we call a EB-66B, electronic reconnaissance, they deactivated the gunner position.   And normally they didn't fly anybody in the gunner seat, except if a crew member needed one mission or something for a special purpose or something, they would let a person fly there.  But normally it was just a crew of six.  You flew--the pilot and the navigator, they flew up front, they ejected up.  But then you had the four electronic warfare officers, they ejected downward.
Speaker 1: So, if something happened, you could eject out of the--
Speaker 2: Ah, yes.  We had ejection seats.  Now, in order to eject from the plane, uh, you had to go through a certain sequence of steps in order to get out of that plane successfully.  First of all, ejecting downward, you had to eject in a certain order.  You had to eject the forward left position, forward right position, the rear left position, the rear right position.  If you did not, we had trouble.  Those who were left, if you didn't eject in that exact sequence, those who were left, they would be injured or killed from the debris and the hatchers and all of the stuff that was flying around.  Now, in ejecting from the EB-66, you had to go through a certain number of steps.  There were about six steps specifically that you had to do.  Otherwise, you're going to be in trouble.  First of all, when you're flying that hatch that the seat fires from, it's fairly small, okay.  So first of all, if you're getting ready to eject--and lots of times when you're flying you've got your feet out here or you're working or you're doing something like that.   When you're getting ready to eject, you've got to make sure that those feet are in those stirrups.  Otherwise, I mean, if that seat fires and--you're in trouble.
Speaker 1: It may take your leg off.
Speaker 2: Oh, sure, sure, just split you, poof.  Now, the other thing is the ejection levers.  They're here in the arm rest.  You've got to have your arms inside those arm rests so you can locate the levers and squeeze, because if you got those outside, you're going to lose those as well.  Um, you have to make sure that your helmet visor is down so you don't get hurt from the flames and the stuff that might fly into your face.  You also have to have your oxygen bottle activated so that you can breathe through oxygen until you get down to the normal breathing altitude.  When we were hit, we were 30,000 miles in the air.  Well, I'm sorry--30,000 feet in the air when we were hit.  But anyway, um, the history of that plane is that 80% of the time, four out of every five of those who eject downward, do not survive.  That is the history of the airplane.  80% of the time, they do not survive.  The reason being because of all of those things you have to do.  But also, when you're ejecting downward, there are different things playing on you: the pressure and the gravity force, than if you're ejecting upward.  And so, what happened to us, fortunately, fortunately, three of the four of us survived.  Three or four of us made it.  Now, just a little quick story on that.  Um, when you're in an airplane where you have a number of crew members flying together, the aircraft commander is the one who gives the orders.  He tells the people when to do this, when to do that, get ready to eject, okay, let's go ahead and leave the airplane, blah, blah, blah, okay.  But we were hit that morning by a surface to air missile.  And when we were hit, we lost oxygen, we lost pressurization, uh, the compartment started filling with smoke and fumes, and we lost communications.
Story_ID: 32975
Speaker 1: So, here we didn't have any way of communicating with each other.  There were six of us on the plane.  And the last communication we had on the plane was, as soon as we were hit, there was a big whoop, like a big air pocket, whoop.  And one of the crew members said, what was that?  The pilot said, it was a near miss, but we were still flying.  As soon as that happened, the plane went out of control and started pulling--heavy gravity forces just pinning us to the seat.  I mean, I mean, it seemed like forever, but evidently it was only ten or 15 seconds.  Then the plane leveled out momentarily and then started veering off again.  Now, with all of that going on: lost communications, oxygen pressurization, compartment filled with smoke and fumes, somebody had to make a decision.  Again, what I said about the order of ejection, I was in the position to eject first.  Now, do I leave this airplane or do I stay with it?  And when that plane started veering off again, I said huh, it's decision time.  I went through my ejection procedures, I went through all those steps that I mentioned, okay.  Now, as the old cook says, as the Cajun cook says, he said, I guarantee, I guarantee you I went through every one of those steps.  But I only remember going through one, and that was pulling my helmet visor down.  Now, the reason I know I went through every one of them, first of all, I ejected successfully.  But the other reason is that I had spent three years in the Strategic Air Command.  We worked with nuclear weapons.  You had to be nuclear reliable.  We had specific checklists that you had to follow to the letter, I mean, to make sure you were safe and that you knew what you were doing.  And so, I had learned my ejection procedures in the EB-66C.  So, I know that I went through all of those steps.  But when I ejected, um, flames and smoke were billowing up from the hatch that had jettisoned when I went through it, I went through it.  When I ejected I had burns from the left side, head to toe.  I had a neck flesh wound, I had a sprained left ankle.  Now, it was a good thing I left the plane when I did, because according to the navigator and the pilot, the navigator ejects upward.  According to the navigator, he said as he was getting ready to eject, he looked down in the area where we were supposed to be, and he said flames and smoke were billowing up from that lower part of the airplane.  He also said that as he descended in the chute, he saw the plane burning on the ground.  And, what happened to us was in the order of ejection of us back there, we were injured progressively worse, in the order of ejection.  I received injuries that I mentioned.  The next guy to go out, Len Perkins, he had burns and he had an arm wound that was really bad.  In fact, he's the first one that I found out was alive other than myself, you know, once after we were captured.  Uh, he was, I heard him moaning and groaning, please help.  And the third guy to go out, Larry Barbay, he had a neck, head injury that had him in and out of consciousness for the first two weeks of captivity.  The fourth guy to go out, Craig Norbett.  He was from Connecticut.  I learned his name is on the wall down there now with the over 58,000 others there.  But, about six months after I was captured--during an interrogation, the Vietnamese, they would call you in.  And when they would interrogate you, it would be for one of several purposes.  It might be for propaganda information, it might be for military information, it might be for biographical information.  Um, and so this time they kind of called me in and they were just kind of feeling around.  But they were trying to be nice.  Most of the time they would be torturing you and kicking you around.  They said, "All of your crew members are well but one.  One died shortly after he was captured and injured then."  And I suspect they were telling the truth.  But it was a good thing we left the plane when we did.  And if we hadn't--fortunately five of six of us came back in 1973 in Operation Homecoming.  But if I hadn't left when I did, I could have held up the others getting out of there, and possibly none of us would have gotten out of--those ejecting downward.
Story_ID: 32976
Speaker 1: I'm just asking a question.  Now, you all were flying over North Vietnam, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: We were about thirty miles northwest of Hanoi [Vietnam] when we were hit.  The EB-66C's job, electronic reconnaissance--our job was to take off and go up into the target area.  And we would orbit in the target area.  We would orbit while the fighters and bombers would come in and hit their targets.  Our job was to monitor the surface to air missiles, the anti-aircraft artillery, and the enemy aircraft and warn our fighters--we had warning equipment, jamming equipment and communications equipment.  Our job was to warn our fighters and bombers where those enemy threats were, so that they could dodge them and hit their target.  So after they'd come in and hit their targets and leave the area, then we would leave orbit and return to our base.  But the problem was when you were in a turn with the antennas pointing out different ways, you couldn't see what was going on down there, and you were very vulnerable.
Speaker 1: To being shot down from below?
Speaker 2: Yes, to being shot down yourself.  Now, we had equipment where we could tell if there was an enemy radar looking at us, painting us.  And with some of those enemy radars, what you call acquisition radars, they're just going around seeing if they're picking up something.  And if they pick up something then they start looking at it.  And then they will change from the acquisition radar over to what we call the target tracking radar.  That's when they start looking at you continuously.  That's what we call, that's when they do what we call a lock-on, either enemy aircraft artillery or surface to air missile.  If they do a lock-on of you, you'd better do something fast, within five or seven seconds.  Otherwise, a missile or an anti-aircraft artillery is going to hit you.  So, as long as could monitor what they were doing, um, and you got a lock-on on, you could take evasive action.  You could turn fast and descend, you know, and that kind of thing, in what we call break lock.  Well, on our 49th mission--I was shot down and captured on my 51st combat mission.  But on the 49th mission, we got kind of a close call.  We were up in the same area, about 30 miles northwest of Hanoi, and we got a lock on on them, and we took evasive action and we broke lock.  Well, now normally when you're flying, you say, well, you know you're good for about one close call.  So, we figured hey, you know that's it, hey, we're here.  But on the 51st mission, we were up in the same general area, we got that lock-on, and before we could take any evasive action, we were hit.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Ah, now, I have a note here that you all like flew at 30,000 feet?
Speaker 2: Roughly, roughly.
Speaker 1: Well, is that really, really high?  I mean, I don't have a, even a way to--
Speaker 2: Well, now--
Speaker 1: Is that higher than a normal--
Speaker 2: I think a mile is 5,280 feet, isn't it?  A mile, I think--or this is a regular mile.  A nautical mile is about 6,000 feet.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: But I think a regular mile is about 5,280 feet, somewhere along there.  So, we're about five or more miles up.  So, if you can put that in distance on the ground, you just kind of imagine how far that is.
Speaker 1: You were on, I mean, is that--
Speaker 2: That was a little bit normal for our planes.  Now, we, sometimes we varied, you know, between 20,000 and 25 and 30, but normally when we were up in a good target area where we could see everything that was going on, you know, we flew--
Speaker 1: Is that considered a high altitude for a flight?
Speaker 2: Uh, fairly high, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Alright, alright.
Speaker 2: Now, we had, uh, our crew compartment was pressurized such that you didn't have to breathe oxygen all the time up there.  Back in the old days, if you got up that high, you know, the cabinets were pressurized and you had to be on oxygen.  But if you lost pressurization, you know, then you'd have to be oxygen.  The thing was if you had to eject at that altitude, and if your chute opened and everything, by the time you got down low enough for you to be able to breathe normally, if you didn't have your oxygen bottle--we had oxygen containers as part of the parachute equipment.  If you didn't have that activated, you know, you could be asphyxiated or passed out before you got down that low.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, in your case you did have your helmet on and your oxygen--
Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes, oh yes.  I received, I still have some specks in the eye now from a little bit of burns from the flames and stuff smoking up.  But nothing like it would have been if you didn't have that hooked up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 32977
Speaker 1: So this is July 20, 1966?
Speaker 2: July 20, 1966, yes.
Speaker 1: My birthday--
Speaker 2: In some cases it seems like, seems like eons ago, and in some cases when you start recalling some of that, and things about it, it's just like it's happening just yesterday.  But you say what about it, you say that's your birthday?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's my birthday, yeah.
Speaker 2: Wow.  Neat.
Speaker 1: I remember what I was doing that day, too, when this--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: But I didn't know that was going on.  But--
Speaker 2: I was born on the 27th of July, yeah, yeah, yeah.  In fact, I was shot down about a week before my 27th birthday.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, ah, what I read is when you hit the ground, you were in an open space.  Is that--
Speaker 2: What happened to me was, as I descended in the chute I heard something go, zing, zing, zing.  I looked up, and holes were being torn in the canopy of the parachute.  The Vietnamese were shooting at me from the ground as I was circling around.  Now, I was shot down about 30 miles northwest of Hanoi [Vietnam], and as soon as I hit the ground, I was captured.  Landed on the knoll of Umano (sp.) Hill, grass about knee high, nowhere to hide, nowhere to run.  Now, I tried to collapse the parachute, but here that big--well, red and white and blue parachute--um, the Vietnamese were converging on me from all directions.  They had hoes, sticks, shovels, some of them had rifles.  I mean, they were just converging on me.  I had a momentary thought to fight it out.  Uh, I had my survival gear, my survival vest, a .38 pistol fully loaded, but it was just kind of a momentary passing thought to fight it out.  Because as I saw all of them converging on me, I realized that even if I were to kill one or two of these people, uh, they would still, you know, kill me.  So, I didn't even try to shoot it out.  But within a matter of a few seconds they had pounced on me, stripped me down--my flight jacket, my flight suit, my boots, down to my shorts and tee shirt--and tied my hands behind my back and started pushing me down the knoll of that little hill toward a hut.  There was a hut right down at the bottom of the hill and in the front yard of the hut there was a pit.  And they started pushing me over, they were trying to get me into that pit.  And I'm thinking they're going to push me there and execute me.  So, I'm scuffling trying to keep them from getting me into the pit.  So we're scuffling.  And a Vietnamese army jeep drove up, and it had three Vietnamese army troops, and they said something in Vietnamese.  So, the peasants and the others, they backed off.  And they took me, made sure the blindfold was on me, threw me in the back of the jeep and away they drove.  Now, we were captured about 8:30 in the morning, I was.  And they drove I guess for about 10 or 15 minutes, and stopped and pushed me out of the jeep, of course, with the blindfold, stumbling along.  They pushed me for a little ways, and ended up in a hut, a bamboo hut.  They threw me in there and that's where I stayed for the rest of that day, um, two guards hovering over me, no chance to escape.
Story_ID: 32978
Speaker 1: Now, we learned in survival training that your best time to escape is as soon as you're captured.  Because as soon as you're captured, you're sharp, and I mean you're thinking.  The enemy hasn't gotten your movements and, you know, and hasn't decided exactly how they're going to hold you yet.  So, your best chance to escape is immediately upon capture or shortly thereafter.  But I had no chance to escape.  Um, they did their torture at night, because number one, it kept the prisoners disoriented.  But also a lot of their people were not involved with the prisoners, and a lot of their people did their work at night.  Because during the daytime about that time, 1967, 1966, uh, the U.S. was hitting them pretty hard with the Navy, Wolf Pack Six Air, and the Air Force, you know.  So, their day's activities were disrupted quite a bit.  So they didn't torture you until the night.  But after dark, that's when they started.
Speaker 2: So, you knew you were going to be tortured?
Speaker 1: Well, I didn't know.  I really didn't know what was going to happen, I didn't know what was going to happen.  I didn't expect, I didn't know they were going to torture me, but I just didn't know what to expect.  However, however, I had gone through survival training at Stead Air Force Base in Reno, Nevada.  Now, I went through survival training in 1961 right after I finished navigator training.  And, uh, we learned in survival training, at that time the survival training was taught, about three weeks worth, at Stead Air Force base in Reno, Nevada.  They later moved it out to Spokane, Washington at Fairchild Air Force Base.  Incidentally, I commanded that wing for about two years from about 1983 to 1985.  But um, what I learned in survival training--and we went through a little simulated POW-6 [prisoner-of-war-6] situation in the training--but you never can do it the way it really is, okay, uh, because some things you just don't.  But our trainers--Captain Young, I remember him just as clear as day.  They made it clear that if an enemy holds you long enough, if he tortures you severely enough, he can get more out of you than name, rank, service number and date of birth.  And according to the code of conduct, that's all we're supposed to give: name, rank, date of birth.  And we're not supposed to give any other information that would benefit the enemy, okay.  But, what Captain Young said, he said "If you find yourself tortured or pressured to the position that you have to give more than that, so, what you want to do?"  And this really helped me.  He said, "You think of some little simple story you can tell, we call it a lie.  Think of some little simple story you can tell, that you can remember.  Because if you tell them something one time and you don't remember what you told them that time, they'll come back a day later, a month later, two weeks later, two months later, and ask you the same thing.  They'll check it.  And if you're telling them one thing this time and one thing the next time, you're in trouble, okay.  So, you think of that little simple lie, something that you can remember, and then hopefully that will get the pressure off you and allow you to continue to resist.  What you want to do is avoid giving them anything that's really going to be helpful to them that will be detrimental to your country."  And so, that's when I remembered.  And it didn't happen right at that night, but over time I had to relay--and that stood me in good stead.  But they, the North Vietnamese did not treat us as criminals of war, okay.  They said the war was an undeclared war.  Therefore, we were not privileged to be treated in accordance with the 1949 Geneva Convention, on the treatment of prisoners of war.  They said we were criminals.  Therefore, they said they could treat us any way that they chose and, in fact, they did.  It was tough, it was tough.  In a lot of cases you had to decide what's worth living for, what's worth dying for?  That was an individual thing you had to do.  But we had the code of conduct, you had the oath of office, okay.  Code of conduct says "I'm an American, serving the force and guarding my country and my way of life.  I'm prepared to give my life in their defense."  And it goes on to talk about if in command I will continue to, you know, resist and I will not surrender my men while they still have the means to resist.  You go into another one of the articles that says, "If I'm captured, then I will continue to resist by all means possible."  It goes on, "I will not aid and abet the enemy, blah, blah, blah."  The last part, Article Six, "I will never forget that I'm an American responsible for my actions and dedicated to the principles that made my country free.  I will trust in my God and in the United States of America."
Story_ID: 32979
Speaker 1: And so, you know, you had that, but you had to decide in some cases what's worth living for, what's worth dying for.  And I will tell you, you would be surprised.  A lot of things that a person will jump at the spur of the moment, "Oh, I'd go down before I'd do that, I'd die before--"  When the chips are down and you really got that to make that decision, a lot of things that you might think off the surface might be worth dying for, but they're not.  There are some things that are.  Now, in my resistance, and in some of the torture, just, you didn't think you could take another moment of it.  I had determined that there two things, and a few others, but two specifically, that I would take torture through death, that's what I would do.  One of those was that I would take torture through death before I will aid and abet the enemy and do anything that would cause grave harm or injury to any of my fellow prisoners.  That was one thing, because we were in it together from the very beginning, and I knew that they were trying to exploit, divide and conquer and manipulate.  And that was one thing.  The other thing, I said I've got an oath to keep, a code of conduct to follow.  I will take torture to death before I will collaborate with the enemy and aid or abet the enemy to the extent that if I do come back to our great country, to freedom, that I would be ashamed to look myself in the mirror and be able to hold my head up.  Now, back in those days, maybe a little bit now, but even before, they were sure.  You would hear a lot of talk in the U.S. about the black man can't take it, the black man is weak, they give in, blah, blah, blah, blah.  And I was determined that I would not be guilty of anything like that.  The other thing is I realized that we have a great country, a great country.  Now, my ancestors came here as slaves, I grew up in segregation, I've lived through integration.  Hey, we have problems, there's no question about it.  But hey, we have the greatest country in the world.  The Lord has blessed us.  We have a great country.  And I love this country just like any other American loves this country, and I want to see this country prosper.  And again, you take what you have.  No country's perfect, no situation is perfect.  But you take what you have and you improve on it and you make it better.  One little anecdote, it was interesting.  The Vietnamese, they knew that we had racial problems in this country.  They tried to play the race card on me.  And after I was there about six months, they called me in for an interrogation.  Again, you kind of get a drift.  That's the first few words or sentences of what this thing is about.  And they said "Look, uh, we're colored people.  You're a colored man.  The United States is waging a war of genocide against colored people."  They said, "If you side with us, if you help us, we can make life better for you."  They said, "This war may go on for years and years."  They said, "we fought against the Chinese, we fought against the French, and we'll fight against the U.S., as long as it takes.  But for you, but for you, we can make life better for you.  If you will help us, we will arrange for you to go to a neutral country and we'll arrange for your wife and your family to join you in that neutral country, and you can have a happy life."  Now, they knew about the guy that wrote the book, "Black Boy", they knew at the time we were having some racial problems and--
Speaker 2: Richard Wright.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, and, and, and, so they were trying to play that race card.  Now, once they found out, and I told them in no uncertain terms, "No, I'm not going to do that."  Once they found that out, they called me an "Uncle Tom".  They knew what Uncle Tom meant, knew what a life it was.  And they really harassed me and kicked me around, cut my food, my rations for a time.  And they tried it, but when they found out I wasn't going to go along with them, from then on, about every six months, they questioned me to see where I was.  But no, I wasn't about to collaborate with the enemy.
Story_ID: 32980
Speaker 1: Alright.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today for the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ah, sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Full name is Norman Alexander McDaniel.  That's N-O-R-M-A-N, A-L-E-X-A-N-D-E-R, Mc-D-A-N-I-E-L.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born on July 27, 1937 in Cumberland County, North Carolina, the city of Fayetteville, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: At the present time, I'm a retired Air Force career officer, but I do own my own business, a little company called Motivation Assistance Corporation, uh, in which I do motivational speaking.  I also do workshops on leadership and management.  But I also do part-time work with a company in the area, uh, out in Falls Church, Virginia called Inverness Technologies.  I do part-time facilitation for the TAP Program.  The TAP Program, Transition Assistance Program, is a program mandated in 1990, led by the Department of Labor in coordination and partnership with the Department of Defense, the Department of Homeland Security, and Veterans Affairs, whereby all military men and women from all of the military services who are separating or retiring from the military are required to go through a two and a half or three day workshop to help to deal with the stress of transitioning from military life into civilian life, and re-crafting and re-wording, re-phrasing the military training skills, knowledge and abilities from military terms into civilian terms to help them to develop a resume; to help them to learn how to dress properly for job interviews; how to actually conduct themselves during an interview; and then on a positive note, how to evaluate job offers after the interviews.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright, and we are here completing an interview we started in March--
Speaker 2: That's right. (laughter).
Speaker 1: --March of 2012.  Uh, and today's date is?
Speaker 2: Uh, today's date is 18 June, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: At the present time, we're at 1400, actually, it's 1440 New York Avenue, or 700 14th Street, which is an office building, a business building in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Right, Skadden Arps law firm.
Speaker 2: Skadden, Arps law firm.
Story_ID: 32981
Speaker 1: Now, when we left off, you were telling us the story about your 2,399 days of captivity in and around Hanoi, Vietnam during the Vietnam War.  This is 1966 to 1971?
Speaker 2: 1973.
Speaker 1: '73', [1973] okay, alright.  So, I think--we didn't talk about how you were shot down and about your capture.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: We were discussing some of the psychological tactics the South, I mean the North Vietnamese were using on you in terms of race.  What did they, what were they doing?
Speaker 2: The North Vietnamese, as I might have stated earlier, considered the American flyers captured over North Vietnam during the Vietnam War, considered us as criminals and not prisoners of war.  They alleged that the Vietnam War was an undeclared war, and therefore we the American flyers captured, were not privileged to be treated according to the 1949 Geneva Convention on the treatment of prisoners of war.  So, they called us criminals.  And as such, they said that they were justified in torturing us or doing anything to us that they saw fit, because we were the aggressors, the invaders.  Usually, when you were called from the cell or driven from the cell in which you were kept, into an interrogation or torture room, it was for one of three purposes.  They either wanted propaganda information, they wanted military information, or they wanted biographical information.  And usually, you could tell within the first few exchanges.  They would ask you a few preliminary questions and then move into some of the more substantive questions.  And you could tell very early in the interrogation which one of those three lines they were going to pursue--military, biographical, or propaganda.  And so, there were times when during the first part of my incarceration, the first year or so, a number of the interrogations were for military information.  But as time went on, the number of interrogations for military information became less frequent.  Because, whatever military information I might have had was becoming dated and old and not as useful to them.  But the biographical information and the propaganda information, they continued to try to exploit that during my entire period of incarceration.  And it wasn't long after I was captured and the interrogations began, that they tried to exploit the race issue with me.  Um, during one of the interrogations that I was called in, they indicated that the United States was waging a war of genocide against colored people, and that they the Vietnamese were colored people, and therefore, the United States were the aggressors.  However, they said for me, they said, "You're a colored man, and therefore, you should side with us, you should help us."  And um, they knew about the race riots that took place in 1966 and so forth.  They knew about the author that wrote the book called Black Boy.  Uh, and there was a lot of controversy about that back in the U.S.
Speaker 1: Richard Wright.
Speaker 2: Richard Wright, okay.  And so, they talked about those things.  And then they made a proposal to me.  Uh, after I was there for about a year, I'd been in for several interrogations.  They were trying to get propaganda information, but naturally, um, I had taken an oath of office, I knew the Code of Conduct, the United States fighting man's, or the fighting person's code, and I knew how I was supposed to conduct myself and I had no intention of aiding and abetting the enemy.  And so, but they began to make me an offer.  In 1967, I was there--it was about a year, and the war was looking kind of bleak, and it looked like it might last for years and years.  So, an interpreter through the Vietnamese camp commander proposed this:  He said, "Look," he said, "this war might last for a long time.  We fought against the Chinese, we fought against the French, we're fighting against the United States."  He said, "We'll never stop fighting.  We will eventually win."  He said, "This war might last a very, very long time.  But for you, but for you, we can make life better for you.  If you will agree with us, agree to speak for us and to make appearances and to help us, then we will arrange for you to leave this camp and go to a neutral country, and we will arrange for your family to come and join you in that neutral country.  And then you can live, you will be free.  Will you help us?"
Story_ID: 32982
Speaker 1: That's aiding and abetting the enemy. That's actually going against your oath of office, violating your oath of office.  So I said, "No." I said, "I can't do that."  I said "That's against what I'm supposed to be doing."  So they probed me a couple of more times to see if in fact I was firm in my answer.  And once they found out I was, then they began a tirade of rough talk-- called me, uh, they knew the term "Uncle Tom".  Called me an Uncle Tom, and that I was a lackey, and blah, blah, blah, blah.  And then they threw me back, took me back to my cell.  And for the next two or three weeks they harassed me--a little bit of torture--it wasn't severe for that purpose, and they cut my rations, what little meager rations I was getting.  And then they brought me back for another interrogation and asked me the same thing again, and I gave them the same answer, because I was committed and determined that I would not aid and abet the enemy.  I also was determined that there were some things that I was willing to die for before I would cooperate and collaborate with the enemy.  Now, it's very interesting, and, you know some people say, oh, I wouldn't do that, I'd die before I'd do that, or blah, blah, blah.  But it's very interesting, as the old saying goes, when the rubber meets the road, sometimes you'd be surprised at some things that aren't worth dying for.  But there are some things that are worth dying for.  And I will just throw out a couple of them in addition to some others.  But a couple that I was very, very committed to was being true and loyal to my country and my fellow prisoners, to and through death.  One was I would take torture through death before I would say anything or do anything that was harmful to my fellow prisoners that might cause them torture, injury, grave danger or their lives.  We were in that together as American fighting men and women, and my commitment was to remain true and loyal to them.  Second thing:  I was willing to take torture through death before I would collaborate with the enemy, aid and abet the enemy to the extent that it would cause me, if I should survive that incarceration and return to our great country the United States of America, that I would be ashamed to look myself in the mirror because I had not remained true and loyal to my oath.  Now, there's nothing racial about this, but in those days and possibly even today, a lot of people say a black man is weak, he can't take it.  You know, when the chips are down, he'll give in.  And that was another reason that tied in with not aiding and abetting the enemy, because I felt that I was serious about my oath of office, about following the code of conduct, the fighting person's code, and I said I'm going to remain true and loyal to that.  So, those were two things.  There are some others, but I'll just leave those off.  But there were a lot of things, little things like making a little propaganda here and there, of saying a statement or something like that.  Ah, in a lot of cases, some of those things were not worth dying for.  And in fact, um, I would say, as I said earlier, I was kept in solitary confinement isolation for the first two months of captivity, and had a cellmate for a couple of weeks.  And because I wouldn't make propaganda for them and write a propaganda letter home, they threw me back in solitary isolation for a couple more months.  But from then on, I had at least one cellmate, and at that time, we were now organized as a POW [prisoner-of-war] wing, we called ourselves.
Story_ID: 32983
Speaker 1: Once we got organized after the Son Tay Raid and they moved all of us into the big camp there, Wallow prison, the Hanoi Hilton we called it--we organized ourselves as the 4th LIPOW Wing.  We had squadrons and flights and all of that.  And we did that covertly though, because if the North Vietnamese knew that we were doing it overtly, they would torture you and separate you and put some of the people in isolation.  But, um, once we got organized, we put out some policies.  The senior ranking officers there through covert means, clandestine means.  We put out some policies on how we should act and what we should do.  One of the policies--we called them Plums, those were the policies, and we had a number of Plums that we would abide by.  And once you say Plum Number 1 or Plum Number 6, you know they wouldn't know what we were talking about.  Everybody would know you didn't have to state the policy.  You'd just say Plum Number 1, blah, blah, blah.  But one of the Plums had to do with giving information, uh, divulging information to the enemy.  And that Plum said something to this effect:  It said, "Don't give the enemy anything, the adversary anything without torture, anything that would be useful to them, without taking torture.  But you determine how much torture it is worth for a given bit of information that they're trying to get.  But once you take torture to the point of significant pain, and you determine that giving in is less harmful to you than continuing to resist, then you will want to give them a little bit of information.  Give them as little as you can, so that they will stop the torture, but so that you will be able to keep yourself and come back again to fight another day."  That was the kind of policy.  And so, that was reassuring once we established contact within the 4th Allied POW [prisoner-of-war] Wing, because that's what I had been doing all along.  But it was good to know that the overall policy of the POW Wing members was that.
Speaker 2: Uh, in that regard, I mean, uh, now, I don't know if I asked you this before.  But I assume, I mean I would think that--you were in Vietnam fighting--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and you had a position of responsibility.  So, I take it that you had resolved in your mind that the Vietnam War was worth fighting?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes.  Let me just say quickly--yes, uh, in a short answer.  Definitely I felt it was worth fighting.  I felt that we were right in being there.  Uh, first of all we had a commitment to the South Vietnamese government that we the United States considered legitimate, uh, and when they needed our help I think we were obligated to provide that help.  Also, uh, there was a perception in the Communist world, especially in the Middle East and within China, that the United States was a big bluff.   They called us a paper tiger, that when the chips were down we would not stand up to our commitments.  And also, going back and looking at the way--Uh, Vietnam evolved out of the Second World War, see.  Unfortunately, unfortunately, if we had done, in my estimation, the truly right thing during the 2nd World War, we would never have had the Vietnam War, because Ho Chi Minh was against the Japanese as, the axis powers tried to take over Vietnam.  They came, they wanted the Westerners to help them, the U.S. and France and England.  But because of our ties with France, we were tied to France, and France was occupying Vietnam. Then we sided with France.  But if we had sided with Ho Chi Minh, he was more of an independent type person.  He wanted sovereign and stuff.  He wasn't strictly a Communist just following the Communist ideology down to the tee.
Story_ID: 32984
Speaker 1: And so, if we had sided there with Ho Chi Minh, then we wouldn't have had Vietnam.  But, be that as it may, uh, when Ho Chi Minh--because North and South Vietnam was divided at the end of the 2nd World War, um--when Ho Chi Minh decided to invade South Vietnam to try to force South Vietnam to become re-united with North Vietnam--and South Vietnam was considered a sovereign nation, then we had a commitment to South Vietnam to support them.  And if those people wanted to be free--Ho Chi Minh had his people under a Socialist Communist type regime, and I felt that we were right in standing beside South Vietnam.  Um, now, I do appreciate and accept that the Vietnam War was very, very controversial.  And my thing is that--and there were a lot of protests there as the war went on in the late 60's and early 70's.  I mean, real protests.  In fact, um, my position was then and still is, that if a person opposed that war because they felt it was immoral and wrong, and if they really, really felt that way from the bottom of their heart, I mean really truly felt it, that was fine with me, no problem with that, okay.  I felt the other way.  I felt that we should have been in it.  But you see, honoring that position I think is part of our American system, freedom of thought, you know, freedom of decision.  Nobody should be forced into something.  The people during the Vietnam War that I have a problem with are the ones who were opposing the war for publicity and propaganda purposes.  These are U.S. citizens, and those who ran off to Montana, to Alaska, wherever, to avoid the draft or tried to finagle their way out of the draft.  I have problems with those.  But for those who honestly disagree with the war, I have no problem whatsoever.  Um, now, uh, here now as we look back on this thing in retrospect, um, we see that once we left, North and South Vietnam had kind of re-united, but I definitely felt that we were right in being there.
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.  So, you felt a commitment, you know, so, so you're acting from a full sense of commitment?
Speaker 1: Right.  I took an oath of office upon being commissioned Second Lieutenant of the United States Air Force around June 3rd of 1959.  And that oath said, "I, Norman McDaniel do solemnly swear that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States, all enemies, foreign and domestic.  And that I will well and faithfully, no,--that I take this obligation freely without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion.  And that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties of the office upon which I am about to enter, so help me God."  That was sincere, okay.  And was resolved--and as long as I was on active duty, and even as a retired officer, I'm resolved to maintain that commitment.
Story_ID: 32985
Speaker 1: Also they have, and what we had was the Code of Conduct, the U.S. fighting man's code.  Now they call it the fighting person's code because, you know, women are in the service and so forth.  Uh, we were required to abide by the code of conduct in our military activities.  Now, when we came back--because the North Vietnamese did not consider the Vietnam War a declared war--we had a review.  The Department of Defense and the services, we had a review of the Code of Conduct.  And we, the Vietnam POWs [prisoners-of-war], were allowed to make our input and our comments.  And the question was, "Do you live by and abide by your Code of Conduct, or when the chips are down and the going gets tough, do you just forget it and try to survive?"  And after a very critical review of that code of conduct inputs and discussions, it was determined that yes, the United States fighting men and women, they do need some guide, some construct to keep them focused.  Because if you don't have anything, then, you know, anything goes.  Uh, however, I think there was, there was one little phrase changed but it wasn't enough to make a significant difference, a couple of those articles in the code of conduct.  Now, there's a couple of articles in the code of conduct.  One, the first one:  "I'm an American serving the forces and guarding my country and my way of life. I'm prepared to give my life in their defense."  Okay.  On down in that code, the second, third and fourth articles say something to the extent that "While I'm in command I will never surrender my men and women while they still have the means to resist."  Then you go on down and find capture.  "I will give only name, rank, service number and date of birth."  I think that's the little part that was modified a little bit, because they said that in some circumstances you could give a little bit of information if it's welfare, health or something like that.  Ah, "I will give only name, rank, service number and date of birth.  I will evade or resist answering further questions to the utmost of my ability."  Then on down, another article says, "If I am captured, I will continue to resist by all means possible."  Um, "I will not aid and abet the enemy or do anything harmful or disloyal to my fellow prisoners."  That last article, Article 6, there's six articles in the code of conduct.  I said, "I will never forget that I'm an American dedicated to my country, and responsible for those--uh, and dedicated to the principles that made my country free.  I will trust in my God and in the United States of America."
Story_ID: 32986
Speaker 1: And those two--the oath of office and the code of conduct, along with my family--wanting to get back to my family-- When I was shot down and captured, my family didn't even know I was flying combat missions out of Thailand.  At that time--it was later made public, but at that time it was not official U.S. policy to admit that the United States was flying combat missions over North Vietnam out of Thailand.  So I hadn't told my wife [Jean Carol Breeze McDaniel].  And when I came up missing in action, uh, I don't know if she suspected something or not.  She probably did, but I'm sure it was more of a shock to her than had she known I was in harm's way on those missions I flew.  And I was just listed as missing in action for two years, uh, before my wife found out I was alive.  I was just missing in action.  Now, I might have mentioned in the earlier interview that when I left home, our daughter was not quite one year old.  We had to celebrate her first birthday a week early so I could make my port call.  My son was going on four when I came back.  We were celebrating our daughter's eighth birthday, and the son was going on eleven.  Um, but one of the things that kept me going that enabled me to take a little more torture when I had been tortured to the point that I would say,  "Good Lord, this, I can't take anymore--"  Ah, people are tortured, people die, I mean, in war.  People died in the biblical wars, people died in the Napoleonic wars, they died in World War I, World War II, the Korean War.--"Hey, I just can't take anymore."  And each time I would reach that point where I thought I had gone my limit, somewhere, somewhere I would reach back and say, "Lord, I need to get back to my family.  My wife and my children are depending on me."  And somewhere I would garner just enough strength to hang in there, hang in there.  And so, my family was very, very precious to me.
Story_ID: 32987
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, uh, now, were there, now did you see other prisoners, POWs when you were--I mean did you--how much contact did you have with other prisoners?
Speaker 2: We, for the first--as I said earlier, the contact I had with the other fellow POWs--at first, my first two months were in solitary confinement.  Then I had a cellmate for two weeks.  And because I wouldn't make propaganda for them, write a propaganda letter back to the United States and home, they threw me back in solitary confinement isolation for another two months.  And after that, I had at least one cellmate for the rest of my incarceration.  In fact, during the last several years after the first peace talks started, I was in a cell with three, four, five other fellows.  And so we, it was good to be in touch with the other fellow POWs [prisoners-of-war] because that helped us to kind of maintain some semblance of balance.  But, during my incarceration in solitary confinement, there were times after I was there for about a month or five weeks in solitary confinement, I'd be called into an interrogation and be asked questions.  And I'd hear somebody answer.  I didn't recognize the voice, but it was me.  Ah, I'd been under so much pressure and couldn't talk except when I was in interrogation that I'd kind of lost touch with my voice.  But we did have contact from the very first time that I was captured, the first few days.  Uh, usually when they capture the American flyers, they would take them to Hanoi [Vietnam] to the Wallow prison.  We called it the Hanoi Hilton.  And there was a part of that prison that was called the Seven Cells.  That was the first place where they took the prisoners initially--really tortured them hard, terribly, and tried to get as much information from them as they could.  While I was in the Seven Cells, uh, it was a small dingy cell in the basement of the prison area.  They, you were in a very small cell, a little dingy light shining in your face all the time, a concrete pallet, and barred up.  And you couldn't see out.  You couldn't tell if it was day or night.  They would take you out of the cell for interrogation, lead you through a little passageway.  You still couldn't tell if it was day or night--into a torture room or an interrogation room.  And there they would torture you and interrogate you and then bring you back to the cell.  You still didn't know if it was day or night, and throw you in there.  Now, you might be in that cell for an hour, two hours.  You go into a fitful sleep, and all of a sudden they're knocking on the cell opening it up to drag you back out for another round of interrogation.  You might have thought that you had been asleep for five, six or eight hours, when it might have only been an hour or two.  So, that's the way I existed the first couple of weeks of captivity.  Now, in that situation, it's the only time that I lost track of day and night.  I couldn't tell if it was day or night.  But after that, when they moved me to one of the more permanent camps--they moved me to an old French film studio that they converted to a prison.  We called that one "the zoo".  I spent a lot of my time in the zoo.  Once they moved me to that one, uh, you could tell the day and the night and so forth.  Because even though they had the cells bricked up, they had bricked up windows, they had just enough--and a few little peepholes that you could tell if it were day or night.  And you could also tell whether or not it was Sunday.  That's the way you kind of kept track of the weeks.  Because if you got a little bit off track, they did observe Sunday as a non-work day, and not much was done.  So, you could tell by the interrogations and all the activities, that if you sort of lost track, wait until that day that, you know, that things were kind of quiet, and you could realize that it was Sunday.  Now, as far as the day of the month, uh, other than the day of the week--you could tell the day of the week.  But in terms of whether this is June the 5th or July the 8th, you know, we couldn't do that, except that on holidays--Christmas-- they would use Easter.  Uh, they would use the 4th of July, and then their Independence Day, and their lunar New Year. And you would know what day it was then, because they'd be doing something a little different, a little special.
Story_ID: 32988
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when you were first incarcerated as a POW [prisoner-of-war]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --were you with other prisoners?  Because I know at some point they put you in solitary confinement.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: So, give us a sense of the chronology of that.
Speaker 2: Right.  What happened was when I was first shot down, the plane went down about 8:30 in the morning.  We had an early morning flight.  And as I said earlier, our job was to go up in the target area--the EB-66C--that's the electronic transfer reconnaissance airplane, a medium-sized bomber where they had closed off the bomb bay and modified that area for electronic warfare officers.  So, you had electronic warfare officers sitting forward--
Speaker 1: Now, we went over that part, we have that already.
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: But, in terms of when they got you on the ground and stuff like that, what was the chronology of you, uh, your captivity--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --with others, and as a person in solitary confinement.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: We did get that?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I remember.  Okay, super.  Um, what happened was when I was first captured, um, they took me and they held me.  I was kept in a very populated area.  But they held me in a little hut with a couple of guards hovering over me all that day.  And I didn't know what had happened to the rest of the crew members or anything, or the plane.  They did their torture at night because it kept the prisoners disoriented, and it also kept the Vietnamese who were not involved with the prisoners from knowing what was going on.  They did most of their work at night because during the daytime, the U.S. would have planes coming over from raids, from the Navy and the Air Force, and so they were disrupted in their work during the daytime.  Uh, that night, the first night, they started the interrogation torture by 9:00 that night.  And I might have gone through a series of what happened that first night, but that was very, very intensive and painful, but--
Speaker 1: You were already burned, right?
Speaker 2: Well, well, actually what happened, when I ejected from the plane, the plane was hit by a surface to air missile.  When I ejected, I went through smoke and flames that were building up from the hatch that had been jettisoned, so I could eject.  So, I had burns from the left side, head to toe.  I had a neck flesh wound, I had a sprained left ankle.  So, um, the only medical treatment I got for that was--after they captured me and took me to the place, the little hut where the guards held me for the rest of the day, a medic, some Vietnamese in some old smock came by, and in broken English, asked if I were injured.  And I pointed out what my injuries were.  And all he did was take some kind of something that looked like some kind of old liniment or some kind of pink colored stuff and dabbed some of it on the neck flesh wound.  And that was the extent of the medical attention that I got for those injuries.  Now, that night, uh, when they moved me to the more permanent camp, what happened that night, they really did their torture.  And when I wouldn't answer the questions--I only gave them the name, rank and service number, and date of birthday--they went into the torture.  And they hit and kicked and slapped me around, and cinched me up real tight, arms and legs at the ankles, threw me in a reverse ball, and threw me out on the ground from the hut there.  And it was so tight, I was so tightly tied that it caused swelling in the arms, wrists and in the ankles and the legs.  And the more swelling, the more intense the pain.  They dragged me back in for a round of interrogation, still asking what plane I was flying, what base I was coming from, and so forth, so forth.  I'm only still going to give them the name, rank, service number and date of birth.  They cinched me up much tighter, slapped me around, kicked me around some more and threw me back out.  Now, I'm really hurting now.  I mean, I'm really hurting.  And they brought me back in that second time.  I'm wondering how much more of this can I take?
Story_ID: 32989
Speaker 1: Now, I went through survival training at Stead Air Force Base in Reno, Nevada in 1961.  They moved it out to Fairchild Air Force Base in 1967.  That's where the Air Force survival training has been since then.  But during that survival training--a three week period where they take you in the field and take you through a lot of things and through a little POW [prisoner-of-war], simulated POW encampment situation.  And during that exercise where I spent two or three days in the simulated POW camp, during an interrogation, one of the instructors made it very clear--and he demonstrated by wrapping us up in some statements we were making, and we couldn't keep everything straight.  Uh, he made it clear that if an enemy holds you long enough, if he tortures you severely enough, he can get more out of you than name, rank, service number and date of birth.  So, what you want to do is be prepared to--what are you willing to give?  Like I was telling you, about some things that were worth dying for.  And you should have some lie or some story or something cooked up, that if you are tortured and pressured enough that you have to give something, that it will be something that will not benefit the enemy that much, and that will not be that harmful.  And so, uh, when they brought me back in that second time, I mean, I'm wondering can I take any more of this?  One of the things I did not want to do, and that was to be tortured to the extent that I really lost it all and I'd be willing to do anything for the pressure and the torture and the pain to be relieved.  Because if you let yourself go to that point, then you wouldn't have any restraints on what you told or what you gave.  Um, there were a couple of cases during the encampment--I know of where a couple of my fellow prisoners did that, because they were, I mean, they were determined, hey, I'm not going to give them anything, I'm going to hang in here, I'm going to hold out.  And the enemy took them to the point where they were just almost helpless, and they actually gave more than they would have given had they been in control.  I always wanted to be in control of my mind, my faculties, when I was saying something and doing something.  Because one of the things they would do, if you gave them information, they would come back during another interrogation in another torture session and ask you the same thing.  And they would compare what you told them that time with--so, if you gave them one story one time and a different story the other time, ooh that could make life tough for you, too.  So, so, when they brought me back in that time, uh--and I had learned this in survival training.  And they said, "Look we know who you are.  We know what plane, your name--" --blah, blah, blah--naturally they had a name, uh because I had given that.  "We know what plane you fly in.  You fly EB-66C.  We know what base you fly from.  You fly from Takhli Air Base, Thailand.  We know what your mission was."  They said, "If you will admit the truth, we will not punish you anymore."  They called torture punishment.  "We will not punish you anymore tonight."  Well, they have that.  And it wasn't critical that if I confirmed that, it wouldn't mean, as far as I could tell, death, or maybe it might relieve the torture a little bit on me.  So, I very, very reluctantly, grudgingly--because I didn't want to give them anything--very grudgingly, very reluctantly, nodded my head in the affirmative and said, "Is that right?"  And so they relaxed the pressure of the ropes and threw me back outside, but at least I wasn't hurting as much.
Story_ID: 32990
Speaker 1: And that's where I stayed until about 3:00 that next morning when they decided to take me and another fellow prisoner down to Hanoi [Vietnam].  We were about thirty miles northwest of Hanoi when I was captured.  It's interesting, I might have mentioned this before, but when times are tough, sometimes misery loves company.  Because all during that day--shot down in the morning--all during that day, before they started to torture that night, I could just visualize that EB-66C going back to Takhli Air Base, everything looking good, getting ready to land, with just one little ejection hatch missing.  Old Norm McDaniel had over-reacted and ejected out of a good airplane.  That bothered me.  But, it turned out that just about dark before they started the rough stuff torture, I heard somebody moaning, "Help, doctor.  Please medic, please doctor.  Help, please, please.  Water, please."  And I listened, listened, listened, listened, and I detected that it was the voice of one of my fellow crew members.  Now actually, I felt pretty good.  Sometimes misery loves company.  Because I thought to myself, well at least, at least, one other fellow crew member is down.  It turned out that it was a good thing that I left the plane when I did.  I might have mentioned before, that in that plane you had to eject in a certain sequence.  If you didn't--back in the electronic warfare office compartment it didn't matter that much with the pilot and navigator who ejected up, but for electronic warfare officers, you ejected downward.  And if you didn't eject in exactly that proper sequence, those who were left might be injured or killed from the hatches and the debris and all the stuff that was flying around, if you ejected out of sequence.  I was in the position to eject first.  And, um, when I ejected, I went through the smoke and flames that was building up from the hatches.  But I had to make that decision to eject on my own.  Normally, in a plane where you have many crew members, the pilot says do this, do that, da da da da da.  But when we lost oxygen pressurization, the compartment was filling with smoke and fumes.  Um, and the plane was out of control, pulling heavy gravity forces when it veered off the first time after the missile went off, and punctured the fuel tanks of the plane.  It seemed forever, pulling heavy gravity forces, but it leveled off momentarily.  And then it stayed that way for just a few seconds and then it started veering off again.  That was the time that I had to decide, do I leave this plane or do I stay with it?  So, all that day, while the guard was hovering over me, I could visualize that plane going back to Takhli Air Base and only one little hatch missing, where I had over-reacted.  But what happened was we were injured back in that compartment.   We were injured progressively worse in the order of ejection.  It was a good thing I left the plane when I did.  I received injuries that I mentioned.  The next guy to go out, he had burns.  He had an arm and shoulder wound that was pretty bad.  He was the one that I heard asking for help, "Please, water.  Doctor, please.  Water, doctor."  The third guy to go out, he had burns, he had a neck/head injury that had him and out of consciousness for the first two weeks of captivity.  The fourth guy to go out--according to the Vietnamese, about six months after I was captured, they called themselves giving me some news about my fellow crew members.  They said one of my crew members died shortly after he was captured because he was injured very badly.  I suspect they were telling the truth.  His name is on the wall down there now with that more than 58,000.  But, uh, the navigator said that when he ejected--the navigator and pilot ejected upward.  The navigator said when he ejected he kind of looked down in the belly part of the airplane where we were supposed to be.  And he said flames and smoke were billowing up from that lower area.  And he also said that as he descended in his chute, he saw the plane burning on the ground.  So, it was very, very fortunate that I left the plane when I did.  And one other little thing on that, if I didn't mention it already, is that the history of the EB-66C is that 80% of the time, four out of five, those who eject downward do not, do not, survive.  And fortunately, three of the four of us came back.  So, very, very, fortunate, very fortunate.
Speaker 2: Did the navigator survive?
Speaker 1: Uh, yes, the navigator survived--
Speaker 2: Was he captured, too?
Speaker 1: Uh, yes, yes, yes.  Uh, what happened is all six of us, according to the Vietnamese, the one that died shortly after he was captured, all six of us made it out of the plane.  Five of us were repatriated in 1973, under Operation Homecoming.
Speaker 2: So, it was the one, the last one--
Speaker 1: Just the last fellow, the last warfare officer to go out didn't make it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 32991
Speaker 1: So, what I was trying to get at--at first is how much contact did you have with the rest of them--
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: --during your captivity?
Speaker 2: Right.  Uh, the rest of my crew members, or all of the POWs [prisoners-of-war]?
Speaker 1: Yes, both actually.
Speaker 2: Well, see, as I said, I was in that solitary confinement for two months, and they wanted me to do propaganda for two weeks.  I wouldn't do it, so I went back to solitary.
Speaker 1: But, what I'm asking is at what stage during your captivity did you go into solitary confinement?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, oh, oh.  As soon as we were there.  I never saw any of the other crew members except clandestinely peeping through a crack or something.  I never saw any of the other prisoners for the first two months I was there.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is that the portion of your captivity where they were trying to get critical military information from you, right?
Speaker 2: Well, they tried, the North Vietnamese captors tried to get military, biographical and propaganda from me from the time I was captured to the time I was released.  It was just a matter of the frequency at which I was interrogated or harassed or tortured, and which one of those of three, or combination of those three, they were trying to pursue.  But they always tried to get that.  During the first several months, a year or two of captivity, it was more intense, it was more frequent, but they always tried.  Uh, during the first few months though, it was very intense.
Speaker 1: Could you tell us about what you were saying before, about towards the end they were trying to get more biographical and propaganda information from you--
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: --rather than military.
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, oh.  Well, no, they were trying to get all three all the time.  Um, they didn't try as hard on the military information later on, because as I said, it was becoming less valuable to them and it was more dated.  But, the biographical and the propaganda information, they were after that throughout the incarceration because they wanted the propaganda information to number one: use it if you were something nice about them, or that was derogatory to the U.S.  They would try to use it to influence the fellow prisoners, to let them know how some of your fellow prisoners think and talk, and therefore you should be that way, too; to try to use it to divide and conquer the fellow prisoners--some of the propaganda.  But they also used some of that propaganda to send back to the U.S., uh, and try to influence people who were somewhat critical of the war.  They also used that propaganda to--depending on specifically what they were trying to get from you in a particular interrogation.  They would use it to broadcast to their people in Vietnamese, in North Vietnam and South Vietnam, to try to encourage them and make them feel like they were really doing the right thing, fighting.  The, uh, biographical information, they wanted that so they could manipulate you, so they could know as much about you as possible.  In a few cases, and I don't think they did this to my family, but in a few cases depending on the information that they extracted from a particular captive, they might contact some family member, you know, through some of their contacts, some family member to try to influence them.
Story_ID: 32992
Speaker 1: Now, were there other African-American POWs [prisoners-of-war] in the pit?
Speaker 2: There were other American, African-American POWs there who were flyers.  When I was shot down and captured, somebody on my crew was the 100th American shot down and captured alive over North Vietnam, according to the records.  Uh, about the time that my plane went down on July 20, 1966, there were about 98 confirmed Americans captured alive, or held alive, over North Vietnam, in North Vietnam.  My crew of six, five of us survived.  Somebody on my crew was the 100th.  Uh, when we were repatriated in 1973, from February through April, in releases of about 125 each, over four or five different releases, uh, there were close to 700 of us who were repatriated.  Out of that 700, probably only 30 or 35 were Afro-Americans.  Uh, after the Tet Offensive, there were some Army prisoners held in South Vietnam that the North Vietnam and the Viet Cong felt that the U.S. felt might rescue.  They moved them north and moved them into the camps where we were, although they kept them separated from the ones who had been there awhile.  And there were some black prisoners among those.  But there were only probably 35 or so, 40 at the most of us total, out of the 700 or so that came back.  And in fact, when the late President [Richard] Nixon had a reception for the American ex-POWs of the Vietnam in the White House there in May of 1973, either "Jet Magazine" or "Ebony," I forget which one, they did a spread on all of the African-American ex-POWs.  And in fact, in the archives somewhere you'll probably find something on that.  But, there were only about 35 or 40 us.
Speaker 1: That's like one-half--
Speaker 2: Yeah, somebody--it was about--
Speaker 1: About one-half of one percent.  I want to make that point--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It's the statistic I calculated--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --unless I'm wrong.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: 35 out of 700 is one-half of one percent.
Speaker 2: Yeah, see--you see--see, not many, not many.  Uh, one of the reasons for that--now, one of the reasons for that--if you go back and you look at the statistics from the soldiers, sailors and airmen who participated in the war in South Vietnam, the percentage of African-Americans is much higher.  But among the flyers, most of the flyers were Caucasian and non-African-American, just because I guess of the qualifications and what was required, and you know, getting through flying training and all that stuff.  So, so, so, that was one reason for the smaller number.  I think had the number--had the qualifications to fly been more like basic training in the infantry and getting into the Navy, you know, those kind-- you probably would have seen a higher percentage.  But, but it had a lot to do with the, uh, the requirements to be rated. (Simultaneous)
Story_ID: 32993
Speaker 1: Now, did you have any conversations with the other African-American prisoners?
Speaker 2: Um, yes.  Once the Paris Peace Talks started, we were able to communicate.
Speaker 1: What year, I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Uh, this, this--the Paris Peace Talks started around '68' [1968], '69' [1969].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, for about three years you didn't talk to them?
Speaker 2: For about three years, um, the only contact we had was clandestinely, clandestine means, covert.   But I found out within a year or more that there were a few other African-Americans, I call them black, fellow POWs [prisoners-of-war] there. Now, Fred Cherry, a good friend, Colonel Fred Cherry, the longest held black American flyer, uh, held captive over North Vietnam.  Uh, Colonel Fred Cherry was an F-105 pilot, shot down in October, 1965.  And I won't tell Fred's story because he and one of his ex-cellmates, Porter Haliburton wrote a book a few years ago.  I'm trying to think of the name of it.  I'll think of it later.  But, Fred was flying over North Vietnam from Japan.  He was TDY [temporary duty], was Japan--flying out of I think one of the bases in Thailand, but he was just there for a few months.  And his plane was hit.  And Fred was flying the F-105.  He was flying about 500 knots, and when he ejected, he was flying at such a high speed he didn't have time to slow down before ejection. Both of his shoulders were separated, he had separated shoulders.  And for the first year or two that Fred was in there, in prison, he had a lot of trouble with the shoulders.  In fact, one of the, one of the shoulders was such that it gave him so much trouble that they finally, after several months, they took him to the hospital and supposedly operated on his shoulder.  Well, what happened, that ball joint in there, somehow the thing got melded down into his shoulder, and now he only has limited motion in one side of that shoulder.  When he came back to the prison camp after the operation, uh, he couldn't take care of himself.  So, the Vietnamese, knowing about the racial problems, they put a young white pilot, Lieutenant J.G., Porter Haliburton, put him in the same cell with Fred to take care of Fred.  Now, what they expected was that Porter and Fred would just go head to head and they wouldn't get along, and Porter wouldn't half take care of Fred, and that Porter would be ratting and telling the Vietnamese what Fred was doing, and Fred would be telling them what Porter would be doing and so forth.  No, we're professional, we're Americans, we're in this thing together.  We've taken the oath of office, code of conduct.  And so Porter took excellent care of Fred.  Fred and Porter became the best of friends.  They're still great friends now.  Porter has a place down in Greensboro, North Carolina now, and Fred's living in Silver Springs, Maryland here.  And, and, and, but what happened, as Fred was recovering, they had put some stitches in Fred's shoulder up in here.  And as Fred was recovering, several months, they never took the stitches out.  Fred was coughing and had some kind of congestion or something, something lodged in his throat, and he ended up coughing up part of the stitches.  They had worked their way through his system and he ended up coughing them up.  But Fred and Porter are really good friends.  Fred's a good guy.  Uh, he and I are good friends.  I talked to him a couple of weeks ago.  And as I said, our organization that we call NAMPOWs of Vietnam, POWs--we have an organization called NAMPOW, of all the ex-POWs, and we have a reunion about every other year and we get together then.  But now, out of the 700 or so that came back, there are probably only about 500 of us still alive, because as a group we're getting older and we're beginning to die off.  And so, we've got probably around 500 or so.
Story_ID: 32994
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you get a chance to talk to the members of your crew when you were in captivity?
Speaker 2: Ah, when they had me in the solitary confinement for two months--and then they gave me a cellmate for um, a couple weeks and then put me back in solitary confinement.  The cellmate they gave me was the crew member that was moaning and groaning and asking for help and a doctor.  So, that was the one, that's, I talked to him awhile, uh, associated with him.  And then they put me back in solitary confinement.  But after the Paris Peace Talks started, they re-arranged us because, see, one of the requirements of the Paris Peace Talks was that a list of all the American POWs held would be released and so forth, and that we would be allowed to write to our families at home.  So, the Vietnamese started letting us write six-line letters to our families about every month or so.  And we were also supposed to be allowed to receive care packages, um, or packages from home.  So, that increased our communication.  We got to see other prisoners and got to know them.  They would let us out to exercise once in awhile when they felt the negotiations were going pretty well.
Speaker 1: Did the way you were housed change after the Paris--
Speaker 2: Ah, not the way we were housed.  That stayed pretty much constant, because of the facilities they had.  But the contact we had and the association we had, that was relaxed.  We were able to see other prisoners more, to talk to other prisoners more.  But the facilities themselves, where you lived and slept and ate and stuff like that, those stayed pretty much constant.
Story_ID: 32995
Speaker 1: Can you describe what the facility was like?  Was this an open facility or individual cells, or what--
Speaker 2: The main camp, the Hanoi Hilton we called it, Wallow Prison, that's the official name.  And there was a big prison there in Hanoi, where during the French occupation, ah, the French kept some of the Vietnamese dissidents.  And then when, uh, what happened then is when the Vietnamese gained their independence from France, there were some Vietnamese who were still sympathetic to the French, so they kept some of the Vietnamese dissidents.  That's where Ho Chi Minh and his people kept some of them.  Then when we got shot down, that's where we going.  Now, they had this area they called the Seven Cells.  And that's where for the first couple of weeks they brought you and broke you and really tortured you bad and all.  Then beyond that, in that complex, there were probably about seven or eight big rooms, ah, that could house 25, 30, prisoners. And what they were, they were big kind of hall-like type structures that had a big concrete pallet in the middle that sloped down slightly from the middle of the pallet, sloped down lightly so that you could get probably a sleeping bag or an old bamboo mat on each side of the those slopes.  And that's where the prisoners slept.  And then, and that was raised up about two and a half feet from the floor.  Then around that area, about a three foot--three or four feet width period--was around that big pallet.  And that's where you walked.  And then they had a place down at the end where you could get your bowl of soup or whatever you had to eat there.  And that was essentially it, those six or seven rooms like that.  And then they had a few smaller rooms that would house two, three, four, five or six, where if they wanted to isolate you from the others they could pull you out, uh, and they could do that.  Now, that was Wallow Prison, Hanoi Hilton.  Um, "the zoo," what we called the zoo--and I spent my time at the Hilton and at the zoo.  They had another camp called "the briar patch" up near the Chinese border.  Uh, they had one down in Son Tay.  I never went to those.  But, uh, the zoo was an old French film studio where they had, there were about five different buildings in there.  And um, one--we just gave them names.  We called one "the office," one "the pig sty," and "the barn" and "the stable".  But in those, they had rooms.  There were rooms in those--big rooms.  And some of those rooms were big enough to house three, four, five prisoners.  Some were only big enough to house a couple.  And that's where we stayed.  But they had either, uh, wooden saw horse beds for you, or concrete pallets.  Most of them had concrete pallets.  Some of the concrete pallets had manacles, so if they wanted to strap you down and keep you, you know, down.  And um, they had doors that were, um, bricked up and bars across them, and windows that were bricked up and bars.  And then in each door they had a little, maybe eight by eight or eight by ten, little door.  We called them peepholes, where they could open the latch and open it up.  And that's where sometimes they would hand you food through that if they wanted to just keep you in there and not let you out at all.  Uh, and they closed it and latched it from the outside.  But they could check in on you anytime.  Sometimes the guard and the interrogators would like to just come see what you were doing.  If they caught you trying to communicate, caught you, uh, if you-- there were certain times you were allowed to sleep, certain times you weren't allowed to sleep.  And if they caught you laying down or sleeping at certain times, they'd harass you and kick you around and get you up, and stuff like that.  But that was basically the way the physical set-up was.
Story_ID: 32996
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 2: Alright.  And, I was just going to describe the perimeters of the prison camps that we were talking about.  The camps were set with the structures that I just mentioned, but then they were all walled.  They had concrete--brick, concrete walls that were up about 12, 15 feet high all around the perimeter of the camp.  And then on top of the walls, there was glass embedded, cut glass, where they took bottles and things and just cut them up, and embedded them at the top of the walls, so if you tried to crawl over, you know, try to get a hold--and then on top of the glass was barbed wire.  So, that covered the perimeter.  And then at each corner, at each major corner of the wall, it had a guard tower.  And usually they have an armed guard sitting up in those towers.  So, they wanted to make sure that we did not escape.
Speaker 1: What was the food like?
Speaker 2: The food that we had was very, very--I call it very bad.  But it was very basic.  Um, usually if you had fish, it would be the old cod-type fish--scales, and maybe you might get the fish head or just a little piece of fish.  Um, and the other meat that they might have would be a little piece of pork sometime, or a little piece of chicken that they would mix into the main course that they served.  Now, each meal consisted usually of what we call a main dish--soup and bread or rice.  It was mostly rice.  For the first couple of years I was there, I only saw bread a few times.  But then as the Paris Peace Talks got underway and the bombings relaxed some, we would see more bread.  But, you would get a little bowl, maybe about six inches in diameter, six or seven inches in diameter and three inches deep--well, about two and a half inches deep.  You would get that bowl kind of level, covered with rice.  And then you would get a bowl about that size or a little smaller than the one I just described with the rice, of some kind of watery soup.  Uh, normally it might be bamboo soup or collards or cabbage or something like that.  And you wouldn't get much substance there.  You'd get just a few pieces of solid, but mostly watery stuff.  And then if you got a side dish we call it, the side dish would be maybe something that was steamed or fried like the fish, and it would be on a dish.  But you'd only get a very small portion of that, maybe a couple of tablespoons full if it were something like--they might take potatoes or they might take cabbage, and they would steam them or smother them and put maybe just a little piece of pork in it, or fat.  And if you got any kind of meat at all (laughter), you felt that was a treat, because when they would dish it up, you know, you may or may not get any meat.
Story_ID: 32997
Speaker 1: Now, we felt that the food was terrible.  And you were fed twice a day, about 9:00 or 10:00 in the morning and then again about 4:00 in the evening.  But lots of time the meager portions that you received, you would be just about as hungry at the end of the second meal as you were before the first meal, but then you're going to have to wait another 18 hours or so, 15 or 18 hours, before you got your next meal.  Um, so, but, but, what it was, even though it was terrible--I think during the first year and a half I was there, the first two years or so, I think got down to about 110 pounds.  And normally I weighed about 150 pounds, 150 or so forth.  And with that food--and I ate just about everything that I received.  Some of the fellow prisoners couldn't handle the country, agrarian, or the basic food because they had not been used to eating that.  I grew up on a farm.  We sharecropped, and you know, whatever moved or didn't move, we'd eat it if were edible.  So, I didn't have a problem with the food we were getting, it was just the amount, as far as I was concerned.  But some of the fellow prisoners couldn't handle it.  It messed up their stomachs.  They got Beriberi, they got sick, and some of them just wouldn't eat it.  Some of them got down to skin and bones just about.  But, um, I got down to what I would guess was about 110. And then after the Paris Peace Talks started in 1969, and after Ho Chi Minh died in September, 1969, they improved our treatment, because they thought that we probably would be released some day, and they didn't want us to come out of there looking too bad.  So, by the time I was repatriated in 1973, my weight was back up to, about, close to 150, but it wasn't a healthy weight.  But they increased our rice rations and we were getting more bread and stuff like that, so I was able to--and they even let us exercise a little bit during the last few years there.  During the first couple years there, they wouldn't let you move around in the cell.  They wouldn't let you exercise, because they thought you were scheming or something.  And I think that affected our health as well, yes.
Speaker 2: Now that caused you to be weaker, I guess?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes it did.  Now, speaking of the food. Even though we thought it was terrible and garbage, uh, we found that, we found out after, I guess after the Paris Peace Talks started as time went on when they started improving our food, that we were eating just as good as they were.  They weren't eating all that well.  Now, they probably got more of it, but in terms of, terms of feeding us bad stuff and them O.K. stuff, we were eating basically the same thing.  It's just that they were able to eat as much as they wanted, uh, probably.
Story_ID: 32998
Speaker 1: And so, from that point of view, we were fortunate.  The American prisoners held over in North Vietnam were fortunate.  Um, the American flyers captured in South Vietnam and the few that went down in Laos, they weren't that fortunate, because in those places they didn't have the food to feed them.  They were on the run themselves, for the most part.  But I think Ho Chi Minh had put out the policy, uh, because he was president of North Vietnam--passed away in September, 1969.  Ho Chi Minh had been a prisoner of the French.  And uh, life was kind of hard for him, and he knew how tough prison life could be.  He put the word out right after Alvarez was captured, Everett Alvarez, the first American captured over in North Vietnam, Gulf of Tonkin Incident, August 1964.  Ed was there for about seven months by himself before any other American flyers were captured and brought in.  Because, from the Gulf of Tonkin Incident until the first part of 1965--so, from August, '64' [1964] to early '65' [1965], the United States, under President Johnson's leadership, they were trying to decide, you know, the significance of the Gulf of Tonkin Incident and whether or not we should start an air war over in North Vietnam.  But, in early 1965, the decision was made to start the air war over North Vietnam, and that's when we started having more and more Americans shot down and captured.  February, March, April, and then on.  We had a lull in the fighting from late '65' [1965] until early 1966, when the late President Johnson was trying to get Ho Chi Minh and the North Vietnamese to come to the negotiating table.  But since they wouldn't come to terms, we started the bombing back, uh, in early 1966, and we were really on a heavy bombing span during 1966 and 1967.  But Everett--Everett, they treated him fairly decently.  And in fact, um, he was able to get Red Cross packages and he was able to converse with his family by letter.  But after the bombing started in earnest in early 1965, all that was cut down.  Ho Chi Minh had put the word out to his people.  He said, "If the American pirates--", p-i-r-a-t-e-s, not p-i-l-o-t-s.  "If the American pirates are captured, don't kill them, but make them suffer."  Ho Chi Minh knew how tough prison life could be, but he also knew how valuable, how much Americans valued life.  And he knew that the American prisoners would be pawns and good negotiating tools.  So, he wanted to keep us alive, but he wanted us to suffer.  And we did suffer, there's no question about it.  Uh, until Ho Chi Minh passed away in September, 1969, we were treated very, very badly.  I mean torture, harassment, uh, food deficiencies.  If we had continued to be treated after 1969 the way we were treated before 1969, a lot of us that came back in 1973 would not have made it through.
Story_ID: 32999
Speaker 1: But anyway, some of the prisoners didn't know that Ho Chi Minh had put that word out.  And in 1965, 1966, even '67' [1967], as some of our planes went down and some of our fighting men and women were captured, some of them--I'm sure that we lost some of them, maybe not a lot, but I'm sure we lost some of them because they felt, well, if they're going to kill me anyway, if I'm going to die anyway, hey, I'm not going to be captured, I'm not going to be taken alive, I'm going to fight it out.  Now, one fellow that I know, John Pittsford, he was an F-105 pilot from Mississippi, shot down in 1965.  When John was shot down, um, the Vietnamese started converging on him, to capture him.  And he took his .38 pistol which was part of his pilot gear, and he shot one of them point blank.  He said he was sure he killed him.  But they shot back at him and shot right through the muscle part of one of his arms, just destroyed the muscle, but they captured him.  But, see, he didn't know that they were going to, you know, capture him alive.  And his arm was in a sling for the whole seven years or more that he was there.  In fact, when we came back, you know, he was still--they had an old cloth sling around his arm to keep it up, to keep it from dangling.  But a lot of the--I'm sure we lost some American flyers because they figured, hey, I'm going to die anyway, so I'm going to try to shoot it out, to make it out.  And they didn't make it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, uh, after 1969 did you hear from your family?  Did you--
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.  What happened, I did not hear from my family at all, uh, from the time I was shot down and captured, July 12, 1966, until it was close to Christmas of 1969.  Uh, Ho Chi Minh passed away in 1969, September, 1969, and our treatment significantly improved.  Ah, we were given better rations and we were allowed to exercise and even allowed to, you know, touch base and communicate with other prisoners on a limited basis.  Um, part of that improvement was that we were allowed to receive letters and packages from home, and also allowed to write six-line letters home.  And, maybe periodically, about every two months or so, I would hear something from the family.  The first time I heard from my family, though, um, I got a letter from Virginia Beach, Virginia.  And my wife [Jean Carol Breeze McDaniel] was supposed to be in Greensboro, North Carolina.  And I'm looking here--What in the world is this letter doing from Virginia Beach?  Why have they moved there?"  Well, it turned out that when I got into it, the letter was not for me.  The package, it was a little package and a six-line letter.  It was not for me.  One of my fellow prisoner's name was Eugene McDaniel.  Eugene, Red McDaniel they called him, the Navy, okay.  His wife was in Virginia Beach.  They got the packages mixed up.  They gave me his package.  And so it wasn't until we finagled around and I finally convinced them, you know, that it was not my letter, although they wouldn't take the package contents back.  So, Red and I, he lives down in Mount Vernon, Virginia here now, just south of Washington.  And we joked lots of times, because I ended up eating whatever he had, whatever was in his package, and I, I don't know if he got mine or not.  But that was kind of comical.
Story_ID: 33000
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I have here that in '71' [1971], your wife received a three minute tape of you?
Speaker 2: Ah, I'm not sure if she received that tape--.  Oh, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes.  Okay, okay.  Um, what happened, I think--did I tell you how my wife found out I was alive?  Uh, where they would make propaganda at Christmas time and allow you to have Christmas services-- they would allow prisoners from the different buildings to come, uh, into the little, I guess the camp commander's interrogation room, a big interrogation room, and have a Christmas service.  And, uh, they would let you have that Christmas service for the purpose of making propaganda.  They would take pictures and send those pictures to France and other places, to show how well we were being treated.  But it was just propaganda.  Now, it turned out, the first time I got to go one of those services was 1967.  I didn't get to go in '66' [1966], but in 1967, I went.  Through covert means--the senior ranking officer--we passed the word that if your name has not been released, if you question whether or not your family or the U.S. knows that you're alive here, go ahead and attend one of those services or meeting.  Because, even though the North Vietnamese are making propaganda on this, it will benefit the U.S. and us to know that you're out.  Because once your name got out, or once your face got out, they would be less likely to kill you or to get rid of you, okay.  So, in 1967 I was allowed to go one of these Christmas services.  They would pull one or two from the different buildings, and in some cases that was the only time you got to see the other person during the whole year, or even, you know, make some kind of communication with them.  So, that was another thing.  When we went to those Christmas services we didn't do a whole lot of worshiping, you know.  We gave it mouth service, lip service, but it was mostly communicating.  You know, we were exchanging--and other stuff.  So, it was good for us, even though it made propaganda for them.  In 1967 when I was allowed to go to one of those, they took the photos and sent them back, sent them to France.  And then France of course, would send them to the U.S. and our casualty resolution people started looking into it.  And they saw mine, and they thought it was me, so they sent it to my wife and wanted her to confirm it.  And she confirmed it.  She said yeah that's him.  But, because it wasn't a good picture, they sent that same picture to several other black African-American families--their sons or their husbands or what not, and they'd say, "Is this your loved one?"  Just about all of them would say, "Yep, yep, yep, yep, yep.  That's him."  So, it turned out they had to go back and forth and really dig into it to confirm it.  But that was one way.  Now, after the Paris Peace Talks started, and this I think is the result of that, um, they started letting us exercise a little bit, and again, some of that was for propaganda purposes.  They even in 19--, it might have been around '71' [1971], they let some of us, the one we called the "pig sty," they let--there were about 20 of us in this particular building in different rooms, about five in a room, about a five room building.  And they would let us out in the courtyard once or twice a week to exercise, and they even let us play basketball.  And I think that's when they took some pictures and they sent my wife a little bit of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's the video tape?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: NBC, I guess got hold of--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, that's right, that's right.
Story_ID: 33001
Speaker 1: So, by 1973 you had been in captivity for--when they finally released you, you'd been in captivity for 2,399 days.
Speaker 2: Yes, over six and a half years, over six and a half years.  And we used to, we used to count the days pretty closely, but then it got so, after a while it got so lonely we stopped counting days.  And we just started looking at it from a year to year point of view.  Um, we were always optimistic, never lost confidence, never lost optimism.  Sometimes the optimism wasn't too high.  But what would happen is we always thought that we would be out of there before long.  Now, when I was shot down and captured, before I was shot down and captured, I figured this was is going to drag on and on, and on and on, and on and on.  And, my objective was to go to Takhli Air Base, fly my 100th mission and come back to the States and press on with life.  At that time the people in my squadron were getting the 100 missions completed in eight or nine months.   The policy at that time was that you would go to South East Asia, fly 100 combat missions and return to the States, or you would stay for a one-year tour, whichever came first.  Most of the people get in the missions in eight or nine months, so I figured I'd be here for eight or nine months and I'm out of here.  Well, when I was shot down and captured, it's amazing how your perspective changes when your situation changes.  Now, before I'm thinking, this war is going to drag on and on and on.  Soon as I'm captured, interrogated, and tortured, I'm thinking, oh, man this thing's got to be over pretty soon.  I mean, we got to get this thing over here, so I can get back.  Oh, man.  And so I'm thinking, this thing's got to be over soon.  But it didn't happen the first year, the second year, the third year.  We got to the point where we would always, at the beginning of the year, we'd say, hey, this thing is going to come to a conclusion, and sometime this year, we're going to be out of here by Christmas.
Speaker 1: Just as a historical reference, World War I lasted four years.  World War II lasted four years--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --and the Civil War lasted four years--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --there's been a--you know, the Korean Conflict, two years--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So, why would anybody think it would last any longer than that?
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.  That's exactly right, that's exactly right, yes, yes.  And so, we were kind of expecting it.  But after a couple or three years, we started saying each time--at the first of the year, we'd say well, we'll be out of here by Christmas, we'll be out of here by Christmas.  And that's what helped to keep us going.  I think a lot of us, if we had known going in the first day we were captured that we would be there as long as we were, a lot of the fellow prisoners who survived may not have.  They might have just thrown up their hands.  But, because of that optimism, "It won't be long, it won't be long", so forth, so forth, so forth, it kept giving us a little extra hope to hang in there.  I think another thing too, that helped us.  And I always say this when I speak to groups, is that realizing and believing that our fellow Americans had not forgotten us; that they were rooting for us, that they were doing their best to try to get us out of there.  That helped to keep us going.  I think that any of the prisoners, when they were first captured, if they felt oh, the U.S. has forgotten about us, I mean the people have gone on about their lives, I think a lot of the guys would have just given up.  But knowing that hey, our fellow Americans are standing behind us, they want us out of here, they're working to try to get us out of here, that kept us going as well.
Story_ID: 33002
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you said after '69' [1969], your treatment improved a little bit and you got more food and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did your body heal up?  I mean today do you still suffer any of the effects of torture and the captivity?
Speaker 2: Yes, to some degree.  Yes, yes.  Uh, we, after our treatment improved in 1969--from 1969 until we came back, again, we, a lot of us didn't get significantly worse off than we were.  Ah, jungle itch and vitamin deficiencies and, uh, some things of that nature.  Stress, those things, were some of the results of our long incarceration.  But in terms of the Vietnamese not being as hard on us, and us surviving after 1969, it made that a little easier.  Now, ah, when we came back, because of the food deficiencies, vitamin deficiencies, etc., uh, we were examined very closely--physically, mentally and so forth, when we came back.  And because of the food deprivation and the nutritional deficiencies, one of the things that was found when we got back, and they checked us out, was that our bone structure, uh, calcium deficiency, had aged much faster than our contemporaries.  For instance, I was in my thirties when I came back.  My bone structure was like someone in their sixties or seventies.  And as a whole group, that's the way it was.  Now, what happened was the Air Force and the Navy have kept records of us, physically and emotionally after coming back.  When we came back, the Air Force was doing all of it's physical exams at Brooks Air Force Base in San Antonio, Texas.  And they invited us each year to undergo a real strict evaluation, so they could track.  They also, the Navy was doing their evaluations at Pensacola Naval Station [Florida].  Now, after about ten years, the Air Force decided to stop doing theirs at Brooks, but to work with the Navy.  And so, the Air Force people now go to Brooks, go to Pensacola, along with the Navy folks, but they keep a track of all of the ex-POWs as a group medically.  But also, they started tracking a group of Vietnam veterans--flyers, contemporaries of ours who were not POWs [Prisoners-of-war].  So they have that group and they have us, and they compare the two groups over time to see what changes and things are taking place.  But, that vitamin deficiency and nutrition, that's one thing that's definitely different.  The stress, uh, and the uncertainty and the tension and stuff, that's another one.  A lot of us have a lot of arthritis.  A lot of us have all kinds of things that come from stress, incarceration, and some from torture.  And what happens is they continue to do that.  I was down in Pensacola [Florida] just back in April for an ex-POW physical.  I try to get down about once every other year.  I don't try to go every year, but every other year.  And they've come up with some good information.  They've done studies and published some results that will help our military men and women who are in service now.  And if some of them should ever find themselves in that situation, they would have a better idea of what to expect.
Story_ID: 33003
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you're currently 70--?
Speaker 2: I'm 74.  If the good Lord blesses me to see July 27, I'll be 75.  And I consider myself one of the, I call it one of the lucky of the unlucky.  Back around 2000, 2002, there was an OSD, Officer of the Secretary of Defense, Public Affairs guy, that did a little story on me when I was working down at the Defense Acquisition University at Fort Belvior, Virginia.  And the article was, the article was titled "One of the Lucky of the Unlucky."  Now, I call myself one of the lucky of the unlucky, but really I call myself, fortunately, blessed by God.  Um, if it had not been for the grace of God, I wouldn't be sitting here speaking today.  In terms of things that got me through that incarceration, that helped me to survive it, um, first was that faith in God and his strength that pulled me through.  Second, was my love of country, my oath of office and my determination to remain true and loyal to my country and to my fellow Americans.  Third thing was my family.  The year I left, of course, I thought I was making all the big decisions, you know, the wife depending on me and all that.  She was probably making them, but I was just, you know, thought I was, I was feeling it.  But here, two small children, wife [Jean Carol Breeze McDaniel], in the prime of life, hey, I got to get back to them.  And lots of times when the torture got so tough that I didn't think I could take another moment, somewhere deep down I reached down, I've got to get back to them, and I'd hang in there just long enough to endure it.  Um, and the fourth thing that helped was faith in my fellow prisoners and commitment to them.  We were in it together.  We knew the enemy was trying to exploit, trying to divide and conquer, and I didn't want to let them down.  And we felt that we needed to help each other.  So, those were the sources of strength that helped me through that long incarceration, times when I didn't think I would live to see another moment.  The greatest one by far, the greatest one by far, was that faith in God.  Now, I had accepted Christ at the age of twelve, at an old country church down in Fayetteville, North Carolina.  They had annual revival meetings down there.  God touched my life, saved me, and I never have been the same since.  And in my teen years, my college years and early years in the military, we'd go to church.  We'd try to do the right thing, tried to start family, right.  So, I'm here now flying my missions over North Vietnam, out of Thailand.  And for some reason, on every mission that we would take off on, that old EB-66C underpowered engine, Man, it would take off the runway, "Brrrrrrrrr."  Oh man, and man you're just kind of trying to pull that thing up.  "Come on up, come on up, come on up."  Finally, near the end of runway, it would get airborne.  "Whew", breathe a sign of relief, "Airborne."  But when we would take off, my prayer always was "Lord, if something should happen to me, please take care of my family."  A strange prayer in a way.  You would think I would be praying, Lord get me through this mission and get me back, you know, on the ground so I can finish up and get back to my family.  But that prayer was "Lord if anything should happen to me, please take care of my family."  I tell you what, when you're trusting in the Lord, God through Jesus Christ, the Holy Spirit indwells in you the things that you aren't even aware of.  And I'm sure in retrospect, that was the Holy Spirit interceding and preparing me and helping me to be able to deal with that situation.  Now, when I found myself a POW [Prisoner-of-war] there, first thing I'm thinking, "Lord get me out of here, get me out of here.  Hey, you know, I haven't been a bad person and, you know, and my wife and my family need me.  Get me out of here."  It didn't happen the first day, the second day, the first week, second week, first month, second month, first year, second year.  I said, "Lord, what's happening?  What's happening?"  I had a crisis of faith.  Here I was asking God and expecting him to answer my prayers and they weren't being answered the way that I wanted them.  So, I struggled with that.  And I was there for over two years, over two years, before I finally accepted, well maybe, just maybe it might be God's will that I never leave here alive in the human mortal frame, that I may go from here into eternity.  Ummm, tough.  Now, it's interesting.  But a human being--it's one thing to accept something, understand it and accept it intellectually, mentally.  It's a whole different ballgame to accept it in your heart.
Story_ID: 33004
Speaker 1: It's one thing to accept something and understand something mentally and intellectually.  It's a whole different thing to accept it in your heart.  Now, even after I accepted intellectually and mentally that hey, I might never get back to the U.S., never get back to my family, might die right here from torture, from deprivation, from whatever--I don't know how long it was, but it was some period of time that I struggled with that. Because, even though I had accepted it intellectually, I had not accepted it in my heart.  When I did, though, when I did accept it in my heart, I gained a great sense of peace.  I realized a closeness to God that I had never realized before, and that I have never lost since.  When I accepted it in my heart, I realized that well, this life is passing.  Even if lived to be 100 or 150 years old, this life is just a flash in the eternity of time.  And so, I'm just passing through.  And, if I believe the Bible, if I believe scripture, that I will be better off--we'll be better off if we're trusting in God at the time that we draw our last breath--after we leave this world, much more than we are here.  Not only that, but just as He promised to take care of me, He will take care of my family.  So, I can be at peace that He will provide in some way.  He will take care of my family, because I'm trusting in him.  And I'll tell you, it has made a big difference in my life since.  There's a maturity of faith that causes me, in a lot of cases, to not sweat the little things.  A lot of people around here worry about oh, the weather, what I'm eating, what I'm wearing, oh, you know, I don't have enough money.  Let me tell you.  Most of that stuff is not on the Lord's level.  Most of it is down at the lowest level, okay.  If you have the right faith, if you try to live the right life, if you're treating your fellow men and women right, the Lord will provide, the Lord will provide.  1st Corinthians 10:13--2nd Corinthians 10:13, says "There's no temptation taken to you but such that is common to man, but God is faithful and will not suffer you to be tempted above that which you're able, but will, with the temptation, also provide a way to escape, that you'll be able to bear it."  That means in so many words, that nothing will happen to you that has not already happened to somebody, and God knows what you're under.  He's not going to let you undergo more than you can handle.  So, rest assured.  Now, having said that, um, then, uh, uh, when, when I was there, I didn't worry a whole lot about the physical stuff.  Yeah, we only had one change of clothing, and the meager meals and stuff.  It was mostly the person to person, people, communications, family, that I missed most.  And that was reinforced as well.  Even today, I put a lot more value on relationships and people than I do on things.
Story_ID: 33005
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what I want to ask you now is, how do you--I think before we discussed this somewhere in the last session, about how you felt when they finally released you, when they finally--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, we did discuss that.
Speaker 1: When did you--yeah, you said that you were sort of numb when you finally were released.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: You didn't feel extreme elation.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Well, was it because there was so much discipline, and I guess over the six years, that--
Speaker 2: Well, no, it wasn't just, uh, me.  Uh, in terms of feelings during release, what happened was, as a prisoner being incarcerated, tortured, you had to control your feelings.  The Vietnamese were very image conscious.  If they were interrogating you or trying to pressure you or torture you for information, if they felt that you were trying to be cooperative, if you were giving them as much as you knew, they wouldn't be nearly as hard on you, and wouldn't torture you as long, as bad, as they would if they thought you were stubbornly resisting them.  So, with that in mind, you had to really control your emotions.  You couldn't show a lot of anger, you couldn't show a lot of you know, hey, I'm going to resist you so and so's to the very end, you know.  You're not going to get anything out of me.  So, having to control those emotions for so long, the old saying, I lost touch with my feelings.  Because when we were called out into the courtyard in late January, 1973, and told by the Vietnamese camp commander through an interpreter--and this was part of the agreements in Paris [France] that the prisoners would be notified that they were going to released.  And through that interpreter, the camp commander said that the fighting and cease agreement had been reached, and that we would be released.  You would think that everybody--and they called three or four hundred of us out there, and all of us weren't in the exact same camp, but two or three hundred of us were.  And you would think everybody would just say, "Hey, hey, Hallelujah, hey, hey," and just be floored and just slapping.  And--no, no--you heard little grunt here, a little [clearing throat sound] there, but no real exhilaration.  We were kind of like the men from Missouri.  You got to show me.  Because we had had so many ups and downs, you know, the Tet Offensive, uh, Son Tay, and the--  And so, we'd had so many ups and downs until, hey, say, you got to show me.  So, when we came out of there, when I came out of there on February 12, 1973, um, and got to the Philippines, flew to the Philippines, during the initial debriefing I was told--
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, I didn't want to interrupt you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's alright.
Speaker 1: --but I want to ask you like, now, then this is something that I don't think anybody really thinks about, but how did they do that?  Did the Vietnamese, how did they present you back to the American--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, okay.
Speaker 1: Did they abandon you somewhere--
Speaker 2: Okay, got you, got you.
Speaker 1: --or did they take you with a medical ward or, how did they--
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.  When, when, when we were told uh, as I said, when we were told that we were going to be released, you know, then we found out over the next few days, um, that we were going to be released in groups of about 125 at a time, based on when we were shot down and captured, starting from--the one held the longest would be released first--to the one captured last would be released last.   And so, the plan was to group us off into roughly 125 each, and, uh, then we were going to Gia Lam Airport in Hanoi [Vietnam] and fly out of Gia Lam Airport.
Story_ID: 33006
Speaker 1: Okay.  We were released in groups of 125 in 1973, between February and April.  And, uh, we were released in the order of capture.  Those captured first were released first, those captured last were released last.  Well, the first release was from Everett Alvarez, August, 1964, the Gulf of Tonkin Incident, to Ken North, an F-105 pilot that was shot down in September of 1966.  That put my crew, these five members of my crew, about 12 or so, from the end of that group, from the last part of that group.  It turned out when we found out that we were included in that first group, we also discovered that some of the fellow prisoners who had some illnesses or some long-standing things wrong with them who needed to come out with the very first group that came out, were not included in that list.  They just took them strictly by the date of shoot down and capture.  So, we were a little bold then.  We felt we could argue with the captains a little bit. (laughter).  So, we started agitating for them to add those people to the list who needed to come out first, um, since a lot of them were not included on that list.  So, what the North Vietnamese did, instead of just benevolently adding those to the list, for each person they added to the list, they took one off.  So, a couple of days before we were actually released, uh, they had cut my crew in half.  Uh, three of us came back with the first group on February 12, 1973.  The other group came back, the other two came back about ten days later with the next group.  Now, one of the things that upset the pilot, our aircraft commander Bill Means, was that he said "Well, we all went down together, and we all should come back together."  But that's the way we came back.  Now, when we were released, we were taken from the prison camp, uh, early on the morning of release, to Gia Lam Airport which is the airport there in Hanoi [Vietnam].  And then the United States--uh, North Vietnam allowed the United States military to fly C-141 medical evacuation planes into Gia Lam Airport to pick us up, to take us back.  So, we all were bussed from the prison camp to Gia Lam Airport.  And then, uh, there was a little exchange table set up.  You had the Vietnamese on one side, and the U.S. on the other side.  And so, as the Vietnamese would identify us and call our names, and make the marks on the record, then they would hand us over to the Americans.  I will never will forget the full colonel, I forget his name, but I never will forget the face.  Boy, one of the faces I liked more than anything I ever saw in the world.  It was just such a nice thing, to see a friendly face.  So, uh, then they handed us over to the U.S., shook our hands, put us on the plane and then we flew out.  There were three planeloads that came out in that first group of 125, and, uh, it wasn't until we broke ground heading out of Gia Lam back to the Philippines, that we really felt like we were out of there.  Now, when we took off, everybody was quiet.  And then when the plane got airborne, everybody just yelled.  The nurses and the medics were all happy to see us.  Now, again, uh, I participated in the euphoria and all that, and the celebration, but I didn't feel anything.  I knew we were coming out, but I didn't feel a thing.  So, when we got to the Philippines, what happened was we landed at the Philippines.  They kept us at the Philippines, in the Philippines, at the hospital at Clark Air Base, for two, three, four days depending on what your medical situation was.  They wanted to check, evaluate you, see if you didn't have any contagious diseases, see that you weren't so crazy that they couldn't bring you back to the States, and all that.  And then after two or three days there, depending on the individual, they then flew us on back to the States by way of Hawaii.
Story_ID: 33007
Speaker 1: So, I was there for four days before I came back to the States.  Now, while I was there, during some of the initial de-briefings, the medical evaluations, I learned, was told that my father died in 1968.  I heard it, but I didn't feel it.  Also, I was told that my youngest sister, uh, had died in 1968.  I heard it, but I didn't feel it.  I lost touch with my feelings, had to control my emotions.  And it was several months later as those feelings began to come back that I really broke down and cried over the loss of my father and my sister.  But, what happened then was we came on back, and there were a number of bases around the United States where they brought the ex-POWs, depending on where your home was.  Some of us came into Andrews Air Force Base [Maryland].  Some came into Scott Air Force Base [Illinois].  I think some came in, I believe, Fairchild Air Force Base [Washington].  And there was a base either west-over--one of the bases up in New England.  But there were five or six bases around the country where we came in.  All of us initially though, came from the Philippines into Travis.  And then from Travis, and then we were flown to those different bases in the U.S.  It was very interesting.  There's a nice picture that was taken when I landed at Travis there.  A major in the Air Force--we were promoted along with our contemporaries, incidentally.  If our records were okay when we came up missing in action, then we were promoted with our contemporaries.  So, when I was shot down, I was a young captain.  When I was released, I was a senior major.  Uh, but anyway, then when we came to these bases in the U.S., myself, Greg Sure and a number of the guys from Virginia, Fort Smith, Virginia, uh, they gave us de-briefings and all that kind of stuff and checked us medically.  When we were determined to be okay to go home, then they flew us by T-39 aircraft, they flew us to our homes wherever they were.  So, I was here for about a week in Andrews Air Force Base and then flew on down to Greensboro, North Carolina where the mayor of the city and everybody greeted us.  That's where my wife and family were living at the time.  From then on it was a matter of kind of getting back in the groove of things, getting re-adjusted.  Uh, there was no push on us by the part of the military for us to get back into uniform, to really start working right away.  What happened was they let each person kind of determine what their situation was.  Some of the fellows wanted to get right back into flying, and some of them wanted to kind of take it easy for awhile.  There were a few who actually wanted to change, change careers--not change careers, but change specialties.  We had some of the guys who were shot down as navigators, as pilots and co-pilots.  And a few of them wanted to go into the ministry.  Some of them wanted to go into medicine, uh, and there were a couple of other things.  And one of the very, very positive things, one of the very good things, was that the Department of Defense, and the services were very amenable to helping us to get into whatever we wanted to get into.  Naturally, I wanted to stay in service and get back to flying and what not.  And I take my hat off to the Department of Defense and all the military services for helping the ex-POWs [Prisoners-of-war] to re-adjust and to really have a smooth transition, even though in a lot cases it wasn't easy, based on the background.
Story_ID: 33008
Speaker 1: I have a question.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Not to interrupt you--
Speaker 2: Uh huh, now, that's okay.
Speaker 1: The question is what do you credit, uh, I mean, I guess, what helps you the most in terms of making your re-adjustments, in terms of civilian life, after this traumatic experience?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  Uh, the question is what was most helpful, what helped me most to re-adjust and move on with life after coming back from such a traumatic experience.  In fact, the book I wrote, "Yet Another Voice", I have a chapter in there called Resurrection.  And, um, it has to do with coming back, being released from North Vietnam and trying to get your life back together.  And to me, when I titled that chapter Resurrection, it's kind of being, coming out of hell back to real life.  But what helped me most to re-adjust I think, was that continuity.  Continuity of family, continuity of family.  What happened, is, um, the Department of Defense and the services, they did their best to help us by having our families--if there was a friend or a person that we wanted to see, that we wanted to be with us as soon as we came out, they did their utmost to have that person there, available.  Also, they arranged for us to have somebody who was a contemporary of ours who had the same kind of career up to the point that we were shot down and captured, to kind of be our escort for about the first week, to answer questions, to kind of help us to get back into the groove of things.  So, we had those assistances.  But the thing to me that was most important, and I think to a lot of the ex-POWs [Prisoners-of-war], was that continuity of family.  The ex-POWs whose families were there when they went down and were captured and lost, and who were there when they came back, they seemed to adjust as a group better than the ones--maybe the family was broke up or things didn't turn out too well family wise while they were away.  There were some divorces while the fellows were in prison, because of the long incarceration.  And for the most part, the fellows felt, um, kind of, felt sympathetic toward that, because it was very tough on the families.  Over there in the prison camps we knew what we were facing.  It was survive, return with honor, remain true and faithful and loyal to your country.  I mean, that was it.  Stay alive to fight again another day.  Back here, the families, hey, life goes on.  People living normal lives and stuff like that, and I'm sure for a lot of families it was much tougher on the family than it was on the fellows themselves.  In fact, my wife [Jean Carol Breeze McDaniel], when she, after two years when she found out I was alive--in limbo for two years not knowing if I was dead or alive--she said in some cases after she found out I was alive, it was just as tough on her as it was before she found out.  Because now, she said now that I know he's alive, will he stay alive?  Will they torture him to death?  Will they kill him?  Will something happen before he gets back?  So, again, the thing that helped most, was that continuity of family, and I just, I'm very thankful for my family.  My wife did a super job of keeping me alive in the children's mind while I was away.  Although the son was almost four when I left, he recognized, he kind of remembered me somewhat.  But the daughter, all she knew of me was what the wife told her, because she didn't remember anything much.  And in a way, in terms of the re-adjustments to the family, it was easier for me to re-adjust to my son than it was for my--I mean it was easier for my son to re-adjust to me than it was for my daughter to re-adjust to me.  What happened was when we came back, during the first few weeks, you know, everybody's happy and jolly and glad to see each other.  So, you know, the children are doing some things that weren't quite right, that needed some correction, you know.  Ole' Dad kind of let them pass because, you know, everybody's glad to be back.  But after a few weeks, you start seeing some little disciplinary things that needed correcting there.  And so Dad started kind of putting his foot down a little bit.
Story_ID: 33009
Speaker 1: Well, naturally, the wife [Jean Carol Breeze McDaniel] and I--just again, I thank the Lord for her everyday, just honor her, and so thankful that she was there and that's she still there, and we have a very great relationship now.  Um, it was that she was just a little bit overly-protective of them, and in some cases, a little too lenient.  And, uh, she said sometimes at night when I was away she used to worry a lot and lay sleepless, worrying about if she let something happen to one of the children, when I came back, I would fault her for it.  So, in some cases she wouldn't let the son do things that a normal boy would do, you know, scrub his knees and get a few skins and take a few chances and stuff like that.  And so, when I came back, then, because the son--before I left, when I would cut the grass with my lawnmower, he'd have his little push mower when he was three, and we'd go around.  So, after I started correcting them, at first neither one wanted to receive the discipline.  But the son after a few weeks, he started accepting it and we kind of got it back together.  The daughter, when I started disciplining her, she started rebelling.  And it wasn't until she was about a sophomore in college before we really got it back together and she really started accepting my discipline.  Because even though I would put a pretty firm hand down, she would still want to do things her way.  One time when she was a teenager, she was in high school, and there was some place she wanted to go, or something she wanted to do.  But whatever it was, it was definitely not appropriate.  And I got right in her face, and I said "No."  I say, "You will not do that, because I'm your father."  Boy, she took one step back, put her hands on her hips and she said, "I don't have a father."  And she was serious.  I think somewhere in her mind--they lived in Greensboro, North Carolina while I was away, and they went to Greensboro Day School--and I think she probably saw the other children with their dads around sometime, and so, where's my mine?  She probably felt, you know, I don't have a dad.  And so, that carried through.  But, she was a sophomore in college when I think she began to realize, well, you know, maybe some of these things the old man is saying aren't so bad.  Maybe Dad's not so dumb after all.  And we started getting it back together after that, and it's just been better and better ever since.  And in fact, just Father's Day, the other day there, she sent me a nice little booklet with some of the things that she felt and some of her perceptions, and I mean, some nice gifts.  And she's just a jewel.  I'm just so thankful for both her and the son and the wife.
Story_ID: 33010
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, one other thing.  When you came back, you went to college.  You went to the Armed Forces Staff College?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And then you got your master's degree in 1975.
Speaker 2: Florida Institute of Technology.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and the Air Force School of Technology in Florida, right?
Speaker 2: Right, that's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, now, what did you--uh, it says you published a novel about your experiences in Vietnam.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (inaudible).
Speaker 2: That's right, right.
Speaker 1: And, uh, then you launched another part of your career.  You did some systems programming work.
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: Then I think you finally settled into a career of training Air Force staff in terms of how to handle, you know, stress--
Speaker 2: Ah, well, well, well, no, no, not really handling stress.  It was more just training air crew members, yes.  But, but, but would you like me to run through a little of that?
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Um, now after coming back and spending a month or forty-five days of rest and recuperation, we did some de-briefing at Andrews and all that kind of stuff.  And then I went home to Greensboro, North Carolina where my wife was living at the time, and the children.  And, uh, I was there for a number of weeks.  Then after that, to get back into the groove of things, most of the men and women who were repatriated wanted to stay in the military.  They had a choice to either get out, separate or get out.  But most of us wanted to stay in, because again the Department of Defense was doing its utmost to try to help us to re-adjust and to keep on with our careers, or to change into some other disciplines, if we'd like to stay in the services.  Um, and so I chose to stay in.  Uh, at my years in service, it was appropriate for me to go to what they call intermediate professional military service school.  You have squadron officer school for the junior officer, and you have Armed Forces Staff College, Air Commander Staff College for the intermediate officers.  These are young majors and regular majors.  And then you have your senior service schools.  Uh, the Naval War College, the Air War college, the Industrial College of the Armed Forces, and those are the schools for the senior officers.  So, in order to get back in the groove of things before getting back into operations assignment, I went to the Armed Forces Staff College in Norfolk, Virginia.  Ah, and that was a very good assignment.  In fact, fortunately, while I was there, Admiral Denton, Jerry Denton, he was a Navy captain, a fellow ex-POW [Prisoner-of-war], and he made admiral.  And he was the president of the armed forces staff college, or the commandant of the air forces staff college when I went there.  Now, also right from the armed forces staff college, I wanted to get some additional education.
Story_ID: 33011
Speaker 1: So, I was able to go through the Air Force Institute of Technology to pursue a master's degree in systems management at the Florida Institute of Technology.  And that was very, very beneficial because my background was in engineering.  But before I went to Vietnam I worked on the development of the F1-11 airplane as a manager of the Penetration A, a portion of that airplane's development.  So, with that master's in systems management, it was kind of appropriate for me to get into business in the Air Force continuing my career in what we call the systems acquisition business.  That's where you work on the development of airplane missiles, uh, equipment, chemical biological stuff.  So, I studied and received my master's at the Florida Institute of Technology between the summer of 1974 and the summer of 1975.  Upon graduating from there, I was assigned to Andrews Air Force Base in Camp Springs, Maryland, which is the Air Force systems command headquarters.  It was at that time.  And I was responsible for the development of air crew simulators, aircraft engines, chemical biological defense equipment.  I had a real good assignment there, and that's where I was promoted to the rank of full colonel.  And in getting promoted to the rank of full colonel, normally what you do is you get a chance to go to one of the senior service schools.  But because I was in the acquisition business, I had also signed up to go to the Defense Systems Management College, which was to help get you more into the acquisition system.  And since I was already in that assignment before I was promoted to colonel, they let me go ahead and go to Defense Systems Management College, which was very good.  And then I went on up to Newport, Rhode Island, to the Naval War College.  And it just so happened that at the time I was up there in the senior program for officers, it is Admiral Stockdale--Admiral Jim Stockdale, was the, he was the president of the Naval War College.  So, I got a chance to interact with him.  Some of my other fellow ex-POWs [Prisoners-of-war] were up there.  But what happens when you go to senior service school, normally they send the majority of a particular service member to their particular services school.  For instance, the Army would normally go to the Army War College in Carlise Barracks, Pennsylvania.  The Air Force would normally go the Air War College down in Montgomery, Alabama.  The Navy would normally go to the Navy War College.  But, they also select a certain number of those officers from the different services to go to the other services' school.  You got credit for that Senior Service School, but it was a good way to mix and kind of exchange ideas.  So, I was very fortunate in getting to go to the Naval War College, although I'm, you know, I'm Air Force.  And after coming back from that, then my assignment was to the Pentagon where I was head, I was the division head of the Congressional activities division and the acquisition policies division.  I was responsible for working for the Air Force research and development, all of the congressional inquiries, all of the preparations of the Three Stars to go before the hearings in terms of the authorization and the appropriations for monies that we needed for the development, and acquisition of our airplanes and our missiles, and things of that nature.  And then fortunately, um, I then was assigned to Howard University.  At that time, um, the Air Force was looking for an 06.  That's full colonel, black, Afro-American with combat experience, to take over the Air Force ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps unit at Howard University].  Dr. [James E.] Cheek was the president of Howard University at the time, and he had (laughter) a black colonel running his Army ROTC unit with combat experience, and he wanted an Air Force guy.  Because at the time, they just had a lieutenant colonel Air Force over there.
Speaker 2: Now, what year was this?
Speaker 1: This was 1981.
Speaker 2: 1981.
Speaker 1: Um hum.
Story_ID: 33012
Speaker 1: So you were at Howard University, 1981, teaching--you were in charge of the Air Force ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps]?
Speaker 2: Right, that's right, that's right.  At Howard University, 1981, I was assigned over to be the Commander of Air Force ROTC, Detachment 130 and also the professor of Aerospace Studies there.  And it turned out that Howard University has the only Air Force ROTC unit within the District of Columbia.  So my cadets, a Cadet Corp of about 170 cadets and students, it consisted of colleges students from Howard University, Georgetown University, Catholic University, George Washington University, and Trinity College and UDC [University of the District of Columbia].  So we had a very good mix of cadets, male, female, different races and groups.  And so we had a very, very good Cadet Corp.  Also, while I was there I was responsible for overseeing, to some degree, the Junior ROTC units, a number of them in Prince George's County.  So had some good affiliations there, and, of course, you had some good activities.  I think in terms of career progression, I was on my way to making a Star, being an 07, in terms of career progression, that assignment was the kiss of death.  There had never been a Colonel promoted out of Air Force ROTC to General Officer at that time.  They have done it since.  And I was supposed to be the one to do that.  But things change, and I won't go into the details, but some of my sponsors and higher ranking officers and things moved and changed, and things changed.  And it didn't happen.  Now, so career wise, that stopped me from moving on to 07 because if I had left the Pentagon and gone back to Wright-Patterson Air Force Base and taken over a big program office, that would have pushed me on up to 07.  But in terms of satisfaction, in terms of importance, in my estimation, in terms of impact on young people's lives, it was the most important, the most rewarding and worthwhile assignment that I ever had.  I'll give two quick examples, and then I'll quit.  Several years after I--well, actually, yes, several years after I retired, I was in the Pentagon, down on the concourse walking through.  And a young Major ran up to me and said, "Oh, Col. MCDANIEL".  And I looked around, and it was one of my female students from George Washington University.  She was a young Major, and she said, she said, sir, she said, I just wanna tell you how thankful I am for your help and your example.  She said, because I used to have to counsel her and get on her quite a bit to keep (laughter) her on track.  But she said, if it hadn't been for you, she said, I don't know where I'd be today.  She said, I just thank you so much for the influence that you had on my life.  Another young man, he--I saw him several years later.  And he was assigned to the Pentagon at the time.  I was down at Fort Belvoir [Virginia] working civil service at the time.  He actually had me come up and pin on his Major's rank for him.  He'd been in service about ten or eleven years.  And, and so it's examples like that.  There's another young man that was outstanding, and he went into the missionary field.  And, of course, we're still in touch.  He's been over in Africa doing all kinds of great things.  He's back in the states now doing a lot of good work.  But in terms of helping young people and influencing their lives, that was the most rewarding, I think, and in a lot of cases, the most important assignment that I had.
Story_ID: 33013
Speaker 1: How long were you--
Speaker 2: I was there for two years, and because, '81' [1981] to '83' [1983], because, again, some people changed that were supposed to move me on up in rank.  It didn't happen.  There were a couple of people in higher places who wanted me to move up, and they tried to help.  So for a Colonel in the Air Force, you had, you needed to be a Wing Commander or something equivalent to that if you're gonna hope to get a star.  So working with them, I received an assignment to be a Wing Commander of the Air Force Survival Training Wing out in Spokane, Washington.  And that was a very rewarding assignment.  You teach men and women, crew members and flyers in the art of survival in all kinds of environments and climatic conditions, arctic, desert, water and basic and all.  And that was a good assignment.  I was there for a couple of years, and that's when I was in what you say, the most primary zone for making one star.  And when that did not work out, then I wanted to get back to a command where I had some contacts and where I'd probably go to work in civilian life, which was in the acquisition business, the management, the leadership position.  And that's where I left the survival training wing in 1985 and was assigned back to Andrews Air Force Base [Maryland] where we worked on some technologies to help the Air Force to be better in the future.  And from there, my last active duty assignment then was at the Pentagon at OSD [Office of the Secretary of Defense] where I worked as an assistant deputy for the Under Secretary of Defense for International Programs.  And there, we handled foreign disclosure policy, export license and cooperative programs with other countries.  And that was a very good assignment too.  And that one is the one that kind of propelled me on to retirement in early 1988.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in '86' [1986] and unless I'm wrong, correct me, you received the Defense Superior Service Medal?
Speaker 2: Yeah--in nineteen eighty--
Speaker 1: Was that '86' [1986] or--
Speaker 2: That was '88' [1988].
Speaker 1: Eighty-eight [1988], okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, 1988.  That was upon retirement.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  All right, so that was in '88' [1988].
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Story_ID: 33014
Speaker 1: Now, since that time [retirement], you've been a consultant, right, to the--
Speaker 2: Well, I've, I--what happened was when I retired in 1988, I went to work for a defense contractor, a company called Automation Research Systems, down in Alexandria, Virginia.  And I worked, I supported the test and evaluation part of the Strategic Defense Initiative Organization for a couple of years.  And that was from '88' [1988] till '90' [1990], and then in '90' [1990], early '91' [1991], I decided to move from defense contractor work into civil service work.  And that's when I went down to Fort Belvoir, Virginia to the Defense Acquisition University.  That's a DOD [Department of Defense] school for program project management, leadership and those kinds of things.  And I worked, I performed at Defense Acquisition University from 1991 until 2006.  That was a civil service job.  And while there, I was a professor of Program and Acquisition Management.  I was a department chair for the Program Management and Leadership Division, Department.  And I was also an associate dean for Customer Support and Outreach.  And so I did that for fifteen years, and then I decided it was time to move on.  So I retired from civil service in 2006.  And that's where I did some consulting work in those disciplines that I'm current in and competent and also motivational speaking.
Speaker 1: Okay, speaking of motivation and--well, okay, what is your main theme in terms of your motivational speaking?
Speaker 2: Well, in the motivational speaking I, I focus on how to help people deal with the challenges of life, to inspire them, to help them to see life in different perspectives and the big pictures.  And what happens is, some of that has to do with how I made it through successful as a POW [prisoner-of-war] in Vietnam.  Lots of times, we all face challenges in life.  To me, one of the big ones was the POW experience.  For some people, it's a career crisis.  For other people, it's loss of a loved one.  For others, it's just really the disastrous results of a parent-child relationship, of a marriage relationship.  And while these are challenges in life that a lot of people face, you have to say, why is it that some people face those situations and after adjusting and regrouping and taking some actions, they move on with their lives in a positive way and others, it seems to destroy.  They get stuck.  I mean they, it can just destroy them.  They never get over it.  What's the difference?  And so what I do is I take them below those surface experiences and say, what faith, what values, what integrity, what character, what will, what endurance, what things underpin what you're facing and dealing with that helps you to get through these things?  And usually, I do not have a canned presentation.  I don't have a set presentation because you lose your feeling for it, and you lose your energy.  Plus, you might not be hitting the audience just right.  I never have a canned presentation.  But what I do is I focus on the theme of the interest of the group that I'm speaking to.  I speak to the little, six, seven years old.  I speak to people in senior citizens homes, 85, 95.  I speak to military groups.  I speak to civic groups.  I speak to business groups.  I speak to religious groups.  And what I do is I find out what are their themes and interests, and then I couch my presentation around things that will help them.  And sometimes I'll bring in a few of the POW experiences, but my primary focus is helping them to deal with whatever it is they're dealing with, how they can handle those things, no matter what they are, if you're going about it in the right way.
Story_ID: 33015
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you have a poem here--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --that you made it.  Do you read this poem at these occasions, the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Very seldom.  Sometimes, depending on the audience, you know, once I've seen the audience.  But, but it's called "My Plight".  And it goes something like this--and this was penned, actually thought up, around 1968.  And it was during the time, right about the TET Offensive when things looked like they might break, and we might get out, and then things started looking bad again.  And no, it wasn't '68' [1968]--no, it was '68' [1968].  It was around 1972 when the Paris Peace talks were dragging on and on, and we were going through the bombings over North Vietnam.  And it looked like the North Vietnamese were not going to agree with anything at the table.  So this is, this is the way I wrote it.  It's called "My Plight".  "As time goes by, I find no need to cry, though faith has smiled, has frowned upon my upturned brow, and happiness has mostly passed me by, I still await the hand of saving grace."  Ah, no, that's not it.  That's not it.  Let me start over.  You may have to scratch that part.
Speaker 1: We have it here.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, let me get the first sentence 'cause I'm--oh, wait a minute.  Yes, it is, yes, it is, yes, it is.  Okay, okay, okay.  I was right.  See, boys, second take, okay.  In the sonnet of "My Plight", I call it, I kind of crafted it as a sonnet because Shakespeare wrote a lot of things in sonnets.  And what it is, you have 12--four lines, four lines, four lines, and then two to kind of wrap it up.  And really, I had to craft this from memory because we didn't have pencil and paper.  You had to kind of make up what part you want, and then as you were trying to come up with the other part, you had to retain what you had.  And it was kind of a challenge mentally because you didn't have any pencil or paper to write it down on.  But it's called "My Plight".  "As time goes by, I find no need to cry, though faith has frowned upon my upturned brow and happiness has mostly passed me by.  I still await the hand of saving grace.  For six long years, I've sat behind these bars.  Sometimes too cold, more often though, too hot.  Through windows small at night, I watch the stars and wonder why to me befell this lot.  To cry would seem to say that I am weak, though six long years detained, my strength has rest.  And often from here, my fate looks naught but bleak, still I must stand and try to meet the test.  I'm still a man and though I'm badly bent, I'll hope and strive until my life is spent."
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Story_ID: 33016
Speaker 1: One question we always ask is, when you look back on everything that's happened in your life to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Expound on that just a little because I, I can come at that from a lot of different directions.
Speaker 1: Well, in terms of what are the things that you're leaving behind for future generations, what deeds have you been a part of--
Speaker 2: In terms of legacy, if I were to think of what I leave or what I hope to leave, it is that if you trust in God, if your faith is in the right place, things will always work out eventually for the best.  Now, my philosophy of life is that life itself has a lot of ups and downs.  It has a lot of challenges, it has a lot of problems.  And so for me, Norm McDaniel, whatever I can do to help a person, any person, fellow human being, to get through life, to make it more meaningful, or more productive, happier for them, if there's anything I can do, I wanna do that for them, as a fellow human being.  I do not want to put any stumbling block or put anything, anybody--in anybody's way that will make life more difficult for them.  Some people will hold grudges.  Some get something against you, and I mean they will just their utmost to make life miserable for you.  Un-un.  Life has enough of those of its own.  And so anything I can help do to help you to get through better, then that makes me feel like I'm doing what I should be doing for my fellow human being, but most of all, my first allegiance is to be obedient to God.  One last point.  When I left the prison camps in North Vietnam, I didn't hate those people.  Even though I was treated very harshly, called criminal, very, very badly.  Some of my fellow prisoners, the way the survived was they hated the Vietnamese so that it gave them that strength to hang in there.  Now, the Vietnam was controversial.  There were shades of gray.  I felt we were right in being there, still feel that way.  But, again, you had to have something to hold onto, to motivate you, to give you the strength to take the torture, the deprivation and the pressure when things really got tough.  But my thing was not hating the Vietnamese.  My thought is and was, and I really feel strongly about this.  If I'm at war with you, and truly at war with you, I'm gonna do whatever I can to win.  And I'm gonna do whatever I have to do to end that war as fast as possible, with victory on my side, with the less harm and death to my people.  Therefore, if I have you as a prisoner, and I need to torture you.  I need to exploit you, whatever I can do that's going to get information from you that will save my people, save lives on my side, help to get that war over, get the war over quicker, I'm gonna do it.  And so I didn't fault, and don't fault, the Vietnamese for their treatment of us.  The thing that I do feel about the Vietnamese, at that time, at the time I came out of there, I actually felt sorry for them, actually felt sorry for them, because when I walked out of that prison in Hanoi Hilton to Gollum Airport [Vietnam], getting ready to board a plane and head to freedom, I knew that I was coming back to freedom, even though we have racial problems in this country.  You know, there is stuff going on.  I knew that I was coming back to a better life.  But all they had to look forward to was the propaganda and the control that they were under.  And I actually felt sorry for them.
Story_ID: 33017
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything we need to cover before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Did you intend to cover post-traumatic stress?  Was that another different one or was there something else you were going to--or do you wanna let that one go or what?
Speaker 1: I asked about it.  If you wanna say something else about it.
Speaker 2: Well, no, you asked about it, but I don't think--I think, I don't think you asked me about my experience with it?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what I was asking about.
Speaker 2: Oh, you were?
Speaker 1: But go ahead and, go right ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay, very, very briefly.  This thing of pressure, stress, taking its toll, and it did take its toll on us.  It takes its toll, I think in today's environment, it takes its toll on a lot of people just from the pressure of life because this thing of post-traumatic stress is real.  At the time we came back from Vietnam, Operation Homecoming, 1973, and during the Vietnam War, post-traumatic stress was not recognized.  American service men and women were coming back, doing crazy things, acting strange, and, hey, they thought they were just crazy.  But they did not recognize post-traumatic stress.  But it was.  In the first World War, I think they called it "shell shocked".  In the second World War, they called it "battle fatigue".  In the Korean War, they kind of called it "war weariness".  But they didn't recognize it as post-traumatic stress, which it was in all of those.  And people, I mean I had friends, I have a couple of brother-in-laws, I mean one of them--both of them, psychologically messed up from the Vietnam War.  One was in the Third Marines and one was in the 25th Air Calvary (unclear), messed them up.  But what happened, it wasn't until the early to mid-'80's [1980s], after some of the think tanks and some of the colleges and universities did research to prove conclusively that Vietnam veterans, a lot of them, were suffering from post-traumatic stress.  And then we started getting help for it.  Now, post-traumatic stress, sometimes, it hits a person as soon as the traumatic event happens.  I mean, if you were driving a car and you hit and killed three or four people, it can be so traumatic that you fall into that post-traumatic stress right away.  Others, if a woman is violently raped, I mean, poof, the effect is right there.  For some people, it's a delayed reaction.  In my case, it was delayed.  I came out of Vietnam, hey, ready to go, keep on with my career.  And I didn't have my first bout with post-traumatic stress until 1990, 1990.  I had finished my career, although I was, I'd have nightmares and recurring dreams and stuff like that from time to time.  But I was so interested in pressing on with my career and being successful, hey, I didn't have time to, you know, to be worried about that.  And the wife [Jean Carol Breeze McDaniel] was supporting me and all.  And what happened with my first bout, I was working for a defense contractor, and I was a technical person, which I'm a mechanical engineer.  The project manager lost the confidence of the sponsor, of the customer, and the customer said they didn't want to see the project manager again from our company.  So the company owner wanted me to take over as the team leader of the project, project manager of the project.  And it was heavy in software, software development.  I'm not a software guru, no, mechanical, but not software.  And so I told him, I said, sir, I can't do this.  This is beyond, you know, my ability.  Oh, do it, do it, do it.  He said, we'll give you all the technical people you need.  So I jumped in, okay, never failed at anything.  I can handle it, jumped in it.  Well, it was a tough job.  And I was spending nights, weekends, working and I was getting--now, this is competency, and this is where you're really incompetent.  And I'm working at trying to come up to speed, come up to speed, but putting in a lot of extra time and effort, tension and stuff.  And I started having those, re--those nightmares again.  And the predominant nightmare was that you're in prison, you're being tortured, I mean, and somehow you struggle and you fight, and you escape.  You're back home with your family, everything is good.  And all of a sudden, for some reason, they get you again, and drag you back, and they, and I mean they're torturing you and everything.  And you're before a firing squad, and boom, they shoot.  And all of a sudden you wake up.  I started having those recurrent dreams and those nightmares, okay.  I'm still struggling to get back up to speed.  Now, what happens, as you put in that extra effort, you're losing sleep, you're losing energy and stuff.  You're learning and getting better, but if you don't get up to the top where you can back off, it's this fight or flight thing in the human seek (unclear), you know, it's something (unclear).  You hit a point of (unclear) and return.  And even though I was putting in the time and effort, truth, I was doing worse, doing worse.  And that just increased the stress, those recurring nightmares and panics.  I'd have panic attacks, anxiety attacks, start forgetting stuff.  I got so bad before I had to go in for treatment that I couldn't even function, couldn't function.
Story_ID: 33018
Speaker 1: Now, post-traumatic stress is just like alcoholism.  First of all, you gotta realize you got it.  Second, you gotta be willing to get treatment for it, okay, and then thirdly, you gotta get the right treatment for it, and keep yourself on even keel.  In some cases, the treatment involves just consultation and counseling, where it helps you to get your arms around whatever it is that you're dealing with and get back on track.  Sometimes it involves counseling and medication because see, when you're under stress for a long period of time, it messes up your brain, the dophimins, the serotonin, the synapses in your brain, signals passing by.  It can mess you up to the point that you're just totally helpless.  Now, so, in my case, I got counseling and medication, and after about a year, year and a half, I was good to go.  Two schools of thought on post-traumatic stress.  One is that you get, realize you gotta get treatment for it.  You can be cured of it.  Other school of thought is once you get it, realize you got it, you get treatment, but you never get rid of it.  You learn how to manage it.  I'm of the second school of thought.  So I thought I was good to go there, you know, after the first time.  Hey, I know what this stuff's all about.  I know when I'm getting a little bit down, messed around and let myself slip back down into it in 2008, again.  And what triggered it, what caused it, when I came back from Vietnam, I bought my mom a home back in Fayetteville.  She lived in New York.  She always wanted to come home.  After she got up there, she was dissatisfied.  I got her back home.  I, my wife [Jean Carol Breeze McDaniel] and I bought the home and put her in it and all.  And she lived there until she passed away in 2006.  But I have (laughter), a half brother, he's better now, but at the time, half brother and a niece whose father was killed at Khe Sangh, okay, and her mom is my sister [Mildred Florence McDaniel] that was, died in 1968.  So here my mom [Fannie Marie McDaniel] is raising these two.  And so she's raising them, but this half brother is not worth a flip.  So he becomes a liability on her, but it's a symbolic relationship and she depends on him, and he depends on her.  And she would not want me to get rid of him.  She would not want me to do anything to cause him--he got so bad, he'd mess around with her, with her social security checks and stuff.  And she had Parkinson's and Alzheimer's and she eventually passed away from that in 2006.  During the last two years of her life, she wouldn't have known me from you.  So here, she passed away, hey, this guy, he's not paying rent.  He's not doing anything, messing around the house.  He was messing up.  So that's pulling on me, and I wanna get rid of him, but I know my mom would not want me to do that.  Also, there were some other things at play that were pulling on me, and what happened, I started going, I started having these recurring dreams, and all that kind of stuff again.  The city down there would call when things were right.  He wouldn't keep the place up.  I'd have to go down and straighten it up.  My wife was on me night and day to get rid of it because she didn't want that liability on us.  And I'm here, hey, I let my mom down if I kick him out, what's gonna happen.  Bottom line, when I finally decided, hey, he's got to go, he's just got to go because what happened, there came a time when something happened, and it could have caused us personal liability and messed up our home and everything else that we had.
Speaker 2: What you're saying--
Speaker 1: Financial.
Speaker 2: --if I may intervene--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --is that, what you're saying is that stress--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --the stress of everyday living sometimes can trigger this deeper sense (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's exactly right.  If you don't manage it, and if you don't know what's going on, there can be other things in life that can trigger that, absolutely, okay, 'cause there's always there.  It's just a matter of you managing it well.  Now, so what happened is I started having recurring dreams.  I started having those nightmares again, pulling me down.  And I'm, now, see, that's another thing.  You've got to, when you're managing that post-traumatic stress, you gotta know where you are at any given time.  You gotta kick back, you gotta take some things to keep it going.  Now, there's a, there's a slope, there's a curve, okay.  There's a slope.  Here's up here where everything's going okay, and you're all right, okay.  And something goes a little wrong.  You dip down a little bit, but you're, hey, I need to back off.  I need to get away for a while.  I need to verr, verr, verr [sound].  But on that slope, you start sliding down that slope, if you realize where you are, that, hey, I need to do something, until you get to a certain point on that slope, you're objective enough, you're thinking enough, you're competent enough, that you can take actions to get you back up and to move right on, okay.  But if you're not aware of what's happening, and you let yourself slip far enough down that slope, you can hit a point on that slope where you can't stop.  And you can't stop yourself.  You've got to get help.  Somebody else has got to help you.  And that's what I let happen to me.  After we finally got rid of the house, and I'm having these nightmares again, being pulled back in the firing squad in Vietnam, coming back.  And what happened was, we got rid of the house, and he had to go 'cause I tried to get him to pay rent and stay there, no, no, no, nothing I tried to do worked.  So we had to kick him out.  So the guilt's really pulling on me.  And what happened then was, I had slid so far down that I couldn't stop.  My wife saw it.  She said, look, she said, you need to get help.  You need to get away from this.  I said, oh, I'm okay.  But I didn't realize it.  And when I did realize I needed help, plunk, I was so far down, I couldn't stop.  So I had to go back in and go through another round of help.
Story_ID: 33019
Speaker 1: So, again, after the second bout there, I've learned more.  You should learn each time, and I'm, I'm very confident this time that I know how to manage to the extent that I don't let myself get far enough down that slope that I don't stop because what I found this second time is that there're a lot of things--you can see a few things coming, and if you just take some action to kick back, and my attitude toward a lot of things, outlook on life, I, I used to be a Type A person.  Everything had to be done in say, if I had 10 things to do, in a given day, if I got nine of them done, I'd be upset and irritated because I didn't get that tenth one done.  But see, my attitude is just the opposite now.  If I have ten things to do and I get nine of them done, I'm so thankful for getting that nine done, I can relax and enjoy that, and, hey, I'll, I'll pick the tenth one up the next time.  But I think lots of times, the way a person deals with the challenges of life has a lot to do with whether or not, you know, they will, are subjected to post-traumatic stress and the problems along that line.  But I'll tell you, I don't think that today there's as much stigma attached to post-traumatic stress or mental illness as there was back in the '70's [1970s] and early '80's [1980s].  That was another thing.  Military people, if you're gonna stay on active duty and so forth, and, boy, they found you had PTSD [Post-traumatic stress disorder] or you had a mental problem, I mean that was it.  But now, you know, they're saying as many as one out of every four or five Iraq, Afghanistan veterans are suffering from, that (unclear).  So it's something that I think is more understood or more accepted, and I think that our medical authorities and population and citizens are more able to deal with it in a rational, constructive way.  But I think for the health and benefit of a person, they really do need to take of themselves and try to live a balance life.
Speaker 2: What I guess, does the U.S. government or do the, I mean does the military or do--what agency, what institution would you recommend in terms of someone that has post-traumatic stress, in terms of being able to deal with the problem?
Speaker 1: Oh, oh, who can help the most?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Oh, certainly, the Veteran's Administration, the VA has come a long way in the last 12 years or so.  Yes, yes, the VA is very good.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 33020
Speaker 1: Now, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: My hopes and concerns for the African American community today is that as individuals and as a community, that we will be more educated and informed as to how fortunate we are to be Americans.  And in this great country, the United States of America.  And even though we have our challenges and our problems in this country, we are truly, truly blessed and fortunate to be American citizens, and that as a black community, Afro-American community, we should be looking toward appreciating and taking advantage of the opportunities and the freedoms and things that we have available to us in this country, rather than complaining about what we don't have or complaining about what happened in the past.  We need to take what we have today, be thankful for it, and make the best of it from a position of faith, faith in this country, and helping ourselves first, and then helping the larger community.
Speaker 1: Okay, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a man who started from meager beginnings.  Mom and dad [Fannie Marie McDaniel and Clyde Oliver McDaniel], reared during the Depression years, sharecroppers for a living, but a person who was very, very thankful for the blessings of being an American, for being free, for having the opportunity to make a better life for himself and, hopefully, to some extent, did do that.  But most of all, I would like to be remembered as a man who found and accepted God through Jesus Christ, and who every day has tried to live according to the two great commandments, to love God with all my heart, mind, soul and then the second commandment to love my neighbor as myself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
