Story_ID: 18814
Speaker 1: My name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton and I am the interviewer. And Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Today's date is Thursday, September 30, 2004, and this interview is taking place in Washington, D.C.  Now if you would please for the record tell us your full name including your middle name and spell it.
Speaker 2: I don't have a middle name.
Speaker 1: Oh, no middle name.
Speaker 2: My name is Minyon Moore, M-I-N-Y-O-N Moore, M-O-O-R-E.
Speaker 1: Would you please tell us the date and location of your birth.
Speaker 2: I was born May 16, 1958 in Chicago, Illinois.
Story_ID: 18815
Speaker 1: Would you please share with us your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Corn.
Speaker 1: What favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall, summer.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yellow.
Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: Nassau [the Bahamas].
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying. Do you have one?
Speaker 2: "I must tell you" (laughing) and "In all due respect". (laughs)
Speaker 1: Would you share with us your occupation?
Speaker 2: I currently work for the Dewey Square Group. It's a public affairs firm.
Story_ID: 18816
Speaker 1: We'll begin talking a little bit about your mother.  Would you please share with us your mother's name and where your mother grew up as a child and where she was born.
Speaker 2: My mother was born--her name is Sandra Jones, Sandra Moore Jones. She was born in Jackson, Mississippi. She grew up in Chicago [Illinois] like most African Americans from the South, they migrated to the North and she was raised on the South Side of Chicago, raised by--no actually, she was raised by my great-great-aunt.  My grandmother's [Marie Palmer] father's sister.  In turn, she raised me and my sister and brother.
Speaker 1: And how was it that she was raised by her great aunt?
Speaker 2: Well my grandmother--well, we called her my grandmother but she was really my great-great-aunt--she moved from Jackson, Mississippi and she came to live with us. And she also--well my grandmother was working, she lived with my grandmother. So she just kind of went from house to house to house. She was kind of like the matriarch.
Speaker 1: And did your mother ever share any stories with you about what life was like in Jackson before they moved to Chicago, even about the move itself?
Speaker 2: Well I knew what life was like for them because every summer we were forced to go back to the South. We were--my great-great-grandpa [Poppa Bud] as we called him, which was my great-great-uncle, he had a farm in Terry, Mississippi, so every summer my great grandmother which we called her 'Mama', she would take us on a train back to the South. So we kind of knew what she--what it was like you know. It was like porta-potties, I mean outdoor toilets, you know. It was wells, it was walking to the corner store. It was going to church on Sundays, so we got a real sense of what she grew up like.
Speaker 1: But did she ever talk to you about what her life was like as a child and share any particular stories with you?
Speaker 2: Well not really.  I mean she--my mother's actually very interesting because she's--for her children to be so vocal, she's really a quiet soul.  It was literally mama who was the person that was kind of like the driving force that used to tell all the stories.  But I mean--obviously--because she was a very, very beautiful woman. So you know, you could tell that she--you could tell that she certainly had her activities if you will. She was you know--but she was always very, very kind and you could tell that whatever she did, she always put her heart and soul into it, you know. She did use to talk a lot about just simply you know, the hard times and how we shouldn't take anything for granted. The one thing that I think that I watched over the years is just her hard work.  I mean it really kind of just seared in my head, you know.  We were raised by my mother probably until I was about ten years old.  So my mom--you know with mama, the two women raising three--actually it was four kids. My brother [Eugene Moore] got killed when he was eleven. So--and I watched her.  I watched her work at nights, you know. She was a factory worker and she moved her way up. She was an accountant, so--I think the thing that I saw most about her, she just worked all the time.  Because she really didn't--you know.  I think she had a good time with life, you know.  She was--she didn't seem to be an unhappy person. She talked a lot about just--you know, growing up and making sure you're honorable and doing the right thing.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a little bit about the origin of your name?  Is it a family name, Minyon?
Speaker 2: I think it was--as I recall, it was one of her friends.  One of her friend's name. She was French I believe, and she named me after her.
Story_ID: 18817
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit now about your father, starting with your father's name, where he was born, and his background.
Speaker 2: My--our father, our original father we never really had any contact with, our birth father.  The only father that we knew was Wilbur Jones and my grandfather who we called 'Daddy'. (laughs) So he raised us from the time we were eleven until adults until his death. And he--interesting enough, the interesting thing about who we saw as our father, he was raised in the North. Born and raised in Chicago [Illinois].  And there was almost like this cultural clash. On the one hand you had the Southern one, and on the other hand you had this Northern--I didn't call him a liberal, but you know he was like, "Oh, come on, let's go have fun."  "Oh no you're not.  You're going to church."  So you had--you could see--actually I could see the influences in my life now because on the one hand I'm very strict about certain things, but on the other hand, I'm very progressive, I'm very open minded. So, you know, that's the way we grew up I guess.
Speaker 1: What could you tell us about him?  How would you describe him?
Speaker 2: Fun, loving.  I mean walk into the room and you know he would certainly be the belle of the ball, I mean loved to joke, I mean, you know his side of the family actually were a lot of big jokers.  His sister, they're just loving.  I mean real--he was more the emotional one.  My mother's [Sandra Moore Jones] like kind of subdued, but he was the one that come, give me a kiss, give me a hug. Yeah, that's the type of person he was.
Speaker 1: Do he ever share any stories with you about his growing up and whatnot, what it was like for him as a boy growing up in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Well actually what he used to talk about--because he was a postal worker and he used to talk a lot about what it was like being a postal worker, being a sharp union person, you know, getting involved. Both he and my mom got involved in the civil rights movement and you know, being an activist, and you know, just think--you know, he used to talk a lot about how times were you know harder for African Americans and you know, you've just got to make sure you get yourself educated and work hard, you know, and play by the rules and hopefully the rules will be enough. But you know, I just--sit and listened to him talk about you know, the olden days and he and my uncle talked about sometimes you know, what they used to do in the South which is not for the record.  I mean he would go down and visit my uncle, my mother's brother, because I guess they all worked at the post office together. They were all very close.
Speaker 1: And being a postal worker was somewhat of a job of prestige for African Americans during that time period. So was he very proud about it?
Speaker 2: Oh God, yeah. Absolutely. In fact, I still have his postal pin that he got after 25 years.  I mean you know it was staple. It was a sure staple in the African American community.  It was one of my summer jobs.  So I--you know I knew the labor and work that he had to do, you know, tossing mail and things like that and I also knew the risks because those were people that were probably more exposed to alcoholism, most exposed to you know--just the harder way of life, but they were very proud about the work that they were doing and he was certainly one of them.  I count him the one--the proudest.
Speaker 1: And do you remember when he came into your life and what it--you know, what it was like for you to have him in the house now after growing up without--like you said, you know, the biological problem in the house.
Speaker 2: I don't think it was a strain because he was always very giving, very loving.  I mean he was close to my uncle which gave a lot of comfort, my mother's brother, and he was a close family friend. So I think that helped to alleviate any tension. If anything, it was probably different for him coming to you know a household with three children, never having any children of his own. Actually he had one daughter, and--you know, I don't even know--wait a minute. It might be the brother, I don't know, but I know that you know that must have been--as I look at these families now, and I think about you know trying to mix these relationships.  I know it must have been a trip--a strain for him more than it was for us.
Story_ID: 18818
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your ancestors?  Do you know if you came from free people, slaves, was there ever any talk about that in the family?
Speaker 2: Well actually it's interesting that you raised that question because um--my great grandfather, great uncle, whatever you want to call him, born in 1874 or something like that, he--I actually have a letter upstairs where he was trying to get us declared as Choctaw Indians, and I read the--interestingly enough, I read the letter last night. And actually I'll give you a copy of that on your next trip because it would have given the chronological order.  I think they were free. He was clearly--I mean, as far as I can remember back is [great-great-uncle] Poppa Bud, and they were very free. And he was not--but his parents were slaves.
Story_ID: 18819
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your grandparents, your [great]-great-aunt and [great]-great-uncle [Poppa Bud] who you knew.
Speaker 2: Sounds confusing, doesn't it?. (laughs)
Speaker 1: As grandparents on your mother's [Sandra Moore Jones] side, and would you begin again by telling us their names again?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Marie Palmer--that's my grandmother, my mother's mother.  And John Palmer was my grandfather. But that was my grandmother's second marriage, but he was the grandfather we knew.
Speaker 1: What can you tell us about them?
Speaker 2: I remember they used to come pick us up every Wednesday and take us to Fun Town which was an amusement park. I remember that they used to give us ten dollars every birthday.
Speaker 1: Wow, that was a lot of money.
Speaker 2: Lots of money.  I remember that my grandfather was always coming by to check on us and see how we were doing and you know--we called him 'Daddy'. I remember him you know just being a gentle soul.  I mean I still remember my grandmother being a little bit more forceful than him (laughs) as they can be.  "Daddy, go sit down." (laughs).  I remember when my grandmother got sick, yep, and he didn't make it home.  I remember that.  And I remember my grandfather shoveling snow. Had a heart attack, I remember that, you know.  I remember them well.
Speaker 1: Let's just take a moment, Scott.
Speaker 2: Sorry.
Speaker 1: That's okay.  Ms. Moore, tell me, what is your--did you know your grandparents at all on the father's [Wilbur Jones] side or any of your stepfather's?
Speaker 2: I knew my father's mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We called her 'Madear'.  It's interesting, I don't know how it ended up like this, but we call my grandmother--my grandmother on my mother's side, we call her 'Ma', we call my great-great-aunt 'Mama', and we call my father's mother Madear. And then we call my mother 'Sa', which her name is Sandra. (laughs)  I guess that's short for Ma. (laughs) We have too many of the M's going already.
Speaker 1: And Madear is often used in the African American community, short for 'Mother Dearest'.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: So what can you tell us about Madear staring with her name?
Speaker 2: Bertrina.  I used to confuse this all the time. Bertrina Jones.  She was wonderful. God she was wonderful. She was very much like my father.  I mean very much like him.  I mean they were--you know, you see them together, you could tell that they were just definitely related.  I mean she was a loving, very kind soul. She was just you know--force but you know full of anecdotes, you know.  She always had a story to tell.  I can't remember these stories. (laughs)  My mind is like overloaded right now.  But I mean she--she's really, really wonderful.  I mean you know, she'd--we'd go over and see her. We loved her as much as we loved my grandma, you know, so.  It's interesting on your mother's side.  You tend to cling more to your mother's parents, but in this instance, even though he was our stepfather, it was just--I mean it was no break, you know.
Story_ID: 18820
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: The things that I remember is--I remember a couple of things. They were--these trips to the South were like embedded in me. It's like you know, they're really big staples and I believe me and my brother [Carl Moore] and sister [Diane Moore] are and my brother [Eugene Moore] that died, I believe that those were things that were always carried because you know, growing up in the city [Chicago, Illinois] having working parents and you know, getting on that train every summer was just like it was an absolute must. And I remember that really, really clearly. I remember my brother was always accident prone and we were always calling my mother [Sandra Moore Jones] at work because we had to rush him to the hospital because he just always got something.  Something always happened to him, you know.  I remember my sister who was always the sassy, frassy.  She's going to kill me for saying this. But she was always smart, you know. She was the--you know, the bright, the thin one, the one that you know had the boys and all that. So I remember that a lot.  I remember--you know I tell you everything that sticks out in my mind, this big snow storm of 1967.  I remember my mother walking through that snow. I mean we were like sealed in the window just waiting for her to come home, and here she comes, trudging through that snow with some White Castle [hamburgers].  I kind of remember that.  I remember the vacations that her and my father [Wilbur Jones] used to take when they quit making us go to the South. I had a lot of good memories as I think back. There were a few bad ones, except my accident prone brother. (laughs)
Speaker 1: Can you share with us a little bit about what holidays were like in your house? Were they very festive times?  Like what was Thanksgiving, Christmas, Easter--what were those like in your house?
Speaker 2: There is never a holiday that was never celebrated and if they could make up one, they do that.  Birthdays, Thanksgiving, Easter, Memorial Day, July Fourth. Every holiday was a ritual one. Whatever you're supposed to do on that holiday, we did.  If it was Easter, you dressed up and went to church.  If it's Memorial Day, you dressed up with your new shorts and go outside and play and eat barbeque and go over to your cousin's house.  You know when you--can I just step back a second?
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: I was just thinking about something else I remembered.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: One of our favorite activities was skating.  And--
Speaker 1: Roller skating?
Speaker 2: Yes.  As we got of age, my mother used to let us go to the rink on the bus. And the only time that we could not do that was when we had to go back to church at 6:00 [P.M.] because we're all in the vespers choir, you know.
Story_ID: 18821
Speaker 1: The thing that I think that I probably haven't emphasized enough was the church aspect of our lives. We actually grew up in the same church. And when I go back home, I go to the same church.
Speaker 2: What's the name of the church?
Speaker 1: Third Baptist [Church, Chicago, Illinois].  Yeah, and Reverend Elmer L. Fowler was the founder. We grew up in the church and you know, the only way she [mother, Sandra Moore Jones] could really punish us was to tell us we couldn't go back to church.  I mean she really--it's pathetic, isn't it?  The only way she could really punish us that would really hurt our feelings was to tell us we couldn't go back to church.
Speaker 2: So you all didn't dread going to church?
Speaker 1: No. Loved it.  Loved it.
Speaker 2: Was it a typical Baptist church?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Typical Baptist church, typical people, you know. My great great grandma, she was the oldest member of the church. She was featured in 'Jet' [magazine].  I'll try to find that too when I come back so you'll have that.  I mean my family was like huge in the church. And it wasn't--it wasn't one of those over-imposing Baptist churches, I mean--it was very very diverse in studying and Sunday school, but you know, it was very comfortable. We loved it.  We loved our pastor.  I mean gosh, that was like the pride--I mean we looked forward to going to church. And to say we couldn't go to church was like, "Oh my God. She has committed murder!" It was really that bad.
Speaker 2: Interesting because you know, most kids, they talk about how they dread it, going to church.
Speaker 1: She could tell us we couldn't go to the [roller skating] rink, she could tell us we couldn't go outside.  She could tell us everything.  And the only time we went--as my great grandmother--as we started getting older and she started getting a little frail, the only time we'd really, really get in lots of trouble was if she left us in the house by ourselves, and my mother found out about it or my father [Wilbur Jones].  My father found out about it, and then all heck would break loose.
Story_ID: 18822
Speaker 1: But finish telling us the story about the roller rink--you could go on the bus.
Speaker 2: Yep. We'd take the bus up to the roller [skating] rink. We'd get in there and do our Earth Wind and Fire [R & B music group] songs, go around them curves like we knew what we were doing, coming out of there and you know--when we started getting--when the tides starting turning more, but she [Sandra Moore Jones] started getting a little bit more nervous about us catching the bus and going out there, but for as long as I can remember, that was our Saturday ritual. We'd go to that roller rink--79th Street [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Would it be a meeting place for friends?
Speaker 2: Yes. And you know you meet a lot of people there too. Yeah. And I'll tell you, I guess this shows how old I'm getting, but back in the day, you know, it just was different, you know.  Kids were different.  Kids were--they valued life a lot more.  I mean, we had one killing in our neighborhood. It was actually very different in mind. The guy that I went to the prom with. And that was like a--I mean it shook the entire neighborhood.  Blind killing. Now it's like--it's--you--you know what I mean.
Story_ID: 18823
Speaker 1: Could you please give us your siblings' names in their birth order including yourself.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My oldest brother, Eugene Moore, who I told you got killed.  Do you want to know--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: He was playing baseball with a group of friends by a railroad track and the train came--well actually, if the ball went on the track, it was an out.  They all ran for the ball--all the kids ran for the ball.  He got crushed and his head hit the side of the rail and he started bleeding pretty badly and the kids got scared and left and ran. They--I mean they were children, so--the left him and the train came and cut his legs off.  I think the tragedy was my mother [Sandra Moore Jones] was in the hospital at the time, so--yeah, I think that's been pretty hard for her. So he was the oldest, he was eleven when he got killed.  Then my sister Diane, who is--who tries to be the matriarch.  She's really--I mean we're really close.  She's really dear. She's--she is--I'm forty-six, so that means she's forty-seven.  I'd say forty-eight for the video. (laughs)  She's forty-seven, and then my brother who's two years younger than I am, Carl Moore.  They all still live in Chicago [Illinois], so--that's us.
Speaker 1: And what impact did your brother's death have on the family, especially you and your siblings?
Speaker 2: Well certainly you know, like anything, any death you know, I think--you know, I don't know what it's like for a parent to lose a child, but clearly to lose a brother, and you're that young, and to lose him so tragically and so you know horrifically.  I mean it leaves an impression on your life so you always--you know, you always challenge when you hear about people losing their loved ones, but--it was pretty tough, but--I think the value of having a church that you grew up in you know made it easier.  I remember the entire school came to our service and, you know.
Story_ID: 18824
Speaker 1: Can you kind of give us an idea of what daily life was like for you as a little girl? So you'd wake up in the morning, and what would you do next?
Speaker 2: Well, if it was--actually, I can remember a couple of cycles. I remember as I told you the cycles going to the South. And I also remember the cycle when we would go to camp, you know. We'd have to go to camp or at least it was always something organized.  We'd go to camp in the summers.  I remember--I was actually--I think I was very mature for my age all the time. I never--I was never that outgoing.  Stop?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: I was never that outgoing.  I was--I was kind of fun, but I was not, you know, I was not outgoing.  I remember once when I was outside playing on my new bike, and a little boy grabbed my ponytail from behind.  I caught hold to a barb wire fence to try to get him to stop. When I got ready to pull off, my hand got stuck and I ripped my finger, and instead of coming in and telling my grandmother, I came in and rinsed it off in cold water and put a sock on it and went to bed. So when my mother [Sandra Moore Jones] got in that night, well actually that next day when we got ready to go to camp, she was like getting everybody up in time for camp. So I had this sock on my hand and she's like, "What is this?"  And she sees all this blood and--so, I was--I guess I wasn't forthright, I guess.  A little scared.  You know, life for us, when you've had--and this is something I'm sensitive to now. When you have an elderly person in your household and as we got older, life for us became taking care of her and making sure that you know--she was well taken care of, that she--you know, so we were forced into a lifestyle probably--because my parents worked, you know. They either worked nights or they worked days and the fact of the matter is she'd given her entire life for us. She'd given an entire life for freedom for my parents to do what they needed to do, you know. She'd taken us to you know--summer vacations.  So it was our time to give back and it was kind of how you remember it, so.  And I remember one morning when she was really getting frail, it was at a point where you had to help her do everything.  And we had just gotten her clean, she had gotten her hair combed, and we laid her back down, she--you know you could feel that she was feeling good, and then she--she had to go to the bathroom again, and she did it on herself.  And you can sense in her, you could see it in her face, that she was really sad because she had just gotten clean. And after I finished--I think that's when I really learned patience. Because I saw how important that was to her that she didn't get screamed at, that, you know--"Oh, that's okay. We'll just start this process over."  And I was very young. I was really young. But I keep that in the back of my head because you know, a lot of times when you just want to flick off--like today, I'm going, "Oh God, I'm not ready for this, I don't want to do this."  And I'm like you know--but you just slow yourself down and you just--you know.
Story_ID: 18825
Speaker 1: Typical African American neighborhood.  I mean--it was a combination of single family homes and two-story buildings. We lived in a two-story building.  Upstairs we had another family that had probably three or four children like us and it was a great building.  Across the street, my best friend, Yvette Peters.  Down the street the twins, Leatrice and Beatrice.  I still stay in touch with them.  Down the street from them we had the Petes.  So it was really community.  I mean if you were out doing something, and you wasn't right, everybody would know, you know.  Miss Hazel would call my mother [Sandra Moore Jones] and say your son was on the back of a truck.  You know how they used to ride the trucks.  It's interesting the things they used to do to have fun and get in trouble compared to what they do today.  But he'd be riding in the back of the truck.  Many times he got hurt, fell off the back of the truck, a milk truck as they tell it, you know.  Everybody--everybody really watched out for each other.  I remember there was a couple, I can't remember her name though. She lived across the street and we all loved her because she had a boyfriend that was in the military. So every time he would come home, we'd see that--I guess he was in the [U.S.] Army--we'd see that base, we'd go flock around.  You'd think she'd want to be by herself with him. We'd go flock around, sit on that porch and just listen to him talk about his military service.  Roxanne--Roxanne is her name and her boyfriend.
Speaker 2: And he'd talk about all the different places he'd been?
Speaker 1: Exactly. We'd be all in--and then we'd be like, "Oh my God, we want a boyfriend like him," and we prayed over that. That was our first image of trying to find--and you know interestingly enough, the first guy I really liked was a military guy.  So funny how that stuck with me. (laughs)
Speaker 2: Ms. Moore, tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up, remind you of your childhood.
Speaker 1: Sights I would say--when you say sights, what do you mean?
Speaker 2: Like when you see something and it like triggers a memory, you know.  Like you may see--you know like um--a big oak tree and it kind of reminds you of growing up or you would smell fresh bread baking and that kind of reminds you of your childhood.  If you lived near a railroad track, perhaps when you hear a train, that kind of thing. So what--when you see something, what sight reminds you of your childhood or growing up or--and what smells and what sounds?
Speaker 1: I think--actually, when I kind of go through different blocks or go back home, you know where we--even though we don't live in the same area now, but when I go past these blocks that's got these two-story buildings on them, I'm always thinking about--because we actually lived in two different places.  Bishop--I think it was 77th [Street] and Bishop [Street] and 69Th [Street] and Green [Street, Chicago, Illinois], and you always think about--you know, I always look for two-story buildings. And you know it's like either you lived in a really nice two-story building, you know--and I kind of compare them now because you know they really have nice two-story buildings, and then you kind of have your average ones. So when I look at them, I always think about you know being back home.  The smell--that's hard to say because you know I never thought of it that way, you know.  Clearly on Memorial Day you know about the smell unless it's barbeque, you know.  But I guess you know--it was kind of like a soul food block, yeah.
Speaker 2: And what sounds remind you of growing up?
Speaker 1: Lots of kids. Lots of kids playing outside.  That's what's so different these days, you know.  You don't see as many kids out like you used to.  I mean it was just lots of kids, the block parties, you know. We went through all of that.  It was just really lots of kids.
Story_ID: 18826
Speaker 1: What was the name of your elementary school?
Speaker 2: Altgeld [Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Do you remember some of your teachers and classmates?
Speaker 2: I remember Ms. Bryant. I actually remember two teachers. One teacher I remember I was in first grade, and I was--it was an art teacher--and one of our--I'll never forget this.  One of our--one of my classmates was--she was crying, and I think I went over to her and you know, to try to comfort her I guess, if I could you know recall it right, and I remember her coming up to me and shaking me and telling me, "You're not the savior of the world," and to leave her alone.  I remember that.  I also remember Ms. Bryant who was probably--you're always having one teacher in elementary school that pushes you further. And I tried to push back and so I had to go with "So?" She'd say, "You say 'So' one more time and I'll have your mother [Sandra Moore Jones] come up."  "So." So it was.  Not only did I get the spanking from the ruler with her, we had the one from my mother, so--I remember those two teachers in grammar school.
Speaker 1: What was some of your favorite subjects?
Speaker 2: I loved English.  I loved History, Black History. I loved Black History.  I think those were my two favorites.
Speaker 1: And did they do a very good job of teaching Black History?
Speaker 2: Well actually I had Black History in high school [Chicago Vocational School, later Chicago Vocational Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  But now in elementary school, what type of student were you?
Speaker 2: I'd say average, you know. I would say that I wasn't--that's the only time I can remember my mother having to come up to school for me.  I would say I was average. I was not--I wasn't spectacular.  I think I was just average.
Speaker 1: And during the elementary school years, what type of child were you? Were you obedient, shy, mischievous?  What type of child were you?
Speaker 2: I think I was obedient, you know.  I don't think I was the type of child that--you know, I was getting a bunch of notes written home to my mother and she had to constantly like--say, "Oh my God, this child would never make it," you know.  It wasn't that at all.  In fact, if I can recall during our elementary and high school days, I don't think she had that problem with any of us which was pretty fortunate.
Speaker 1: And when you were in elementary school, did you have dreams and aspirations? What did you want to be when you grew up?  Did you think about that at all in elementary school?
Speaker 2: You know, I thought like most kids, you know--always growing up wanting to be a nurse or wanting to be a teacher. You know some of those noble, public service jobs that you can do.  And I think I grew up wanting to do something of service and to help, you know. So--I think it was probably a nurse because--it was mainly because of my great grandmother, you know.  I saw some of the pain that she went through, you know, so.
Story_ID: 18827
Speaker 1: Let's just talk a little about the middle school or the junior high school years.  Can you kind of tell us a little bit about what type of--you know, preteen you were starting to become. What type of young lady you were developing into?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I'll tell you, and I say this pretty humble.  Our anchor was church, so it was--I mean we pretty--I mean we had a pretty sane preteen. I wasn't--you know--I don't think there was anything spectacular about how I was doing business, you know. I was walking to school with all my friends, hanging out.  I wasn't, you know--I wasn't trying smoking yet. (laughs) You know, I wasn't coming home late from school or anything like that. I think that--
Speaker 1: Who were some of your friends?
Speaker 2: Gwen--Gwen Thompson who's still my friend today.  Lisa Townsend--we're all church friends [from Third Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois] too, so it was kind of--you know, like many of us went to the same high school, many of us went to the same grammar schools, so--Gwen and Yvette.
Speaker 1: And what were some of the things that you all enjoyed doing during your spare time?
Speaker 2: In that day, you were either jumping rope, hanging out, going [roller] skating, hanging out on the porch, going skating. The big thing was skating and bowling back then.  Those were the things that we did most.
Story_ID: 18828
Speaker 1: What was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: Chicago Vocational [High School, later Chicago Vocational Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois]--CVS.
Speaker 1: What were some of your favorite subjects in high school?
Speaker 2: Home room with Mr. Pataki (ph.).  He was good, he was the football coach.  He was wonderful.  He was absolutely wonderful. We loved him.  I loved my Black History.  I loved it because I loved--my teacher was Mrs. McPherson.  She was just spectacular.  I tried to find her today. She was just incredible.
Speaker 1: What did she teach?
Speaker 2: She teached Black History.  I mean--she taught--I thought she taught black life.  I mean she really instilled in us a sense of pride and a sense of values about who we are, who we're to become. And even our principal at the time, Mrs. Cridington (ph.).  Oh God--I still see her and talk to her.  So--I mean, just amazing. And those--I think those two women, you know, along with my own family--I think they just gave me so much confidence, you know, to be. To be whatever.
Speaker 1: And your Black History teacher--did she teach you things that--did she teach you about people you had never heard of before other than you know, Booker T. Washington, George Washington Carver?
Speaker 2: Yep. She took us through the entire Civil Rights Movement, she took us through Brown v. [the Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas, 1954], she took us through the sit-ins in Greensboro [North Carolina, 1960]. I mean you know, anything that was relevant to our history and to our communities.  I mean she even went further back than that of course. Those are the things I can't remember except the Richard Wright books we would have to read all the time.  Was it 'Black Boy', or what was the name of it?  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And did you enjoy--
Speaker 2: Every minute.
Speaker 1: That reading?
Speaker 2: Every minute of it, yep. Every minute of it, so.
Speaker 1: And so when you were in high school, what were you thinking that you wanted to do with your life? What were you thinking that you wanted to be when you grew up?
Speaker 2: You know at the time, I probably was thinking about getting out of high school. And because it was a vocational school, you know, we all ended up, either in shop, like car shop--whatever it was called, or in--
Speaker 1: Auto mechanics?
Speaker 2: Yep.  Or in stenography, and I took stenography, so I assume that I was going to be some stenographer somewhere, which I did end up being for a couple of years.  It was a great skill set to have, you know, shorthand. Shorthand and typing. So that's the vocation I assumed I was going to be typing, some secretary somewhere, so.
Speaker 1: How was it that you ended up going to a vocational school?
Speaker 2: Well actually you ended up--we considered it one of the best schools. So we didn't consider--you know, we didn't look at the fact that it was a vocational school.  You either wanted to go to Lindbloom [High School] or you wanted to go to CVS.  And if you were lucky enough to get into either one of those two schools, then you felt like you had really gotten into a great school.
Speaker 1: And when you were in high school, what was some of your thoughts about college?
Speaker 2: That I kind of looked forward to it, but I didn't want to go away.  That I wanted to stay home.  I was kind of a home girl.
Speaker 1: Why didn't you want to go away?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I just didn't--you know, I just didn't want to leave my mother [Sandra Moore Jones], I didn't want to leave my grandparents you know. I just didn't--plus you know, I was working. I wanted to keep my jobs. (laughs)
Story_ID: 18829
Speaker 1: What kinds of jobs did you have in high school [at Chicago Vocational High School, later Chicago Vocational Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I worked at the post office--
Speaker 1: Did you work there during the summer or did you also work there during the school year?
Speaker 2: Summer.  I worked at my grandmother's factory where we made--I think uniforms.  That was actually--all of us had to go through that boot camp. (laughs) It was like a boot camp. All of us went through that one, and we got paid I mean which is--I think we were probably rich kids compared.
Speaker 1: What kind of things did you do with your money?
Speaker 2: I'm sure we spent it on all kinds--all manner of stuff. Bought clothes, I was buying clothes.  You know my mother [Sandra Moore Jones] was very good about letting us keep our own little money, you know. And it was a lot.  You know you make two or three hundred [dollars] at that age.  I look back then and I say I could be a millionaire, but I don't know what I did with it. But we spent it on stuff, you know, preparing us for school and whatever.
Story_ID: 18830
Speaker 1: So you knew that you were going to college. It was just a matter of where?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And so what were some of the schools you were considering?
Speaker 2: Well actually I think I--I don't know how I fell into the University of Illinois, Circle Campus [later University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], but that's kind of where I ended up and I don't know if it's because I was looking for a little bit more flexibility because at the time I was working, so I was trying to get some classes that would accommodate my work. I think at that time, I was working full time at the post office during the day. So I think I was trying to get something to accommodate the schedule.
Story_ID: 18831
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate from high school [at Chicago Vocational High School, later Chicago Vocational Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: 1976.
Speaker 1: So when you graduated from high school, what were you thinking you were going to do with your life?
Speaker 2: Well I wanted to take off a little bit and just work and make some money, and try to figure it out. I really wasn't certain. And that was actually a very interesting period for me because I just was unclear about what I wanted to do next, so I did take some time off, I went out to California to visit my aunt and stayed out there a couple of months.  Met some friends, you know.
Speaker 1: Did you like California?
Speaker 2: Yes, I liked it.  I liked it a lot.  We used to call her 'The Warden'.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Because she'd be--it was me and like three cousins and you know, we'd be lazing around all day and about two o'clock, we'd know that car was coming, so we'd get up and start trying to clean up because we knew The Warden was coming home, because we hadn't done anything all day long and she'd be mad when she came in. (laughs) It was my father's [Wilbur Jones] aunt.
Speaker 1: So you traveled to California?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: What else did you do?
Speaker 2: I stayed out there, met a friend you know, and came back to work and school, and then started trying to figure out--major in start--decided I was going to major in Sociology because I still had those kind of--mission to help.  So--I actually started volunteering at a lot of different places.  I started volunteering at Northwestern [Memorial] Hospital [Chicago, Illinois] because I said well this will give me an opportunity to see if this is you know, what I really wanted to do.  Go into the medical field.  That's when I started thinking about--and that's actually--by that time, I was working at Encyclopaedia Britannica when I came back.
Speaker 1: What were you doing there?
Speaker 2: I was working in the Advertising Department.  I started off as a--secretary. It was [Administrative] Assistant now, but it was Secretary then--Assistant to the Vice President of Advertising.  So that shorthand came in handy.
Story_ID: 18832
Speaker 1: It was around like 1977, 1978 when you were working at Encyclopaedia Britannica?
Speaker 2: I believe so.
Speaker 1: Were you working there full time?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And you were going to school [at the University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] at night?
Speaker 2: At night.  Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like at school, going at night?  Did you have an opportunity to meet a lot of people?
Speaker 2: No.  And see I'll tell you, as I look back on the college days, there were actually a couple of regrets.  One that I--I'm going to fast forward for a second here because I actually made up the experience when I worked at the White House [Washington, D.C.], because that's like a college sorority and fraternity because you end up having friends for life.  But I think the regrets that I had was I didn't go to a historically black college because when I had the opportunity to go to the Atlanta [Georgia] campuses, you felt this energy and the energy among the students and the pride. So I regret that, and I also regret the fact that you don't have any lasting friends that you take with you, you know, because it's not like you see these folks every day.  You see them from class to class if you're lucky.  So you're not seeing them all the time.
Speaker 1: And what were some of the classes that you enjoyed most?
Speaker 2: I think I admired psychology and sociology classes because I liked the human spirit and learning more about how people think, how they react to certain things. So those I think I really enjoyed those classes the most.
Speaker 1: Did you take any political science classes?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: How did you like those?
Speaker 2: I see them all in the same vein, you know, because it's all learning about the history of something or somebody. So I enjoyed them a lot.  A lot in fact, yeah.
Speaker 1: And did you think that somehow you'd become involved in politics?
Speaker 2: Well, I had an inkling that I would be doing something, but I didn't know what it was.  I just had an inkling.
Speaker 1: Something in politics?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: When did you have that inkling?
Speaker 2: I think when I decided to do a paper, and I need--and my professor, if we could land an interview with Reverend [Jesse] Jackson, that had to be something to politics, you know.  If I could get an A on a paper just for writing about him, you know I'm like okay, there must be something to it, you know.
Speaker 1: Tell us about the paper.
Speaker 2: Well the title of the paper was 'When Blacks Become Mainstream, They Lose their Identity'.  That was pretty novel back then, huh? That was back in the early '70s [1970s] that I was doing stuff like that.  And the professor--there was  group of us and he made it very clear that if we got an interview with Reverend Jackson, that would probably get us into the upper percentile of our paper.  Now I didn't get the interview with Reverend Jackson which in many ways and hindsight I'm grateful I didn't. I got it with Reverend [Willie T.] Barrow. At that time, she was the Executive Director of Operation PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity] and when I listen to her talk about you know how it's hard you know for blacks to mainstream in, but you know they have to have a sense of themselves before they could even go in the door and all that.  So we got the interview and we got the A on the paper.  But after I--after the interview, she says, "You've got to come over here and volunteer," and I'm like "Here I go again volunteering again," and I did, you know.  If you worked on Saturdays I had, I would go over and help her out and it got to a point where you know I was splitting my work, re-work, my classes and volunteering between the three of them, and I finally got to a point where she said "You need to quit the real job and come work for me for no health care," and--so I did.
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: Um--I guess it was in the '80s [1980s] then.  I guess we were in the '80s back then.
Speaker 1: So early '80s.  So you had graduated from college?
Speaker 2: Yes. Actually--
Speaker 1: By then?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what year did you graduate from college?
Speaker 2: '82 [1982].
Speaker 1: And you graduated with a B.S. Degree?
Speaker 2: Sociology.  Which they're still holding for record.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Because in a sense it's actually--I guess I can put it on here. It's a long complicated story. Sociology was a class that we all loved to hate, and we had a professor that was really, really tough. I mean he was really tough. So I took it and completed it the first time, so I went back and done it--I did it again.  And lo and behold the professor died.  You cannot believe--I mean you never would think that this could ever happen in real life.  None of our grades were recorded, yeah.
Story_ID: 18833
Speaker 1: You went to work for Operation PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity] in the early '80s [1980]?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And what kind of work were you doing? What kinds of things were you doing?
Speaker 2: I was Reverend [Willie T.] Barrow's assistant.  Started and went right in as her assistant.  Shorthand again came in handy.
Speaker 1: Were you like invigorated by the work that you were doing and did you feel like you know, "I am really making a difference here?"
Speaker 2: That's exactly what you feel like.  You felt like you were really doing something to really help, you know. All this time I was volunteering at all these various places, thinking that this was my calling. I even volunteered at the deaf blind center and worked with a little kid named Jamie who I swear could hear and see.. (laughs) And I was doing all these things for this yearning that I had to just help. And then when I went there, I really kind of found my calling, you know.  I felt like you know they were doing important work, they really tried to empower people and so I just kind of took off from there.
Speaker 1: What is the environment like?
Speaker 2: Tough. It was tough, you know. Some days it was--especially as a kind of outsider who didn't grow up in Operation PUSH. But once people got to know you and love you, they would mentor you and then take you under their wings, you know.  Everybody from Mrs. [Lucille Conway] Loman to Reverend Barrow to Betty to you know--all the folks you know, Janette [C.] Wilson. They all became like mentors of mine. Kind of being mentored through the movement and--you know, they're all my friends today and they're all very proud, and then Reverend [Jesse] Jackson, you know, he was--at the time that I came, he was on the verge of kind of moving into kind of the [National] Rainbow [Coalition] aspect of what he was doing. So it was a very interesting transformation at the time.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the first time you met him?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about that and describe it?
Speaker 2: Well, I hate to say--I'm not sure it was eventful, you know, because I believe I was just sitting in a staff meeting and Reverend Barrow introduced me as her new assistant, so you know--that's pretty much how.  You know, I was a kid, I was like you know--eventually I became like one of his kids, you know, [Sandra] Sandy [Hansborough] and the rest of them. But it wasn't--I don't think it was anything spectacular.
Speaker 1: What was like the reception in--you know, was it exciting to your family and your friends that you were working in you know, Operation PUSH?  Like what was the reception among your peers and your family?
Speaker 2: Well my father [Wilbur Jones] and my uncle and my cousins--some of my cousins from the West [California]--I think they used to go to Operation PUSH all the time.  And you know for me, they just saw me doing--you know we always--and I don't know if this is a trait in my family or what--you always kind of overdid whatever you did. And like we overdid church. And this was like another church movement in where I'm overdoing another movement. But they--they were happy for me.  I think the challenge came when I decided to move to Washington [D.C], you know. It was a huge decision for me because I had decided not to go away, you know and my parents at that time had bought a building, so I was living in my first apartment in kind of a garden level if you will, so--so you know I mean it was a really big, big deal.  But they--I think they were proud, you know.
Speaker 1: And why did you decide to come to Washington?
Speaker 2: Because I felt like the work was important enough and that you know I had to at some point cut the umbilical cord and just grow up and try to tough it on my own and see what the real world was like without the safety net and you know, I was really passionate about my work with the Rainbow and with PUSH and Reverend Barrow thought it was the best thing for me too. She said "You've got to go, you've got to, you know, take it up a notch." So she encouraged me to do it.
Speaker 1: And so what year did you move to D.C.?
Speaker 2: We moved in eighty--it was right after his [Jesse Jackson's] run [for U.S. President].
Story_ID: 18834
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your activities with Reverend [Jesse] Jackson's [U.S.] Presidential campaign.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm. I did the '88 [1988] campaign. And I was kind of--in 1984, I was kind of on the sidelines a little bit.  Just doing some youth stuff, youth activities.  But I was really very involved in the '88 [1988] campaign.
Speaker 1: In '84 [1984] were you thinking--were you kind of like taking mental notes that when this happened again, you know, you'd be in the mix?
Speaker 2: Well I didn't think of it that way.  Interestingly enough, it kind of went full circle from what Mrs. McPherson [at Chicago Vocational High School, later Chicago Vocational Career Academy, Chicago, Illinois] had taught us about who we were as a people and what this meant. So historically, I actually understood the significance of what was going on.  I didn't see it in the terms of my life, you know.  I just saw it in terms of our life. And I was very proud.  Even as a youngster, I was incredibly proud to see this happening and you know couldn't wait to you know--I'd say to myself, "Oh, can't catch that vote."  I was casting the vote thing at that time, so--and then I actually didn't get involved until I went to [Operation] PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity] and worked, you know. And that's when I got involved in the campaign itself.
Speaker 1: So you moved to Washington [D.C.] around--
Speaker 2: '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: 1989?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: After the '88 [1988] campaign?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So can you tell us a little bit about your involvement in the 1988 campaign?
Speaker 2: I was Deputy Field Director.
Speaker 1: And what did your responsibilities include as a Deputy Field Director?
Speaker 2: Mainly organizing the states that he was running in, you know.  Going to the various states, making sure that the field operation was in place, that you were actually you know alerting people to his you know, arrival.  Kind of helping with the ground activities and making sure that people had enough information about who he was and what he stood for and--um hum.
Speaker 1: And you traveled all over the country?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm. Went to Texas, Michigan, New York, Pennsylvania.
Story_ID: 18835
Speaker 1: What were your thoughts about politics?  What were you thinking about politics and the role that you would play in politics?
Speaker 2: Well actually I think I was--I guess I was a little bit naive, because I was like, "Oh great.  I think they're on the cusp of electing the first African American president."  Negative. (laughs) But the fact of the matter is that was the premise for which we were working. We weren't working to believe that we were losing. We were working to believe that we were doing something to--for a greater mission and greater cause and you know.
Speaker 1: Was the loss devastating?
Speaker 2: No. It wasn't devastating because I think the Reverend [Jesse Jackson] was kind of magnanimous.  He has always been magnanimous, you know.  People don't give him a lot of credit for it, but in your terms of what he has done for the country and the [Democratic] party, I think he always goes to a higher level and in turn, we go with him, so, you know.
Speaker 1: So after you worked on Jesse's [U.S.] Presidential campaign in 1988, then you moved to Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: Yep.  Came back, made the decision that he was going to move his headquarters, the [National] Rainbow Coalition, not [Operation] PUSH [People United to Serve Humanity], but the Rainbow Coalition to Washington.  He felt that's where it had to go.  I being one of them and that's where it all started and that's where it began and that's where I am now.
Story_ID: 18836
Speaker 1: What did you do when you got here in 1988, Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: It was actually '89 [1989].
Speaker 1: 1989.
Speaker 2: I think I was his Development Director [of the National Rainbow Coalition] at the time.  If you knew anything about Reverend [Jesse] Jackson's organizations, you're everything. Either Development Director, you're the receptionist, you're the person that does the outreach, you're the fundraiser, you're everything. So I'm sure I was a combination--I was--actually as he described my role when I left, I was the glue he says.  Yep.
Speaker 1: And how--what are your thoughts about Washington, D.C.?  How did Washington, D.C. compare to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: It's very different. Very different.  I mean you have a sense of community in Chicago, you had a sense of belonging.  Here in Washington, most people don't live here, they just--you know, they come from somewhere else.  They're not many neighborhoods.  You literally have to live where I live to have a neighborhood and you know people were very status conscious and I wasn't use to that because the background we had came from, you grew up believing that it was never about you, it was always about the higher mission and the higher call. So when people asked you what you did and where you lived and what kind of car you're driving and all that, you know it was really--you know, it was a bit different.
Speaker 1: Where did you live when you first moved to Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: I actually lived in a house with a friend of mine over on McKenzie Avenue. It's back over here, right off of Sixteenth Street, right off of Military Road.  I lived there on the third floor of their house. I think it was three or four girls sharing a house. Then I moved down here on Fourteenth Street which has become trendy now. Fourteenth and V [Street] and I stayed there. Then I left and went over to Fourth [Street] and M [Street] which is another trendy area. And then I came here and bought my first home, here about eight or nine years ago.
Story_ID: 18837
Speaker 1: And what was the political climate like in Washington, D.C. in the late '80s [1980s]?  What was the political climate like?
Speaker 2: It was invigorating, it was good.  I mean you know, we felt like you know, the things that had happened with both [Jesse] Jackson's 1988 campaign--1984 and 1988 campaign had opened the door to a whole new revolution of politicians, you know, elected officials.  People were, you know, bold and they were out there running for office and--so it brought in--it ushered in a whole new generation of congressional members. So I mean I think our politics were alive and well and you know--we were feeling empowered and like, "You know hey, this is our country too."  So that's kind of where it was, um-hmm.
Speaker 1: But with the Republican [political party] White House, was the climate any different at all?
Speaker 2: This is who you know we're used to having in the White House.  You know, when you're from the Movement, you know, it's never about the house, the White House or you know who's empowered.  It's about what you are standing for and what you continue to stand for regardless of parties. And our missions were always more morally-centered. They were not politically-centered. And so I think that gave us you know the upper hand to not have to figure out whether it's a Democrat [political party] or Republican, even though it's become a little bit more clearly defined now, but back then you were on a moral mission and you--whether it was [Ronald] Reagan, [George] Bush or whoever was in office, your message was always the same, you know.  Our African Americans and people of color need to have better wages, better jobs, you know. Women need to be--have equal work for equal pay.
Story_ID: 18838
Speaker 1: You were with [the National] Rainbow Coalition from 1989 until?
Speaker 2: 1992 when [U.S.] President [Bill] Clinton came into office.
Speaker 1: And can you kind of just talk a little bit about the changes you saw taking place in--within the organization during that time?
Speaker 2: The Rainbow Coalition?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Actually it was very interesting.  Because Reverend [Jesse] Jackson obviously was beloved in the African American community.  And if you give us a strain for him and for us when he decided to you know, expand his base which he--which he obviously had to do in order to you know, speak a little bit more broader and for more people.  And I remember a conversation that I had with him and I'm so grateful that I listened to him. When he decided to expand his base, obviously you have to take care of your base because he used to tell us all the time, "Everybody needs a base to fly from and a base to land."  So that left me tending to the African American community a lot on his behalf, you know, just servicing because you know the one thing about people that they don't never really understand about him is he really does a lot of service that people don't get.  He makes a lot of phone calls for people, he writes lots of letters.  All of the stuff that you'll never see. They talk about him being in front of the camera a lot. The fact of the matter is, you know, he's making waves from behind the scenes and just trying to help people. So a lot of that fell on my shoulders. And you know I get to be--you know how you get to be a little bigger and better, you think I just don't want to do African American politics, I can do more. And he recalled a conversation that he had had with Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]. And Dr. King told him, "Jesse, you have no right to know anybody if you don't know your own people."  And he gave me that same conversation and it was the best thing he ever taught me.  Me getting to know my own people has been the anchor to my career.
Speaker 1: And you know going back on the road--the paper on mainstream African Americans, you said at that time you were glad that you didn't get an interview with Reverend Jackson.  Why were you glad?
Speaker 2: Because it introduced me to Reverend [Willie T.] Barrow, and she instilled in me things that he could have never instilled in me because it was such a--even though he was--it was a Movement, it was very glamorous at the time when Reverend Jackson was at the height of his career.  He was very popular, it was very--you couldn't miss the substance for the superficial and she gave me the values that I needed to be a part of this Movement and especially as a female in this business. So I was grateful that I had her teachings first. And it helped me anchor myself and you know, it kept me with a moral sonar that I still have today.  About the time he came along, I was like her, I was slapping him around. (laughs) Because she's slapping him around all the time, putting him in his place.  So you know, there's only a few of us that can be bold enough to say Reverend Jackson, that's not right.  And so--it gave me the courage and the strength to be able to you know--be honest no matter how painful it was.
Speaker 1: During your time at the Rainbow Coalition, were you starting to feel like you were outgrowing the organization a little bit and really wanted to get out there a little bit more?
Speaker 2: I don't know if you ever outgrow the Movement because you can--I mean once it's embedded in you, it's in you for the rest of your life.
Speaker 1: But were you thinking you wanted to take the Movement someplace else?
Speaker 2: Well I was thinking I probably needed to get more experience in order to help the Movement a little bit better.  And at that time, that's actually when I decided to make the transition because I felt like you know, I needed some more skill sets.  I mean you just--you know, you get to a point where you have to learn a little more in order to be of value at it, to anything. So that's when I actually had to decide to make the move.
Speaker 1: What did you think your deficit was in terms of your skills set?
Speaker 2: I think that actually understanding what the real political environment was really all about.  I mean we were actually--we were fortunate. We were isolated. We were in many ways protected by Reverend Jackson and the leaders of the Movement. So we really didn't have to encounter the harsh racism that a lot of people had to encounter.  I mean we fought against it, but we were never subjected to it because we had them, you know. We didn't have to, you know, go in and tussle with our right [wing] contemporaries every day.  Because we had each other and it's a very different feel, you know. And you're a little bit more emboldened then most people that are in these positions, you know, that didn't come through this Movement. Because you also know that you can't get wedded to any job, you know. So--I think that learning--that learning that environment was very important.  Helping to--help influence it and have them understand who we were. Who we are as a people is very important to me.
