Story_ID: 68316
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer for the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Paul Bieschke.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Noel Mayo, N-O-E-L, M-A-Y-O.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: December 30, 1937.
Speaker 1: Place of birth?
Speaker 2: Orange, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Industrial designer and educator.
Story_ID: 68317
Speaker 1: All right.  Before we get started, in depth, we ask five People Magazine-ish type questions, and they just require a short answer.  The first one is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Falafel.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: No, not really.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Jamaica.
Speaker 1: And, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No, nope, can't help you with that one.
Story_ID: 68318
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your parents in a good way, talk about your parents.  Can you give us the names of your parents, and spell them for us please with their dates of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I can you tell you, my mother's name is Blanche Bryant Mayo, and she was born in--somewhere outside of Atlanta, Georgia, I think Stone Mountain.  And my father is Noel Mayo, and he was born somewhere in Georgia too, but I don't know.  They met in the North, so.
Speaker 1: How do they spell their names?
Speaker 2: B-L-A-N-C-H-E, and Noel, I'm a junior.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Did your parents give you a story on how they met?
Speaker 2: No, I never heard that, never did.  There's a lot of disconnect there, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have any idea of what your ancestors were doing in the 19th century or during slavery or reconstruction, or are there any stories that go back further?
Speaker 2: No.  There is some connection with the Seminole Indians out of Florida, and I think on my mother's side some of the--some Caucasian that married--had babies somewhere in there, but I don't have any details.
Story_ID: 68319
Speaker 1: Sir, did you know your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Two out of four, on my mother's side, Daisy Bryant, like the flower, and her husband, Carson.  He was a--he was a house painter and a jewelry maker.  He made things in silver, all kinds of rings and things on the side.  She was an artist too, she painted water colors when I was a kid.  So they were kind of models for me to watch and be intrigued by.
Speaker 1: That's something.  What did your father do for a living?
Speaker 2: He worked for UPS and things like that, cleaning, maintenance, that sort of thing.  Never had much of an education, my mother never finished the--I think she finished sixth grade or fifth grade.  She raised part of the family, her siblings.  She was the oldest female, I think about nine children on her side of the family.
Story_ID: 68320
Speaker 1: I want you to think back, you were raised in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], right?
Speaker 2: Pretty much, yeah.
Speaker 1: How did your family come to move to Philadelphia from Orange [New Jersey]
Speaker 2: Early on my father [Noel Mayo] shift jobs a lot and moved back and forth, and then later, my mother [Blanche Mayo] was manic depressive and I would be left with my grandmother [Daisy Bryant] or some uncle, my mother's brothers, who lived in New Jersey, right across the river here in Camden, and so I would be placed with one of them periodically and then she went to the hospital.  I wound up going to boarding school created by the Quakers out in Cheyney State University [now Cheyney University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney Pennsylvania].  It was right next door, I went there--went in with--my aunt still has my grades from the fourth grade, they were all Ds and Es, and I went into the school out there and wound up with straight As from that point on.  They had the laboratory school at Cheyney, and I went to a thing called Sunnycrest Farms [for Negro Boys] where kids literally ran the farm, they grew the cows and chickens and gathered the eggs and corn and all that, and you got up every morning, worked before school, came back, took a shower, went to school, came back did chores afterwards, school homework and that sort of thing.  And I found it very stimulating and intriguing and learned to read and love reading because of the laboratory school, so it was a lot of fun, probably saved my life.
Speaker 1: So when, what year was that when you went to--
Speaker 2: It's been the fifth through the eighth grade, so.
Story_ID: 68321
Speaker 1: --Now, think about, I want you to think about the neighborhood that you grew up in, well, the neighborhoods you grew up in.
Speaker 2: All of 'em.
Speaker 1: Yeah, just kind of give, give us an idea of what some of the sights and sounds and smells of the neighborhood were?
Speaker 2: Well before--the ones I remember before Sunnycrest [Farm for Negro Boys, Cheyney, Pennsylvania], were here in the city in South Philadelphia. I--lots of little kids, small street, playing in the street, shooting marbles, mothers on the steps watching the kids, pre-television, pre-air conditioning so they could--windows were open, they could look at and see what was going on.  Anybody new came in they knew it right away, if there was any problems, they knew it right away, so there were group--kind of has a group responsible for all of the kids and so it was kind of shared environment.  When I came back from Sunnycrest, the educational system was not as good.  I don't think I studied very hard from eighth grade till high school.  I just read on my own and enjoyed it.  So at--from junior high on it was things called fights in South Philadelphia between high school kids, Italian and black kids and that sort of stuff.  I never got involved in it.  I could walk right through.  What they really were was little riots.  I never got hit or hurt or anything.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  I just never connected to it, either side in that sense, of wanting to be physically involved.  So I could walk through the crowd and kind of get out of the way.  I don't know what it was.  And I'd get on the subway and go home, never got involved.
Speaker 1: That's quite a town.
Speaker 2: It was, it was amazing.
Story_ID: 68322
Speaker 1: Tell us about what did you really like in school?  What were your favorite subjects in school?  Did you have any teachers that you liked in school?
Speaker 2: Well, Sunnycrest [Farm for Negro Boys] stimulated that.  They had the lab schools, as I mentioned, one of the classes the instructor would you allow you to--if you got an "A" or a paper or answered all the questions during the class, you could stop and do anything else you wanted to do.  But the requirement was if she asked you a question again you had to answer it, and if you didn't answer it, you had to stop what you liked to do and go sit in the seat again.  And my pleasure was going to the back of the class and going through National Geographic Magazines that she had from the early 1900s all the way through.  So I do that or I would draw and I could do either one of those things or read a book, but if she called me, I had to answer, and that's what made it challenging and fun, it kept me stimulated.
Speaker 1: Can you name any particular teachers?
Speaker 2: Her name was Valentine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mrs. Valentine.  And she was a little round black lady and just terrific, very encouraging, very positive and helped me discover that learning was really fun.  It could be exciting as well.
Speaker 1: This is starting the fifth grade?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  So from that point on I had As all the way through, just never, never thought about anything lower.
Story_ID: 68323
Speaker 1: In the neighborhoods, what kind of activities were you attracted to that were involved in the streets.  What kind of stuff did you like?
Speaker 2: Generally, it was just playing with--we'd go to the playgrounds and school yards and things like that, play little basketball, 'cause I wasn't very good, I was small, and just tag and whatever kinds of games kids did during that time, nothing stands out particularly.  But I did like to read a lot, and I would draw a lot on my own.  So I spent a lot of time at home.  I had good friends who didn't draw but they would ask me to make drawings for them, so that became kind of fun.  My uncle who kind of was my second father also raised this interest in me in drawing.  He went to the same university, same college as a war veteran and later I went to the same school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What school is that?
Speaker 2: The, what's now called the University of the Arts here in Philadelphia.  Then it was the Philadelphia College of Art.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me, what was high school like, and were you involved in any high school activities?
Speaker 2: I was on the gym team and the track team in high school, but I spent most of my time working on a portfolio, to submit to the city for a scholarship, which at that point paid four years of college.  And I figured if I didn't go to college I would join the [U.S.] Navy, cause I was reading all kinds of books about the Navy and submarines and all of that and was fascinated by the notion.  So it's totally in contrast with art, see the world and that sort of thing.  Happily I did get a full scholarship to--to the university and discovered somewhere in there that I was not good at taking orders, so I actually applied to the ROTC or the high school equivalent to be a pilot, to learn how to fly, and the first day the officer in charge came in and he asked everyone to come to attention and I said, "what?".  And he said, attention, and I said, for what I came here to learn how to fly.  And he said this is a military requirement, you have to come to attention.  And I said, thank you very much and left, so I didn't--never learned how to fly.
Story_ID: 68324
Speaker 1: So when you were ready for high school graduation, did you have an idea of what you wanted to do--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --Or had you done enough art where you thought you learned enough?
Speaker 2: Well, in working on this effort to get a portfolio together for the scholarship, the high school instructor asked us to write a term paper on a subject that we were interested in, a part of which we didn't know anything about.  I was working my way through high school, delivering art supplies for those cities the largest art store to ad agencies and art directors all in the city, center city.  And the owner of the art store would let me take any new book home that I wanted, long as I brought it back undamaged and so I could go through any book, the library didn't even have these.  And I would take them home every week.  And I knew about illustration and painting and sculpture and lithography and all of that.  And I discovered this one little area called industrial design.  So as a result the requirement on the term paper was that you had to interview three people in the field and do the history of the area, whatever the subject was.  So I discovered the field, interviewed three professionals who were practicing in the city, decided that's what I wanted to do when I went to college.  By the time I finished the term paper, I got an "A" on it and I got the scholarship. I interviewed the head of the program at the college as one of my people.  And went into the major, much to the chagrin of my family, because they said "how many negro designers are there?" and I said "I have no idea."  So they went to the college and said we want to talk to the dean and want you to tell this young man how many people have graduated in this program who are African American, at that point negro.  And he said, none.  And they said, how many tried.  And he said only two in the history of the program.  One flunked out and one quit.  So I said what's that got to do with me.  I didn't understand it.  And they said well, you know, are there any jobs, and the dean said well, I don't know, never had anybody graduate.  So at any point, I decided to take it.  I wound up being an "A" student in it.  And because I had done the term paper, I knew more than most of the faculty about the history of industrial design, and pursued that from that point on.  I wound up working the summer of my junior year for the head of the department with one of the faculty from the program, and the two owners decided to go off to--one went to Europe to--Bill Sclaroff (ph.) was a top designer, went off to Europe to marry a German girl and his partner, my faculty head, went to Europe on a project in Algeria, and said, here's the office--I'm a junior in college, here's the clients that are gonna to be calling, just take care of it.  I didn't know anything.  The faculty member who was working with me said this is insane and he quit, left me with the office, the checkbooks, everything, and I wound up taking on projects by myself, hiring other students and paying them and paying projects through.  And it was a successful summer.  I actually made money.  So that was my kind of introduction in junior year to the field, first hand.  And then after graduation, I went to work for the office, and that's the firm I own today [Noel Mayo Associates, Inc.].
Story_ID: 68325
Speaker 1: How fast did it grow, I mean, how was business when you first began?
Speaker 2: Well, when I went to the work for the firm there were three people, it was a small little office.  And it grew up to about twelve under the original owners.  When I took it over with two other partners, we were about nine and then I bought the two white partners out and we were about six and we went up to twenty and I realized I really am not a manager of people, that--that many people.  And now we have three people here and three in Columbus [Ohio].  So it's a--we do a lot of work, but I use a lot of freelance people with very good skills, just not fulltime.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So tell us about some of your projects, what you've done?
Speaker 2: We've done everything from trade show exhibits all over the western world.  We've done work in Nigeria and Casablanca, Morocco, and Algeria, World's Trade Fair Show for the State of Maryland in '64 [1964].  We designed the State of Maryland exhibit, worked for IBM in Seattle, Washington, things I don't even put--size anymore, but they were a lot of fun, learned a lot, did good work.  My favorite area, I grew--I trained in product design, but I learned graphics and interiors and began to focus on those to be an inclusive kind of design issue.  So I've designed everything from office furniture, seating, desk to electronic products, dimmer or lighting patrols, medical equipment, that sort of things.  So it's a wide range, and most of the clients we work for, we try to work through the firm, doing not just one product or one interior, but all of their design-related issues.  That makes it fun.  Most clients enjoy it because they have a sense of coordination.  They're not dealing with several different firms, so that's what makes us a little different.
Story_ID: 68326
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me about a project, the Moroccan project, the World's Fair in Morocco?
Speaker 2: It was an interesting thing.  We had to bid on the project against other firms, so we low bid, right?  So you get the project, you have a year of work to prepare it, to design everything in it, to specify it.  We had to do it--design it in using English measurement and metric, so we had to translate the drawings from not only English to French so it could be built in Morocco, and I was in charge of the entire project so I had eight people working under me for a year.  We were finished ahead of schedule.  I got married the day before I left and my wife came over later at the end of the exhibit.  When I went there, I was the first black to ever done one of these shows so the local workers were all looking at me like "Oh, we're so glad to see one of color."  And it made a warmer relationship with the people setting up the show.  I enjoyed the local foods a lot and was invited to many dinners.  When my wife showed up, she was written up in the Casablanca newspaper as this poor child that sacrificed part of her wedding for me to come over to do this project.  So when she got off the plane, she had camera men there, people shooting photographs of her and she had no idea what was going on.  It was a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: How many people attended the fair in Casablanca [Morocco], do you know, or how many could attend daily?
Speaker 2: Probably 20,000 a day.  It was just hoards of people, literally packed right through the exhibit.  Because it was an American exhibit, the Red Chinese were there, the French were there, Germans, English, all had their own shows, but ours was the most popular.  We had a one-man helicopter that took off every half an hour.  So when that started up the crowd would see it and it would hover above the building and fly around and then land.  There was a product to be sold to the Moroccan Government for surveillance and things like that, with printing presses running.  But huge crowds would come.  It was all free and they were discovering all of these toys and games and food products and farm equipment, all to be sold to the government.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So the issue, in fact, was to develop business relationships between the Department of Commerce and the Moroccan Government to sell them wares, in effect.  And we desired to try to make that exciting.
Story_ID: 68327
Speaker 1: Now when you, when you consider a design, what are the things that you take into consideration, I mean, in terms of any design you make?
Speaker 2: In any design the first issue is what problem are you trying to solve?  Many people think--and there are many things that are designed just to look nice, but we try to solve physical and emotional problems.  So if we're doing a product, there's ergonomic issues can you push the button without hurting yourself, do you know what button to push first, is it easy to disassemble, to install, or whatever.  So defining the problem is the first task and then once that definition is there, usually part of the solution comes out of it.  The next step is to go ahead and solve the problem from an economic and aesthetic point of view and ergonomic issues as well.  So if we're doing a product, we doing it that way, if we're an interior it's the same issue.  What are you trying to do?  I showed you slides of a home, and the owner of that home said my problem is I want to entertain guests for business purposes in my home, and I want to be able to break them up into smaller segments so that I can interact individually with them.  And we created three different zones for that purpose.  Now it turned out he also wanted to come home and be comfortable and by making smaller spaces--smaller groupings, he could, in this huge living room, he wouldn't feel so lost and so it worked out for both purposes.  Maybe I could show you some of that later.
Speaker 1: What are some of the household items and stuff that you design or (unclear) quite a few products?
Speaker 2: I guess I'm best known for the dimmer controls, the lighting controls for Lutron Electronics, you'll see those products almost anywhere you go.  They're in most commercial spaces, most residential installations, you see 'em in movies all the time, and they're number one in that business, we've created a whole line of products that interior designers like to use, lighting designers like to use, and ultimately the consumer likes to use.  They can be used with remote controls, so you can dim it without getting out of your chair, whole house dimmers where you can push one button and all the lights will dim in different parts of the house.  So there's lots of functions in making those products so the people can understand them easily in their interactions was part of the major task.  And that being successful, the company is grown to be number one.  And we've worked with them for thirty-five years.  When I met them they had twenty-five employees, there are several thousand now.  And we've done the president's two homes, their office building, consulted on their first building and their last building.  Every building in between we've been involved in the aesthetic issues as well as functions.  So it's been a very good client, very long, positive relationship.
Story_ID: 68328
Speaker 1: What, what are some of the--I know you're one of so very few black designers, I mean, tell, tell me about trying to find others in the field and what the result has been?
Speaker 2: Well, it was almost impossible.  Very few--it's a field where most people don't know what an industrial designer is in the first place.  It's grown in popularity in the last ten years because design in general and the arts in general have grown in popularity.  There are more people that go to museums in a year that attend all the sports events in the United States in a year.  So art has become a major part of our life, although it isn't talked about very much. Individually we talk about it, but as a group it's not discussed that much.  So out of the arts very few people know what industrial designs are, out of that you have 10 percent of the population, plus or minus, being black.  Only a small fragment of them ever think about industrial design or figure out what it is.  So it hasn't attracted very many people to it, just as it hasn't attracted very many Caucasians.  It's still a very small field by comparison to engineering or advertising or architecture.
Story_ID: 68329
Speaker 1: We were talking about how people take design, industrial design for granted, don't even think about it, and yet everything we use is intentionally designed by somebody.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  And most people don't even think about it.  I mean when I had interviewed students were going into the field, I asked them what kind of things can you name that had been designed, you want to be in design?  And most never think of the kitchen appliances, the stove, the refrigerator, the microwave and knives and forks, dishes, the table, the cabinets, the light fixture and on and on, because there're just there.  You go to the store and you buy them and you never think, why did I buy it, why did I pay more for this than for something else.  And it's usually some aesthetic nerve that struck at that point.  And it's become more and more critical as more products become common.  What separates them is the aesthetics, the quality of the function and the aesthetics.  So people buy more and more objects that are beautiful that work well, and if it's not well designed and doesn't work well, they tend not to sell as well, they tend to sell for a lower price and people put up with a lot of pain.  We're good at putting up with things that aren't comfortable and we accept that in many, many cases.  But once you learn enough about it, you realize you don't have to put up with a poorly designed kitchen knife or microwave or whatever.  And people are paying more attention to that.
Speaker 1: I think this design, you know, back during the Cold War, you know the Russians were criticized for their lack of design.
Speaker 2: That's right.  They were engineering driven and they didn't marketing capabilities.  You didn't have a lot of choices as a consumer so it didn't matter, you know.
Speaker 1: So you stand in line for whatever you could get.
Speaker 2: Right.  Ergo, if you can get anything.  So if you got a car, it didn't matter what it looked like, and you just hoped it ran.  So that was the difference, we had this incredibly--I'm reading a book now called "The Rise of the Creative Class" [Richard Florida] and it's an intriguing idea that, that creativity is really one of the drivers, it was thought to be manufacturing or industrial systems.  But behind all of that is someone who's creative, who said we can manufacture more quickly or effectively.  And this country has been built around bringing people from all over the world and plugging them into this milieu and winding up with a very, very exciting and creative culture that we don't quite recognize yet.  And that creativity is what stimulates so many things in our society.  We got some creative criminals and we got some creative artists, as well.
Story_ID: 68330
Speaker 1: Okay. Now tell me about logo design.  What, what, what are the considerations in going to a logo designing.  I've seen, I've heard people talk about their logos and all the things that they want to go into a logo, a lot of ideas and dreams and they seem to all come to focus right at the logo, which seems sometimes to be--it would seem impossible to create something that's gonna really--
Speaker 2: Illustrate all of those things.
Speaker 1: --Ideas that they have about their business?
Speaker 2: That's true.  And we do a lot of corporate identity logo design development for small and medium companies.  And I found that the smaller the less experience the people running the company have, the more they want in the logo.  Say they wanted to express strength and creativity and excitement and heritage and all of that, and in fact, you can't do it.  So if you look at the logos that you can recall, you'll find that they're typically simple.  The "Nike" swoosh is world famous and it was done in a few minutes in effect by a young woman for $39.00 or something.  They just adapted it and they marketed it well.  And they've learned how to put it out front so everyone could see it, so you see that mark, you don't need the word "Nike".  If you see "Nike" you think of the swoosh.  How many logos, Shell Oil Company, BP Oil Company, logos for Lucky Strikes, designed by Raymond Loewy, in the circle with Lucky Strike.
Speaker 1: Like a Target?
Speaker 2: Right.  And you'll find that I teach this.  The best logos are the ones that are, in fact, like Target, they're square or round because your eye goes to that simple image more easily to focus.  Linear logos, things that are spelled out long words "Steelcase" or other kinds of names like that are more difficult to make as really powerful logos because they're so linear.  So squares and targets typically work with that.  So we try to get in essence a good mark that stands for quality first that can communicate quickly so that, all these other issues you can't put in the mark, they just confuse the entire image.  And--you can see bad logos every day, they just fall apart when you look at it.  It's hard to see, it's hard to read and the best ones are easy to see, easy to recognize, have some sense of power.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Two logos that I want to bring out and they're incredibly powerful.  The yin yang symbol kind of a Korean flag mark, the Japanese sun and the swastika, incredibly powerful marks, instill fear in everyone once they saw it, that just--it was marketed well, use the red on white backgrounds or black on white backgrounds, done by very good graphic designers during that period and used to inflict all kinds of emotional responses.  So it's been used by governments as well to market the country in good and bad ways.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Nazi logo endured despite--
Speaker 2: Unbelievable.  And once you see it nobody forgets it.  Even though it was based on an Indian form, that was flipped around, they took it and used it.
Speaker 1: --NBC, about fifteen years ago, paid for a new logo and they expanded the--
Speaker 2: They didn't know what to do, they--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the peacock (unclear).
Speaker 2: --Right, and they tried and they, I don't know, they paid over several million bucks for that logo and they wound up with a series of peacocks.  And it was a problem of introducing color into television and how do we say that and express it and keep this notion of the peacock and all of that, so.  It's a very challenging issue.   CBS has one of the best logos, the eye, and that--once you see it, you know it.  It's very, very powerful and it's been around and maintained effectively for years.  There are some debate that that original logo was actually done by a black designer.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And who worked at the firm and never got credit for it.  So we've been trying to find out about that through the school, track down--I've got some people who knew him, and they said yes, he did do it.  But we'll see.
Story_ID: 68331
Speaker 1: Now, when you were part of--you're part of an organization called the--it's a black designer organization?
Speaker 2: Organization of Black Designers [OBD].  A young man name David Rice, when he was in college, contacted me to join this thing he was creating, but it never got off the ground for about fifteen or twenty years later that it actually took off.  And he created a series of conferences.  The first one was held in Chicago [Illinois].  And I was one of the attendees.  And it was the first time in my life where I had seen that many black designers from so many areas that I never knew existed.  And that was the same for each one.  No one else had met more than one other black designer in their life.  Most had never seen another one.  I mean, we wind up spread all over the country, some in Europe, Asia, and it just nowhere to see each other.  So that conference evoked about 400 people into tears, and when David opened the conference with this wonderful feeling, the skills that were there, that we--none of us knew about.  So what you're doing, I've been doing on the other end, I've been developing an exhibit of designers' work that has traveled to all of the OBD conferences as well as to several major design colleges around the country and their panels, photograph of the designer, their background and examples of their work, according where it was designed by a black designer, for over twelve years.  All these little dishes you see he was in charge of, products for Sears [Roebuck and Company] and--
Speaker 1: I don't think most people have no idea--
Speaker 2: --Have no idea because in the journals they publish a name.  So in Europe they think Noel Mayo is some Italian guy, right, maybe Spanish.  But certainly they don't think of us as black.  The mustang, the new mustang about seven years ago when they redid it, was designed by a young black woman, the first female to be in charge of a major car program.  So trying to get that information out is important and you're certainly solving part of it, and we're focusing more just on designs, so.  It's an exciting thing to discover that--do you remember the General Motors' Cadillac with a kind of Rolls Royce tail ends back in the '70s [1970s], it had this flair?
Speaker 1: --Right.  That's an Eldorado?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was an Eldorado.  That was designed by a black guy.  Well, so what?  But you know, now--
Speaker 1: A lot of brothers had them.
Speaker 2: --That's right.  He knew what would make it work.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: So it's an intriguing area to be involved in personally.
Story_ID: 68332
Speaker 1: What's been your biggest design problem?  Have you had a big problem designing something?
Speaker 2: I did a, not--I could tell you the longest design project I ever had.  I designed a toggle switch dimmer.  It looks like a toggle switch and you can--
Speaker 1: Slide it.
Speaker 2: --Slide a little piece on the side and it goes to pre-set mode and whenever you turn it on or off, it's at that same point.  I sat down and designed it in about fifteen minutes and the owner came in and said, not, that doesn't look like our kind of product, I want you to do something fresher, more exciting.  Four years later at about forty different designs later they came back and produced the first design.  But every month I would have to come up with a whole new concept.  And they made models of these things, it was amazing.  That's the longest project I have ever been involved in, four years.  But other than that I haven't had any problems that I haven't been able to solve and find that most of them are function of understanding the problem and letting the subconscious work on it.  So even where I might be sketching, I allow my mind to work on it, and usually when I sit down it pops right out.  So I've been blessed or lucky that way over the years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I can see where once you get stomped, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Usually I don't, it's just been really luck.  One of the processes is normally you get a design assignment, you come back to your office and you work on it.  With Lutron [Electronics] I go there--I'm going there tomorrow, and they're gonna hand me an agenda which I haven't seen yet and a group of engineers and manufacturing people will come in the room, and I'll sit and literally design on the spot.  They'll tell me here's the problem here, here are the constraints, this is what we can't do and usually within an hour, I've solved it.  And they're all sitting there around me, waiting for me to finish a drawing, so it's an intriguing way to work.
Story_ID: 68333
Speaker 1: What do you see as a future of what you're doing in terms of the black community, you know, there are the young people that are being trained, I think you're moving to an (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well, more and more major companies are beginning to understand that diversity of design is really an issue.  That people from Asia and that American and African blacks, South America, all have a slightly different twist on how they see the world, and bringing that imagery into design is allowing them to get fresher answers than the traditional Caucasian designers who have been there, who were basically all training out of the Bauhaus period, clean, simple, solve the problem, I was trained out of that period.  And I'm looking forward to a richer, more aesthetically diverse impact that minorities will bring to the design world.  And you can see it in fabrics and fashion and that sort of thing, but it hasn't hit hard products like furniture and cameras and more popular items 'cause they're not there yet.  They're not involved in those areas yet, but I think you'll see that explosion of creativity happen in the next ten years maximum.
Speaker 1: That's good, that's good.
Speaker 2: It really is.  For example I--would you think of Peru having an industrial design program, would you think of Columbia, South America having an industrial design program, would you think of Thailand having two major colleges of design?
Speaker 1: Thailand, maybe.
Speaker 2: Thailand, right.  I think of Thailand as a small peninsula almost and design not being an issue.  There are two colleges of design and they send their students to the states for their masters or Ph.D. programs quite often.  But they have--all these countries have discovered that design makes the difference in their profit margins and then their success in the marketplace being competitive.  So Hyundai, for example, is a modest, moderately priced car that has hired a new designer and their new products are selling much more successfully.  Because they have to compete on this world-wide basis, so they realize that they have to train people and the only flaw in it that I see is that they're winding up sending everybody to the same U.S. schools for their fine tuning.  And what they really need to do is focus on their own aesthetic and bring something totally fresh to the programs.
Speaker 1: That's something that's a challenge to--
Speaker 2: It is.
Speaker 1: --African Americans--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --Try to bring their own aesthetic to--and there's even discussion in the '60s [1960s] (unclear) such thing.
Speaker 2: Sure, sure, 'cause you never saw it, you don't know what's deep inside--we didn't know our history, we didn't know our aesthetic background, we never saw the artifacts from Africa.  And as part of growing up, when I went to college I was told that there was no black art, African art, it was all craft, you know, even though Rockefeller built a whole museum around it.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And luckily my aunt and uncle at the time had told me this history of art and it really is sculpture the Benin bronzes created were better than Greek sculptures, you know they're casting bronze, beautiful pieces.  Well, we need to understand that and bring it back to the forefront so you can begin, enrich your life and the cultures of the rest of the world.  We spoke to--I had a speaker at the [Ohio State] University [Columbus, Ohio] a year ago who wanted--his dream was to open a department store in effect that sells cultural artifacts. Where would you get sheets based on Indian design or African design or Chinese, right.  Where would you get furniture that reflect some of those cultures.  And he searched around--he did open a store, a small one as a prototype, but he's having a heck of a time finding things that really reflect the rest of the world.  It's all been kind of Americanized down to this one cultural look and everything else has been kind of shunned as saying, "naw, not quite as nice."  In truth it's the reverse.  Those cultures have wonderfully rich materials and artifacts that we can draw on.  So I'm having two grad students work, doing research on developing a kind of new graphic for clothing or for other things, towels and window fabrics and that sort of thing, to see if she can come up with some--they can come up with some artifacts that are truly fresh but harken back to another culture.  They're having a lot of fun kind of exploring that idea.  And I think that'll change the planet in a lot of ways.
Story_ID: 68334
Speaker 1: Tell me in terms of aesthetic is there something that you've created that you're proud of that you think could come down in black aesthetic with you?
Speaker 2: No, I haven't done any, personally.  My work has been based on the Bauhaus notion, and I just kind of woke up realized that's all I've done, you know.  So it's in the back of my mind but I haven't done anything personally with it yet, busy teaching and selling design that makes money currently, and there are other manufacturers yet, so we'll be ready when it happens, when it's appropriate.  And I'm working on designs that I want to have manufactured myself, office system that I want to produce so that it could be FedEx-able so that you could have a whole work station that your wife could pick up in a box, bring it in the house, put it together and not get a hernia, and do it with one tool called a screwdriver, and I have a prototype sitting in the other room.
Speaker 1: Now what is it again?
Speaker 2: It's a home office furniture system.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  Those are pretty heavy these things.
Speaker 2: You can't lift--
Speaker 1: Yeah, they're made out of--
Speaker 2: (Unclear).  They're made out of flakeboard, fiberboard, outrageously heavy because they're basically so cheap.  But they warp over time and distort and fall apart.  And this is a much better system.  So we've gotten some grants from the state to develop the prototype and I'm modifying that some more.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what material are these made of?
Speaker 2: This will be made out of a foam material and--so it will be much stronger than flakeboard, but one-eighth the weight, so you can literally pick it up in two boxes and carry it in.
Speaker 1: It some kind of a laminate with a foam core?
Speaker 2: Foam core, yeah.  I can't give you more detail than that.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right.  I'll be making it.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You don't want to do that.
Speaker 2: Not you.
Speaker 1: No, I wouldn't do that.  The people of--I know I've seen quite a few museums get great use out of different kind of foam core displays.  You do design displays too?
Speaker 2: Exhibits and trade shows.
Speaker 1: Exhibits and trade shows.
Speaker 2: We've done all kinds of commercial trade shows selling products for companies as well as kind of business trade shows for people like IBM, major manufacturers that have to be broken down and moved easily and reassembled.  And they're a lot of fun.  You learn an awful lot going through the process, discovering how to express whatever that company makes, you know positive and informat--formative way. I enjoy that very much.
Story_ID: 68335
Speaker 1: Now is there any aspects of this business, the design business that we haven't touched on other than how to finance it, I guess.  But are there--
Speaker 2: That's one, yeah.
Speaker 1: --But you said just a few minutes ago a lot of people don't know who you are?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: They see the name so they can't discriminate against you because they don't know who you are by looking at your name.
Speaker 2: No.  And I could give you a whole series of stories but one of the issues which typically they see the work, they find out about Noel Mayo Associates [Inc.], they call up and say we'd like you to design something for us.  I go to the firm and I walk in and their mouths fall open.  It's like, "ah, you're Noel Mayo?"  Yes.  And that happened enough to the point where I started mailing brochures with photographs in them so that they wouldn't have to go through this.  I mean, they're trying to say, well we--I didn't really know, but you know, that kind of thing.  So got to mail 'em information before we actually met.  I had a white guy that worked for me who was a terrific interior designer, and I would take him with me to the first meetings cause he was gonna to run the job.  I usually do the concept and he would take on--finalize all the details.  And he would love to go and watch the confusion as the president of the company would say, "oh, I know" talking to him.  And he would just, not even stick his hand out, he say "no, that's the boss right there".  And they would get red and all the rest of it.  Because you just--no one really thought there were black designers doing that kind of work.  So I don't blame them, it's just the shock of not knowing or assuming that nobody was in that area and they're still very few, very few around the country.
Speaker 1: Is there an aspect of this design business that we haven't like really discussed or you need to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we've talked about the design process a little bit.  The aspect of how do you get a client is--
Speaker 1: --That's the toughest.
Speaker 2: --Is an issue and because most of the clients really have no idea that black designer exists, A, B, why should they hire them when their cousin's a designer and they could hire them.
Speaker 1: You spoke off camera too about getting to know Charles Harrison [HM] from Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, right.
Speaker 1: And Charles Harrison became, after many, many years head designer for Sears [Roebuck and Company].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And a lot of people, most of people didn't know that he was black.
Speaker 2: That's right.  Did he ever tell the story of his first encounter with Sears?  He was doing freelance work for the people at Sears, but they never--the design director's boss never saw Harrison, they just saw the work.  So they kept feeding him work and feeding him work and after a while, they were so successful, they said, you know would you like to work here, and he said, would be great, you know.  He was a young man out of college about three years or so and maybe a little longer.  So they offered him a job, the designer in Sears, offered him a job and then when the actual interview came up with the designer's boss there, he got a letter saying sorry, the job doesn't exist.  So the design director kept feeding him work for years and then finally they hired him about ten years later, but it was quite a struggle.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: He was a very, very talented man and very creative, good problem-solver, did some great work.  And ultimately they learned that it was to their benefit.  It didn't matter he was good at his job and made good things happen.
Story_ID: 68336
Speaker 1: I was talking about getting clients is part of the challenge for any designer and in particular for minority designers, finding, getting access to publicity and that sort of thing is one the critical issues because the typical journals do not publish photographs of the designer, they'll use the designer's name.  Architects are saying they also have that problem, black architects typically get most of their work through competitive bid for city state or federal dollars where there--it's not an old boy network, they can actually bid and have a better chance.  There is a firm in Columbus [Ohio] called Moody Nolan that is--Moody and Nolan are both African American.  One's an architect from OSU [Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] and the other is an engineer, and they have grown a business of over a hundred employees to the point where they're not on minority bid lists, they go straight after major contracts from major companies around the country.  And to my surprise 98 percent of their employees are white, you know, they're there, but hiring and finding blacks who come into the business, they just haven't been able to do as well.  So that's another kind of issue.  At one point my firm [Noel Mayo Associates, Inc.] was predominantly white, because I couldn't find black kids.  If they're really good, I wanted them to get as far as they could and if they could go in a major corporation, I thought that would be better.  In more recent years, I've tried to focus on bringing in minority people who are talented.  Tony Ute(ph.) in the other room is from Cameroon, and he got his masters under me at Ohio State and I hired him, he's just terrific talent.  We're looking at kind of planning issues for community groups, for profit groups, where you can go in and say this is a concept for a hotel that'll make it more successful than the traditional hotel.  And we can design the entire thing.
Story_ID: 68337
Speaker 1: You, you design the interiors of stores--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --As well too, to make them more efficient.  That's part of the reasons (unclear) right, make them visually easier to shop?
Speaker 2: To shop more easily, to find things more easily, to attract you to the things that are more profitable for the store owner.  Color can be used to move people through spaces to make them look at certain things more readily than others.  Lighting is a critical part of that.  The human eye is designed to look at the brightest thing in any given space.  So if I lit a match over here, your eye would go right to it, you could not ignore it.  So by lighting things differently in a store, you could make people move to it, go to it and buy from that spot.
Speaker 1: What are some of the values of some of the colors, for instance, red?  If I had a business and painted it red, I mean, other than the traditional red light district--
Speaker 2: Well, that's the first thing everybody thinks of.
Speaker 1: --What else would be the benefit of painting it red?
Speaker 2: Red turns on a pituitary gland and actually makes you want to eat more, drink more and spend more.  It raises your blood pressure.  So if you look around at restaurants, you won't see blue restaurants, very rarely.  You see blue seafood restaurants and blue Greek restaurants.  And both of those would do better if they had red, because it really does make you want to eat more and spend more.  Blue turns off the pituitary gland and makes you want to eat less and spend less.  It lowers your blood pressure, pink and beige and other colors do do the same thing, they lower blood pressure, make you less active.  See red is a very powerful color and it affects every ethnic group.  It's not one type over another.
Speaker 1: There was a myth about black people and red.
Speaker 2: Black people?
Speaker 1: There is a myth about black people and the color red.
Speaker 2: What?  I don't know the myth.
Speaker 1: It's just, you know the color red is attractive to black people, that we wear more red than other people would wear, and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I haven't been able to see that.  It's usually--Red is very powerful.  It goes all the way back to the Egyptian makeup time.  The museum in New York did an exhibit on makeup, right.  Red has always been used by people of light color on the lips, 'cause no male can resist red lips.  They can't help it they look right at it and want to move to kiss it, right?  And there were all kinds of other sub-messages attached to that.  But women know the power of red, and if you have a blue-based red in here, (pointing to tie) versus a yellow-based red in there, men will be attracted to yellow-based red and woman wear blue-based lipstick if they are with other women.  If they are not trying to get a man, they wear blue-based lipstick or even browns.  If they're after a man, they'll use a yellow-based bright red lipstick, and it works every time.  I give a lecture on this so it's--and it absolutely is true, it never fails.  And it doesn't even matter what ethnic group again.  There's a theory that Caucasians need red lipstick because their lips are thin so you can't--the signal to attract the male is not as powerful, so they use lipstick.  Where African-base people have fuller lips, so they're easier to spot the signals as you become aroused, your lips expand, right, they get a little fuller and people can spot them more easily.  So the need for color lipsticks on African types is not as great.  The signal's already there, physically.
Speaker 1: I heard in a lot of institutions there painted this pale mint green color, I mean, well it's a pale green, not mint green.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, hospitals.  Yeah that was done to again lower--they didn't know why, they just knew it worked.  It lowers your blood pressure, it makes you calm, it helps the doctor doing surgery not have contrast problems.  It gives them greater contrasts and see the cuts and things more readily.  So there are lots of powerful reasons for color.
Story_ID: 68338
Speaker 1: Black is one of the most powerful colors.  If you think about who wears black, what are all the cliches that wear black.
Speaker 2: Ministers.
Speaker 1: Ministers wear black, religious people, mafia, cops, you know, you have these executives in a book called "Dress for Success" they did studies that show that executives, the president and CEO wore black.  Anyone below him that wore black would disappear within a year.  They would be fired because it meant that that person was after his job.  So only the key players in corporations there wear black.  Designers wear black a lot 'cause they think it's cool and actors and artists wear black all the time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, even the (unclear) in Chicago [Illinois] you can tell when you're approaching them everybody's got black on.
Speaker 1: Every black sweater, whatever.  And conversely, if you're a student and you wear black to a class, you got a different grading problem.  And we've proven it through a number of those studies at OSU [Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio].  Kids who wear dark colors to class are perceived immediately as not being as bright or as intelligent.  No puns.  The kids who wear tan or white colors to class the first day get a higher grade across the board.
Speaker 2: The first impression.
Speaker 1: First impression the first two weeks.  I tell a student if you want to improve your grade, next quarter where a tan, light tan, beige colors and white shirt for the first two weeks, then it's over.  You've established that image, and they--we can't erase it.  And the students who come back and said, you know, I did get better grades, but I don't know if I'm working harder or what.  But it does turn out to be true.  So my question is should blacks wear black?  Talk about profiling, you want to go--to die right away?  Get caught driving in a white neighborhood wearing black clothes, you're in deep trouble.
Speaker 2: The Black Panthers wore black.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Black tams and black leather jackets.
Speaker 1: And they saw it as a--it is a powerful color.  But it frightens--it frightens other blacks as well as whites.  If you walk down the street in a totally black outfit, people will look at you and slowly, just slightly, shift out of the way.  They can't help it.
Speaker 2: Ninjas dress in all black.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, yeah.  No question about it.  So use of color in design is a critical issue and not many people understand that it's a psychological issue relative to color application.  So it could make you eat more, drink more, sleep better.  There have been tests that show that what you wear if you're blindfolded and we just took color panels and put it around your body if you're wearing a swimsuit, we have totally different muscle responses, and you have no idea what the color is.  Red makes you stronger, blue a little bit weaker, pink a lot weaker, so that, all of that hasn't been studied enough.  So my theory is the colors that you sleep on, the colors in the room, the colors of your underwear, women wear bright colored underwear.  Men are starting to be offered bright colored underwear the last ten years or so and that has a physiological effect, but it has not been studied enough to verify it and it's been studied to a limited degree and it hasn't been published, so the general public has no idea about the--it's powerful stuff.
Story_ID: 68339
Speaker 1: What about shapes of letters.  It just, it just occurred to me in art, you're in commercial art, you have your choice of thousands of fonts.  What do, what do you--how do fonts affect reaction?
Speaker 2: There are fonts that say strength.  There are fonts that say new, contemporary, old, ancient.  So those forms you look at them and we all identify pretty quickly with that notion, I mean, you can show old English type to anybody and they'll say, well it's old, you know it's not contemporary.  You can show a sans serif face, serifs have the little feet at the bottom, so you could have an "I" it does that at the bottom (indicating).  If you show a san serif, it's no foot, it's just square.  That san serif is identified with contemporary, clean, etc., serif with more tradition.  So we influence people aesthetically all time.  And newspapers rarely use the san serif type face for their mast head.
Speaker 1: Well, it would seem as though it would be easier to read, but I don't know if it really is.
Speaker 2: It is easier to read on a mast head, but most companies use a serif type face to say tradition.  We've been here a long time, was it, "USA Today" san serif type face.  So they're saying, no, we're new, we're contemporary, we're today, not old or anything else.  That happens in packaging so when you go to the store you're looking for fine old marmalade.
Speaker 1: (Unclear)(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Right.  You don't look for hip new marmalade.  If you do it's gonna be san serif, so all of that's part of it.
Story_ID: 68340
Speaker 1: Just saying that you are still a young man, you've been successful in what you do, what's your future like, where are you going next?
Speaker 2: I'm pretty excited about it because I was with-- entering another phase and that is to design for manufacturing.  A whole series of things for hotels and homes and that sort of thing that we will have manufactured and sold in projects that we're developing now and for royalties so that, instead of designing for a fee, that stops once you stop drawing, you design for a royalty, the payments come--
Speaker 1: On a regular basis.
Speaker 2: --Forever.
Speaker 1: People are using it.
Speaker 2: This chair was designed by a fellow when he was in college.  He sold it to Noel Furniture.  He made a prototype of the arms and the frame and all that.  And he wound up making a million bucks the first year.  And every year thereafter he got the same percentage, the sales maintained and grew for about ten years and he did quite well, one chair ten years payment, big difference.  So I'm looking more at that, doing more work in South America and Africa and possibly Asia and creating a kind of different company.  We're working on it now to create a company where we pull in top-notch minority designers, black designers from wherever they are.   And that's the result of working with OBD [Organization of Black Designers].  There's a guy in Texas that does aircraft interiors for 747s for the sheikhs in the Middle East, top-notch stuff I mean you walk down the aisles and the lights come on as you approach and as you leave the lights go off and all kinds of tricks, but the aesthetics are terrific.  He's probably the only black in the world that does that.  He works out of his house doing planes that are worth 20, 30 million dollars, you know.  Well that kind of mentality brought to new manufacturing techniques would to me be very, very exciting to kind of mass produce that idea into hotels and ships and things like that.  So that's the future I'm looking forward to.  It's not--I have a theory, and it's not just a theory, it's been pretty much proven that we're designed to live about 150 years in very good shape.  We're the ones that screw it up by drinking, sodas and eating bad food and sugar and all the rest of it. So there are people all over the world live over 150 years and they're perfectly active.  It's not this bell curve life where it lasts ten years.  They'd go up, at peak performance.  And that's intriguing to me.  I think more and more people are beginning to recognize that the quality of life is critical, it's not just having money, it's not just having an education, it's not just having things, it's having a quality of life that you would enjoy and you can share with other people and that's really critical.  As people discover that then design becomes a major part of that, it just does.
Story_ID: 68341
Speaker 1: Have you, off camera I asked you about the history of black designers.  Can you share some of that with us?  Benjamin Banneker is one I knew of, I guess who would qualify, designed the clock I think.
Speaker 2: Right.  The shoe lasting machine [Jan Matzeliger]. I'm working with Tenssion (ph.), we've talked about, we haven't done anything.  The fellow who's collected several thou--I think he's up to five or seven thousand black patented products.  And he's got the second volume coming out now of black inventors.  And it's a list of who and what they did, etc.  But it doesn't tell the economic impact of what was done.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right?  This country responds to that idea so that if you say the shoe lasting machine was a terrific product, this man-made machine that could show--sew the sole onto the upper at a reduced cost, right.  Before that it was sewn by hand and shoes were very expensive.  This machine allowed millions of people to suddenly be able to afford shoes that they could never afforded before.  The impact on America alone was enormous.  It created an entire industry, tens of thousands of jobs.  Half of New England was based on shoe manufacturing at one point and then fishing.  The automatic lubricating cup [Elijah McCoy], which was installed in trains.  You think of the notion of having--the Indians--most people don't know this but when the Indians attacked trains, they knew when the train was gonna stop cause they had to get out and lubricate the wheels because they started to burn and slow the train up.  So they just ride along and watch and realize this idiot's gonna have to stop and lubricate this thing, we're gonna attack it.  When that cup came out it was over, it changed the entire industrial complex in this country.  One black invention changed everything.  The mills in New England making fabrics and machinery all had to stop periodically to be greased.  When the automatic lubricator cup came in, they didn't, they could run 24 hours a day.  And that changed manufacturing around the world.  Well we don't relate to that in the little diagrams of books that you see, it just says the first lubricating cup.  But the impact is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Got to attach a story to it to make it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --I'd like to illustrate that.  I'd like show that and the economic impact, the employment changes.  White sugar, the fellow that created it, now I can't think of his name, created really cheap white sugar.  I think was responsible for the expansion of slavery in this country.  Up until then it was cotton that was it.  White sugar was very, very expensive to refine.  And he made a fortune himself but because of that they had to bring in more slaves to expand that market, the ability to deliver cheap, white sugar.  Those kind of stories need to be expanded so you really understand the relationship, not just this isolated concept that, oh you designed a or invented a traffic light, you know, that changed the entire country, it changed safety around the world.
Story_ID: 68342
Speaker 1: Tell me now, piggy backing on that, what do you see, even though you're still young as your legacy to this point?
Speaker 2: To this point it's been getting products out there that are around the world, being sold all over the world for over thirty years.  Nobody--most people have no idea I done them, but they're there, and helping young people get into the business and into education in design.  And I know I've been a kind of trendsetter, a pacemaker in this field even though I'm relatively young, I've been there consistently for since 1960, so soon it's coming up on forty years, forty-two years in the field, and I'm very excited about the next phase, so, that's persistence, perseverance, a ton of luck.  It's been fun.
Story_ID: 68343
Speaker 1: Okay, now, this is slightly different.  Well before I ask that I'll ask you this--what are your hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: Really, that we've got to--we're at the edge of breaking out of the brainwashing that's happened for 400 years.  And my excitement is there's a contrast here that we'll break out of it and discover something we haven't discovered, the notion that we're not inferior, but in fact, so far superior to whatever we dreamed that we can't even imagine it.  I think that's a different kind of vision.  That--just think of the concept, if you went to Africa to capture slaves, what would you try to capture, the weakest or the strongest?
Speaker 1: Try to capture the--well.
Speaker 2: The healthiest or the sickest?
Speaker 1: The healthiest, of course (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.  You want to have them get back here and do some work.  So if you took them and put them on an island where they had to wait and in incredible conditions for the ship to come and half of them die, what was left.
Speaker 1: --The strongest of the strongest.
Speaker 2: Right.  And then you put 'em on a ship where their height was the height of this desk right, where they had to lay in fecal matter for weeks at a time and when they came up, half would be dead and the other group would try to kill themselves, what survived to get here?
Speaker 1: The toughest of that bunch or the greatest survivors.
Speaker 2: My argument is there has never been a group genetically bred without its knowing it, yet this group exists right here in this country.  The only people that don't know it is us.  And that's just the way I think people understand.  The fundamental question is why is there such resistance to blacks having equal opportunity, why?  When they were slaves, they couldn't be educated.  If they were educated, they were killed. If they learned to read and write they were killed.  I had a professor just come back from--a colleague had just come back from South Africa where they just graduated their first African--South African with a degree in education, college, first in the history.  It was against the law all these years to get an education from a college in South Africa.  You could only get to high school.  Why?  Why would you resist that?  Why would you resist here up until the '20s [1920s] and after slavery and why would you resist it there up until twenty years ago?
Speaker 1: It's got to be fear.
Speaker 2: What is that fear about, what is it about?  I think it's about the notion that you've been bred differently.  And that's--that's all we could do and if you look at it from that point of view no other group has survived such kind of negative powers against it for so long.
Speaker 1: The average black person in the community probably does not realize that.
Speaker 2: No.  I didn't even think of it until about ten years ago.  I mean the notion--when I say that to any person, black or white, they gonna go "wow, I never thought of that."  They never thought of it.  [Adolf] Hitler tried to do it.  He tried to breed a master race and it didn't work, it physically didn't work.  They got all kinds of spin-off children that were deformed and everything else.  So there is something going on that once we discover it, the issue is I think we're here to help fix the planet rather than screw it up, and that's what we're here for.  And I think other groups here to do the same thing.  And if we can do that we can have peace and all the rest of it.
Story_ID: 68344
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  I really haven't thought about it that way.  In one sense I don't care 'cause I believe in now.  After me fine, whatever's there let people be enriched by it or not, it's not my worry or concern.  There's enough going on right now, and it'll take care of itself.  I mean I'm sure most of the people, [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and others who have left incredible legacies really weren't thinking about that.  They were trying to do what was appropriate at the moment.  And that's all we can do.
Speaker 1: Sir, I thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
