Story_ID: 482101
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey, ma'am can you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is Leatrice B. McKissack [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack], L-E-A-T-R-I-C-E, B for my maiden name, Buchanan, B-U-C-H-A-N-A-N, married name McKissack, M-c-K-I-S-S-A-C-K.
Speaker 1: All right and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Seven, twenty-seven, thirty [July 27, 1930].  Keytesville, Missouri.
Speaker 1: And how, how do you spell (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's K-E-Y--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --T-E-S-V-I-L-L-E, Missouri.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation as of today is retired CEO and chairman of the board of McKissack and McKissack.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Architects, engineers, construction managers.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is March the 13th, 2007.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in my residence at 6666 Brookmont Terrace, Nashville, Tennessee, 37205.
Story_ID: 482102
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone we interview and they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I guess seafood.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that encompasses all of it, all the shellfish.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, red.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, fall.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Now that varies, I guess I could say Paris, France.  I've been seven times.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or, or saying?
Speaker 2: Life is a bowl of cherries.  (Laughter) Live it while you can.
Story_ID: 482103
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Archie Buchanan] side.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name was Catherine Buchanan, I'm sorry, Catherine Brummell Buchanan Taylor [Catherine Buchanan Taylor].
Speaker 1: Okay how do you spell Catherine?
Speaker 2: C-A-T-H-E-R-I-N-E
Speaker 1: Brummell (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Brummell, B-R-U-M-M-E-L-L
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Buchanan, you have and then Taylor, T-A-Y-L-O-R.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth was November 20, 1904, and she was born in Fowler, Indiana.
Speaker 1: I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm sorry, she was, no that was her mother, she was born in Trenton, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: T-R-E-N-T-O-N, Trenton, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side.  There, her grandfather was a Dutchman, hence the name Brummell, and her grandmother was a Native American.  And I guess her mother [Mary Brummell], you know, my grandmother on my mother's side was just, I don't know the, I know she was born in Fowler, Indiana.
Speaker 1: Fowler, Indiana?  Is that, is that near Missouri?  Is that near--
Speaker 2: That's near, isn't that Purdue [Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana] where?  Well Purdue is in Indiana, isn't it?  Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Lafayette [Indiana], In- ye- yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Lafayette.
Speaker 1: Lafayette.
Speaker 2: So it's close to Lafayette--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Indiana.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  Now were the, is the tradition that those ancestors near Lafayette were born free?  Since Indiana is a free state or, I mean--
Speaker 2: I guess--
Speaker 1: --would they?
Speaker 2: --they were.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm sure they were, because see when I think about, and I saw my, I guess that would be my great, great-grandfather 'cause my mother always talked about her grandfather.  He was a very robust person, tall and she never, for a long time, we had forgotten the name of her grandmother, 'cause she always called him [sic. her] the little black lady, but she was a very dark native, Am- you know, American and so he--
Speaker 1: So is she, was she Native American or black and Native American?
Speaker 2: No she was Native American.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, but--
Speaker 2: 'Cause my grandfather, her father [Anais Brummell] looked just like an Indian, he was dark skin, straight hair, with the high cheekbones.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he lived to be up in his, he died in '86 [1986], he was eighty-six, when he passed.  Ma- her mother which was my grandmother had a stroke when she was probably in her sixties, then she passed probably by the time, she lived for about five years and I remember as a child and then she passed.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so your, your grandmother was--I'm, I'm trying to figure out who was who?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my grandmother on my mother's--see my mother's mother--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --was born in Lafayette or Fowler, Indiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now beyond that, I don't know too much about, what her were.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, it was, so would have to been--the Brummell came on my grandfather, on my mother's paternal side. The grandfather (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay so that's the Dutch and the Indian side?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But on my mot--grandmother's side, I really don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Though she was a fair skinned lady, tall.
Story_ID: 482104
Speaker 1: Are there any stories that are passed down--
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) from your grandparents [Mary Brummell and Anais Brummell] about--
Speaker 2: Not that I can recall, because see, my mother [Catherine Buchanan Taylor] when she married Archie Buchanan, that was in Keytesville, Missouri and of course, I'm trying to think, he probably had five brothers and one sister.  He was, his origin was Scottish and, what did my brother tell me recently?  Teddy [Ted Buchanan], he was Scottish and a mixture I guess of African American but he was, he looked just like, I mean, I looked just like he did, except that he had sort of reddish hair and I had one brother under me that looked, was very fair with red hair.  And, of course, my baby brother who's coming to see me on Thursday, we look like twins basically.
Speaker 1: Is there any, is there a story about how your, your grandparents moved to Keytesville?  Or, or your, your, well your mother and father meet, moved to Key- did, were they--?
Speaker 2: They lived--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See my father was born in Keytesville.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we have a, he had a farm, he lived on a farm and it was like my brothers had gone back to the bicentennial, it was a hundred years old back in, what was that?  Seven- 1976, and they had a big celebration with the plaque and all like that.  All of our neighbors when we were growing up, there weren't that many blacks in Keytesville, and all of our neighbors were white so I grew up around whites all along, never ever seeing any difference.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And his, my father's brother lived to be 101 and he just passed like two or three years ago and his name was Talmage Buchanan [ph.] and I went back to see him probably in the, oh maybe around the mid-'80s [1980s], after I'd taken over the company [McKissack and McKissack], I had to go over to Kansas City [Missouri], so I just managed to go on over to Keytesville, and that was the first time I had been back.
Story_ID: 482105
Speaker 1: Now did your mother [Catherine Buchanan Taylor] have a chance to go to school when she was growing up?
Speaker 2: She went (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In high school or college?
Speaker 2: Yes she finished high school and then, the interesting thing about my mother was, when my father [Archie Buchanan] died at the age of seven, my mother went back, went to college and she, but she was teaching in those days 'cause she had a high school, you know, diploma, and she was teaching in Keytesville [Missouri].  But she stopped all of that, went back to college and my [maternal] grandparents, the one, Mary [Mary Brummell] and my, you know, the one who was Brummell, took care of us while mom was--and she came to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] and finished her degree and then she came back.  And then we moved and then on the other hand, her aunt [Harriet Wilson Taylor] was married to A.A. Taylor, and so they were coming to visit us and they had an accident and she was killed instantly.  So it's probably five years after that that he decided to marry my mother who had five children and bring us all to Nashville [Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which was a wonderful thing to do when you think about it.  So she came and we ended up, I was thirteen, when I came, so that meant that my youngest brother [Ted Buchanan] was six and my oldest brother [Harold Buchanan] was fifteen.  I have four brothers and I was the only girl.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right so, you're, was your, your, your mother's aunt was married to A.A. Taylor?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, but she, you know, they were older, I guess A.A. was probably seventeen years older than my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: At the time that they got married.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were how, how old were, were you?
Speaker 2: I was in, 1943, so they got married in 1943.
Speaker 1: You were thirteen?
Speaker 2: Thirteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right so, that's when you moved to Nashville?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay. (Unclear).
Speaker 2: So after that we moved to Nashville.
Story_ID: 482106
Speaker 1: Your father [Archie Buchanan] died early, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When I was seven.
Speaker 1: You were seven?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I don't, I just remem- I don't remember too much to tell you the truth about my--only thing I remember about my childhood is, I was three years, four years old, maybe and my oldest brother [Harold Buchanan] told me, "Lea [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack] look up in the sky," and he had thrown a brick up and (laughter)--you know how kids, boys will do?  And the brick came down and landed on my head and knocked me out and I think my, my mother [Catherine Buchanan Taylor] said I was three or four.  Hopefully it didn't do any damage, I'm still here but, (laughter), I'm just saying that was something that happened--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --I do remember that, I remember the brick coming down.
Story_ID: 482107
Speaker 1: I do remember also in Missouri how, you know it was white--we lived on a farm which was really, I always say very nice because children get a chance to learn a lot about nature.  I can remember the great harvests, you know?  They would have all these wonderful crops and in, in the fall, you know, how they harvest the crops?  Of course we were little children and what we would have a ball because all of the--they'd have to have the hired hands come in to help them to do whatever it is they were doing, all we did was have a good time playing and eating, you know.  And the food was fabulous, I remember that, 'cause growing up on a farm you're never hungry, 'cause they would have some of the best dinners, but by the time I came to Nashville [Tennessee], see I, I, you know, left all that behind.  But it gave to me, it let you know so much about the beginnings of things, you know, you get a different perspective and I've always enjoyed walking in the woods and on Saturdays, like we have a place here that's called Radnor Lake [Radnor Lake State Park, Tennessee] and when my girls [Andrea McKissack, Deryl McKissack and HistoryMaker Cheryl McKissack Felder] used to come home, it's like maybe a four or five mile trek, and they would always say, "Mama, you gonna make us go walk?"  I said, "We're all going to Radnor Lake and we're gonna walk," and it was wonderful exercise for you.  So, I think that bond that I had with nature came from the fact that I grew up on a farm and really enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 482108
Speaker 1: Now what was your father's full name?
Speaker 2: My father--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --was Archie A-R-C-H-I-E, Archie Buchanan.
Speaker 1: And what was his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh God, I can't tell you that, I know he was, I just don't know.
Speaker 1: Was he much older than your mother [Catherine Buchanan Taylor] or?
Speaker 2: Yes he was.  My mother was born in 1904, well maybe he was eighteen- cou- could it be 1899?  Or something like that?  There are people, yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: It could very easily be.  She was born in 1904.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause she would be 103, if she were living, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So he was born, in the late 19th century?
Speaker 2: Late--
Speaker 1: What was he ten years older than her?
Speaker 2: I don't know--
Speaker 1: Five years?
Speaker 2: --if he was seventeen or eighteen.
Speaker 1: Seventeen or eighteen?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: If she was born in 1904?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was born in 1880s.
Speaker 2: Back in--
Speaker 1: Something like.
Speaker 2: Eighteen eighty [1880] uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah, or 1881, something like that.
Speaker 2: 'Cause he died at fifty-something.
Speaker 1: Okay and where was he, was he from--?
Speaker 2: He was born in Keytesville, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Keytesville.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right in Keytesville, and he was a farmer?
Speaker 2: He was a farmer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He had a huge farm, over two or three hundred acres and his brother, they farmed the land that brothers, of course they had help--
Speaker 1: Now di--
Speaker 2: --and all the machines and everything.
Speaker 1: Did you know much about his personality at all?
Speaker 2: Not, I don't remember, you know as a child I wouldn't remember his personality.
Speaker 1: Do people say that you take after him in, in any way?
Speaker 2: I haven't had anybody to tell me that.
Story_ID: 482109
Speaker 1: I mean, you know, it's like my mother [Catherine Buchanan Taylor], once--you know, she had five children, and once he [McKissack's father, Archie Buchanan] died, and then she, well, well she went to school and when she came back, then it was the process, of course that my aunt, great aunt [Harriet Wilson Taylor] was killed and so, when we came to Nashville [Tennessee] it was just, you know, it's really sort of where my memories sort of pickup and then they might be a little vague now, 'cause I was thirteen and I remember I had completed the eighth grade and we were going to, I went to Washington Junior High School [Nashville, Tennessee] and then on to Pearl High [Pearl High School; Pearl-Cohn Entertainment Magnet High School, Nashville, Tennessee] and then to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, well tell us about A.A. Taylor, I may think this, we probably should--
Speaker 1: Now he was, first of all he was a Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] Ph.D. in 1929, his undergrad had been done at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], when he graduated he, from Harvard, when he got his Ph.D. rather, he came to Fisk and he was not only the dean of the school, but he also taught a history course 'cause that was his love.  And he did res- a lot of research and he wrote books, you know, about the Reconstruction of, in North Carolina, the Reconstruction of South Carolina, the last one was 'A Negro in Tennessee,' [sic. 'The Negro in Tennessee, 1865-1880,' A.A. Taylor] but there are two others I can't call up right now that he wrote.  And I remember when, in those days, you know, they received, he received royalties from his books, and of course he was more of a historian than he was of writing for money and so when he died in '54 [1954], he forgot to tell my mother about the copyright laws, so they went into public domain, the books did.  And you know, that makes you ill when you try to buy one of his books and they go as high as five hundred and something odd dollars on eBay.  So I said, well, there wasn't nothing you could do about it 'cause she just didn't know about the copyright laws, I learned about it, she died not knowing about the copyright laws.
Speaker 2: Well they're not republishing his books are the- are they?
Speaker 1: Well other people, yes, the publisher can republish them and that's what I'm saying, my brother was telling me, you try to buy one of his books now, what it cost.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would think the, the original edition would be that much probably but--
Speaker 1: Yeah probably so--
Speaker 2: --but, well no--
Speaker 1: --but we have some of the originals, but hey, that's just one of those things when you're not really like a writer writing for, you know, to make your living, then you don't, apparently he didn't think about it, although he knew, he, when he was living.  And, of course, he probably had planned on telling my mother but he had this cerebral hemorrhage and, at the office on his way home for lunch one day.  That was in 1954, June of 1954, he never came out of it.
Story_ID: 482110
Speaker 1: Tell us about growing up, you know, both in Missouri and I guess in Nashville [Tennessee]? Wh- what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, all I can remember growing up in, in Missouri was it was extremely cold and the winters were icy cold and you would s- the snow would come in November, and didn't see the grass until May and then we had to be bused to Marceline [Missouri] to go to school and, but we, the fact that we lived in the country, so my brother and I would, it wasn't that far, we had to walk to get the bus and then we'd have to get on the bus every evening and come home.  But we got up every morning and rode the bus into Marceline, it was about maybe ten miles.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your school in Marceline?
Speaker 2: Mo- Harrison School [ph.], oh, I have the diploma, and I had the nerve to put it up, I think it was the, the teacher's name was Anderson [ph.], and it said Marceline School, elementary school, it was called Marceline elementary school [Marceline Colored School, Marceline, Missouri].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I can remember that the, we would, my brother and I had a bridge to go over once the bus dropped us off to go to our school and sometimes the bridge, the overpass would be iced over and we would literally be on our knees crawling over this overpass to get over it 'cause it was so icy, you couldn't, you know, there were no cars running up over it.  So we would just get on our knees and crawl up, but you know in those days you had snow pants, so you didn't get cold, 'cause you had so many clothes on but it was, that was the hardest part about it.  My mother [Catherine Buchanan Taylor] didn't survive, didn't live as long as she should have because she had rheumatic fever as a child because it was so cold and then she had pneumonia in Missouri, you know when we were growing up, every winter it was just icy cold.  And once she came to Nashville she didn't have pneumonia anymore but it, the rheumatic fever weakened her heart as a child, and that's what took her out at the age of sixty-seven.
Story_ID: 482111
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: The sa- the smells were good old food cooking and I mean we would have these huge, it was sort of like a compound, you know, where there was a huge house where we all--and there would probably be maybe fifteen for breakfast, lunch, dinner.  Breakfast was always--'cause we used to always laugh as children, what would take the, our aunts and, so long and our mother [Catherine Buchanan Taylor] to get breakfast ready, you know what I mean?  And then, by the time they got through with breakfast and they would eat a lot in those days to carry them I guess through the day, because they were working in the fields and carrying on.  And then, of course, you had supper and supper was as late as breakfast was late and we used to always say, what are they doing? But of course, we were having a good time playing as children, sitting under the trees and in the summertime it was absolutely delightful 'cause you remember?  I don't know what the name of the tree is but they had these long like beans on them and I remember my brother pulling them down and he said, "We can smoke these Lea [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack]," and I said, "Smoke them?"  (Laughter) You know, but we couldn't really smoke them, but we used to have a lot of fun.  And we'd have a quilt out in the yard and you'd have huge tree and we'd be under this tree and we would just play games and have a good time.  And of course, sounds, you would hear the sounds of the horses braying, or the geese, and my aunt, her thing was, she always dealt with the fowl, she had all kinds of beautiful chickens and geese and ducks and all like that and then of course, you know, you had horses, cows, sheep, I don't remember any goats, but we had all the other things.  So, you heard all of those sounds all the time, you know, not too many automobiles in those days.
Story_ID: 482112
Speaker 1: 'Course by the time we got to Nashville [Tennessee] it was like, you know, going to school and, you know, you loved all of the different, I did always like the different seasons, you know in the fall and walking to school because we could always walk in a group to school.  I guess Pearl High [Pearl High School; Pearl-Cohn Entertainment Magnet High School, Nashville, Tennessee] was about three blocks from the Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] campus and I remember one time we thought we were gonna be late and a train--we had to cross the railroad track that was on this side of the, of Pearl High and one of my father's [McKissack's stepfather], one of the secretaries was on her way up to the Fisk campus, and the train had blocked the street, you know, so they couldn't get across and we couldn't get across and I guess there were about eight of us crawled across the coupling on the train and she saw us and went straight to my daddy and told him I saw your children climbing through the coupling of a train which was dangerous.  But we were just desperately trying to get to class, we didn't wanna be late for class, 'cause you know they gave you demerits when you were late for school.  But by the time we got home that evening, my father was ready to kill all of us.  He said, "I can't believe you did something stupid like that, don't ever do that again." He was very, very protective of us.
Speaker 2: Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And I guess it's because he had never had any children of his own and here he had, you know, responsibility for five children.
Speaker 2: This is A.A. Taylor?
Speaker 1: Yes, and he never wanted me to ride a boys bicycle and he even told me don't ride a boys bicycle, I'm gonna get you a bicycle.
Story_ID: 482113
Speaker 1: And so, on one night he [McKissack's stepfather, A.A. Taylor] and mom [Catherine Buchanan Taylor] used to walk, in those days it was safe to walk around the campus and after dinner they would always take their evening walks.  And so one time, and we lived next door to, Arna Bontemps, they--
Speaker 2: He was the, he was the librarian at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] right?
Speaker 1: He was the li- he came, well we came the same year so they had a family of five and we had a family of five, and we just gelled right together, in other words, there oldest child was a girl, our oldest child was a boy and then their next child was a b- was a boy and I was the girl.  So we could all go to the movies together, we used to have more f- and it went on down the line to my baby brother and their last child was Connie [Connie Bontemps] and Connie was like a year younger than my brother Teddy [Ted Buchanan] and then I guess somewhere later on, the Bontemps had another son, but he was much younger than, I guess he was probably, I'm trying to think how old was, Alex [Alex Bontemps] was born, oh God, I can't remember but it was, we were in college then.  But as it turned out, we had a good time growing up on the campus 'cause we would all get together, and my- we formed a little club when we were in high school [Pearl High School; Pearl-Cohn Entertainment Magnet High School, Nashville, Tennessee] called the A.I.T. Club [ph.], and we didn't tell anybody what it stood for, but it had the Greek names like alpha, iota, theta, or something like that.  But the thing that made it so nice is, we had the nat- the Girl Scout leader, who was Mrs. Holloway [Josephine Groves Holloway].  Her husband [Guerney Holloway] was a physician as Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and so, you know, in those days you were not allowed just to go to anybody's home, your parents had to know them.  So Mrs. Holloway, being that she lived across Charlotte [Avenue] and they had a building next to where they lived that was like one of the Carnegie Library buildings, that was built early on and she would let our club meet in this building and so we could dance, and but she was always the chaperone.  So because of that, we used to walk from Fisk campus across Charlotte to their home, but it wasn't but about eight blocks and in a group, all the campus kids, it was Tubby Johnson [Henderson A. Johnson], Henrietta Lanier [ph.], who now incidentally lives in Munich [Germany] and I have, I've been to Munich and I, you know, had a chance to see her.  We grew up together, she was an only child and so we used to spend the weekends, or the nights together whenever we could, her father was Dr. Lanier [E.A. Lanier] who was, you know, head of the English department.  We had a fabulous time growing up on the Fisk campus, there was not ever a dull moment.
Speaker 2: Now, wh- was Tubby Johnson related to the president?
Speaker 1: Tubby Johnson, no, no he wasn't.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: He was head of the athletic team.  But he and my father were like this, they were so close that when Tubby Johnson, Sr. died, my--he died like in April and my father died in June, they were just that--he never stopped grieving for Tubby.  They used to travel together and everything and apparently they had been at this, you know, around the same time, they had one son, Tubby Johnson, [Henderson A. Johnson, Jr.] who finally, he passed I guess about three or four years ago, he lived in Ohio, in Cleveland [Ohio] as a matter of fact.  But, so we all were good friends and we would all travel together, we would all go to the movies together, we just had a good time.
Story_ID: 482114
Speaker 1: Okay, now let's go back to grade school now--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and, just, now you were a good student from what I understand?
Speaker 2: Great student, I was a good student, I really made straight A's through elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay, di- did you have a favorite subject in grade school?
Speaker 2: I guess I liked all of them, we had an excellent teacher, I mean he was a, he was really good, I mean he set the foundation for my brothers and for me and--
Speaker 1: This in the Marceline School [Marceline Colored School, Marceline, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  He was really good and--
Speaker 1: Was this like a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a wa--
Speaker 1: --segregated school?
Speaker 2: It was--
Speaker 1: A segregated school?
Speaker 2: --a separate--
Speaker 1: A separate black school?
Speaker 2: Separate black school, and one teacher but he was wonderful.
Speaker 1: Do you remember his name?
Speaker 2: Anderson [ph.]
Speaker 1: Okay, Mr. An--
Speaker 2: Mr. Anderson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Never forget his name.
Speaker 1: All right, and he taught all the subjects, huh?
Speaker 2: He taught all of 'em and I mean, I wonder how he did that now?  When I think back and I guess there might be, there might have been twenty children from grades one through eight, which sometimes it might be two people in the fifth grade, but I mean he, he managed it very well.  He would send us outside to play and he would stand, I can remember him standing in the window looking at us and if he pecked on the window that meant you were doing something wrong.  Think about that today.  I taught school for seventeen years when I first got out of college [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], nothing like that, (laughter), that is I got aw- I stopped in 1969, when I stopped teaching and the kids were getting to be so bad then.
Story_ID: 482115
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a favorite subject?
Speaker 2: Oh, in, when I was in elementary school [Marceline Colored School, Marceline, Missouri], I just liked them all and it was always sort of easy to me.  But now, in high school [Pearl High School; Pearl-Cohn Entertainment Magnet High School, Nashville, Tennessee], I received the Harris Medal [ph.] for the highest average in biology, chemistry and physics, so I got the Harris Medal, it was called the Harris Medal.
Speaker 1: Now was that unusual in high school for, for a female student to receive the, the--
Speaker 2: Probably.
Speaker 1: --the prize for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --science?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Probably was, 'cause I recall, yeah, I'm the only one that got it that I recall.  I'm sure after me, or before me there could have been males, I don't remember all I know is the year I graduated I received the Harris Medal.
Story_ID: 482116
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, but did you have any career aspirations when you were a little kid, I mean, before you--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, to be a teacher.  That was my aspiration to be a teacher, I guess 'cause my mother [Catherine Buchanan Taylor] was one.  And, so I just liked school, you know.
Speaker 1: What, what was the name of your junior high school?
Speaker 2: Washington Junior High School [Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And incidentally, the McKissacks ha- Moses McKissack III had built Washington Junior High School and Pearl High [Pearl High School; Pearl-Cohn Entertainment Magnet High School, Nashville, Tennessee] too.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, the McKissacks built all of the, in those days, integrate- before integration, they built all of the black schools in Nashville, Tennessee, and in surrounding areas.  And I was fortunate enough to do, I did Alex Green [Alex Green Elementary School, Nashville, Tennessee], what else I do?  Jere Baxter [Jere Baxter School; Jere Baxter Middle School, Nashville, Tennessee] and when I retired, I was doing an addition to McKissack School [Moses McKissack Middle School, Nashville, Tennessee], which Cheryl [HistoryMaker Cheryl McKissack Felder] finished up for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did, did you, were you aware of the McKissack architectural--
Speaker 2: I wasn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) construction?
Speaker 2: --aware of them until I went to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].
Story_ID: 482117
Speaker 1: Calvin McKissack was on the board of trustees and he and my father [McKissack's stepfather, A.A. Taylor], being that he was dean are good friends--
Speaker 2: Okay, did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and later on, my husband and I always said that we believed they put us together simply because it was in--I had met my husband at a tennis court on Fisk campus [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], I met him later 'cause I was taking tennis lessons, later I met him at a party, before he went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and so we started corresponding while he was at Howard and whatnot.  But at the same time, you know you're young and energetic and, and I remember one Thanksgiving holiday I was going out with this tall Texan and my--and he was like a junior and I, well he was probably a senior and I was a sophomore, and my daddy said to me, "So well, where are you going?"  I said, "Out with this guy from Texas."  He said, "Do you think that's wise?"  And I said, "Why not?"  He said, "Well don't you expect, aren't you expecting D- ," he used to call him DeBerry [William McKissack]--, "in?"  I said, "Sure, but I mean he's not here today is he?"  I said (laughter), "I'm going." And my father just insisted upon me not going and I'm telling you twenty-five minutes later the phone rang and it was DeBerry on the line saying he was coming to take me out.  And I said to myself, now how did this happen?  But I re- later on, as we dated and courted and whatnot, and eventually getting married, I think my father and Uncle Calvin had a lot to do with it, 'cause I met my, one of my brother-in-laws who was doing a lot of work at Fisk and I had a terrific crush on him, he was so good looking as a, you know, you in--I, I met him when I was in high school [Pearl High School; Pearl-Cohn Entertainment Magnet High School, Nashville, Tennessee] 'cause he would come over to the house and talk to my father and I used to think, oh isn't he good looking.  But that was Moses McKissack IV, you know?  And he was already out practicing 'cause see my husband was the baby, he was the youngest of six boys and so he was still at Howard, so.  But I had met him before he even went there, I had met his brother, before he even went to Howard.  So that's when I first became aware of the McKissacks.
Story_ID: 482118
Speaker 1: Once you did, you didn't have a chance it doesn't seem like--
Speaker 2: Doesn't, I think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and you were going--
Speaker 2: --I tell you when I think about it, and the next thing I know we're going out to their home for dinner, my parents [Catherine Buchanan Taylor and McKissack's stepfather, A.A. Taylor] and me and whatnot and so I just sort of felt like that thing was put together.  It couldn't have been a better deal though.  (Laughter) Because my husband [William McKissack] was one of the nicest, easy going person you could ever have for a husband, number one and he was the best father that any child could ever have and he loved his di- girls [Andrea McKissack, Deryl McKissack and HistoryMaker Cheryl McKissack] dearly.  And he used to tease them all the time and tell them, now you need to make a good record in school, good grades, you gotta have good grades, 'cause he said, first of all, you're going to Howard University [Washington, D.C.]; all of our children went to Howard, they really didn't have a choice 'cause my (laughter) husband used to say, "You can go anywhere in the world you wanna go but I'm only paying for one school and that's Howard."  So what choice did they have?  Then he used to tell them that it if didn't make good grades, he'd send 'em to MI, and I said, "What is MI?"  He said, "Mississippi Industrial [Mississippi Industrial College] in Holly Springs, Mississippi," (laughter).  I said, "You cannot do that to our girls."  But then you would not believe this, my fi- one of the contracts that I had was at Rust College [Holly Springs, Mississippi], which is across the street from MI and the first time I was going to (laughter) visit the campus and I looked over there and I saw these boarded up buildings and all, and one of buildings it had Mississippi Industrial, I said, "Oh my God, that cannot be where my husband was gonna send our girls," (laughter), but it was.  But we, I laughed about that for a long, long time and of course, now he had had a stroke and we couldn't talk about it, you know?  And it was just unbelievable to me, he would do this to my girls.
Story_ID: 482119
Speaker 1: But I did three buildings at Rust College [Holly Springs, Mississippi] and it was just delightful to go down on that campus, Dr. McMillan [William A. McMillan] was the president and I mean, he would call me up, well it, it was very interesting how I got the first project. It pays to know people.  The board of trustees there was a female on the board of trustees--okay it's gonna come up in a minute, her name was, Rankin, her husband was Tony Rankin [sic. E.E. Rankin], he had been the president of MI [Mississippi Industrial College, Holly Springs, Mississippi], and that's where my husband [William McKissack] was saying he was gonna send our send our girls to MI because my husband knew him.  All right, she landed, she ended up being on the board of trustees at Rust College which is right across the street and when it came time to do this wonderful economics building, she says, "I have a friend, Dr. McMillan, that I want you to interview for this job, and she's now running her husband's company [McKissack and McKissack]," and that's how I got the interview and I got the job.  But I always know, knew that she played a tremendous role in helping me get that project.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, two more after that one.
Speaker 2: So, in relationships important in business (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Relationships are so important and of course you've got to do go work too, you know, but--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --you know, but I always enjoyed going to Rust College and when, one time I had already been promised the project and I don't mean to get ahead of myself, but you know--
Speaker 2: We well, we--
Speaker 1: --you gotta get it while it--
Speaker 2: --we're way ahead but go ahead.
Speaker 1: That's all right, you have to get it while it come to the brain.  My daughter Deryl [Deryl McKissack], Cheryl's [HistoryMaker Cheryl McKissack Felder] twin sister was home and she was studying, I mean she was, all the girls would come home and work with me before they were, you know opening their offices in the other cities and the call came in around 3:30 that afternoon from Rust College that we had to be in Holly Springs [Mississippi] the next morning at nine o'clock for this present- to do a presentation to the board of trustees to get the second job.  Well, I'd already been told I had the job but you're dealing with federal funds and you have to do, they have to interview three different people, or three different companies and so everybody was busy and it fell, my lot and when you own a company, you end up having to do some things that, you know what I mean?  So I said to Deryl, I said, "Deryl, I guess it's just you and me baby, we're gonna have to go."  She said, "What do you mean mama?"  I said, "Just what I said, the first thing we gotta do is get our presentation together."  So we started on that like four o'clock in the afternoon; it was nine o'clock when we got back out here, we hadn't eaten any dinner, I don't even know whether we ate any or not.  The next morning at four o'clock we're going out the door down there, she said, "Mama, it's dark out here, the stars are still shining." I said, "Sweetheart, by the time we get to the Tennessee River," 'cause we had to drive, "	it'll be dawn and we'll be closer to where we have to be," and I said, "This is what you have to do if you own a company and there's no one else that can do it but you."
Story_ID: 482120
Speaker 1: Now, back to, where were we?
Speaker 2: Well, we had you at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].  Now when you came out of high school, you came out of Pearl High [Pearl High School; Pearl-Cohn Entertainment Magnet High School, Nashville, Tennessee], what were they, well--
Speaker 1: That was also (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I, I didn't (unclear) but--
Speaker 1: --we had talked about that I was salutatorian when I graduated from high--
Speaker 2: From Pearl (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) From Pearl High.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Did you have any favorite teachers or mentors at Pearl?
Speaker 1: Oh, I had, are you kidding?  Oh we had wonderful teachers at Pearl.  In those days, one of them in particular was Mrs. Mildred Freeman, her husband was a surgeon at Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] who incidentally operated on me when I was about fifteen.
Speaker 2: What happened?
Speaker 1: Oh nothing, it was just a little cyst that I had.  Mildred Freeman would go down, when you would come in out of, of junior high that called it in those days, so when you left Washington [Washington Junior High School, Nashville, Tennessee], you went to Pearl but you all would, all of the students would go in to the auditorium, Mrs. Freeman would come in and pick out her homeroom class and she picke- and when she picked you out, you were hers for three years and she kept her children, or students that she picked out, but she did not play, she was an excellent teacher, she was an English teacher.  So she taught you English but you were in her homeroom too, so she kept tabs on you, she more or less, course my father [McKissack's stepfather, A.A. Taylor] being that he was a Ph.D., he would pick out the subjects you know, 'cause I took Latin, believe it or not, that was such a dead dog.  That was my least favorite topic in the whole high school, but I had to take two years of Latin 'cause my daddy said, it teaches the derivative of words and everything which is true. Boring but, you know, hey, what can you do?
Story_ID: 482121
Speaker 1: And so, my favorite class outside of the English class I guess was science, I enjo- and mathematics, I always enjoyed math and science and so I think it was also being pushing along by my father [McKissack's stepfather, A.A. Taylor] whose good friend was Percy Julian [Percy Lavon Julian] and he was into the sciences.  And so, dad inspired me to major in chemistry at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], however after two years of chemistry, and staying in the laboratories in the spring time when everybody else was out having a good time on the campus and you'd be up there shaking acid off your hands and things and whatnot.  I told my daddy, I said, "I don't wanna be a chemist." It broke his heart, I said, I think I'll just have to be a mathematician.  So I, but I, look I was exempted from my exam in chemistry, I did--Dr. Brady was then, St. Elmo Brady, he did what was called a walk, a chalk and talk, that was your examination.
Speaker 2: Now what's that? A chalk and talk (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) A chalk and talk meant that he would tell you to go to the blackboard and he wou- he would tell you to start writing, 'cause he would start asking you questions and you had to write the answers on the board, equations, after equations after equations, but I got an A on that chemistry exam, thank God.  And, as a matter of fact, I made straight A's, and then I took scientific German and I had a German teacher, Dr. Galler [ph.], who was wonderful, made straight A's in that.
Speaker 2: Scientific German, so the German language is applied to science?
Speaker 1: Yes.  That was rough, oh God was that rough, that was a rough scie- and I'm st- I should have been taking French, but no I'm taking scientific German, but as it turned out, I made A's in that so it wasn't so bad, the only D I had on my record was when we were in humanities, which you had required subject in those days.  And you know humanities dealt with philosophies and all the different ideologies, just a lot, well I don't know what possessed the little group of us, what got in our brain, that before the finals we would go down to the place on Jefferson [Street] called the Peacock [ph.] where they served beer and we all sat down there and drank up I don't know how much beer and then had to go take our exam and in this exam, they took it and you had to go to the chapel, you'd have two seats, you know, you couldn't see anyth- I mean, you were just like isolated and I never will forget one of my buddies, who's still my buddy, (laughter) we're still good friends today, she just started laughing, 'cause we looked at the test and we didn't know (laughter) you know, you just drew a blank and then she was raising her hand, talking about I gotta go to the bathroom and you're not supposed to be excused, but anyway I got a D out of it.  So, you know, when my daddy found out about the grades, I said, oh God, I said I'm so glad I got a D, I thought I had failed the course and of course you know you do something stupid like that once, you don't ever do it again, but don't ask me what possessed us.  My oldest brother [Harold Buchanan] was in the class and we just decided to just live it up and we lived it up and most of us flunked the test, so that was the only stupid thing I think I did when I was in college.
Speaker 2: Okay now, now were you, now this is in college?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: With the D, okay.
Story_ID: 482122
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In high school, oh I did do something in high school, my little friend who lives in Munich [Germany] now, you know she was an only girl and I was the only girl.  My brother and several of our classmates dared us to play hooky, (laughter) I don't know what possessed us to do this, but you know, teenagers are crazy and so--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes this is, this is true.
Speaker 1: No.  Teenagers are literally crazy.  And I, I know and I mean, 'cause whatever possessed me to do that, I'll never know.  But anyway, they dared us in Mrs. Freeman's [Mildred Freeman] class, 'cause remember she's our homeroom teacher.  So Henrietta [Henrietta Lanier (ph.)] and I planned our little deal what we were gonna do, we were gonna meet, 'cause I lived on one side of the campus, she lived on the other so, we were gonna meet right across from the chapel in the music rooms, we were gonna hide our books behind the piano 'cause they had, you know music for the students at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], (laughter), so that's what we did.  And then we walked straight down Jackson Street to downtown Nashville [Tennessee], went to (unclear) in those days, in those days you know, they had record booths, and honest to God, my daddy [McKissack's stepfather, A.A. Taylor] did not believe us nor did her father when we told them that we had stayed in those record booths all day long playing records, we went out and got something to snack on and we come back in there and just, you know, it's nobody, 'cause we had to be very cautious, you know they had truant officers in those days and they had people checking on students who were playing hooky, but they didn't catch us.
Speaker 2: Now just for the record, a record booth.
Speaker 1: A phonograph booth, you know, they--
Speaker 2: So you--
Speaker 1: --had doors and they had individual compartments and they had the record player in there, so you could go get all these wonderful classical records or whatever they had and we played records all day long.
Speaker 2: --go inside the booth, close the door and there's speakers in there and--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you're able to get to hear the, hear the--
Speaker 1: But see my father had forbidden me to go downtown and go down an alley to a movie, in those days, blacks could not go in the front door and dad was such a civil rights person, he said you--no child of mine will go down an alley and climb, I don't know how many flights of stairs to go to a movie and we did not do that. I just never had any de- desire to degrade myself of going down an alley, I just wouldn't do that, 'cause he really instilled that in us and so, he just could not believe that we had spent all day long in a phonograph booth.  And so the only thing we did wrong, by not getting back a little earlier, we thought we had timed it right, my baby brother [Ted Buchanan] was coming home from school.  No, he was in the yard and the students used to pass by from Pearl High [Pearl High School; Pearl-Cohn Entertainment Magnet High School, Nashville, Tennessee] and he asked one of the, my classmates, well where is?  He called me sister, "Where my sister?"  And she said, "Your sister didn't come to school today, she's sick."  That's the tale my brother had said, oldest brother [Harold Buchanan], so my youngest brother runs in the house to confront my mom [Catherine Buchanan Taylor], "Mom what's wrong with sister?"  She said, "What do you mean what's wrong with sister?"  "She didn't go to school today 'cause she's sick." I need to slap him when he comes in here on Thursday for that.  (Laughter)  Anyway we had a three story home on the campus, still as an English Tudor home, I came through the kitchen door and we had three steps that went up to the landing, 'cause there was a door, this was in the kitchen, there was door.  I opened the door and I was going up the steps to my room and my mother was standing at the top of the landing of the second floor with her hands on her hips saying, "Where have you been?  Your daddy is on his way down to Pearl High to talk to the principal." Now you know I nearly died right there.  And so, she sent my brother to catch him, and to tell him to come back, that I was home, thank God, he didn't get to Pearl High, 'cause we probably would have been suspended.  But we might as well had been, 'cause my daddy put a hurting (laughter), he didn't hit, in those days they didn't spank you or anything, 'cause you're too old for that, he just took all of our, took my privileges away and called up Henrietta's father and took her privileges away, there would be no spending the night, no going to the prom, no doing anything for a month.
Speaker 2: So you missed the prom?
Speaker 1: Yes!  I missed that first one, the junior prom, 'cause this was our junior year, (laughter), so you know, we couldn't go to any basketball games, and he just grounded us for a solid month, they both did, they were in sync with their punishment and we were so, I wanted to just literally just choke my little brother but he didn't know.  But anyway, that's one stupid thing I did during my (laughter) high school that was the only thing I did.
Story_ID: 482123
Speaker 1: So, it was no question you were gonna go to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], I guess, huh?
Speaker 2: No, there wasn't any question about that.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And then of course, and I, it was such a, Fisk was really in its heyday then, it was such a beautiful campus. It was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now you graduated from Pearl [Pearl High School; Pearl-Cohn Entertainment Magnet High School, Nashville, Tennessee], it was nineteen--?
Speaker 2: In 1947.
Speaker 1: Forty-seven [1947], okay.
Speaker 2: I graduated in Fisk in 1951. And then taught, started teaching in 1952, and then started working on my master's [degree] in 1954, I got a master's in phycology from Tennessee State [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well we, were--tell us about the, ha- what Fisk was like in those days?
Speaker 2: Oh Lord--
Speaker 1: 'Cause you hear these stories--
Speaker 2: --I know today (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) people about Fisk--
Speaker 2: --Fisk, and I just--
Speaker 1: --in those days.
Speaker 2: --had a call before you all came the, from The Tennessean asking me to write a letter, editorial, I'm working on it now, about Fisk, well, one of the things is that Fisk had probably the largest endowment of any HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] in those days.  The president, when you know it was white, Dr. Thomas Elsa Jones, Charles S. Johnson was the first black president at Fisk University, he became president when I was a sophomore at Fisk, 1940, no he came in 1947 [sic. 1946], so was I a freshman?  Forty-seven [1947], yeah, 'cause I think in '57 [1957], was when--anyway it was the cultural center in Nashville [Tennessee], I mean when they had the music arts festival always in the spring, if the Fisk people wanted to go, you had to get there early, early, because the Nashville white community was coming to Fisk, it was the cultural center. And it was just so much going on, I mean.  Okay Langston Hughes was in Arna Bontemps' home, at least once a month, I met so many, Josephine Baker came to Fisk, I done forgot many of the people that were--you know, we grew up with these people around us all the time.
Speaker 1: Yeah the--
Speaker 2: The Harlem Renaissance, like Aaron Douglas who was--I had to play bridge with him in my father's [McKissack's stepfather, A.A. Taylor] and mother's [Catherine Buchanan Taylor] home at the age of fourteen, because they played, that was there, you know, what they socialized in playing bridge every other night.  And when, and Aaron Douglas wife, Alma [sic. Alta Sawyer Douglas] lived in New York [New York], she never moved to Nashville, so he would go visit her in the summertime, she probably came to Nashville two or three times.  And, you know, not stay that long but Aaron grew up, I mean I grew up with Aaron Douglas and him being around all the time, not even realizing the significance of these people like Arna Bontemps was like my second father.  And Mrs. Bontemps [Alberta Johnson Bontemps] in the end, you no she lived to be ninety-seven, and just recently died about what?  Three years ago and she was, after my mother passed, it was like she was my mother, I would pick her up, we used to walk together, she was walking with me, climbing going to Radnor Lake [Radnor Lake State Park, Tennessee] in her eighties and she contributed her longevity from all that walking we used to do.  We used to log over ten miles a week, and this was after I started running the company [McKissack and McKissack] too, because I had been in the habit of walking, so I just had to keep it up and on the weekends I would spend a lot of my time with her.  But being on that campus was just unbelievable 'cause you had all of the arts, on the Sundays we would go to chapel, my brother and I went down the aisle and joined Fisk Chapel [Fisk Memorial Chapel, Nashville, Tennessee], under Dr. Faulkner, who was William J. Faulkner, he was such a wonderful person.  And he and his wife had a home up in Wildwood, so that's how we started going to Wildwood, New Jersey, after you know, when I was married and we would take our children to Wildwood, New Jersey and always rent a, an apartment and stayed for two weeks but that was because of the Faulkners. They had a home up there and they were such wonderful people and they lived across the street from us when we were growing up as children on the campus.
Story_ID: 482124
Speaker 1: One of the things that my mother [Catherine Buchanan Taylor] did, and I thought was really great for me was being that I was the only girl, she didn't treat me like I was just a girl, she used to tell me you can do anything a man can do, you know what I mean?  Like just when my brothers, I remember one time, they went on a vacation in the summertime, so she said, "Well Lea [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack], you'll have to cut the yard," you know, 'cause we had a push lawn mower, so I'd be out there pushing that lawn mower.  But on the other hand, she taught my brothers how to cook too, they had to cook, they had to do everything in the house that a woman would do. Which was a good training.  I remember one time I was over in, God I don't even know where I was, Northwest, Missouri, Northwest State Missouri University [sic. Northwest Missouri State University, Maryville, Missouri], was in Missouri, 'cause I flew into Kansas City [Missouri] and they picked me up to take me to the campus and I did like a three day deal over there.  The dean of the school had asked me if I'd come over and speak to the students, this was after I was running the company [McKissack and McKissack] and I did a, they did a radio interview with me and they did a television interview, I had to speak to the general public, I had to talk to classes and I mean the president of the university had a reception in my honor.  It was really, you know, nonstop, but it was so interesting, it was a very interesting school, I have a plaque back there somewhere that they gave me for coming over there doing that.  But one of the questions they asked me was, how did you, how did you think, or how did you feel in taking over a male dominated company?
Story_ID: 482125
Speaker 1: Yeah you were talking about how your mother [Catherine Buchanan Taylor] raised you to--
Speaker 2: Oh my mother raised us t- we could all do everything, was we had to do everything, my brothers, I never had to wash dishes, my brothers did, 'cause I liked to cook and so I was cooking at an early age.  My mother really did not like to cook, she did it out of necessity, but I enjoyed it and my father [McKissack's stepfather, A.A. Taylor], I was making apple pies by the time I was thirteen, and I was making these pies and I would always have to make, they were so good, my father said, "Well one thing about it child, if you ever need a job, you could go into making apple pies."  But I would always have to make one for him and then one for the family, so I was making two apple pies, three apple pies and in those days you know, he had to have dessert every evening so I loved to cook, I ended up doing the same thing for my husband [William McKissack], but it was always relaxing to me.  And just like when I was running the company [McKissack and McKissack], I wasn't always able to do it on the, during the week, but on the weekends, I would always cook these big meals and prior to me running the company and I was a homemaker for fifteen years, after I was told I couldn't teach anymore because of my health, I had three major operations by the time I was thirty, by the time I was forty, I mean serious operations.  And as a result of that, it helped me to get--I'll tell you the best time of my life when I was a homemaker, I enjoyed each and every day of it, like I used to tell my girls [Andrea McKissack, Deryl McKissack, and HistoryMaker Cheryl McKissack] every day is a holiday to me.
Story_ID: 482126
Speaker 1: So when you graduated from Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], you taught school for--
Speaker 2: I taught school for seventeen years (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) seventeen years? Was it high school or grade school?
Speaker 2: I taught elementary it was, and then--
Speaker 1: For different schools or did you get a chance to--
Speaker 2: Different. I only taught at two schools. My first assignment was in East Nashville [Nashville, Tennessee], at Meigs Junior High [Meigs Junior High School; Meigs Academic Magnet School, Nashville, Tennessee], but I taught fifth--well in those days, you would keep a class for three years, I taught fourth, fifth and sixth grade which meant that you had your students for three years, which was if you had a good teacher, a good thing, if you had a bad teacher, it was a bad thing, but we had a fabulous principal and he was always checking to make sure.  So it made it good for those of us who really enjoyed what we were doing, you had to be a good disciplinarian, you had, you know what I mean?  And I was found some letters that, from one of the parents, there and a picture of one of my students, because he, they were, the father was a dentist and I think the mother had gone to Fisk and they moved from here to Dayton, Ohio, Dr. Walton, Martin Walton. And they had two sons and I taught Martin, but I was looking through all the old photographs and ran across Martin, Jr.'s picture, but his mother, they lived here in Nashville [Tennessee] for years, 'cause he was a Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] graduate.  And I had the good fortune of teaching their son--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --Martin Walton III, I think and he was a good student but his mother was a very helpful parent, she would cut out articles and, you know and just send me a lot of wonderful material and all like that, but she thought I was an excellent teacher.  So she kept me informed of what Martin had become and everything and I ran a, she even sent me his picture when he graduated from college and I have that picture and I ran across it the other day and I thought, oh my goodness, it really jogs my memory way back, you know.  But, I don't recall teaching his son, 'cause his son was in, I mean his brother, 'cause he was in another class, but I enjoyed teaching and having those three years to mold a student was really good.  So I taught at Meigs for nine years which meant I had three different classes of students.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's beginning in 1951?
Speaker 2: Two [1952].
Speaker 1: Fifty-two, [1952], okay.
Story_ID: 482127
Speaker 1: When I left Meigs [Meigs Junior High School; Meigs Academic Magnet School, Nashville, Tennessee], I was, I went out on maternity leave. Our oldest daughter [Andrea McKissack], was about ten then I guess, or nine and our twins [Deryl McKissack and HistoryMaker Cheryl McKissack Felder] were born, in '61 [1961], and I stayed off for nine months, I was trying to make it a year but I mean honey, (laughter) being a--it wasn't easy, I said, I got to get outta here these kids are driving me, you know, two babies at one time is something, just kind of (unclear).  So, I went back to work, I called up the, I'll never forget this, I called the superintendent, I said, I'm ready to go back teaching, and he sent me to Wharton Junior High [Wharton Elementary and Junior High School, Nashville, Tennessee], and over there--
Speaker 2: How do you spell that one?
Speaker 1: W-H-A-R-T-O-N.
Speaker 2: Okay Wharton Junior--
Speaker 1: Wharton. It was called Wharton Elementary and Junior High, 'cause over there, I taught, we had a, the principal knew my parents [Catherine Buchanan Taylor and McKissack's stepfather, A.A. Taylor]. Mr. Ross [ph.], he was delightful, and we went to him one day, we taught fourth grade, fifth grade and then sixth grade, but we didn't keep our kids for three years.  So we, what we did and, and they called it in those days the intermediate department, we all got together in the intermediate department, there might be about twenty teachers and we went to him and said, we wanted to team teaching, it was at the beginning of team teaching.  He said, "Well, I tell you what you do, if you want my approval, you're gonna have to write it up and submit it to the board of education, and if they approve it, then you can do it."  So we met, wrote it up, took us probably a year, and presented it to the board and then he allowed us to do team teaching, whereby he put us all on one wing, fourth, fifth and sixth grade, where we could exchange, the children could exchange classes and they started exchanging classes in the fourth grade and we found that this helped them with discipline, it, when they went to junior high, they didn't have to worry about changing classes, and it made them feel like they were grown up like the junior high students.  And all we had to do was to defend our program to the board of education which we did and we were able to do that, so at Wharton Junior High, I taught nothing but math and science and then we would work it out whereby we would divide the children into groups, you know, and we deal with the lowest on the scale and we'd take the test scores and do it like that.  And sometimes, you know, we had to shift them around a little bit, but by, it wouldn't take us long to figure out, but it was a good camaraderie among the teachers and we just had the time of our lives.  And we'd take them on tours and trips and things like that, so at that time, so that was really great.  And so, I taught, we each had to have a homeroom, but then they would change classes and do this and we would just have a ball doing it.
Story_ID: 482128
Speaker 1: Now, during this period in time when you, you were like very familiar with your husband's [William McKissack] work? His business (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I ain't know anything about my husband's work. The only thing I knew about my husband's work, number one was how to spell the world architecture, I did know that, number two, the only time I was involved was when they would have dedications of the buildings, and he would say, "Lea [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack], I need you to go to this," and I would go.  Outside of that, Uncle Calvin [Calvin McKissack]--his father died in 1954, '53 [1953], probably, Moses III [Moses McKissack III] and then Uncle Calvin was running the business [McKissack and McKissack]. Uncle Calvin fell in love with me and called me partner and I'll never forget, he would take me on these fabulous trips, you know, like he would, all over the country doing business.  He called me one time and he said, 'cause he called me partner early on, his wife died in 1949, so Uncle Calvin would have me out, he was always entertaining dignitaries, I mean, he was still on the board of trustees at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].  I met Bennie Mays [Benjamin Mays], because of, I've been meeting all of these wonderful dignitaries in those days because I was sitting at the other end of his dining room table--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I never knew when I had to go out to the house for dinner, 'cause I guess he didn't know either, he had a housekeeper, and when my husband would come home, he says, "Lea, we got to be out to Uncle Calvin's six o'clock."  Well when we had the twins [Deryl McKissack and HistoryMaker Cheryl McKissack], I had like four people working for me, 'cause, and especially as I decided to go back to teach school, I said, I can't deal with this.  So, I had a nanny, I had a housekeeper that did the housework and it freed me up because he was a businessman, and I always had to be available to go out to Uncle Calvin's.  So that was really a wonderful time, 'cause we'd go out, they'd meet these wonderful people and, you know, it was always cocktails before dinner, and it was so interesting and then we'd have this wonderful dinner and then Uncle Calvin--I remember him saying to, you know, after everybody had left, he'd say, "Okay now, it's time for us to go home, 'cause I'm going upstairs and look over these plans that I've had these boys--," talking about my husband, "drawing on, 'cause we can't have any mistakes." So, that was such a wonderful time.
Story_ID: 482129
Speaker 1: Also, I remember one time he called, and he said, "Partner?  Would you like to go to Mexico City [Mexico]?"  I said, "Uncle Calvin [Calvin McKissack] are you kidding?"  He said, "No."  He said, "I'm taking you to Mexico," I said, "But Uncle Calvin, I'm teaching school," and it was always at a time and sometimes during the holidays, you could not, you were not supposed to be absent on the first day after a holiday.  And I had--said Uncle Calvin, "But I don't know about it."  He said, "Don't you worry about that, I'll call the superintendent." And he would.  So he would take my husband [William McKissack] and I on these trips to Mexico, we went to Mexico so many times, I mean, I ran across pictures of those where he had a friend down there and we were staying at the Continental Hilton in Mexico City, my husband and I were in the bar having a cocktail and he sat down beside of this man who looked like he was black but guess where he was from?  He was from Kuwait, and he had had lunch that afternoon with Rockefeller [Nelson Rockefeller] in New York [New York] and he wanted to take us out to dinner and by this time, Uncle Calvin comes in and he says, "Oh no," he says, "I had my rel- I have every, dinner planned for my," you know, children, he said, "So you can join us," and he did.  And so, we were up on the top of the hotel in this fabulous swanky restaurant where they had orchestra and music playing and all like that and so, I can't even think, I have his picture, I just ran across that and I said, he said, well he wanted to dance with me, so, no my husband and I went out dancing, that's what it was, and when I came back, this person had gotten me a big bottle of perfume and put it in my plate.  And so, and then we came back and that's what people knew any, that much about Kuwait, you know, and so we came back and there it was so interesting to have met someone like that.  And Uncle Calvin went to Africa every year, the last thing he said to me before he died, which was the day, the night before he died, the next morning, he was in the hospital, and he used to say to me, 'cause I'd go up and push him down the hallways and take him on little rides in the hospital and he would say, "Partner, you must promise me that you will go to Africa," and I said, "I will Uncle Calvin," but never realizing if I really was, but I did.  But also on, we would go to Haiti, 'cause you know they were building the University of Haiti [Port-au-Prince, Haiti], I have the contract that was written in French that they would use for the, the building of the University of Haiti.  And in those days, that was in, back in the '50s [1950s], we were there, I've been to Haiti several times, but--
Speaker 2: So little Papa Doc [Francois Duvalier] was the ruler?
Speaker 1: Papa Doc was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Papa (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Duvalier.
Speaker 2: Doc Duvalier, yeah.
Speaker 1: Duvalier was--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --president.  And so my husband, Uncle Calvin and Moses IV [Moses McKissack IV], his brother, there were five of us in the party, it was Moses and his wife Natalie [Natalie Stuart McKissack], my husband and myself, Uncle Calvin, he took all of us to Haiti for Christmas.
Speaker 2: So they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We had done.  Oh it was fabulous and he would tell us, "Whatever you want," we were behind this, we stayed at this beautiful hotel called the Beau Rivage [Port-au-Prince, Haiti], it was right, right across the Truman Highway, Boulevard, it's called Truman Boulevard [Boulevard Harry Truman], was the Caribbean Sea, but there was a wall around this hotel, you know?  I mean, I had never been in an impoverished country like this and I tell you it was devastating to me.  So my sister-in-law, Uncle Calvin and my husband and her husband would go to meet with the president every day and Uncle Calvin would tell Natalie and myself, "Now, now ladies," he would say, "be dressed and ready to go at five o'clock," and honest to God sometimes, we'd have to prop each other up, because we'd get to drinking and having a good time and, and they had these wonderful but huge olives like that, they'd put in these martinis and we were drinking martinis and Uncle Calvin was saying, "Now don't forget, you gotta be dressed and ready to go," 'cause every night he had someplace fabulous to take us.
Story_ID: 482130
Speaker 1: A lot of times people were throwing parties in his honor. One of my classmates at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] was named Tippenhauer, in school at Fisk we called him the banana boat boy, but his parents were wealthy and the Tippenhauers were the ones that was having a fabulous party for us when we went down there, because Uncle Calvin [Calvin McKissack] knew all of them.  Now, we had what you call guides, you know, and interpreters, 'cause they spoke nothing but French and you could not go out without either Savane [ph.], or Mr. Louie [ph.], those were the two guides and the people that we had that were to take care of us and took us everywhere we were together.  And so, Savane is still living today and he lives in Florida, and he had spent time at, in Nashville [Tennessee] with, at the company [McKissack and McKissack], you know, at the firm with Uncle Calvin, and 'cause he was one helping them get the project, Father George [ph.] in Port-au-Prince [Haiti] was the commissioner of education, he owned a villa up in Kenscoff [Haiti], with forty-five rooms, and every weekend he would come down from Kenscoff which was about thirty miles, pick us up and take us back up into the mountains. We were so high up, that he would, we could sit out on one of his balconies and see the planes landing in Port-au-Prince.  Now it was 99 degrees in Port-au-Prince, it was 45 up in Kenscoff, I mean you would go from hot to cold, but we didn't mind 'cause it was so hot in Haiti, but it was not hot in Kenscoff.  And then there was another lovely place called Petion-Ville [Haiti], which was about halfway between the two and he would, we would go out to dinner and places like that, to French restaurants and it was just fabulous, we went to [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham's home, she had a villa in Port-au-Prince, and the thing that, I'll never forget the day we went to her home 'cause she served us punch, a coconut punch with Scotch, I'm allergic to coconut and I drank some of that punch and on that night we were on are way to Petion-Ville, I began to become ill and I said, "Oh God," I said, "Uncle Calvin, I am deathly ill."  I said, "Can you all just let me out on the side of the road."  I thought I was gonna die, but they took me back to the hotel and I stayed there the night, and the next day I was okay, but I was so sick, I said, "I'm highly allergic to coconut, bananas and pineapple and I'll tell you, you'd almost have to kill me to eat, get me to drink some coconut milk."  (Laughter)  Would you like a Coke [Coca-Cola] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now did you, did you?  No.
Story_ID: 482131
Speaker 1: Did McKissack [McKissack and McKissack] finish the, the university pro- project [University of Haiti, Port-au-Prince, Haiti]?
Speaker 2: No!  You know what happened was that Duvalier [Francois Duvalier] was, he was overthrown wasn't he?  Or did he die, and his son, Baby Doc [Jean-Claude Duvalier]--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right, right.
Speaker 2: --Baby Doc took over, they never--
Speaker 1: Give Jean-Claude a--
Speaker 2: --Jean-Claude, was his name.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But Baby Doc, he, you know, they never, I'm trying to think happened, they did the plans and got--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --they had a contract and everything, and I'm sure they got paid some money, but they didn't never finish it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because you know how they don't even finish the roads over there, they'll start, you know like Truman Boulevard [Boulevard Harry Truman], it was not finished because the presidents would steal the money, I even met President Maguire [ph.], before Papa Doc, he was before Papa Doc, 'cause he came to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].  And Maguire was before, right he was before Duvalier, but they just had some real weird practices down there 'cause--
Speaker 1: Some of, was Maguire related to the archbishop of Haiti?
Speaker 2: Probably was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Thomas Maguire [ph.]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think--
Speaker 2: And when he left--
Speaker 1: --it was Thomas--
Speaker 2: --he took--
Speaker 1: --where I was in the Garvey [Marcus Garvey] movement--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: --it like (unclear).
Speaker 2: --and he took so much money, Maguire did when he left and then of course, I think Duvalier just died didn't he?
Speaker 1: Yeah I, yes he did.  He was, he--
Speaker 2: And that, I don't--
Speaker 1: --he died--
Speaker 2: --yeah.
Speaker 1: --and then, and then Jean-Claude--
Speaker 2: And then Jean-Claude--
Speaker 1: --he, he was Francois Duvalier.
Speaker 2: --yeah.
Speaker 1: And, then Jean-Claude--
Speaker 2: Jean-Claude was--
Speaker 1: --was (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh God.
Speaker 1: And they chased him out.
Speaker 2: 'Cause they chased--
Speaker 1: Finally--
Speaker 2: They ran--
Speaker 1: --yeah, (unclear).
Speaker 2: They finally got him but he was just, he was not trying to finish or do anything, his wife [Michele Bennett] had, oh they just, they just were living extravagantly, which was, and the people.  I could never understand, they had two distinct classes, the powerful and rich and the extremely peasants and the poor, I mean it though, it really killed me, I said this is one place I could not live because it was just, something that you had not be accustomed too, you know, the, just seeing this kind of devastation and poor people, it's awful.  And then for the other people just to be so rich, that it was just--
Speaker 1: So this was when you all were there, it's like it was the--
Speaker 2: It was in the--
Speaker 1: It was in the '60s [1960s] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) fifties [1950s].
Speaker 1: The '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: No in the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: Fifties [1950s], '50s [1950s] okay.
Speaker 2: And it was unbelievable how they were living--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: --I remember dancing out under the stars on the, a shell that they had, I mean, they were just living like, you know, just like money was flowing like water.
Story_ID: 482132
Speaker 1: What's incredible to me is that most people, black people in this country had no idea, I guess maybe unless you live in Nashville [Tennessee], that there, that we had a, a company that was--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: --capable of doing that kind of building and--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: --construction, you know?
Speaker 2: Well they, you know, they just didn't know about it because you know it was in nineteen- what was it '45 [1945]?  Yeah, it was in 1945, when the largest federal contract was ever awarded to a black firm, was to build the Tuskegee Airbase [Tuskegee Army Airfield; Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama]--
Speaker 1: Okay. And the McKissacks--
Speaker 2: --and it was a $5.6 million project, my husband [William McKissack] was a water boy on that project.  And they built it within six months, and the thing that, I'll tell you, who did know about us was the Tuskegee Airmen, because of that, I had the opportunity to meet undersecretary of the [U.S.] Air Force, I can't call up his name right now, he was black, and my daughter was in Washington [D.C.], now we have an office there now.  And I remember her second husband calling me and saying mom you gotta come to Washington to a black tie affair and he would not tell me what it was for and when I got to the affair, it was so cold, I flew in the snow to go to this thing, oh it was so cold, I'll never forget it, I had on boots up under a long dress, and when I walked into the building, it started coming to me, as to why they had me there, was because there were all these pictures of the Tuskegee Airmen and they were honoring the undersecretary, he was, what was his name?
Speaker 1: Not Davis?  Not, Benjamin?
Speaker 2: Not, oh no.  But I met, Benjamin Davis, Jr. [Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Not Chappie, James [Daniel "Chappie" James, Jr.]?  This is, was a--?
Speaker 2: This was a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the Air Force?
Speaker 2: --undersecretary. Undersecretary of the Air Force who was black and the secretary was a white woman, but he was the speaker for the Tuskegee Airmen, or something.  Was his name Coleman [ph.]?  His name might have been Coleman, because during the course of his speech, he said, "There is a lady that has traveled here in this inclement weather to be here with me this evening, and would Mrs. McKissack [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack] please stand.  It was her firm [McKissack and McKissack] that built the Tuskegee Airbase," and all of these Tuskegee people who were, you know, flyers who are still living, I mean they had to all come and, they all wanted to shake my hand and it was just such a wonderful thing and then after that, I was invited to every affair that they had, 'cause they used to meet once a year and have a big banquet.
Speaker 1: This is, this is from the 1940s? Right (unclear) okay (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, this from the 1940s, the (unclear) some of them were still living then, there were so many people as a matter of fact, one of our Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] presidents had been a Tuskegee Airman, Dr. Rutherford Adkins [Rutherford H. Adkins], he was a pilot.  And my niece and nephew, Pat [Patricia C. McKissack] and Freddy McKissack [Fredrick L. McKissack] have written the history of the Red Tail Angels ['Red Tail Angels: The Story of the Tuskegee Airmen of World War II'], and that's about the Tuskegee Airmen, because they are writers, Pat McKissack is a writer and her husband, who is a nephew to my husband, gave up his job, he had an engineering company over in St. Louis, Missouri, and to do the research and to help her write the books, but they did the 'Red Tail Angels.'
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I've got a couple of their books at home, actually. I--
Speaker 2: You do?
Speaker 1: I knew they were related--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --but I didn't know how.
Speaker 2: --oh yeah, well it's Freddy McKissack is, his father was my husband's oldest brother, Lewis Winter McKissack, and, oh it has been a delight, one of the highlights of my life was visiting them in their Chesterfield, Missouri home, where they do all there research and all there writing it was like a step back in time.  It was such a wonderful experience to, and I spent like maybe four or five days with them and it was just delightful. And they're always being honored, you know, they've been and honored all over, national awards, and what have you.  And every time they come to Nashville, to the library here or like maybe three years ago, they were the guest speaker at University School of Nashville [Nashville, Tennessee], and the director of that school is a dear friend of mine, as a matter of fact, I saw him last night and he invites me out to have lunch with them when they're here.
Story_ID: 482133
Speaker 1: Just to get back to the chronology of the story--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so you taught for seventeen years but fell ill and had a series of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I came--
Speaker 1: --operations, right.
Speaker 2: --became ill in, the first surgery I had was in 1965, the second, and I recuperated from that. The second one I had was in 1966, which I always felt like, took my mother [Catherine Buchanan Taylor] out of here, or was it the last one?  No, it was the one in 1969, when I had to stop teaching, but in 1966, that was the serious one, I had kidney surgery. Stayed in the hospital three months and that was a traumatic time in my life because my little twins [Deryl McKissack and HistoryMaker Cheryl McKissack Felder] were about three or four, and they couldn't understand why they had a sick mother, but staying in a hospital for three or four months, good God, I was at Meharry [George W. Hubbard Hospital - Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].  I had the best doctors though, Dr. Frank Perry [Frank Perry, Sr.], was one of my doctors who really literally saved my kidney, they said they operated on me for five hours, I had blockage in ureter and it's, which is the size of a straw, that leads from your kidneys, you know.  And, he opened that up and removed the masses and reset it in my kidney and I stayed in the--they didn't know if it was gonna be successful, but it took it three months, and during those three months, I had a catheter in me that was horrible, that they changed periodically like every two weeks, if I was lucky, and until, you know, it cleared up, 'cause it was pumping blood until it cleared up, I'm in the hospital.  And, of course it was rough, it was really hard on me but I survived it.
Story_ID: 482134
Speaker 1: And then in '69 [1969], I had go- oh, in '60 [1960], after that, I got out of the hospital [George W. Hubbard Hospital - Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] in '66 [1966], in May, I went in in May and got out in August, and a week later my mother [Catherine Buchanan Taylor] had a heart attack and she was teaching at Lane College [Jackson, Tennessee].  So here I am going to Lane College, my mother had a heart attack in the classroom.  The McKissacks had built most of the building on Lane campus, and you know, Lane's in Jackson, Tennessee--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --C.M.E. [Christian Methodist Episcopal] school (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) C.M.E. church, my husband [William McKissack] was C.M.E., so we'd go down, I go down there and stay with my mother until, it took us a month before I could relocate her back to Nashville [Tennessee].  So I'm down there, maybe my husband would come down, you know, every other week or I'd have a--you see, being that I was the only girl, my brothers would fly in, but you know, they'd always be the bread winner so they going back to work, it was a rough time for me, but my main goal was to get my mother well.
Story_ID: 482135
Speaker 1: All right, so you were talking about, now, you were about 1969 now, you had another illness in '69 [1969], right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You just told us about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was--
Speaker 1: --your mother [Catherine Buchanan Taylor] passing and the other illness in '66 [1966]?
Speaker 2: No my mother hadn't passed, I mean, I got that--
Speaker 1: Okay she was--
Speaker 2: --wrong, my--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --mother was still living--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because it was it in 1969, and she visited me in the hospital [George W. Hubbard Hospital - Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], I'm--well it's Christmastime and I'm going, I ran into my surgeon, who was a friend also, and he says, "So Lea [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack], how ya doing?"  I said, "Well Frank [Frank Perry, Sr.], I just got this little tiny pain here in my side." He said, "What?"  He said, "I tell you what, come on with me to the office." And I go and he examines me and he says, "You know?  Go home pack your bag and come back to the hospital."  Now this is during the Christmas holidays and you having a good time, and I go home, my mother's home and I like that 'cause she's visiting, you know, during the holidays, and Lane [Lane College, Jackson, Tennessee] hadn't started back, and I, I just didn't have the heart to tell my husb- anybody, but finally I said, "Mom," I said, "I'm gonna have to go back to the hospital 'cause Frank thinks he needs to examine me and whatnot, he didn't tell me what he saw when he examined me."  So, she said, "Okay."  And I go back and he keeps me in the hospital for two weeks. Now how he told me I had a growth and I said, but he said, "But Lea, I'm giving you some medicine to resolve it."  Well, you know, after being in the hospital for two weeks, they had run all the tests they could run, I'm thinking, well why am I still here?  It hit me like four o'clock on a Sunday morning, this man is gonna operate on me again, but he doesn't have the heart to tell me, 'cause like I said, he was a close friend.  And sure enough, that morning at seven o'clock, 'cause he had his way- he always made his rounds, the door swung open in my room and he came in there with his white coat, and I said, "Frank, the only reason that I can figure out that you're holding me in this room is because you plan to operate on me in the morning, now when were you gonna tell me?"  (Laughter) He said, "Today."  He said, "Sure enough, you're going to surgery in the morning at seven o'clock." And, you know, I just, by reasonable deduction, I said, you know, if people could take medicine to dissolve growths, you wouldn't have surgery right?  They wouldn't have to be--so just common sense made me realize that.  And so I told him, I said, "Okay, I'm ready to go for the thing."  He said, "On the other hand, if you do, do this surgery, I'm gone have to suggest to you that you need to retire from teaching in order to get well."  'Cause see I'd had surgery in '65 [1965], '66 [1966], and here it is '69 [1969], he said, "You need time to recuperate and you're just not doing it."  And so, he said, "I'm gonna write you up a disability, and that's the end of your teaching," so I told him on the way, I'll never forget it, on to the, way to the operating room, he said, "It's over, for your teaching career," and I said, "Okay."  I said, "Just let me wake up."  And I'll never forget, in the operating room, you know, they had given me everything they could possible give me to knock me out, but I was so scared on that third surgery, cause I think my daddy [Archie Buchanan] died on, and my real father died on the operating table.  I those days for appendicitis, and I thought, gee, I've come through this twice and that third time, I just don't see how I'm gonna make it and anyway, I'm in there and I said, "Frank if you just promise you'll knock me out so that when you can hear the people on the stretcher coming to get you," I said, "if I don't have to hear that, I'll be okay."  Well they couldn't knock me out, I was that scared, my brain just would not go, and so finally in the operating room, where you usually don't ever see too much in there, I'm wide awake telling him what he had to do (laughter) he's all geared up and they had put the, you know, the little thing in the mouth, he said knock her out, 'cause I could see him, I said, "Frank, if I don't survive this I'll hunt you for the rest of my life, so now, (laughter) you better"--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) For the rest of your life?
Speaker 2: For the rest of his life.
Speaker 1: His life (laughter).
Speaker 2: I said, "You better make sure I come through this surgery." And he said, "Knock her out," and I'll never forget, and so when I came to, you know, in the recovery room, I said oh thank God, I made it again, but then you gotta fight, you know all the pain and all that stuff it just, another uphill battle, but anyway I made it for the third time.
Story_ID: 482136
Speaker 1: And then I go- started getting happy all over again, thinking, oh God, I don't have to ever go teach again, you know, I can spend this time with my twins [Deryl McKissack and HistoryMaker Cheryl McKissack Felder] and my oldest daughter [Andrea McKissack], that was gonna be nice. So I didn't mind, I just, just closed the chapter in my book in 1969, I came out of the hospital [George W. Hubbard Hospital - Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] in 1970, 'cause I went in in December and came out in January, but it was like the end of January before he let me out.  And I'll never forget my mother [Catherine Buchanan Taylor] coming up from Lane College [Jackson, Tennessee], and looking in the bed and she said, "Listen Lea [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack], if somebody's got to die, it cannot be you, Lord let--." She, she said, "I asked the Lord to take me but let you live."  I said, "What do you mean mom?"  She said, "Because you got to live to take care of these kids, these daughters of yours." And sure enough, in '71 [1971], my mama died on May the 5th and --
Speaker 2: And you, your twins they were ten years old, I guess around ten year, they were born in--
Speaker 1: They were born in '61 [1961]--
Speaker 2: Sixty-one [1961], so they were ten in '71 [1971], right.  And my oldest daughter was, she was ten- shoot my oldest daughter was married, or was about to get married.  No mama--my oldest daughter got married in 1970, so my mother died in '71 [1971], that's it.
Story_ID: 482137
Speaker 1: I was on the mend, you know, and it took a little while, I mean it took a good while, and then I remember in '71 [1971], after my mother [Catherine Buchanan Taylor] died in May, I lost my oldest brother [Harold Buchanan], he died at the tender age of thirty-nine and I had one of my best friends' husband, was my mother's doctor.  So my mother died on May the 5th, 1971, my brother died--before my brother died, her doctor died, June the 29th, 1971, and we were really good friends in that they were going to spend the weekend with us at the lake, we had lake property, still got the lake property.  They were gonna spend that time with us and we were going to, I had given them the key to go out to the lake house, 'cause my husband [William McKissack] and I had gone to Atlanta [Georgia].  So we get back from Atlanta and find out that Red [ph.], we called him Red, Red had died, so that was devastating.  So his wife literally moved in with us 'cause we were already gonna be at the lake, you know?  They had two little boys, David [ph.] and Robert [ph.] and David became an architect because of our company and, of course she remarried again, and married my surgeon 'cause his wife had died, (laughter) I mean this is, you know, convoluted story, but anyway, and now she passed, she lived right down at the end of the hall, she moved in here five years ago and she died two years ago at Thanksgiving, on Thanksgiving morning.  And we were just like sisters and 'cause when--after Frank [Frank Perry, Sr.] died, I said, "Helena [Helena Perry], you don't need to be living in that big house by yourself, you need to move up here at (unclear)." And one day I came home and the lady who had been living at the end of the hall, while I was on a trip, 'cause in those days, I was gone all the time, running, you know, opening up these offices [of McKissack and McKissack], she, her daughter had come down and her mother had become ill, very ill and she had taken them back to Kentucky and I just happened to be coming in from the office and I said, "Well what happened to your mother?"  And she said, "Well I had to take her back to, put her in a nursing home."  I said, "Well what are you gonna do with her condo?"  She said, "I have no idea."  I said, "I do, you can sell it to my dear friend," and I called Helena and she said, "Really."  Helena had bought it like she sold it within maybe three days, and so Helen then lived next door to me and it was, by now I'm retired and so was--and she was a doctor, and so I used to cook the meals for us, 'cause we used to eat together every afternoon we'd come over and have, she'd come over from work and we just had a ball.  But anyway, that happened.
Story_ID: 482138
Speaker 1: But in '69 [1969], '70 [1970], I'm outta the hospital [George W. Hubbard Hospital - Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and I'm recuperating and you know, as I start feeling better and all like that, I said to my husband [William McKissack], "Why don't you let me handle all of the bills?" 'Cause he was doing everything and now that I'm not working anymore, I said, "Why don't you let me handle everything in the household, that was so you can concentrate on the office," 'cause Uncle Calvin [Calvin McKissack] had died in 1968, so it was just a series of peop- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So your husband took over the business [McKissack and McKissack]--
Speaker 1: He took it over in '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: --in, right.
Speaker 1: And so it was always a series of, you know, of stuff going on and traveling and everything and I said, "That would just be one less hassle you'll have to deal with, since I'm not working now, I can handle all the household and everything." And he agreed to do that.  And as I got older, I mean, as I recuperated and got stronger, you know, we had a 216 unit apartment complex that he was president of and I said, "Why don't you let me go down there and learn a little bit about that business, and you know, maybe work a half a day or something like that" so he said, "Okay."  So I went down and start helping manage College Hill [College Hill Apartments and Housing, Nashville, Tennessee] and, but it wasn't that I did that much work, I would sort of look over the books and just see what was going on, you know, just to have a general feel for it.
Story_ID: 482139
Speaker 1: And it was good that I did because, you know, bam, he [McKissack's husband, William McKissack] has a heart attack and a stroke and here I am in charge of four different companies 'cause I had the architectural firm, I had the College Hill [College Hill Apartments and Housing, Nashville, Tennessee] apartment complex, he had a Devonelle [ph.], another apartment complex, and he had a construction company.  So I had four different things that I had to deal with overnight, it was like a nightmare to me, and the only thing I really knew anything about was how to spell--only thing I really knew was how to spell the word architecture, and I did have a little knowledge of what was going on at College Hill, but outside of that, it was like unbelievable, I tell people I had a spiral notebook, and I would have on one page, McKissack and McKissack architects, the next page I'd have McKissack contractors, and the next page I'd have College Hill and the next page I'd have Devonelle Apartments.  And I was going to meetings and trying to keep up with this 'cause my husband's in intensive care for a month and I'm going and doing all of this, for nine months, I don't think I slept too long, ate too much, drank a lot, but I managed to get through it, and my twin daughters [Deryl McKissack and HistoryMaker Cheryl McKissack Felder] came home in March of 1984, and said, "Mom," 'cause he had the heart attack in '83 [1983], May, and it was in March of '84 [1984], that they came home and they said, "Mama, you look like a zombie."  It was like nine months after he had the stroke and they took him back to Washington [D.C.], 'cause we had an apartment in D.C., and they said, "'Cause you're doing everything for daddy, and you're just wasting away," you're, I mean, you know, I was, 'cause I mean, you know, it's very difficult.  I don't know if you've ever been around stroke victims, but they don't even know how to brush their teeth, they take their toothbrush and, comb their hair.  I bet you I bought fifteen toothbrushes trying to teach him, it's a slow process, I had to get an electric shaver so he wouldn't cut himself, it was unbelievable.  But, he was--I got him out of the hospital, I took him to the office and I put him in his chair in his office and I said, "Now do you know," hoping it was gonna come back, but they had already told me that when he had the stroke that it had just blew this half of his brain, you know.  But I just kept thinking, and it affected his speech, but he was slightly paralyzed on the right side, all of that came back through therapy and everything and then when the girls took him to Washington, that's when he really made tremendous gains in his, taking care of himself and everything, 'cause they said, "Now daddy we're not momma, we're not gonna cut your food, we're not gonna do this, you're gonna have to learn how to do these things."  One morning they called and said, "Mama, daddy has taken the car and the dog and gone," in D.C.  Now, I'm telling you, I had the worst headache until he came home that, you know, they said, "Mama," they called back and I said oh God, please don't let him get (unclear) hopefully he doesn't hit anybody, or anything like that, but he managed to get back.  He never lost his sense of direction.
Story_ID: 482140
Speaker 1: The first time I had to go to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], 'cause he had just started work back at Tuskegee, I was scared to death, I was frightened to death, for some reason, of Dr. Payton [Benjamin F. Payton], now don't ask me why, 'cause I had gone to see all of our other clients to tell them that everything was going along, the only thing missing was my husband [William McKissack], but everything would be just perfect.  So I finally had to go to Tuskegee, Cheryl [HistoryMaker Cheryl McKissack Felder] is with me, and my husband, we have him on the back seat lying down so he could rest, we had stopped in Birmingham [Alabama] and had dinner, and you know it's dark and I didn't know where the turnoff to Tuskegee was, and (laughter), I will never forget, it was like eleven o'clock at night and I said to Cheryl, I said, "Cheryl, I have no idea where we're gonna turn off here to go into Tuskegee."  She said, "Well Mama, you know I don't."  My husband sat up on the back seat and just sat there and when it came time, he said, "Turn." We turned and it was right, came right on into the campus, I had my dear friend who still lives at Tuskegee, when she came to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] her father was head of the hospital there, Tuskegee [Tuskegee Veterans Administration Medical Center; Central Alabama Veterans Health Care System East Campus, Tuskegee, Alabama], his name was T.T. Tilden and he was a good friend of my father's [McKissack's stepfather, A.A. Taylor], so he called my father and said, "I'm sending my daughter up there take care of her."  We became instant friends and we are still friends today and she went back Tuskegee, 'cause she lived in Chicago [Illinois], but she went back to Tuskegee to take care of her mother who was ill, who eventually died.  So we, and they had this two story home, so we used to stay with Betty [ph.] when we would go down, when I would go down on business and after I met Dr. Payton, as soon as I would finish one job, he would give me another, the campus home, the president's home now, they have it because of me, 'cause one day I was riding in and there had been a whole lot of controversy about the fact that the president wanted to build a new home on the campus.
Speaker 2: Was he staying in the old Booker T. Washington home at that time?
Speaker 1: Yes, but he was, no, oh no, no, no--
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: He was staying at a house right there on the campus that a Dr. Patterson [Frederick D. Patterson], 'cause I had been to Tuskegee before and Dr. Patterson was living there and then Doctor Payton, you know, was the next president, you know after Dr. Patterson.  Well, I'm driving in and I'm going, approaching it from a different direction this time and I look over on the left hand side and there is this beautiful grey mansion with a cupola up on the top and it's surrounded by this black wrought iron fence.  So I was on my way in to see the president so when I got in there I said, "Dr. Payton, guess what?"  He said, "What Mrs. McKissack [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack]?"  I said, "I saw your new home today."  He said, "What are you talking about?"  I said, "Well listen instead of you building a new home, you need to have that beautiful grey mansion."  He said, "Oh you talking about Grey Columns [Varner-Alexander House, Tuskegee, Alabama]?" I said, "Yeah."  He said, "Well the Department of Interior [U.S. Department of the Interior] owns--the Park Service [National Park Service], which comes under the Department of Interior owns that."  I said, "Dr. Payton, with all of your pull, I know you can swap that property for some property over here on the campus 'cause that needs to be your home.  Think about how stately it is." Six months went by, he called me one day and he said, "Mrs. McKissack come down here, guess what?"  He said, "I got the Grey Columns and I want you to renovate it."  It is a gorgeous home, one of the highlights of me running the company [McKissack and McKissack] was when I was invited back to Tuskegee for a homecoming and stayed in the grey, in the Grey Columns.
Speaker 2: Now what had the Grey Columns- Columns been before?
Speaker 1: It had been a slave master's home, the cupola which is up on the top, was where the slave masters used to go up and look up out over the fields of cotton and make sure the people were working.  But then it had just, you know, the Park Services had bought it and how they inherited, I don't know how they got it but they had it and I said, "Oh come on Dr. Payton, I know you can work a deal whereby you can get this Grey Columns," and he did, beautiful home now, I mean, you know, it was a massive renovation, we had to gut it all, with the exception of the outside.
Story_ID: 482141
Speaker 1: I wanted to go back to something that I, I have in the notes here that in 1987, you sued the City of Nashville [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And it was said by the people at the city that, they said where did this feisty woman come from?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).  Her husband [William McKissack]--
Speaker 1: Her husband was--
Speaker 2: --a good man.
Speaker 1: --was nice.
Speaker 2: Was a nice man,--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --a good man.
Speaker 1: --and, and here you are suing the city, what, what happened, what was the, what was the?
Speaker 2: What prompted that?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh that's a good story.  I just talked, well I didn't talk about it two weeks ago, I had to speak down to the 100 Black Women [National Coalition of 100 Black Women], but in 1983, when my husband became ill, he was doing the- he was working on a $15 million project here in Nashville for a high school and he had a partner, I mean they had given it to two, they were gonna give it to Hartfield and Roberts [ph.] and McKissack and McKissack, and up until two days before our interview with the board of education, mind you now, my husband's ill, and they're coming to my office all the time, we are talking about strategizing and getting our presentation together, two days before our interview, president of their company called me and said, "Mrs. McKissack [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack], we've decided to go after this building, after this school by ourselves." And naturally they got it because they had been told by the powers that be, you can, you can forget--you don't need to use McKissack, we're gonna give it to you in a black neighborhood at that.  I let that go by, and they told me to my face, "Well had your husband been well, we would have known who we could call, or look to in case we had any problems, but since you're not an architect," which I have never ever decided, claimed or any other kind of way to be one, "we don't know you can talk to."  I said, "Oh yes you can, because I have a person here in charge." I had bought a firm out of Memphis [Tennessee] on the advice from my lawyer, and it brought in the president of that company and he was now, you know, I had paid for the company and so he's now part of our company, so I would have a registered architect, so we let that go by.
Story_ID: 482142
Speaker 1: Then here comes this $250 million Nashville International Airport [Nashville, Tennessee], and my husband [William McKissack] is recuperating now, and I'm thinking, in order for us to get some of this work, there were two other architects in Nashville [Tennessee], black, they were friends of my husband, and I went to them and I said, "You know we need to combine our services and go after this project and get a piece of this 250 million," 'cause now that helped me out 'cause I had two guys who didn't have any employees, they were just doing architectural work by themselves, which meant they couldn't handle a large project by their self, I had all the work force plus I had my president.  And so, I cooked this nice meal for them and invited them over and I said, "Now, gentleman I didn't stir in these pots today for my health, I did it for a reason.  We need to pull our forces together and go after part of this airport project." Avon Williams, civil rights lawyer, was my lawyer, he was my lawyer but he wasn't my husband's lawyer.  So he, I am, you know, he came on in, he's the one that had setup everything for me and got the power of attorney and all that kind of stuff.
Speaker 2: He's one, that twenty years before, was--
Speaker 1: Loob-
Speaker 2: --working with--
Speaker 1: Z. Alexander Looby--
Speaker 2: --SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and--okay.
Speaker 1: --who was a contemporary of my father [McKissack's stepfather, A.A. Taylor].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And they were at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] together by the way.  So, so I knew all these great people anyway, they agreed, so we go with Avon out to the Airport Authority [Metropolitan Nashville Airport Authority] board to meet with them.  Now our firm had built an airport back in nint- you know, back in for- 1945, nobody in Nashville had ever done an airport, so what the powers to be had done, was they had hired a firm out of Florida to come in and teach Gresham and Smith [Gresham and Smith Architects; Gresham, Smith and Partners], who were good friends of ours, how to do an airport, then they paid them off, and sent on back to Florida and they gave the big $250 million project to Gresham and Smith.  Okay, instead of the airport authorities saying we will require that a certain percentage will be go to minorities, no, they tell us, you will have to go talk to Gresham and Smith.  Well now, Gresham and Smith, who's gonna give up 250--come on!  Even though my husband and the powers to be at Gresham and Smith, it was two guys, Flem Smith and Batey Gresham, they were both--my husband, Batey and my husband went to Saudi Arabia together and, 'cause we were doing a building for the prince of Saudi and he was doing hospitals.  And, you know, they looked at us like we're crazy, sorry I done already lost this $15 million job, all this other stuff, I mean, you know, they just weren't even giving us any work.  If it hadn't been for Tuskegee, Alabama, I'd been out of business, as a matter of fact, I used a lot of my resources making payroll in those days and our lawyer said we just need to sue the city.  So we sued every agency in the city, the public schools, it started out with the airport, and that's where that article came about.  Now, I ended up in court, the three of us did end up in court with this, (laughter) they said we broke the Antitrust Act [Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890], by combining our firms, which was a, you know, glob of nothing, but it took them a year to decide.
Story_ID: 482143
Speaker 1: In the meantime, prior to that, all of the banks were just, had opened up their flood gates for me, whatever I needed come get it.  Mrs. McKissack [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack], we behind you.  First American [First American National Bank of Nashville; First American Bank of Nashville] has loaned Moses McKissack III, a hundred thousand dollars in 1920 something, that was like a million then right?  All of our money had been at First American, luckily I had, when I was not working, those fifteen years I was a homemaker, I'm driving down Charlotte [Avenue, Nashville, Tennessee] one day and something says, you need to get a bank of your own in your name, not with your husband [William McKissack].  Thank God I did, and there's another reason why I did that, but I can leave that part of the story out, but anyway I did, and so it was at that time, Third National Bank, and when, we ended up suing the city, this was a fed- a case that goes to federal court on discrimination, that everything closed up to me.  All the banks, basically shut down on us and the articles in the newspaper and all like that, so it was not an easy time for me and I used to think it was the principle of it that made me do it.  Now what happened was, and if I had listened to Gresham [Batey Gresham] and Smith [Flem Smith], because in May of '83 [1983], when my husband was laying up there in the hospital, the owners came to be and said, "Now Mrs. McKissack, we know you're not an architect, why don't you let us send us, send us one of our people over here to be your president." Had I done that I never would have had to worry about suing anybody because I would have had all this work, but I wasn't willing to give up my company [McKissack and McKissack].  I just didn't think that's what my husband would want me to do and at that point we were seventy-nine years old. I guess we were that old in '83 [1983], yeah, 'cause it started in 1905, well we were like eighty-five, seventy-five years old, however I just couldn't see that and it always had a black person in charge of, so I said I can't do that.  Plus, I had my three girls [Andrea McKissack, Deryl McKissack and HistoryMaker Cheryl McKissack Felder] that I was thinking about, they need to deal with this.  So, after the suit, you know, it was, it was really hard, I mean, I was, it was just really rough, I was making pol- payroll out of my own money.
Story_ID: 482144
Speaker 1: Well, these is pretty bad times. You just lost (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were rough times for me but, and you know, I'm a, I'm a very optimistic person and I said this too will pass and I had no problems in taking my resources and keeping the company [McKissack and McKissack] afloat.  I made payroll, I did whatever I had to do in order to keep my company up 'cause I said, there had to be a way. And then, one day I was down at Lane College [Jackson, Tennessee] and I had stopped in to see the president and he said, "Mrs. McKissack [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack], I want you to build me a learning resource center," and I had a blank contract, I said, "Dr. Chambers [Alex A. Chambers], I'll be more than happy to do whatever it is you want me to do, but I need you to do this for me today.  I need you to sign this blank contract, and I will take it back to my office and I will FedEx it back to you after we fill it out."  He said, "Mrs. McKissack, are you telling me (laughter), that you need me to sign a blank contract for you?"  I said, "You know why?  Because I can take that contract to the bank and it's as good as gold and I'm gonna take it to my bank," which was Third National Bank at the time and I go up there and I meet with a vice president, what is it?  We're still friends today, what is his name?  Oh God, he was tall and good looking, look like a movie star, what was his name?  It'll come to me, anyway, I told him, "Listen, I need you to treat me like, I need this bank rather to treat me like they do all their white customers, when you're doing a project, they don't front the money, like I've been doing, I need the banks to front the money and what I have here in my hand today is a contract and I need money to make the payroll to get the work out."  He said, "Mrs. McKissack how much do you need?"  And that was putting me back on top again, because if I didn't, if the money had not come in from other projects and whatnot, Willoughby [Mark Willoughby] was his name, I would call Mr. Willoughby and he said, "Mrs. McKissack, how much do you need?"  And he would walk it down to me, he would walk a check down to me.  And he said, "Just let me know how much you need," he was the, and we are still good friends today because he was the first banker that was nice to me and prior to that time, I had $3 million in the bank at First American [First American National Bank of Nashville; First American Bank of Nashville], and I went down there, of course I didn't, in those days, I didn't know to go to the top of the, you know, to go to the head top, you know, the CEO of the bank, instead I'm down there with a little loan officer and he had me filling out all these papers and things and I said, "Sir, if you pull up my personal account, you'll see what I have in there."  He made me sign all kind of notes for twenty thousand dollars, where all I did was, after I met this Mr. Willoughby, I just went in there and wrote him a check for twenty thousand dollars, and told him that, I took all my money out of First American and scattered it around, that was smart too.  And so, I had some up there at Third, but I didn't, it was my money it was not company money, you know?  So, at--that helped though establish you know, a relationship with the other banks, but I cannot believe, so when Denny Butoff [Dennis Bottorff], who came back to be CEO of First American, he called me up, and said, "Mrs. McKissack, we got to, I want you to come down and go to lunch with me," and I said, "Okay," and I go down there and he says, "I wanna know, why you took your money outta this bank?"  I said, "Because there was a little low life loan officer on the first floor that almost made me sign my grandmama's collateral away in order to get twenty thousand dollars."  He said, "Well you come back to this bank, we won't do that to you." And it taught me the good lesson that you have to go to the top. Even when I eat in restaurants in Nashville [Tennessee], I have to know who the owner is or the manager, they don't ever, if it's a chain I say tell me who owns this restaurant.  When a new one opens?  It just became, I learned so much, in running this company and I had such wonderful experiences.
Story_ID: 482145
Speaker 1: First thing I did in 1983, when I took over, I went in with my lawyer, my husband [William McKissack] had a no-win situation where he had three, he had two vice presidents and himself on the board of directors, well they out voted my husband, he owned the stock and my lawyer said, "Hell, I believe he had a stroke before he got to the big-un," I said, but, (laughter) and he was away, he would leave on Tuesday morning going to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and he didn't come back 'til Friday, and they were robbing him blind in the office.  I knew that, and then when I convinced one of my buddies, for my husband to hire him as vice president of marketing.  So he was sort of feeding me information all along, telling what was going on and all like that and how one of the vice presidents were using you know, moonlighting on the company [McKissack and McKissack], he was doing dealings as large as what the firm was doing and this was because the bookkeeper was in cahoots with him and when the call came in for husband, she would give it to him 'cause he wasn't here, he was down in Tuskegee working bringing in the money and they spending it up.  So anyway, I got rid, when I went in that office it was a very hostile situation, one vice president told me, well you know, this is a corporation you can't come in here and do this.  I said I'm well aware of the fact that it's a corporation, I got the corporate minutes I have read the corporate minutes so I know what's going on in here.  First thing I did, I had board of directors, I had a stockholders meeting so I could change the board of directors, well since I own 85 to 90 percent of the stock, that was an easy thing to do, and do you know, some--he, my husband had given, his employees, his top employees twenty-five shares of the company stock, do you know they had the nerve to have a lawyer sitting up there with them when I had the first stock holders meeting (laughter) and I went in there to the meeting and I could not believe this.  So my husband had a bar in our conference room, I went to the back of that bar, got me a bottle and took it into the bathroom, and, (laughter) I'll never forget Cheryl [HistoryMaker Cheryl McKissack Felder] comes in, she said, "Mama what are you doing?"  I said, "What does it look like I'm doing, I'm in here getting fortified to go in there to take care of this meeting." I said, "Would you like a little something yourself?"  And she said, "Okay, give it here."  (Laughter) So my girls were in the meeting, so I put myself and my, all of my daughters on the board.
Story_ID: 482146
Speaker 1: Then I hired an engineer out of Detroit [Michigan], and an architect out of D.C. [Washington, D.C.] who were contemporaries of my husband [William McKissack], asked them to come down and spend a week or two weeks of whatever they thought they needed, to assess what I needed to do in the company [McKissack and McKissack].  There were two guys I could trust, my oldest daughter [Andrea McKissack] was running his engineering firm in Detroit, and the twins [Deryl McKissack and HistoryMaker Cheryl McKissack Felder] had worked for the architectural company in Washington when they went to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  So, you know, they went through and then they wrote the recommendations and I set out and went on to work, but it was crucial, I had some hard times, I used to almost cry going down Charlotte [Avenue, Nashville, Tennessee] to the office because the employees were so mean to me, they were all males, the only secretaries we had in there were people in the corner typing specifications and that evil bookkeeper who really did not like me and she resigned, two weeks after I took over, which was really good for me.  And so, then I asked one of the persons who had been there, she worked in that office for twenty years, and I asked if she would like to help me run this company, and I said, "What I need for you to do is to handle the money because I got to get out here and get some work."  So I took her to the bank and I told the bankers, I said, "This lady here has my, she has carte blanche to do whatever it is she has to do with the money, I trust her that much."  I came back in December after taking my husband to California, he was able to travel and I opened, got on my desk and up under my, one of my (unclear) she had a hundred thousand dollar check there that had come in, she said, "I just wanted you to see it, now give it here (laughter) 'cause I'm putting it in the bank."  But I mean, she handled the money, she knew where the bones were buried in that business, but she had been stuck in a corner, sometimes we were lucky enough that I could take her with me to travel, so it was, I could just I could write a book on the experiences that I had in running the company.
Story_ID: 482147
Speaker 1: That first Christmas that my husband was able to travel we went to California, stayed for two weeks, he had a person running the construction company, who wouldn't tell me anything, so I realized I had to get rid of him and while I'm away, he changed the board of directors in the construction company, I came back and found that out and I thought, okay, I know I got to get rid of him, but I had to be nice to him 'cause I mean, I didn't know what was going on and he wouldn't tell me.  I'd get an envelope to come across my desk sometimes, it might have twenty thousand dollars in it, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From, from where?
Speaker 1: From the construction company, but he wouldn't tell me where, he would just give me what he thought I deserved, and so, you know, all I did was, I said oh God please, send me a sign, tell me what to do.
Speaker 2: That sounds like Tony Soprano or somebody--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --an envelope with--
Speaker 1: Um-hm. And I'm telling you the truth.  I would go to bed and I always had a pad beside my bed because I would have to pray and I said, "God you've gotta help me on this one.  I gotta get rid of this man, but I don't know how."  Well, it came to me in the middle of the night, my husband had a partner, Hall Hardaway [L. Hall Hardaway, Sr.], which was Hardaway Construction [Hardaway Construction Corporation, Nashville, Tennessee], he was a good friend, Hall was always there for me, if I needed payroll, I could call Hall and say, "Hall I need thirty thousand dollars."  He said, "Okay Lee [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack], come over here and get it." I said, "I'll give it back to you."  "No signing notes nothing, just come over and get it."  Well it hit me in the night that I was decided that I had to get rid of him, that I had to dress up my husband, and go out there and talk to Hall, my husband could only say fine, or yes, he could not carry on a conversation, Hall didn't know that, so I go out there and I said, "Hall, I said De [William McKissack] has decided that he wants to sell the construction company and he needs you to help him do that," and he looked at De, and he said, "De are you serious?  You wanna sell the construction company?" He said, "Fine," that's all he had to say and I knew he would say that and Hall said, "Okay Lea, I'll get it done."  I said, "Because I need you to deal with the guy he has running it, 'cause I can't deal with him."  And so Hall called me up, said, "Bring your lawyer, it's a done deal," and I went out there with my lawyer and I told them they had six months, we had about twenty trucks with McKissack contractor on them.  I said you got six months to get my name off of these trucks or you gonna have to start paying me for the use of my name.  So they got my name off the trucks and I got my money from the construction company, went on about my business, 'cause I couldn't do all--I couldn't do all of it, I knew I couldn't, 'cause I still had College Hill [College Hill Apartments and Housing, Nashville, Tennessee] and I still had Devonelle [ph.], which was an apartment complex which I knew was gonna be problems because he was in it with two other people.  But anyway, I managed to survive that.
Story_ID: 482148
Speaker 1: Then the next thing I sold was College Hill [College Hill Apartments and Housing, Nashville, Tennessee] 'cause it was paid for and there was no more write off, so I went out and found a buyer for that, sold that, 'cause it was either sell it or renovate it, it was gonna cost $8 million to renovate it, and I said there's no way I'll ever live to see that paid off, or we won't get any benefits from that and it was a family business and Uncle Calvin [Calvin McKissack] had left his shares to all of his nieces and nephews which were my children and everybody else's children and so they wanted it sold, so I sold it and gave them their money and everybody's happy.  The last one I had to deal with was that Devonelle [ph.], which was a monster. (Laughter) One of the partners was a banker, and this is the gospel, a lady rode in on a motorcycle, so he told us, and decided she was the bookkeeper and he made her the bookkeeper, and every month when I would go to meetings, there was a deficit, they were never paying off anything, it was a new basically complex.  It hit me one day, I said wait a minute, how can we spend this much money on repairs when the buildings aren't, it's not any more than, it wasn't even five years old, nothing was getting paid or anything.  The other partner was a lawyer, who was supposed to have been my lawyer, a banker and my husband [William McKissack], the lawyer had taken the other person who was in real estate, who should have been there, he had managed some kind of way to confiscate his shares, I found all those letters in my husband's papers and I was devastated.  But then I'd already had dealings with my lawyer, for instance he had me working on a project for six months, he had written himself a retainer for our company [McKissack and McKissack] and when we sent him an invoice for our services, he said, "Oh, I had a gentleman's agreement with your husband."  I said, "What?"  I said, "That's it."  I told the person who was over the money, I said no more retainer for him, he's not gonna pay us and we've been working on a project for him for six months, we had run, I had run up a whole lot of payroll and he wasn't even gonna pay us for it.  And I said, you know what will freeze over before he gets another dime outta this company and I said I'll get me another lawyer, but now here he is the council for this Devonelle as well as, one of the owners that he had taken from somebody else.
Story_ID: 482149
Speaker 1: Well, it just got--oh and so then, the next thing I know that happens, we had met, and this was like '88 [1988], '87 [1987], 'cause my husband [William McKissack] died in '88 [1988], it was in '88 [1988], that we had gone to Washington [D.C.], my husband and I had, and before we left, we had a little celebration because the banker was saying he was more in, mainly in charge of the, of the complex and he was saying, oh we're just doing fabulously well and we're thinking everything is okay.  Well, while I'm in Washington [D.C.], you know, my husband dies in a hotel room and, of course, well you know, that's, that went on and he died at the end of February, and then next thing you know, it come dealing with Devonelle [ph.] and all of this stuff and the banker says that the lady disappeared, who was doing, keeping the books, during the course of all that time, I was examining the books and I'm thinking, how can you spend this kind of money?  She would have fifty thousand, thousand dollars down there for repairs, she went outta there with the money.  Now, what the banker had done was taken money from the bank which is against the law and put it into the, he claimed into the project, where he's an owner, conflict.  I'm in D.C., and I get a call from the person who's managing College Hill [College Hill Apartments and Housing, Nashville, Tennessee] for us, and she says you've gotta come home just, pronto!  Because they are closing, the FSLIC [Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation], is coming in to close community bank, community whatever it was, and we have all of College Hill's money in there, so you got to get it out.  So I was on a plane back, got the money out and then the next thing I know the FSLIC is calling me talking about Mrs. McKissack [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack], your husband is a partner to this and we have to take your deposition and I want you to know I put them off for three to four years, before I let them take my deposition and, because I was scared to death of that. I didn't, my husband is dead now, he knew nothing about it, the counselor is telling me now, who was my lawyer, you've gotta get your own lawyer for this.  Now my lawyer is telling me, they charged me an enormous fee, 'cause they didn't know anything about it, they had to get in there and dig up all this information and whatnot, 'cause when I go for my deposition, I got to have one of them sitting beside a me, since my so called lawyer has left me.  And I'll never forget it, it was one Christmas, or one day we were out to lunch and his wife said to me, who was supposed to be my best friend, "Oh, well we got outta that without us costing us hardly anything."  I said, "Well good for you," I said, "because number one, it cost my lawyer, my new lawyer cost me over $60,000, and then the fact that it was a tax shelter deal, that when you sold it, I had to pay like a $175,000 in income tax." I cried for two weeks and my CPA [certified public accountant] at the time said, "You're gonna have to write that check."  So, to show you how people can do you, but in spite of all of that, I still made it.
Story_ID: 482150
Speaker 1: Okay, in 1988, May, my husband [William McKissack] died in February, I'm in Washington, D.C., wit- with my daughter Deryl [Deryl McKissack], Memorial Day weekend and we were in a fur store trying on furs, I was and she said, "Mama, you got to go up here to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] with me to meet Dr. Cheek [HistoryMaker James Cheek]" 'cause she's working for Turner Construction [Turner Construction Company] now and she says they got all this construction going on at Howard and Turner Construction had told her she had to go up there and get some of--she said, "I need you to come go with me."  And I'm saying, "Deryl you don't need me honey." I said, "You're working for Turner, they love you, you know Dr. Cheek, I don't--," you know I had been, he had honored my husband twice 'cause he honored my husband, but when he honored him the second time, that's when my husband died, he honored him on Friday, Friday night I had this big party for him in Adams Morgan in Washington, Saturday we had a beautiful family day, Sunday morning my husband is dead by eleven o'clock, massive heart attack.  And so, anyway, you know, it was devastating to me, so in, getting back to my point in May of '88 [1988], I'm in D.C., Deryl says, "Oh mama you going with me," so she grabs me and takes me outta that store and we go up to meet with Dr. Cheek.  Now we get up there and we get in his office and so he says, to me, you know, "You have my condolences; I'm so sorry that you lost your husband; he was a Howardite," and all like that.  And so Deryl doesn't say a word, she's sitting there on the sofa and I'm thinking, well somebody's gotta talk, so I said, "Well Dr. Cheek, I guess my husband would want me to establish a scholarship in his honor, in the school of architecture and engineering." He said, "Oh Mrs. McKissack [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack], that's just wonderful," and that just 'caused him to open up and start telling me what I needed to do in order to get the ball rolling on giving this scholarship to Howard, and then he says, "But let me show you all of the work that we have going on, on the campus," he had models and everything, and I said, in the middle of the conversation and after I'm looking at all these models, I said, "Why should I be up here giving Howard University money when every member of my immediate family was educated out of this school, my husband and my three daughters, and you've never given McKissack and McKissack a job?"  He looked at me and said, "You never asked."  I said, "I've been trying to get to you for two years, and people have stopped me.  They would never let me have an appointment with you and I'm only here on a fluke today because of my daughter, you know, she had gotten it."  And he said, "Well, I'll tell you what, you've got the next project." That was in May, in October, I had signed a contract for a $50 million in Washington, D.C., which put me back on the map again, took care of all of my financial woes and it propelled me into another arena, 'cause now here I am in Washington, doing a project.  And as a result of that, I was chosen to be the national female entrepreneur of the year, I went on the Federal Reserve Board [Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System], I mean it just opened up all kinds of doors for me. And you talking about, it was really something, it was busy, busy times though for me, I was so tired that I could get on a plane anywhere and go to sleep 'cause I was up and down.  I was probably flying three and four times a week going somewhere, 'cause by then I had a $100 million worth of work in progress, 'cause I was doing projects in Memphis [Tennessee], I was doing it, still had Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], and it just, you know, at one time I was probably on fifteen different HBCU [historically black colleges and universities] campuses and that project put me back on my feet, and was able to just go on.
Story_ID: 482151
Speaker 1: After Deryl [Deryl McKissack], see 'cause I was trying to get Deryl to come home to help me if I landed that project, instead Dr. Cheek [HistoryMaker James Cheek] hired her and put her over his entire construction program 'cause she had been working with Turner [Turner Construction Company] for five years, all of my girls worked for Turner and they have some fabulous experience from them.  How I got Cheryl [HistoryMaker Cheryl McKissack Felder] into the business was that, when she left Wiley and Associates [sic. Weidlinger Associates], Cheryl has a master's [degree] in structural engineering, so when she left Wiley and Associates, she went to Turner, the president of Turner then was the guy who had hired Deryl in Washington [D.C.], he's now in, over present--over Turner International and he's getting ready to send my child to Kuwait and I said no way Bob [ph.] are you sending Cheryl to Kuwait, um-hm, that was during Desert Storm [Operation Desert Storm]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I said, oh no, no, no, no, you gonna have to send, you go and tell Cheryl I said that it's time for her to come home and help her mother. And sure enough, that was in November?  By January 1, Cheryl was flying home on Monday and going back to New York [New York] on Friday 'cause she was married to a New Yorker, they had no children, thank God and she would say, "Mama I got the best of two worlds."  She said, "I got you during the week and I got my husband [Fred Felder] on the weekend." We had so much fun traveling and going to the schools and going to different places and getting work and if we could drive, I would do the driving and she would write down everything and when we got back to Nashville [Tennessee], she'd pass all of this on to the secretary, she would write the client and thank them and all like that, we'd be onto our next job.  So, it was a wonderful time for me and it was like busy, busy, busy. Plus it filled the gap that my husband [William McKissack] was gone and so, I don't think I spent too many weekends in this condo, I was gone most of the time, I was either in Washington, or New York and Detroit [Michigan], and sometimes I was so tired I would go into Detroit and my, that's where my oldest daughter [Andrea McKissack] lived with her two girls and she was working with Turner then and I would go to sleep and sometimes she'd, I would sleep for two days, 'cause I was just that tired from the constant moving and going all the time but it was, when I look back over it, twenty years of real interesting times and it's something that I felt like that was necessary in order for my girls to get back into the business.
Story_ID: 482152
Speaker 1: You were saying off camera that your friend John Chase [HistoryMaker John S. Chase]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the famous Houston [Texas] architect that designed mo- most (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely
Speaker 1: --of Texas Southern University [Houston, Texas] and other places was incredulous at how you could come in and take over this--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --architectural firm [McKissack and McKissack] not being an architect and I was saying it's, it's about management and then you said it's about?
Speaker 2: It's about knowing how to deal with people and employees, that master's degree in psychology helped me out more than mathematics ever did because you're dealing with employees and it was always, I never tried to do anything, they used to tell me I was a good boss because I always let them know up front what they had, what they were working with as far as I was concerned, that they had their holidays, they knew they were gonna do what, what, they knew what they had to work with and I was always honest with them about that.  And, unlike, for instance, I'll never forget the first Good Friday, and I realized it was Good Friday, in the middle of, and I'm in the office and it hit me, I can't work on Good Friday, I got to go home, so I went into the, what I call the area where all the guys worked, now I had females working there too and I said to them, "Look this is Good Friday, I'm going home, and if you want, if you feel you can leave your work and it'll still be ready when we need it, you know what your schedules are, you can go home too.  But if you wanna stay and work, that's your prerogative, but I'm outta here. Have a Happy Easter." And I did that all the time, because I felt like there were certain things that your employees deserved and I always tried to have that humanistic side of it in order to deal with them.
Story_ID: 482153
Speaker 1: However, I had a situation once where the president of the company [McKissack and McKissack] came in, he said, "Mrs. McKissack [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack], I can't work with So-and-So."  This is a female, he said, "She's not doing her work." I said, "Really?  So why did you give her a three thousand dollar raise last month?  Have you kept a record of what she has and has not done?"  He said "No." I said, "Well then you can't fire her, 'cause if you do, then she'll sue me."  And so, that kept me awake that night and the next morning I woke early and I called my, I had two distinct, you know, I had one person over the engineering department, and one over the architectural part, I called my engineer and I said, "Look Robert [ph.], do you think you can work with Tiffany [ph.]?"  I said, "Because, the architectural side said no, that I'm to fire her." He said, "Oh yeah Lea, I'll work with her." I said, "Good." I told my secretary, "Call her in," so she came in that morning and I said, "Tiffany I have figured out how to save your job," and she reaches in her pocket and she said, "Well Mrs. McKissack, do you mind if I tape this conversation?"  I said, "What?"  I said, "Oh absolutely I mind."  I said, "You tape this conversation and I'm firing you.  I'm trying to save your job."  And so she put her tape recorder back in her pocketbook and I thought I don't believe this.  Well, we go on and then like we had a corporate side and then we had the side where all the draftsmen and people were working, and on that side we had the kitchen and another conference room and all like that.  So one day, after I had saved her job, I'm going over to our kitchen which is down the hall and on the other side and I walk in and there's a strange man sitting at the conference table on my telephone talking, and, I get my water and come out, and you know, I speak to him and I go over to my side and I said to my secretary, who is that man sitting over there?  So she goes and looks and she says, I don't know.  So then I waited a while and then I go back and now, Tiffany's mother has come in and they're having a party, it's Fat Tuesday, they're from New Orleans [Louisiana] and they're having a party there and every--we had some serious deadlines, everybody is on the computers and the computer thing that, what do you call that thing?  That prints out the plan, I done forgot what you call it now but anyway, it's just going lickity split and, and the people are sending their, 'cause you had CAD [computer-aided design] operators, you know, they were working like crazy, and they sitting up there partying in that little conference room where they should have been, and she should have been working.  I didn't do a thing but walk right on back out the door, called up Robert and I said, "Robert fire her tomorrow, get all my keys, get everything, tell her to take everything off the computer."  I said, "Now I saved her job, thinking about she needed the money to build, to buy--" 'cause she was buying a home.  I said well I'm not gonna tolerate that, now she not gonna rub my face in it, 'cause that's what she was really doing 'cause she didn't probably wanna work anymore, but she wanted the money.  So there were all kinds of episodes and things that happened to me when I was running the company and dealing with employees and it's, you know you trust them, you always, I always gave them the benefit of the doubt but after they, I found out that the benefit of the doubt after that it was out my door.
Story_ID: 482154
Speaker 1: Now, did you think in retrospect, that your husband [William McKissack] was too nice, I mean with the kind of thing that you inherited (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My husband was a very easy going, he would not say no to anybody, he had the evil bookkeeper doing all of the nasty work like firing people or, you know, what I'm, like that kind of thing, but he just would not, he couldn't do it.  He was just so nice, I mean really I think he was--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: That he just couldn't, 'cause he had to have known that his employees were doing buildings the size of the ones that the firm [McKissack and McKissack] was doing and yet he was paying them, and he wasn't, one of the employees was not doing his work, he was supposed to be the field investigator on the projects, first the episode I had to deal with was a building falling, the side of a wall falling down and it cost me ten thousand dollars because I had to pay the insurance company, you know, that was the liability and that was the deductible all because he didn't write up the report, he just left, if he had just written the report up it wouldn't have been our fault, so I knew he had to go.  But like I, I didn't tell you but, when I went in there in June, I--or May rather, I knew that I was gonna have to end up getting rid of a lot of people, as it turned out, I got rid of the ma- the main ones, by July I had gotten rid of the main ones that were creating problems and then it probably took a year or two later to get rid of the rest of them.  And all the time, I'm bringing in new people, but it was just a matter of being on top of things and watching that bottom line and, and going, we found enough money by the way, in file cabinets, if a client did not send us the money, they didn't send out any invoices hardly, when I went in there and if the money just didn't mysteriously float in from a client--so I wanted to know what that book, she had ticker tape going out the front door, she was trying to make people think she was working so hard and that's what she should have been doing, was making up the invoices and getting them out.  But we found, my oldest daughter and I, you know, she resigned her engineering job, the company she was running, came home and worked with me for three months from the time her daddy had the heart attack until time for her children to go back to school and she said, "Mama if I don't leave now I'll never leave," and I said, "Well don't go, but I don't want to mess up your marriage," so she went back to Detroit [Michigan].  But she helped me, I mean we worked around the clock, and we found enough money in the file cabinets where it had not been, the clients had not been invoiced to live off of for the whole summer, make payroll and everything so we worked around the clock.  I didn't even know how to read an architectural contract, that's one of the most difficult things in the world 'cause you don't get paid your money all at one time, it's broken up into the DD phase, design development phase, and then you've got the preliminary stage and then you go into that into construction drawings and, I mean it's something else and you have to learn all of that and you get your money in increments, you know like when you finish one phase and you invoice for that.  But they weren't doing that when I went in there apparently 'cause I mean, for us to find the money that we found in the files, and that's just by reading the contracts and then invoicing the client, and we get our money.
Speaker 1: So basically then, it was a family effort, I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah my daughter and I, oldest daughter and I, Andy [Andrea McKissack]--
Speaker 1: --to give--
Speaker 2: --and it--oh absolutely.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: I didn't know anything about 'cause she, she had worked with her father.
Speaker 1: But it helps being a A student who--
Speaker 2: Well yeah--
Speaker 1: --had, had been--
Speaker 2: --you gotta have--
Speaker 1: --serious about your--
Speaker 2: --a little common sense.
Speaker 1: -Yeah.
Speaker 2: You gotta have something up there.
Story_ID: 482155
Speaker 1: Tell me now, what are some of the, just briefly what are some of the projects you're working on now and, and what is your, what's the future,  I guess, prospects of McKissack and McKissack? They- there are three offices now?  I gather?
Speaker 2: Four.
Speaker 1: Four?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Funny thing is when I retired, I just really let it go when I said, I've been lucky all my life, and when I give up something like the phase of teaching, I must close the chapter, homemaking was wonderful that was the best chapter, when I had to go to work, you know, what I mean, I didn't have to, but I chose to.
Speaker 1: Well that's probably a bad question then--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: I, it should--
Speaker 2: --it's not a bad question.
Speaker 1: --should, have been a question--
Speaker 2: It's not, it's like--
Speaker 1: --that, you know, yeah.
Speaker 2: --the projects that I did, the highlight of my projects, one of them was Martin Luther--you know the Lorraine Motel [National Civil Rights Museum] in Memphis, Tennessee in honor of Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], it was the worst, hardest project I ever had 'cause you had three different entities and the state was the only--the didn't really want the project done, they didn't care--
Speaker 1: That's the one that [HistoryMaker] D'Army Bailey--
Speaker 2: Yes, D'Army Bailey--
Speaker 1: --kind of was the head--
Speaker 2: --yes indeed.
Speaker 1: --was spearheading?
Speaker 2: Lord have mercy he was chairman of that foundation [Martin Luther King Jr. Memphis Memorial Foundation], and he was definitely not on my side and it had something to do with something that, that bookkeeper of mine and his wife were good friends, so that's what, 'cause I was trying to think of what have I ever done to this man, I don't even know him.  But, I fig- figured out a way how to get around him, I had a pretty little employee that I sent down there, female and she had him eating outta her hands so, that worked, you know, we finally got through it but it was, I lost money on that project because the state was in- unreasonable in the end in setting up finish time for it to be over.  And I mean I had to send a crew to Memphis to help 'cause we had a, they hired a lousy contractor, I'd go down to check on it, he said, "Oh Mrs. McKissack [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack], I'm going fishing today."  I said, "But you can't go fishing, you the contractor," but the state just really didn't care, but as it turned out, the design on that was fabulous so, you know, that was a great week, opening week of that dedication and all like that.  Back in those days when I was, it was always a conflict with me like, for instance, it was a family reunion in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] of my family, my brothers and all and it's the same time that this dedication is going on so I couldn't leave until the following night of the dedication, so I got there like two days, two nights rather before or two days before it was over and I was tired.  And I flew into Washington, and my daughter got me and I went straight to bed and slept and I slept for about six hours and then she said, "Mom you gotta get up 'cause we gotta go to this dinner for the family," and I said, "Okay," but I was so tired.  That was one of the projects that I did that I was really, really proud of.
Story_ID: 482156
Speaker 1: 'Course, Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], I probably did $40 million worth of work down at Tuskegee.  Soon as I'd finish one building, Dr. Payton [Benjamin F. Payton] would give me another one.
Speaker 2: Was the, the cat- the Kellogg Conference Center [Kellogg Hotel and Conference Center, Tuskegee, Alabama] in one of those buildings?
Speaker 1: No--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --we did, oh the interesting thing was we were able to renovate buildings that Moses McKissack III had built when he pa- you know, back in the 1900s.  I had (unclear), he did so many buildings down there. That was a really wonderful thing to be able to renovate the buildings that your father-in-law had done in the '20s [1920s], and 30s [1930s].  Of course another project that I had that I really liked was the one, you know, at Howard University [Washington D.C.].  I was able to renovate the dormitory that my husband [William McKissack] went, stayed in, Cook Hall [George W. Cook Hall], when he was at Howard and that turned out to be a beautiful complex and then we did Bethune, Bethune Hall [Mary M. Bethune Annex] and which was a good one, what else, I mean it was all over the country, I tell you.  Oh the project at Lane College [Jackson, Tennessee] was beautiful too and the one at, well the three or four of them at Lane- at the Rust College [Holly Springs, Mississippi].  I mean I have a list of projects that I did.  Then I did work for the TVA [Tennessee Valley Authority], which was interesting, but now the girls, they have taken it to another level, by that I mean, architecture is in the, in the New York [New York] office is phased out and it's because they're engine- Cheryl's [HistoryMaker Cheryl McKissack Felder] a engineer and she just recently had a $250 million project awarded her on transportation and had our name right there on the west side, you know, how it when you come in?
Story_ID: 482157
Speaker 1: One of the things that I have done in the past, since I've retired was that, you know, I know people all over the country so, when they would call me, like when, one morning Cheryl [HistoryMaker Cheryl McKissack Felder] called and she said, "Mom your job today is to make sure that we have breakfast with the governor of Tennessee," and I said to her, "Why do we want to have breakfast with the governor of Tennessee?" She said, "Because the governor of New York is coming to meet with the governor of Tennessee, and we need to be at his breakfast table."  I said, "So what else do I have to do today, that's a done deal." One phone call, the governor at that time had put me on his economic growth board [Tennessee Board for Economic Growth].  I was on, and there is a paper right there on it, the economic growth board for the State of Tennessee, which was very interesting.  Cher- I had taken Cheryl to Europe twice with me with the governor 'cause he had invited me to go, he invited a small group and so Cheryl said, "Mama, you not getting outta here without taking me."  So, she went to London [England], we went to Munich [Germany], and then the last time I went she didn't go, he--I went to Stockholm [Sweden] with the governor.
Speaker 2: Now, now which governor is this?
Speaker 1: Sundquist [Don Sundquist], he was a Republican but it didn't matter to me because I mean, after he had put me on his growth board, and that's how we got to be friends and I still get Christmas cards from them every Christmas from the Governor Sundquist and of course Bredesen [Phil Bredesen] was our mayor, then he became governor and also a dear friend of mine.  But, the only two women at that table that morning for breakfast was Cheryl and myself and Don Sundquist strategically put Cheryl beside of Pataki [George Pataki] and two weeks after he went back to New York, he called her and said he wanted to have dinner with her and so she was some of, "Mom, how--oh."  She said, "How am I gonna be--?" I said, "You're gonna do fine honey, that's why you came to Nashville [Tennessee].  Now you go on and meet with, with Governor Pataki." So he had stood by and did everything he said he was gonna do for our company [McKissack and McKissack].  When I was there in the month of October, we went over to Albany [New York] to a meeting, I mean he, they, that's how Cheryl really got going in New York big time, was because of Pataki.
Story_ID: 482158
Speaker 1: It's also true that in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Rendell [Ed Rendell], who is the governor now of Pennsylvania, he had a, he honored me for a whole week in Philadelphia and had me fly up, he was just thanking me for having Cheryl [HistoryMaker Cheryl McKissack Felder] so she could be in Philadelphia to do this work.  They have done so well, and I said last, two weeks when I had to speak down at the convention center to the national organization for 100 Black Women [National Coalition of 100 Black Women], I said Nashville [Tennessee] has a long ways to go when it comes to black businesses, they really don't have any significant black businesses here.  Now which is really bad, they're only 20 percent black in the city and most of the blacks are involved, you know, we used to have thirty-six colleges and universities so most of them are in education, higher education--
Speaker 2: In--
Speaker 1: President--
Speaker 2: --in Nashville?
Speaker 1: --in that--
Speaker 2: Thirty-six co- colleges?
Speaker 1: We used too, now it's down to, they've combined like Peabody [George Peabody College for Teachers, Nashville, Tennessee] is now a part of Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee], so we probably have about eighteen still.  And it's a, it's a highly, it's a metropolitan city in that it's a melting pot for people from all over the world, a lot of different cultures and everything are right her in Nashville.  Last night I was at the chancellor's home for Vanderbilt for a reception that he was giving for the new president at Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and John Maupin [John E. Maupin, Jr.] was somebody I recommended that you all interview in Atlanta [Georgia] now because he was president of Meharry for twelve years, did a fabulous job getting it out of the hole, excuse me, and I'm hoping that you all will really interview him.
Story_ID: 482159
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently, if you could do it again?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Why did you ask me that question?  'Cause I have been ru- running that through my brain.  There're a lot of things I would do differently, I guess I might not, I might listen to what Gresham [Batey Gresham] and Smith [Flem Smith] said and hire (laughter) hire one of their guys and it would have been an easier road, that's a possibility 'cause I would not have lost a lot of money but after all that's irrevelant [sic. irrelevant].  Money's just, you know, so that would be one thing maybe I might have to stop and think about.  But, on the other hand, I probably still, you know, 'cause of them I would not have had to sue the city [Nashville, Tennessee], there would have been a lot of things that would have been done differently had I listened to Gresham and Smith.  But, who's to say that I would have been sitting in this chair, things would not probably have unfolded the way they did 'cause each time I was faced with a challenge, I would just work a little harder and think a little harder and overcome it.
Story_ID: 482160
Speaker 1: We'd normally ask this question and this, it's, it really is, seems to have a lot of significance here with this long history of the McKissack--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --business.  But, when you look back on everything you've done to this point what, what do you consider today to be your legacy?  I guess it's almost like a loaded question for you.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well my legacy would be that I stepped in when my husband [William McKissack] became ill and took over an architectural engineering company [McKissack and McKissack], not being an architect or an engineer and held it together and ran it for twenty years so that my daughters could step in and run it.  That to me is my legacy because at the rate it's going now, and see we're at a point now where we have huge companies wanting to by in and that's what they have done, they have taken it to that level.  Although when my husband was, he had the heart attack on a Sunday morning, early Monday morning, Tuesday morning by eight o'clock I'd had three calls from three major firms here in Nashville [Tennessee] asking me to buy the company.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But then hey, I wouldn't have had all this fun, I wouldn't have got a chance to do all the things that I did.  So, you know, I've been to the White House three times, I was invited three times by Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], and I didn't go but once because I was so busy, I was up in New York [New York] or wherever, I sent my daughter Deryl [Deryl McKissack].  She said, "Mama I can't believe you keep missing these White House functions." I said, "Well I'm always somewhere else." And so the last one I said, well three strikes and you're out, so I made it on the third time, which was really fabulous.  And, I mean, it just opened up a whole 'nother world for me, and I'm go--I don't regret whatever I went through to get to this point--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: --'cause it paid off.
Speaker 1: --right.
Speaker 2: The paying off to me, are my girls running, Deryl mans two offices and Cheryl [HistoryMaker Cheryl McKissack Felder] mans two, and they work harder than I ever worked.  And I'm now trying, they're now at the point where, you know, we're thinking about selling maybe part of it, to big companies and getting, you know, and then they can go and sit on the board and not have to work so hard (background noise).
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: And that's what I'm looking forward to.
Story_ID: 482161
Speaker 1: Tell me this, we, we always ask this question, (background noise) what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community of Nashville [Tennessee] an- and the nation (background noise) today?
Speaker 2: Oh that it's a fair, that my hopes for this community, let's start with Nashville first and then we'll go to national, is that the powers to be in this city will open up its arms to black businesses.  Now they haven't done that here and I know because I was part of the deal, I have paid my dues to this community, I have served on maybe twenty different boards at one time, I've broken down barriers whereby blacks were not allowed to go to the, the Swan Ball was the main function of this area, the Cheekwood Museum [Cheekwood Botanical Gardens and Museum of Art, Nashville, Tennessee], they had the audacity to ask me to be on the board, and then asked me like maybe three months later to sponsor Joe Williams coming to Cheekwood in the summertime and I said to them, I always had a pet answer, I would say, well they had the little folder and little information all together for me to take back, I said, "Well give it to me and I always have to talk it over with my CPA [certified public accountant] before I shell out money for a big event like this."  And then as I'm going out the door, and I said, "But by the way, I don't know what kind of message I would send to the black community if I were to sponsor something out here at Cheekwood when it's closed to blacks period and the only day they can come is on the day, on Monday when it's closed."  Now what kind of message am I sending to the black community?  I can't do that even if my CPA approves it, I can't do it 'cause I'm not sending a negative message to this community until we open the doors to everyone. I said, "Believe or not, I have been on the American Federation of Art [American Federation of Arts] board which is in New York City [New York, New York] and I'm invited to everything.  I just cannot go because I'm running a company [McKissack and McKissack] but I go to a lot of things.  So I cannot understand how in Nashville, Tennessee where we have a museum, Cheekwood botanical museum and you asking me to sponsor something, although I'm a board member, and yet blacks cannot attend the Swan Ball?"  Of course they say, "Well we don't have anything to do with that."  I said, "That's fine, then you talk to the powers that be that do.  Because until blacks are invited to the Swan Ball and can come to this museum, I am not giving a dime to Cheekwood. I don't care if I'm on the board."  You know how long it took them?  Three days, and they called and said, "Mrs. McKissack [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack], you're invited."  I said, "I'm not interested in being invited.  What about the other members?" We had three black member on the board, "Oh they're gonna be invited too."  The next year they called me and said, "We want you to give us a list of blacks that if we send them an invitation they would come."  Before I, and I stayed on that board for ten years and--
Speaker 1: Now what's the name of this board?  This is the, the--
Speaker 2: It was Cheekwood--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Botanical Gardens and Museum.  That was in nineteen- let me see when did they open up that door to me?  I think it was in nineteen- Lord I can't remember when that was?  But anyway--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --it was a, they wrote some nasty articles about it and they wrote some good ones--
Speaker 1: Okay, but you were saying (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean they said--
Speaker 1: --that, that--
Speaker 2: --that the fact that you know, my bro- I had--to make sure that it was done right, I imported my brother from Austin, Texas, and I called his wife and I said, "Frances [Frances Buchanan], I gotta borrow my brother for a weekend." She said, "What do you mean?"  I said, "Well I want him to take me to the Swan Ball" 'cause Teddy [Ted Buchanan] was an IBMer [employee, International Business Machines Corporation] and being that he was an IBMer, he knew--
Story_ID: 482162
Speaker 1: Well see we grew up but no problems of discrimination, on the Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] campus you know we had a white pres- we used to call it checkerboard system, had a white president, a black dean, who was my daddy [McKissack's stepfather, A.A. Taylor], then a white registrar, and this went on down the line like that in the administration.  So they had, and you know you lived around everybody and it didn't matter 'cause my brother as a little boy didn't know he was black until he was going into the swimming pool with his little white buddies one days and the lifeguard caught him in midair and said, "Boy you can't go in there." He said, "Why not?"  He said, "'Cause you are black."  He said, "I'm not black," (laughter) 'cause he was six years old and didn't know the difference.  But they gathered up their children and they said, well if he can't go in the pool, neither can we, 'cause that's the kind of people you had at Fisk see?  So I mean, being that I was born in Missouri and you know, didn't know anything about, you--you know, race was never an issue with me, and I even had a lady at the last, not the last Swan Ball I went to, but one of the Swan Balls I went too, she said, "Lea [HistoryMaker Leatrice McKissack], I have to ask you a question," after she had two or three drinks.  I said, "Fire away." She said, "How do you feel always being the only black in a group in a sea of whites?"  I said, "I don't feel anything 'cause color has never managed--has never mattered to me.  That's the way we were brought up."
Story_ID: 482163
Speaker 1: The last question we have--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --is similar to legacy but a little different. And that question is, ma'am how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, I would like to be remembered as a good mother which I know I will be 'cause my girls [Andrea McKissack, Deryl McKissack and HistoryMaker Cheryl McKissack Fender] just love me to death.  A good godmother and I would also like, 'cause [HistoryMaker] Alice Randall is my godchild, I would like to be remembered as a person who tried to make a difference in helping out the community and making it better for people.  Also that I'd like to be remembered as someone who took over a company [McKissack and McKissack] that was so important to my husband [William McKissack] and managed to make it through, to hand it over to her daughters who--we are now 102 years old and I did my little part by running it for twenty years.
Story_ID: 482164
Speaker 1: And I worked real hard in doing it but my girls are doing a fabulous job, 'cause I just get so excited when I--and their father [William McKissack] has to be so proud of them because when you think about, you know, all businesses have ups and downs, basically I guess, but for us to be where we are today is in a good spot.  And I say that, when you have huge companies wanting part of the action, that, to me that is actually where we are today and I, I am so excited about that.  When I go to New York [New York] next week, I will be finding out where we are on that because my daughters have been meeting in an effort to bring all of this together and take it to another level.  So however, I see them probably, I don't see after them, by that, their children, I don't know would be interested now.  My oldest daughter's-- my granddaughter--I have two granddaughters that are married, one of them is a com- chemical engineer and she lives in Minneapolis, Minnesota and a brain if there ever was one, she's a National Merit [National Merit Scholar], the other one is also very good and Michelle [ph.] might be the one that might step in 'cause she and her husband, the girls are bringing them into the fold because she's, she has her M.B.A. from the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia], so does her husband and he started a company five years ago and took it, what do you call it?  Public, make a big glob of money and so he's consulting now with our company the, you know, so it's a possibility that maybe they will be the ones to carry it on.  But the other ones are too young and I don't see Cheryl [HistoryMaker Cheryl McKissack Felder] continuing on in the pace that she's going, it's just too much, she has two daughters that are twel- eleven and twelve. Deryl [Deryl McKissack] has a little one, bless her heart, my last grandbaby [Ahlyah McKissack Albritton] looks just like my mother [Catherine Buchanan Taylor] and she's only three.  But I just don't see them, and they might, I don't know, but I'm just so proud of the fact that my girls have played a tremendous role in carrying this company [McKissack and McKissack] forward.
Story_ID: 482165
Speaker 1: This is when I was in my office, I guess maybe in 1983 or '84 [1984], after I took over and I'm in my office arranging, getting ready to sit down and go to work.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Go ahead if that's fine, okay ready.
Speaker 1: Well this picture is important to me because it has my, all of my grown women in it, it has my oldest daughter, my two twins and also my granddaughter.
Speaker 2: Okay so if we start here, who do we have?
Speaker 1: Andrea McKissack right there on the first and then we have me, mom, and then we have Deryl [Deryl McKissack], Michelle [ph.] who's my granddaughter, Andi's youngest daughter and Cheryl [HistoryMaker Cheryl McKissack Felder]. Cheryl's in the pink.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, I'm ready.
Speaker 1: All right this picture was taken after my husband's funeral in Nashville [Tennessee] and it has all of my daughters and my two grown granddaughters.
Speaker 2: Okay, from this side?
Speaker 1: That's my oldest granddaughter, that's--sh- I need to get my, where'd I put those sun--you see those sunglasses right over there on that thing?  I've got to back up, oh no that was--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  From left to right?
Speaker 1: From left to right, that is Sherry [ph.], my oldest granddaughter, her mother Andrea, Cheryl, me, I'm sorry, this is Deryl, this is Deryl right here.
Speaker 2: Deryl here?
Speaker 1: Deryl is this one.
Speaker 2: That's you?
Speaker 1: That's me, Cheryl and then Michelle, it di- my grand, my youngest granddaughter by Andrea.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  All right.
Speaker 1: Okay, that is Bill Cosby and myself. I fixed dinner for Bill Cosby in 1984.
Speaker 2: That's me, in the Fiji islands.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, what?
Speaker 2: In the--this is when I was visiting in the Fesi I- Fiji islands, in the South Pacific.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, I, from left to right, I'm the little girl there on the end--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Where?
Speaker 1: On that end, on the left end.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.
Speaker 1: So right, right?
Speaker 2: Right there, that's me at two years old and my oldest brother is like one, two, three, right there between those two girls.  His name was Harold [Harold Buchanan].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, okay ready?
Speaker 2: Yes, this picture was taken for the Jet magazine in 1990 when I was the national female entrepreneur of the year and all three of my daughters are behind me.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Cheryl, Andrea and Deryl.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay ready?
Speaker 2: This is me at Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] with our speaker who was Earl Graves [HistoryMaker Earl G. Graves, Sr.], and I'm on the board of trustees and he was our guess speaker for that convocation for that year, for commencement, rather I should say.  This was one of the highlights of my career.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Being able to pick [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte up at the airport and sh- and keep him all day long and take him back to the airport, he is the most gracious individual and warm individual I think I've met in my entire life.  But he was absolutely delightful, he went all day long without eating, only drank water and when we got to the airport, he was flying to New Orleans [Louisiana] when he left here, he was here for a Fisk commencement and he was, he went in the airport and he smelled the barbeque, and he said, "Oh I think I'm hungry," (laughter) and so we got him a plate, he had a plate of barbeque, macaroni and cheese, baked beans, coleslaw, 'cause he ate only that one time.  But he was so gracious in that people in the airport, was stopping and asking him if--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --they could take his picture and he said sure, you know?  And he was seventy when that was done.
Speaker 1: Yeah he--
Speaker 2: Oh you're not ready yet?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: My daughter Cheryl and myself are sitting in my office in Nashville, Tennessee, when we were getting ready for a board meeting with our employees. We used to have meetings once a year where we all get together and we were making some changes.  So employees from all the different offices were there and we were probably strategizing (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  And next.  Okay and ready?
Speaker 1: This was where I was speaking in Kentucky, Paducah, Kentucky, to a minority enterprise business banquet and I was the guest speaker.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay ready?
Speaker 1: Yes this was taken back in 1983, when I was going to some affair, I don't remember what affair it was.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, next, are you ready?
Speaker 1: This was taken in my office, from time to time they'd take pictures so this was one of them in my office.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This was my first job as a school teacher and this was a Christmas banquet.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, and where are you?
Speaker 1: I'm second from the right there, on the first row, right there.
Speaker 2: Second from right on the first row?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is Meigs Junior High School [Meigs Academic Magnet School] in East Nashville [Nashville, Tennessee] and we were having another Christmas party and this was probably about my third or fourth year.
Speaker 1: There you are.
Speaker 2: Right there.
Speaker 1: Here?
Speaker 2: And this was the last one at that school, right there.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Thank you, next one.
Speaker 2: This is 1962, or so?
Speaker 1: Yeah it had to be '62 [1962].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay ready?
Speaker 1: Yes, I'm on the second row, this is on the end--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  On the left?
Speaker 1: On the left, when I went back after having--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Left.
Speaker 1: On the left.
Speaker 2: This left?
Speaker 1: Right there, second row.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Second row.
Speaker 1: Second row.
Speaker 2: Third row.
Speaker 1: Let me ask--
Speaker 2: The second row?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Second row?
Speaker 2: Yeah that's it right there.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Yeah, (unclear) second row.
Speaker 2: Right there.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  On the left, there we go.
Speaker 2: That's it, that's, that's Wharton Junior High School [Wharton Elementary and Junior High School, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.
Speaker 2: And a par-
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, who is that?
Speaker 2: This is Calvin McKissack who was one of the, he, who ran the company after Moses III [Moses McKissack III] passed, great architect.  If I could have willed anybody to live forever, he would have been one.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  And who is this?
Speaker 2: This is my late husband, DeBerry McKissack [William McKissack], who was a really, really good man, and good husband, good father and I miss him terribly.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay and ready.
Speaker 2: This is A.A. Taylor who was my stepfather from the time I was thirteen until he died, he was a good father.
Speaker 1: He's a dean or (unclear).
Speaker 2: And he was also dean of Fisk University and a historian and a writer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Biological father who served in World War I [WWI], who died very, in a very, he died in nineteen--
Speaker 2: Forty [1940] or?
Speaker 1: He died in 1937.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, what's his name?
Speaker 1: Archie Buchanan, my biological father.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is my sweet loving mother, Catherine Brummell Buchanan Taylor [Catherine Buchanan Taylor].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA SPEAKER):  Okay, ready?
Speaker 1: This is my husband and myself on a cruise in the Caribbean in 1971, we went to Haiti to the St. Martin, to San Juan, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Island.
