Story_ID: 36977
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Suzanne Malveaux.  That's Suzanne Maria Malveaux, S-U-Z-A-N-N-E, M-A-R-I-A, Malveaux, M-A-L-V-E-A-U-X.
Speaker 1: And Maam, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December 4, 1966, Lansing, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a journalist.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: March--I don't know, what is today's date?  March 17, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at this present time?
Speaker 2: Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Story_ID: 36978
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we ask as a warm-up, of everybody.  They only require short answers.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Fried chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite color?
Speaker 2: Crimson burgundy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summertime.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Any island.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "You do you."
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 36979
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  But we'll start with your mother's side first so we don't get the sides mixed up.  So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Myrna Maria Malveaux.  M-Y-R-N-A, Maria, M-A-R-I-A, Malveaux.  And her maiden name was Ruiz.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: R-U-I-Z.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And what is her date of birth?
Speaker 2: September 25, I wrote it down.  She was born in New Orleans [Louisiana].  Can I look at my paper?  I mean, I have it written down.
Speaker 1: That's okay.  So she's--
Speaker 2: She's seventy-two [years old].
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: She's seventy-one and my dad is seventy-two.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  And she was born in New Orleans?
Speaker 2: In New Orleans, yes.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side, and then, what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Ah, my mom, she was, her parents are Grandma Lou, Lucille Ruiz, and her father, John O, Grandpa John O, as I know him.  He was a mail-carrier, and both of them didn't finish, they had an elementary school education, but neither one of them finished elementary school.  And Grandpa John O, he was very smart and very industrious, and so he actually studied on his own, and it was fairly significant that he passed this rather vigorous test to become a mail-carrier, and it was rather rare back in the day that you had--there were very few black mail-carriers-- and he was one of ten, many children, and he actually, his father died when he was very young, when he was in elementary school, and he had three sisters.  And so they had to pull him out of school because he was the only man in the family and he had to start working.  And so he worked at a very young age and didn't go beyond an elementary school education.
Speaker 1: Now this is in New Orleans?
Speaker 2: Yes, this is in New Orleans.
Speaker 1: So he was born and raised in New Orleans?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And then my mother's mother, my grandmother Lou, she was raised by her grandparents, because her parents had died and she was raised by her grandparents.  She was raised in a family that actually spoke French because my grandmother's mother was from France.  But they lost the language at that generation because they were trying to assimilate, and so they were almost embarrassed that they spoke French, and they had to try to learn English and learn it well.
Story_ID: 36980
Speaker 1: Is there a story about your, this would be your great-great-great-grandmother?
Speaker 2: My [maternal] grandmother's grandmother. (laughter)
Speaker 1: Your grandmother's grandmother is coming from--
Speaker 2: From France.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so did she come directly to Louisiana from France or did she go--because I know they--
Speaker 2: It's a little confusing, actually, because what we're able to trace is that we can go back to France, Germany, Italy, Spain--and a slave ship, a slave ship that came to New Orleans that had, it was a Belgium ship--at least that's the story in our family--a Belgian ship that had two individuals, John Baptiste, and Plaisance [ph.], who came--and we lose track of one of them.  I think that we keep up with John Baptiste, and John Baptiste, originally they were slaves.  And then he had eight sons, and those sons worked the land and eventually were indentured servants.  One of those sons was Leroux.  And he had a son, Leroux, and that son had Delton [ph.].  Delton had Floyd.  Floyd is my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's, that's what we believe in terms of the slave ship.  But on my mother's [Myrna Maria Ruiz Malveaux] side--
Speaker 1: That takes us back to about what time, would you say.  The slave ship, that would be what?
Speaker 2: A couple generations.  I mean this is--
Speaker 1: It would be early 1790s or '80s [1780s] or something?
Speaker 2: I mean this is all just kind of research.  This is tossed down from family--
Speaker 1: That would certainly probably take you back to the late 1700s.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean for sure that we can trace our roots back to France on my mother's side because of my grandmother's grandmother, who was from France.  Germany, Spain, Italy--and then we believe this slave ship, which this ship might have come from either Haiti or Senegal, we're not even sure.
Speaker 1: These are two different strains coming together, the European side and the slave ship side.
Speaker 2: Right.  Although it's even not that simple, because there's French on both sides.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There's European on both sides.  It's a big mix.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And Louisiana was a port where people were coming from all over the place forming almost like a new society in those days.
Speaker 2: A lot of mixing.  The French, the Spanish, the slaves.  So the African part, I mean we're very much a mixed family.
Speaker 1: So would your mother's side be considered Creole?
Speaker 2: I guess both sides would be considered Creole although we were always, were identified as black, African American, and certainly with that Creole mix.  We have French, we have Spanish, we have African, and there's a wide variety of colors and shades and textures within our family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And as far as you know, on your mother's side, is there a point of activity in New Orleans basically?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's our focal point.  That's where all our--most of our people are in New Orleans--started in New Orleans.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's our culture.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Story_ID: 36981
Speaker 1: Now are there any stories about your [maternal] ancestors?  I know you talked about your [maternal] grandfather [John Ruiz] coming to the post office which is remarkable, because so many black people with degrees--black men who worked in the post office as a terminal job in those days.  So it's remarkable that someone who didn't have one--
Speaker 2: He worked all the time.  He was a hard, industrious man.  I just remember him as a child.  He died when I was in elementary school, but he was always the one who was the center of the family.  And my grandmother [Loucille Ruiz], she was the one who raised them.  There were five of them and my mom [Myrna Maria Ruiz Malveaux] was one of the youngest of the five.  And it was a, they told the story about how there was a truck that was full of bread, that the door flung open and he and all his friends were grabbing bread (laughter).  All these loaves, and taking them home.  It was like Christmas or something.  But at the time he actually, he and all of his friends built their house.  I mean they built the house that they lived in, the house that my mom grew up in.  And my mom said she was riding her bicycle and she delivered sandwiches to all the guys.  My grandfather and all of them would work day in and day out with, you know, the skills that they had to build their home, and they built this house.  They took turns building each other's homes and that was the first house that they owned.  And they rented before, it was the first house that they owned.  And then it was not a long time afterwards that there was a big highway, an expressway that they built over, and all those black people's, those families' homes, had to go.  And it was heartbreaking, because my grandfather stayed in the house, wouldn't leave the house up until the very last minute when they came and they took all the houses away literally, like moved them out on trucks and moved them to another area.  They paid him a little bit of money for the home but it was heartbreaking for him because he had literally built that house with his hands, and there was a whole community effort, and they were all dispersed after that.  And they moved to Pauger Street [New Orleans, Louisiana] because they no longer had that community now that the expressway had taken over.
Speaker 1: Now that was urban renewal or whatever, was that the era of urban renewal, in the late '50s [1950s] or early '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And a lot of stories, there are a lot of stories about that.  Every city in the country pretty much had a similar kind of story, and that's when the highway comes over.
Story_ID: 36982
Speaker 1: Ah, so your mother [Myrna Maria Ruiz Malveaux], she went to school in New Orleans [Louisiana], and she grew up in New Orleans?
Speaker 2: Yes, she grew up in New Orleans.
Speaker 1: Was there a particular, what did they call the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Well she was in Ward 7, and they grew up in the segregated south, and grew up in black schools.  She always tells the story of just how hurt she was that she wasn't able to go to the neighborhood school.  It was an all-white school.  So she and her siblings, her brothers and sisters, would walk about a mile, and they would pass up the neighborhood school and the pool and the church that they were not allowed to go to, to go to the black school.  And there were even, there were some neighbors, there were white neighbors in the neighborhood.  She had best friends, Wendy and Gay, and Wendy would go off to dance classes, and she hated to go to dance classes, but she was able to go to dance classes.  And my mother, they couldn't afford it.  And she says Wendy would come back and teach her all the dance moves, and my mom would beg for her, you know, "Teach me, teach me."  And she'd teach her all the dance moves.  And Wendy didn't even want to go to dance classes, but it was one of those things where they couldn't afford it.  It was, you know, for whites only and she tells those stories.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, the neighborhood was mixed but the facilities were segregated?
Speaker 2: Yes.  The church--and they sat in the back.  The school, the swimming pool.  The ironic thing about the church is that this is a church now that is predominantly a black church, mixed church.  And my cousin actually painted the mural of the angels behind the altar, and he's got all the angels, and he actually used my sister and myself as models for two of the angels (laughter).  So you have our faces as the faces of the angels on this huge mural in this church where my mom used to be banned from, where she wasn't even able to, really to be a part of.
Speaker 1: She had to sit in the back.  This is a Catholic church, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yes, it's a Catholic church.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: Our Lady of the Sea.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now was your mother able to finish high school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, she finished high school.  She went on to Xavier University.  And when I was, when I was in middle school, that's when she got her master's degree.  She went back to school to get her master's degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What did she get her master's in?
Speaker 2: Teaching, higher education.
Speaker 1: Okay, now let me go to your father's side.  Ah, well before we go, did your mother have any interesting stories about growing up other than the dance story?  Anything else before we--
Speaker 2: Well, she used to love to talk, she'd talk about how they made mud pies outside (laughter).  She was outside her porch and she'd spend a lot of time making mud pies.  We used to, sometimes we laughed as kids at their stories because they were very poor and they didn't have a lot.  And they were happy and they loved to dance and loved to be a part--and New Orleans is such a part of who she is and who we are, but they really didn't have much at all.  So it was always odd to hear some of the stories about how she had to walk a mile to school and walk back.  That she wasn't allowed to use the swimming pool or be a member of the church in times of segregation.  But she always talks about how much she enjoyed her community and the family and the people around her.  But there were struggles, too.  I mean she talked about how everyday as a little girl her older brother Johnny would get beat up by a group of white boys who would every single day hit him, punch him, kick him, as he was going home, on the way home.  And my mom had tears streaming down her face everyday because she couldn't do anything, she was just a little girl.  And, but that's the way it was, you know, that's the way it was.  That's, you know, they were black and they were targets.  She talked about the books that they used that were tattered and torn and worn, and just not having a lot, but also about loving to dance and loving to make mud pies on her front porch and loving New Orleans.
Story_ID: 36983
Speaker 1: Alright, well can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Floyd Joseph Malveaux.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 11, and he's seventy-two [years old].
Speaker 1: So that's 1939 I guess.
Speaker 2: '39 [1939], I think.  I have to do the math.  He was born in Opelousas.  Opelousas, Louisiana, a small town, rural.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: O-P-E-L-O-U-S-A-S.
Speaker 1: I've heard of that before.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's three hours outside of New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  Well, what do you know about his side of the family?  How far back can you trace him?
Speaker 2: So, Grandpa Del and Grandma Nez--so Delton Malveaux and Inez and Delton was one--ten, I believe, one of ten children.  Very poor, didn't finish--I think he had an elementary school education and he was in the business with his brothers, many of my uncles, in the donut business.  They made donuts.  And when I was a kid, actually, I loved it (laughter).  Every time we went to visit the hot summers in Opelousas, spending time with my grandparents, my uncle and my grandfather used to bring dozens and dozens of donuts back, which was fantastic.  We used to love that.  I mean, pastries, just anything you could imagine.  And we would eat them like all summer.  It was just incredible.  And actually they showed us how to make the donuts too.  They had like, you know, the machines and everything.  But back in the day it was, they didn't have safety regulations and things like that.  And so people had accidents all the time.  And so my grandfather actually had like one of his fingers cut off, and it was missing and it was kind of a novelty.  You know when I'd look at his hands I used to like to put his hands in my hands and look at his hands, because you know he had like this missing finger.  And my uncle--like they all had these nubs and missing fingers because it was actually just machines that were stamping and doing all this kind of stuff and--
Speaker 1: Slicing.
Speaker 2: Slicing, and there were, there wasn't any money they would give you back in that day if there was an accident.  It wasn't very safe, and so strangely enough you would think donuts is not a dangerous thing.  But they all had like various bits of their fingers missing.  But he didn't seem to care, and it was always just a really, a big treat when, you know, we would celebrate and he would bring all these dozens and dozens of pastries and donuts for the kids, who would scream and get excited.
Speaker 1: So they worked for a major bakery in Opelousas?
Speaker 2: I don't know if it was a major bakery.
Speaker 1: Just a donut--
Speaker 2: Just a donut factory, yeah.  All the brothers used to work at the same donut factory.  And there was a point where he became allergic to the flour, so he left and then he was a laborer.  He worked at department stores and things like that.  But he had an elementary school education.  And Grandma Nez, Inez, she was the one who went on and got more schooling.  She went on eventually--she wasn't able to go to college because she too had to work.  But then it was afterwards she ended up going to get a college degree.  And she really was the first of that generation to get a college degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So where did she go?  Did she go to--?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Xavier or--?
Speaker 2: She was in Opelousas.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 36984
Speaker 1: So what did your dad [Floyd Joseph Malveaux] say about growing up [in Opelousas, Louisiana]?  Did he--so this is, this is like-Opelousas is sort of a rural area, but all of your relatives are making donuts.
Speaker 2: (laughter)
Speaker 1: You would have thought they would have been farmers, but they're making donuts.  Did he, what kind of work did he do growing up?  I mean, did he have to work growing up?
Speaker 2: Well he, so he was like an only child.  His sister was fifteen years younger, born fifteen years after him.  So he ended up going into the seminary in high school because he thought he wanted to be a priest.  And he came back because he realized he didn't want to be a priest.  And it was his senior year in high school that he actually lived with Deltonez [ph.], his sister.  That was the only year that they lived together as brother and sister.  But it was very rural, and it was a time when, you know, there were fig trees in the backyard, a train that used to roar through the backyard as well, a big beautiful garden--and they also didn't have very much.  He tells a funny story about the first time he remembers getting a bathtub (laughter) and having the bathtub installed, because they used to just have like a little barrel that they would bathe in.  And you know, we used to think that was so funny (laughter).
Story_ID: 36985
Speaker 1: He [Malveaux's father, Floyd Joseph Malveaux] went on to college after high school, right?  Where did he go?
Speaker 2: So my father always really wanted to get out of Opelousas [Louisiana] and see something better, see something beyond this very small poor community.  There wasn't a lot of opportunity, and that's why our family left, left New Orleans [Louisiana], left Opelousas.  And he ended up getting a scholarship to Creighton University [Omaha, Nebraska].  He went on to Loyola [University, New Orleans] and then to Michigan State [University, Lansing, Michigan].  So he got a bachelor's [degree], a master's [degree], and a Ph.D [degree].  And my mother [Myrna Maria Ruiz Malveaux] was at Xavier [University, New Orleans] at the time they married, when he was at Loyola.  And he went to Howard [University, Washington, District of Columbia] and he taught for two years as a professor before he ended up getting his medical degree.  And we were actually at this graduation, which was great.  By then, my mom, by the time my mom was thirty [years old], she had four kids.  And there were two four-year olds--my sister and I, my twin sister [Suzette Malveaux] and I, and my two brothers [Courtney and Greg Malveaux].  One was a two-year old and one who was an infant, so she had four.  And my dad was going to school, he was putting us--you know, he was basically carrying the workload because he was teaching at Howard University.  My mother was also teaching as well, teaching Head Start in first grade.  And so I actually remember my dad's graduation when he got his M.D. at Howard.  And Howard has been a big part of our family as well.  He taught there, practiced at Howard, got his medical degree there, and then became a dean in Howard's medical school.
Speaker 1: He came to Howard as a biologist, right?
Speaker 2: Microbiologist, yes.  That was his specialty.
Speaker 1: Then he decided to go on and get an M.D.?
Speaker 2: And then allergies and asthma was his practice.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were about, from what I remember, about eight years old when he graduated?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 36986
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a story about how your parents [Floyd Joseph Malveaux and Myrna Maria Ruiz Malveaux] met and fell in love?
Speaker 2: Well it's kind of funny because my mom, I think he kind of stalked her a little (laughter).  Because she says he kept her asking her--they were set up through her cousin.  She said "Oh you've got to meet this Myrna Malveaux, she's great."  And dad was described as very smart, and Mom was very outgoing.  Dad is shy.  So, my mom says that there were times that he pulled up--and she was dating other people--and there were times that she would look outside the window, and he's outside in the car just watching (laughter).  And she's like "Oh, this guy, you know, he's really interested."  And finally she said yes, and that was nice.  But we kind of teased Dad about that.  We're like, "You were kind of like stalking Mom for a while."  (laughter).  Because she kept saying no and then she finally said yes because she realized how persistent he was.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, ah, he was in college.  They were in college around the same time?
Speaker 2: Yes.  So he was in Loyola [University, New Orleans, Louisiana] at the time and she was at Xavier [University] when they met in New Orleans.
Speaker 1: Alright, okay.  So they got married before he went to Michigan State [University, Lansing, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Well, they got married--yeah, they got married and then they went to Michigan State together.  So they lived in campus housing for married students.  And that's why I was born in Michigan.  My sister [Suzetet Malveaux] and I were born in Michigan because he was at Michigan State at the time.
Speaker 1: So the family is in East Lansing, is that where you were?
Speaker 2: Yes, in East Lansing, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Story_ID: 36987
Speaker 1: Well, okay, now how many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: I have a twin sister [Suzette Malveaux] and two younger brothers [Courtney and Greg Malveaux].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright, and you are the--?
Speaker 2: I am six minutes younger than my sister (laughter).  So, I'm not the oldest, technically.
Speaker 1: Alright, okay.  Now when you consider your parents' [Floyd Joseph Malveaux and Myrna Maria Ruiz Malveaux] talents, their dispositions, their habits, their looks, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Well I'm definitely like my mom.  I mean everybody says I look just like my mom.  And we share the same vulnerabilities, we share the same passions, we look very much alike.  She's more outgoing than I am.  I mean I think I'm a combination.  I think she has wonderful warmth and appeal to people and she's very social, and I think that's, that's the part of me that I get from my mom.  My dad is very determined, he's very ambitious, he works very hard, and I think that's where I get my drive.  And he's kind of shy.  Maybe I'm a little bit like that too.  So, very much a combination, but everybody says I'm spot on dead on just like my mom.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 36988
Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Just anything, you mean?  Well my mom [Myrna Maria Ruiz Malveaux] says that when we were really, really little my sister [Suzette Malveaux] and I spoke a secret language, a special language only to each other, and that we basically ignored everybody else.  And they say that happens with twins.  And actually I do remember one of the words that we spoke which seems kind of strange.  But there was one word that survived, and the word is "bomyea."  I don't why we used that word, but it means anything that's kind of funny or strange and we would laugh and say "Oh that's so bomyea."  And that's just the one word that survived.  But my mom said like before we spoke English or communicated with anyone else, the two of us just turned to each other and just talked and talked and talked for hours.  I guess it's because we were in the womb together and we were used to being around each other (laughter).  We're like "Who the hell are all these people?"  Now all of a sudden it became very crowded.  So, really, I mean things are almost kind of fuzzy as a child in terms of whether or not I did it or whether or not my sister did it, and I watched her.  I know I fell down, well one of us fell down the escalators, and I don't know if it was me or if I watched my sister in front of me fall.  But to this day we're both like really kind of a little freaked out by escalators.  Um, there's all kinds of stories where we really just--I mean it's such a powerful bond, and it's--you don't really even know sometimes whether or not it's yourself that's feeling it or whether or not it's your twin.
Speaker 1: Now are you identical twins?
Speaker 2: That's up for debate, because I was a surprise.  My mom--the doctor actually said, told my mom that she was gaining too much weight and that she had to lose weight because she was getting so big when she was pregnant.  And we were premature, not by a lot but we were both premature.  And together we weighed ten pounds.  And when my mom first had my sister Suzette and the doctor made a joke and said, "Oh you know you're doing so well.  You want to try for another?"  And she's like, "What, huh?"  And he's like, "No, I'm serious." (laughter).  And my dad [Floyd Joseph Malveaux] started crying, because they realized they were going to have another.  So then I was a total surprise, and that's when I popped out.  And they didn't realize, you know, that she was expecting twins, that she was expecting two.
Story_ID: 36989
Speaker 1: Now we were talking about what kind of a twin you are, and you were saying that there's a kind of twin that has a symmetrical polarity--
Speaker 2: Right.  So we--the doctor told my mom [Myrna Maria Ruiz Malveaux] that we were fraternal twins despite the fact that we [Malveaux and her twin sister, Suzette Malveaux] look very, very much alike.  We're very similar and so my mom just doesn't believe the doctor.  She thinks that we're identical, and later we discovered that there is something that's called half-identical.  So, that's when you actually, we have characteristics of identical and fraternal twins.  So for instance, you know, if you have one egg and it splits, there's a dominant left and a dominant right, where one's left-handed and the other is right-handed, and that's the case with my sister and myself.  Uh, and all kinds of different things that, you know, that we're very, very much alike.  Our voices are identical.  I can't distinguish, it's the one strange thing, it's that I can't just distinguish my own voice if I listen to it on a recording.  I hear my sister.  Or sometimes, even if I'm on camera and I feel that I'm uncomfortable in any way I can actually believe that it's not really me, that it's her.  And that seems really odd (laughter).  But we are really similar to the point where we just identify in a way that I don't think other people can understand that kind of bond that we have.  Maybe it's just because that's the one person that you spent nine months just together growing before you're introduced to the rest of the world.  And that's a big part of who I am.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 36990
Speaker 1: So well, we always ask this question.   What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Ah, the smell of fresh grass after my dad [Floyd Joseph Malveaux] mowed the lawn, the taste of homemade ice cream.  We used to have barbecues in the backyard with our family and our friends all the time and everybody used to take a turn, you know, turning the homemade ice cream.  The taste of homemade ice cream, the peaches, and the sound of my parents [father and mother, Myrna Maria Ruix Malveaux] laughing upstairs with their friends once they put us to bed, and the party went on and continued and they would be laughing upstairs, the adults.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The train in my [paternal] grandmother's backyard.  We used to love to see the train and we'd run out every time the train went by in their backyard.  And it wasn't anything special for them, because they're in Opelousas [Louisiana] and they're tired of seeing this train go through the backyard.   But for us, visiting my grandparents, that was really special, to see a train and to hear the train horn in the backyard.  And the taste of tomatoes and figs.  We had fig trees in the backyard--just little things like, just the special things.  Being with a cousin who's ten years older than you, and you look up to, and you get to go to the corner store right down the street.  Just that kind of special, little special moments.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 36991
Speaker 1: So you grew up in East Lansing [Michigan], but you would go at least part, the earlier part of your life--
Speaker 2: So, I don't remember Michigan because I was just a baby.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we moved.  I was born in Michigan and then we moved to Maryland.  So we were in Suitland, Maryland and then Kensington, Maryland, then Columbia, Maryland.  So the childhood that I remember--I don't remember, I remember stories about Michigan, a great story about how my mom [Myrna Maria Ruix Malveaux] was teaching and my dad [Floyd Joseph Malveaux] was coaching basketball.  And there are these tornadoes that are swirling around and the tornado warning that goes off and how worried my mom was that, you know, my dad was dropping off all these kids to their homes before the tornado hit.  And my mom says she believes we saved the family because Suzette [Malveaux's twin sister] and I started crying.  She was sleeping and Suzette and I started crying.  So my mom woke and she watched the TV and she saw the tornado warning on the TV, and got us together and all, you know, and was heading to this church to a shelter.  And she was trying to reach my dad who was coaching basketball at the time, and he was dropping off all of these kids.  And we were all fine, we were okay.  But we love to tell tornado stories.  That was our time in Michigan.  But we moved from Michigan.
Speaker 1: Now you were age two, I'm sorry--so you all moved in 1968 according to the notes I've got.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, you are too young to remember.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't really--just the legends of Michigan.
Speaker 1: So you, I take it from what you said about your grandmother's place and all that, that you would go to the south in the summer?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we spent all of our summers going to, spending time with all my cousins and my grandparents in Opelousas and New Orleans [Louisiana].  So it was really like, you know, it was a second home.  And in some ways I identify with it a great deal--who I am, and what I am with New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Ah, so well was there, when you were growing up was there a distinct like difference in how people were treated?
Speaker 2: Well, we were really--we were kind of unique in our family because we left New Orleans and we left Opelousas.  And so they used to tease us that we were the egg heads, we were the nerds of the family.  We spoke very proper English.  We didn't have any accents, you know, my uncle, he was like, "Cajul corntree," that's how he spoke, you know.  "Cajul, this is Cajul corntree."  And we were, we turned into east coast kids, suburban kids (laughter). And so we got, yeah, we got a lot of ribbing for that, because we were, we were just a little different.  And so it was fun really.  It was great, because there was the larger family, and the flavor and the accent and the language of, you know, Creole and New Orleans.  And then there was our family and we were a little bit, a little bit different, and they made fun of us for it.  But it was, it was funny.  It was good to be, it was good to be different, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now your father [Floyd Joseph Malveaux] earned his M.D. when you were age eight.  He had a big graduation at Howard [University], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My brother got sick during the graduation.  He threw up on our shoes (laughter).  That's what I remember.  He didn't feel so good.  It happens.
Story_ID: 36992
Speaker 1: So where did you start school?
Speaker 2: Where did I start school?  Let's see.  Rock Creek Palisades Elementary School.
Speaker 1: Rock Creek--
Speaker 2: Palisades Elementary School.
Speaker 1: Now is this is Suitland?
Speaker 2: No, this was in Maryland.  So this was Kensington, Maryland.  When I was a baby we lived in Suitland, Maryland but I don't remember that at all.  And then we moved from Suitland, Maryland to Kensington, Maryland.  And I was at Rock Creek Palisades Elementary School until fourth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you like school?
Speaker 2: I always liked school.  I, early on as a kid I did have a tough time in school.  I used to stutter, and I didn't realize it was actually stuttering, like nobody actually told me I was stuttering.  Nobody made fun of me.  I would just repeat myself over and over.  And so I remember how I used to talk because I'd say something like "Maw, I'm going, I'm gonna go, I'm gonna go, I'm gonna go to the store," something like that.  But I didn't really think of it as stuttering or anything.  And they sent me to speech class.  So when I was in elementary school I did go to the special class, and I remember I had the head-sets on and we had these exercises we had to do.  And that pretty much took care of it for, it was for about a year or so.
Speaker 1: Now did your sister [Suzette Malveaux] have the same problem?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I don't think anybody else had that same problem.  It was like around maybe kindergarten, kindergarten or so.  And then I ended up, I kind of yo-yoed for a little while.   I loved school, I loved my teachers, I loved projects.  My mom [Myrna Maria Ruiz Malveaux] was a teacher.  We always had a million art projects and things going on at home after school.  It was really a kind of a creative place to be, but initially, my--I wasn't testing very well.  And so I was getting big red 'X's across my papers, and I had a hard time--I'd love my time tables and I'd forget them over the summer.  They put me in a remedial, a remedial class for a while.  And I ended up working really hard in this remedial class, and then they tested me again, and the next year I tested in the gifted and talented program.  So it was crazy, it was a very bizarre time (laughter).  And so then they would take me out of class, and instead of going to a remedial class, they took me out of class and they put me in a gifted and talented class.  So then I was with the other class and we had all these puzzles that we had to solve.  And so I had a really hard time of it and I ended up cheating and I avoided these puzzles (laughter).  I was like "Can you tell me the answer to this?"  I could not figure it out, and they realized I was cheating so they took me out of the gifted and talented class and they put me back in my normal class, you know, kind of with everybody else.  So we went back and forth, back and forth for a little while, from remedial to gifted and talented, back to the rest of the group.  And it wasn't until fifth grade, actually the end of fifth grade, when something, I don't know why, but something clicked, and I stopped getting all of these big red 'x's on my papers, and my times tables stuck for the first time because I'd tried and tried and tried.  And it was that time that I thought, as a kid--I was like okay, God decided I'm going to be smart.  You know, it was like, oh this is great (laughter).  Before that, I had, I just didn't know, you know.  I loved school but I couldn't really test very well and I was all over the place.
Story_ID: 36993
Speaker 1: So did your sister [Malveaux's twin sister, Suzette Malveaux] have similar problems?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, no.  That was my experience.  But what happened was I just took off.  I was like this crazy, crazy kid in sixth grade where I just devoured everything, everything.  I wanted to know about the whole world, and I just, with a vengeance, like absorbed almost everything.  Uh, I was in the band playing the clarinet, and I'd practice for hours.  Ah, I joined like every kind of activity I could think of.  It was the Girl Scouts and then it was the Boy Scouts (laughter).  Taikwondo, and extra credit projects, just kind of--I think I was making up for a little bit early on, because I really loved, loved that time in my life when I was really devouring so much of the world, knowledge you know.
Speaker 1: So you're like ten through middle school age?
Speaker 2: Middle school--sixth grade, seventh grade, eighth grade.
Speaker 1: What school did you go to after Rock Creek Palisades?
Speaker 2: Swansfield Elementary.
Speaker 1: Swansfield?
Speaker 2: Swansfield Elementary.  So that was, that was fifth grade.  One year at Swansfield Elementary.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because we moved.  And then Harper's Choice Middle School, and then Centennial High School.
Speaker 1: Harper's Choice Middle School, okay.  So, now you don't know what triggered all this, but you were really--
Speaker 2: I used to get, I mean it was crazy, but I used to have like a 110 grade point average because I did all the extra credit projects.  I had like an A plus-plus.  I was just a crazy kid, you know, I just, I loved it.  I mean, I just, everything around me.  It was such an amazing and exciting time when it all clicked, and I had this curiosity and this hunger for knowledge and for everything around me.  I was so passionate about it.  I think I was really crazy (laughter).  It was an amazing experience, really.
Story_ID: 36994
Speaker 1: Jimmy Carter was president.  Do you think that had anything to do with--
Speaker 2: (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now that's the time he was president.  But, so I mean were you aware of the news and current events when you were a kid, considering what you're doing today?
Speaker 2: Um, only in a general way.  Only when things really were significant and mattered.  Um, sure, I mean I remember the administrations--you know, the shuttle crash-- my mom [Myrna Maria Ruiz Malveaux] was a school teacher--that was very significant to her.  She taught Head Start and first grade, and so that had a real personal impact on her when that happened.  I don't know if it has, I don't if it has anything to do with the fact that I'm a journalist, but I think it makes sense that I have a curiosity for life, for stories, for knowledge.
Speaker 1: Was there a lot of information coming into the house in the form of magazines, newspapers or TV stuff or--
Speaker 2: Well, we used to always, my parents [mother and father, Floyd Joseph Malveaux] used to always watch the news at night.  And we always had, I think like many other people, 'Ebony' and 'Jet' [magazines] in our house all the time.  'The Washington Post', we always had the paper.  We didn't have a lot of papers but we had the local paper.  And we always, we always watched the news at the end of the day.  That was something that my parents did everyday.
Speaker 1: Were there any black journalists on television when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Max Robinson.  And when I was older it was Jim Vance, Maureen Bunyan.  But Max Robinson was like really--my dad really related to him and he was just a part of our life.   Renee Poussaint, I remember her as a kid.  J.C. Hayward.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know Max Robinson was the first national black anchor for ABC.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Then Peter Jennings, and Max Robinson.
Speaker 2: Right, I remember him, Max Robinson.
Speaker 1: There was another one too, right?  Weren't there three anchors on ABC?
Speaker 2: Max, I remember.
Speaker 1: Peter Jennings, he would sign on.  He was in New York and Max Robinson in Chicago [Illinois].  And then somebody in [Washington] D.C. [District of Columbia], I think.  I can't think of the name.
Speaker 2: I remember Jim Vance in D.C., Renee Poussaint in D.C., J. C. Hayward and Maureen Bunyan.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 36995
Speaker 1: Alright,  so all this information (unclear)--I mean, what kind, give us an example of what you track down, you know, what kind of information did you track down?
Speaker 2: What do you mean?
Speaker 1: Was there a specific story or project you worked on that you remember, like did you do something on, say, Egypt or some other part of the world or--?
Speaker 2: When I was a kid?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Was there a specific project that you remember, you know, learning a lot about that you--
Speaker 2: I remember a lot of--well, I loved the solar system.  I used to be obsessed with the solar system, and I put little pieces of clay and set up the whole solar system.  I had an ant farm.  I loved to learn about biology.  I did a lot of things though.  I mean I was a part of a co-ed Boy Scout troop, a Boy Scout troop that allowed girls to join.  And it was an experiment, part of an experiment to see if girls could become Eagle Scouts, and it was one of the best things I've ever done.  Because it really--Girls Scouts was fine, you know, you didn't have a lot of, you know, they'd teach you how to sew and you'd visit hospitals, sick people.  But the Boy Scouts, I mean, we learned how to tie knots, we were rappelling down mountains, we were swimming, we were doing life-saving, you know.  I mean, all kinds of adventures and camping.  And as a kid that was like really, really rewarding.
Speaker 1: I've never heard of that before.
Speaker 2: (laughter)
Speaker 1: That's--you all sound like you did more than when I was in the Boy Scouts.
Speaker 2: Really?  Well, it's funny because we have this course that's a swim course.  You get your life-saving merit badge.  I had merit badges.  I became a first class scout which is, as you know, in the middle.  So it's not Tender Foot, it's not Eagle, but it's first class, so it's like somewhere in the middle.  And I was in this life-saving class, and our last swim exercise we had to swim a mile, and I was a little tiny.  I was just like, you know, seventy something pounds or so, and they really, they discouraged us from doing it because they didn't think I'd pass the class.  But one of the last things you have to do in the deep end is that you have to go down, and there's a big thing of bricks that they tie together, and it's supposed to be the equivalent of a big man who's sunken to the bottom of the pool.  And you dive in and you have to bring this big load of bricks tied in this towel up to the top and throw it over the side, as if you've actually rescued somebody.  And so I went down and I got these bricks and I'm heading up there and I'm doing this stroke, you know, trying that with one hand and getting the bricks up with the other.  And I didn't realize--it took me a long, long time--but I was sinking because this was so, so heavy and I was really tiny.  And--but I just kept trying, and I was swimming and looking at the surface there.  And before I know it they dove in after me, the swim instructor, and he stared at the water, and I was so confused.  And he's like, you know, "Come on, you got to get up, got to get up."  And I was like, "Oh, okay."  And I realized at that point I was sinking, and so I started to swim harder and harder and finally got to the surface.  And I threw this on the side.  And they all started clapping because they thought I was actually drowning (laughter).  So but I ended up getting the merit badge.  I ended up getting the life-saving merit badge.  So I ended up doing a lot of things that I couldn't, I didn't necessarily think I could do.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was, it was, it was incredible.
Story_ID: 36996
Speaker 1: Now, the schools that you attended, were they segregated or were they--
Speaker 2: No, it was very mixed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Actually, I mean I grew up mostly in white neighborhoods, predominantly white, predominantly white schools, ah, especially as we got older.  We had a really unique experience growing up in Columbia, Maryland because it was a great mix of people in our neighborhood.  So you had black families, Hispanic, Asian, white.  So it was a wonderful, wonderful mix in our neighborhood.  But the school was overwhelming majority white.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alright.  Now tell us about high school, Centennial High School.
Speaker 2: Uh, it was a, it's a very good school.  It's actually, it's a very good academic public school.  And we, I had a good experience there.  My sister [Suzette Malveaux] and I went together, and they always separate twins because they say you won't develop normally and socially if you're in the same classes all the time together.
Speaker 1: Were you always separated in school?
Speaker 2: From the very beginning they separated the two of us.  So, we were in totally different, different classes.  But in high school that became harder and harder.   We were on a track, it was like an honor's track.  And so that was very difficult to do.  So, during high school was the time when we were really trying to branch out and become our own people, and being a twin, people loved to, they either loved to make you exactly the same or completely opposite, because it's very confusing for people.  And so sometimes, you know, the teachers they would do silly things.  Oh, you know, if we're in the same class, they'd be like "Oh, you guys want to work on a project together?"  And we're like "No, I'll see her at home.  For God's sake, please, don't put me with her."  So there was a period in high school that was kind of tough, because we were really trying in our own way to distinguish ourselves and be different from the other.  And we're very similar people, so by the time we got to the end of high school we really were in almost seven out of nine, or eight out of nine classes together because of the track that we were on.  And so we made an effort to sit in opposite sides of the room, got to ignore each other, you know, to carve out our own little special place (laughter).  And to my dad's [Floyd Joseph Malveaux] credit, he realized--because we shared everything--I mean as twins you share almost an identity.  But our names are very similar, our clothes are similar, our looks are similar, our interests are similar.  We're known as the twins.  So, like everybody when they're a teenager, you're trying to carve out your own identity.  So I think it's particularly hard when you're a twin.  And to my dad's credit, he realized we shared the same room, and we were going to kill each other.  By senior year we, you know, it was just that hard.  And so he moved out of the study and moved into the washroom.  And he put his desk and his library in the washroom next to the washer and dryer where the dog had his little bowl of food and water, and the newspapers that were out for the dog.  And that's where my dad's study was, so that I could move out of that room that we shared for like sixteen years and move into his study, which he created as my new bedroom so that we could have a little bit of space from each other because it was that, you know, intense during that time.  We supported each other greatly but we also really needed to be our own people and to make our own way.
Story_ID: 36997
Speaker 1: High school, I was involved in a lot of different aspects of the school--in the band, cheerleading, student government, I was the class president.  I was very much in the student government.  So we had a county-wide student government where all the high schools came together.  And myself and one of my best friends, she became the president of the Howard County Student Government.  I was the vice president.  And you know it was really, it was a great social circle.  It was a great thing to be a part of.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Did you work on the school newspaper?
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.  Uh, so you were really involved in high school in a lot of activities?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I just loved doing a lot of different things, a lot of extracurricular activities.  So I had done Taekwondo, I had done the integrated Boy Scout troop (laughter), and the band.  I loved the band.  I played clarinet for six years, percussion for two.  I thought I'd be Sheila E. or something, you know.  I loved the band.
Speaker 2: That's interesting.
Speaker 1: I loved dancing--
Speaker 2: Playing the clarinet and--?
Speaker 1: Percussion.  I always wanted to do percussion, actually.  And my mom [Myrna Maria Ruiz Malveaux] always wanted to play percussion too.  but you know, being a girl playing percussion was uh, really--because all the guys did percussion.  But then I was like "Oh, forget it, I want to do percussion."  So I put my clarinet down and I did percussion.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I used to do all the auxiliary instruments, so--
Speaker 2: So you idolized Sheila E., you know?
Speaker 1: (laughter).  I was a little bit of that.  I don't know, I guess my sister [Malveaux's twin sister, Suzette Malveaux] and I were a little bit of trailblazers, too.  We kind of liked to buck the system, you know.  Whenever they said that a girl can't do this, we always said, "Oh, yes we can."
Speaker 2: Was your sister in the band too?
Speaker 1: Yes, she played clarinet as well.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Did she continue with the clarinet?
Speaker 1: She did, but then she stopped and she had her other interests as well.
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.  So, alright, so when--now this is in the '80s [1980s].  You started in 1980.  This is in '80 [1980] to '84 [1984] I guess when you were in high school?
Speaker 1: Right, yeah.  I had a wonderful moment in the Junior Miss Pageant where I had a talent routine.  That's one of these really great moments.  I was in the Junior Miss and I did a, my talent was dance and Taekwondo.  So you know how they have the guy, Tibo, that guy with those dance--Taekwondo moves?  You've seen him?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That was my idea at the time.  That was really my idea. (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Inaudible).
Speaker 1: I know.  So I did a dance routine.  And it was SOS Band, "Just Be Good to Me," was the music.  And I had this dance that I did, and I was doing this Taekwondo, and it was a three directional board break.  So it was a front kick, a side kick and an elbow smash.  And during all the rehearsals I was never able to do the front kick, side kick, elbow smash, and break all three boards.  And so it was very frustrating during the rehearsals.  And finally, for that performance for the night of the pageant I was able to do all three.  I did the front kick, side kick and elbow smash, broke all three boards, and like the crowd went crazy.  Because you know it was just one of the best feelings.  They were like "Wow." (laughter).  It was great, it was very unique.  You know, at the time you didn't have little girls breaking boards and all that stuff.  But I didn't place, you know.   But the crowd did go crazy.  That was like one of the best moments of like, my childhood.
Story_ID: 36998
Speaker 1: Tell us who were some of the teachers and individuals that you would consider as mentors as you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, in third grade, Mr. Kemp.  I remember him.  He's since passed away.  He died of I believe skin cancer.  But he was really an amazing teacher.  It was Mr. Kemp and Mr. Jones.  And I had Mr. Kemp and my sister Suzette [Malveaux] had Mr. Jones.  And we used to do the most creative wonderful things.  And I'll never forget when we were studying about the Eskimos and the North Pole, we built this huge igloo to get into the classroom.  It was wire, chicken wire, and paper mache in the front door of our classroom, so literally you had to crawl in on your knees to get into the classroom because we'd built this huge igloo entrance. (laughter).  And it was stuff like that.  You know, it's like, wow, I love this guy.  And we also had a unit.  We were studying Asian culture and so we made these kimonos out of white bed sheets from home that you'd bring in and you'd rip off and you'd sew together.  And I even remember--this is third grade, the song that we sang.  [Singing]: [phonetically] "Oh yaka toombera, oshishi, bento solawenchi la ma ni, zi."   Can you believe that?  I mean, I remember that. (laughter)  That's third grade.  But that was somebody who brought like teaching and culture to life, and so we lived it, we breathed it, we crawled into our classroom.  We had little stars for all of our progress that we made along the way.  It was really, it was just a wonderful time.  He was a wonderful teacher.  He brought it to life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Ah, I had some crazy teachers too.  And I'd say Mr. Stevens, the band director, he was one of those.  Ah, he was so intense and demanded perfection, and used to throw bandstands across the room, which I don't think you can get away with now. (laughter).  If somebody wasn't hitting the right note, he was upset.  He had this temper.  He used to turn red, very red.
Speaker 1: And he would throw--
Speaker 2: And he would throw a bandstand across the room, and pitch a fit.  And he's one of those people like, you remember (laughter).  But it was fun.  You know, it's like there were a lot of antics, crazy things that went on when we were kids.   But he was a lot of fun.  He pushed you and pushed you and pushed you.  And we went very far.  Mr. Stevens was another band instructor as well.  We were, we had a great time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Ah, any other mentors or role models as you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Inside of school or outside of school?
Speaker 1: In terms of role models, maybe somebody that you, you know--was there anybody that you particularly admired, either in the media or--
Speaker 2: Well, I certainly admired the black women who were on TV, who I saw on TV, like Maureen Bunyan and Renee Poussaint.  I mean, I was very much aware of who they were and what they did.  The same was true of Jim Vance.  So, I was very much aware of those people who I saw as images, as journalists who were a part of that profession.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I really, I mean my mentors I loved--I was just in love with my mom [Myrna Maria Ruiz Malveaux].  I thought she was just so cool and she was very social and very confident and had lots of courage--and so, you know, my mom and some of my cousins, my aunts.  I really looked up to them.  And my godfather, Uncle Ronald, you know.  They were just, I thought they were everything, they were the whole package.  They were really cool.  They were smart, they were fun.  But they were calm, cool and collected.  I always thought of myself as a little kind of wired, and they were always, just could handle and solve everything, and I looked at them for answers, guidance, and demeanor.
Story_ID: 36999
Speaker 1: It sounds like you had a rich upbringing in terms of all the things you were exposed to.  Did the family travel much when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Well we traveled to visit relatives.  That was the extent of our travel.  So when we were young we were in the station wagon, and you were hitting your brother next to you (laughter).  And it would get really hot and sticky and we would drive and drive and drive.  And when we were kids we'd stop off at the Holiday Inn and get free breakfast.  Kids ate for free.  And we did everything kind of cheaply because we didn't have a lot of money back then.  And then when we got older we would insist on taking turns driving, because Dad [Floyd Joseph Malveaux] would always want to drive the whole distance, and he'd be falling asleep at the wheel.  And my mom [Myrna Maria Ruiz Malveaux] would always assign one of us to like sit beside him and punch him to make sure he was still awake instead of veering off the side of the road, because he always wanted to drive the distance and he didn't want anybody else to drive, but he wouldn't admit that he was falling asleep.  So we were always making sure that he was awake.  But it used to take, it takes like about twenty to twenty-four hours to do the trip from Maryland to New Orleans [Louisiana].  And so when we were kids, we would stop, we'd do twelve hours one day and stop at the Holiday Inn and do another twelve hours the next day, with my parents driving.  When we were adults, we didn't have the patience anymore--or young adults--so we all did it in a 24-hour stretch straight-away, each of us taking turns at the wheel, or knocking my dad so that he was staying awake while driving.  But that was the extent of our travel.  Really it was that we were going to Texas where some of our cousins had moved to El Paso or Houston [Texas].  We were going to New Orleans, we were going to Opelousas [Louisiana].  The first time I was out of the country was Jamaica.  My dad had a friend, it was a conference.  He was going to a medical conference and he had friends who had gone to Howard [University] with him who were in Jamaica, so usually he took my mom to these conferences.  It was the first time he took me and my sister [Suzette Malveaux], and it was in high school, I believe.  And we--our teachers thought we were going to be missing--we missed a week of school and they were very upset, and they thought we were going to be behind, and if we have tests, "You're going to get zeroes on them.  We can't excuse this.  We can't allow you to do this."  But my parents said, "Well, you know, we're going to pull them out of school for a week.  They've never been out of the country.  We're going to go to Jamaica."  And so we took all of our books and some of our assignments.  And my sister and I, it was amazing, because when we came back, we had gotten more done in Jamaica--and were ahead of the class when we came back--than any of the teachers imagined, right.  They all had assumed that they were getting a lot more accomplished than they realized.  So we came back and we were actually ahead of everybody (laughter).  But that was the first time we had actually left the country.  And it was great because it wasn't just this oh we're hanging out on the beach type of vacation.  We were literally, we were staying with my dad's friends, Jamaicans, so we were a part of the community.  We were, ah, it was the first time I'd seen poverty like that, just how people lived.  And it was shocking, it was eye-opening.
Speaker 1: That was the Michael Manning era, I guess, in Jamaica, right?  He was president?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Marley was still alive.  I don't know if he was there when you were there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't, I don't know.  We really, I mean, it was kind of ironic because I was one of the first in our family to really travel, and travel on a regular basis and live overseas.  And it was a worry, it was a concern to my parents when I first--when I went to Kenya, when I went to Egypt.  And, but it was a wonderful, it was a wonderful opportunity for all of us because my parents would come out and visit.  And a lot of that fear about being away, being somewhere else, was really diminished, and they kind of caught the travel bug too, and then everybody started traveling.  So we all started taking off.  And my brother went to Thailand and taught in Thailand for a year.  And my sister went to Zimbabwe for six months.  And my parents started traveling the world.  But that wasn't the case when we were really young.  We couldn't really afford it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37000
Speaker 1: Now when you were in high school I guess the--I'm trying to think of when CNN started, but cable TV was new basically in the late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s].  Was that, do you remember the early days of cable when you were in high school?  I think VH1 now--
Speaker 2: MTV--
Speaker 1: MTV, all those stations--
Speaker 2: I remember when MTV started, sure.  I remember learning about CNN, though, and thinking that that was where I wanted to be, thinking that that like made a lot of sense to me, just because I loved, I loved the idea of it, I loved the vision of it, being international.  I love international politics, it's my passion.  I love traveling, it's my passion.  So, all news all the time-- world reach.  That really, that really resonated with me.  It really pulled me in.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were you a big fan of videos?
Speaker 2: Well, it might be surprising to you but I-- there are a couple of things I was really interested in doing early on.  I wanted to deliver babies, and so I had considered going the pre-med track.  And, I also, ever since I was a kid, wanted to be a dancer.  And so when I was really little, I aspired to be on Soul Train.  And then it was Solid Gold, right, the Solid Gold dancers. (laughter).  Ah, and then it was Fly Girl, one of the Fly Girl dancers, right, on that comedy, what's that comedy--
Speaker 1: In Living Color.
Speaker 2: In Living Color, right.  Uh, yeah, and then it was all of these videos that came out and I, I mean I always just aspired, I loved to dance.  And ever since I was a kid like when we would get home from school we'd put on the radio and we'd just dance, we'd be dancing.  Ever since I can remember walking, you know, they had us out there dancing, you know, and we'd have like little dance competitions, with your cousins and your brothers and sisters.  So that was like a big part of our life, music and dancing and, you know, Dad [Floyd Joseph Malveaux] always had Motown on, and we were always like, "Oh Dad, okay, enough of that.  We want to turn on our music."  You know, so it was like Michael Jackson, and I loved it.  You know that was like a big part of our, my growing up and my experience.  So, it surprises people when I tell them that that was the other passion that I really had.  And I didn't have a lot of, I didn't really have a lot of professional training.  I took ballet, I took tap when I was a kid.  But I loved to kind of free form, and so if I wasn't doing--yes, it might have been dancing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you, I know you said you were a cheerleader in high school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that's why I like cheerleading.  Because I, we were trying to bring a little dance, a little rhythm into the cheerleading section.  It didn't work out so well but we tried.  (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37001
Speaker 1: It's time to graduate [from high school] in '84 [1984].  Now, what were your aspirations?  Did you graduate with any--
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things--my mean my dad [Floyd Joseph Malveaux] being a doctor, he always wanted one of us to be a doctor.  So he was kind of pushing that along.  And I had thought about it because I loved biology and I thought about delivering babies.  I thought that that would be the most noble thing to do, to bring children into the world.  And there was one weekend that he actually set me up at D.C. [District of Columbia] General with one of his buddies, who's a doctor, who's an obstetrician.  And we put our scrubs on and we did deliver babies together for a weekend.  And it was actually kind of the most horrific experiences of childbirth, because you had a lot of people there, no prenatal care--very, very poor--emergency deliveries.  Nothing was pretty.  We had one woman who was obese and was a heroin addict and her baby was dead inside of her and had been inside of her for a while.  But because she was a heroin addict, she hadn't naturally delivered.  So, I was with this doctor, Dr. Lawer was his name.  And we came in together with our scrubs, and I was just his little assistant.  And she was there, and she was very angry, very upset.  I think she might have still been high, and she was cursing at him because she was one of the only white people in the hospital because D.C. General mostly is predominantly black.  So she was cursing at him, accusing him of, you know, undermining what was going on, you know, her baby and all that stuff.  So it was really strange and disturbing to see.  There was another young, young woman, a teenager.  It was like her second or third child.  Nobody was there with her.  Nothing was happening on time, so she didn't have time for any medications.  So she's screaming and crying and everything is just very traumatic.  Another woman who came in had been raped.  And so it was all these different types of deliveries and experiences within that weekend.  And it did not discourage me at all.  I loved it even more.  I mean, I was not deterred by seeing all of that.  It was pretty gross and disturbing, but I still was on that path.  At the same time I also loved storytelling, drawing.  I loved the visual as opposed to the print.  I thought print was way too confining, although I loved to write stories, I loved to tell stories.  I loved to, my sister [Suzette Malveaux] and I ever since we were kids we always had these little play school, little characters almost like little dolls, and we were always acting out things, acting out different dramatic storytelling or family drama or whatever.  So, that was also something that I was also interested in.  So when I went to college, I had these two competing interests.  One was delivering babies and being pre-med, going down the pre-med track, and then the other was really journalism, radio, TV.  And what I ended up doing was starting off pre-med in my freshman year, and at the same time I was doing internships for radio and TV stations.  So I was working for radio and TV stations, reporting.  I was already kind of involved in it.  And so it was, it really was about what ultimately I was passionate about.  And I didn't feel like I--I did not have the commitment to take all of those classes, all the pre-med classes, to go in that track.  And I realized what I really, what I had been committing to, what I was spending all my time was, was leaving my classes and going to the local TV station and to the local radio station and putting on the broadcast, you know, writing and reporting for the local media.  And when I--and I thought well, you know what, I can do this.  This is something I can do as a career.  That's when I really devoted a lot more of my energy and my time and my passion to that, and I let go of the pre-med.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 37002
Speaker 1: We'll go back a little bit to high school.  When you graduated from high school did you have any special role to play, valedictorian or salutatorian, or class president?
Speaker 2: I was the vice president of the student government for the county.  And so I was very active in student government.  I had been the class president.  I wasn't the class president in my senior year.  But I always had a mixed group of friends and lots of different groups that I was with, and was in the top ten percent of the class and part of a group of people who had studied together and ended up going off to the Ivy League--our high school was known for producing students who went off to the Ivy Leagues.  It was a small group, but--
Speaker 1: How many students went off to--now, you went to Harvard, but how many from your high school went to Harvard?
Speaker 2: My sister also went to Harvard, too.  So it was the two of us.  Uh, well, I think there was, I think there were maybe four or five of us who were accepted.  But others chose Princeton, Yale.  It was a whole group of us.  We were also thinking UVA, because we all loved UVA.  But I think it was just the two of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean there was a group of us who got in.  No, no, no, there was one other person.  There were three of us from our school that went to Harvard [University].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Me and my sister [Suzette Malveaux], and actually another clarinet player who used to sit right beside me, Bob.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you consider any other school?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, definitely.  I loved Georgetown [University].  Georgetown was like my number one school for a really long time because of international relations.  I really loved the focus.  It was just, it was funny because my sister and I had decided early on we were going to go to different schools, because as I mentioned, we were getting sick and tired of each other (laughter).  But in high school we're like, we're like "I got to get a little more space."  But it was funny.  At first--well I applied just to see if I'd get it, it was a dare.  And Suzette applied because she was tired of filling out applications, and I think Yale [University] required another essay, and she was like forget it.  I don't want to write anymore.  So she applied to Harvard.  And I was shocked actually that I did get in.  I didn't expect it, because it really was just a kind of a, you know, a dare basically.  And then you know you get the thick envelope.  Then it's like wow, okay, now what do I do?  You know, am I even going to like this place, you know?  Is this the kind of place I need to go to school, you know?  You hear all kinds of things like ah, everybody's like, you know, snobby or they're rich or you know, there's no black people there, whatever.  And so um, my sister got in, and my dad [Floyd Joseph Malveaux] to his credit said "Oh, why don't you go visit the school, why don't you see if you like it?"  So we went up.  And it was really incredible, because for the first time it was actually--there was a black community of people who had been in honors' classes and who were like, I mean, we were, we had a whole community, which was really amazing.  We hadn't had that before.  It was always like, you know, you were one of two or three black students in the class.  And it was just an incredible welcome, you know, an epiphany and it felt amazing.  And so it felt comfortable.  It felt like, well this is the kind of place I could be, I can grow, I can relax and enjoy all aspects of who I am and what I am.  And so they really sold us on the school when we were there.  And we came back, we came back home, and then it was financial aid.  It was like, we can't really afford to go to Harvard and we certainly can't afford to send two of you to Harvard.  So we went back and we asked for more financial aid, if it was possible.  And it came back to us and we did get more money, which was great.  So we were able to, you know, carry the two of us.  And then it was a matter of making decisions, because I had gotten into UVA [University of Virginia]--I had gotten into Georgetown.  We had free rides at a lot of schools, we had full scholarships.  So we weren't going to have to worry about the money if we decided to go.  Much closer to home, Harvard was going to be a big financial burden, and so I went into my room and Suzette went into her room.  You know, we had those separate rooms, and I prayed and I paced the room for awhile, and then I made a decision and I came out and Suzette came out of her room. And I said "I'm going to Harvard."  She said, "I'm going to Harvard too."  (laughter).  So we turned to each other and we were like, "Huh, really?"  "We're going to be stuck with each other a little longer."  (laughter).  But I am so glad we actually did go together, because it was family, you know.  And it was like everything was new and fresh and different and exciting and scary, and I cried, you know.  My parents [Floyd Joseph Malveaux and Myrna Maria Ruiz Malveaux] cried when they left us there on campus, but it was so nice to have her there on campus, you know.  It was like a bit of home and security, you know, because she was my best friend.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 37003
Speaker 1: So well, what were your impressions of, when you started school, what were your impressions of Harvard [University]?
Speaker 2: Of Harvard?  It was very, it was really hard academically the first year.  It was really tough.  And a lot of people were a bit confused that my sister [Suzette Malveaux] and I were both there, because she was on one part of the campus in a dorm and I was on the other.  And everybody kept thinking they were seeing the same person (laughter).  It was like, "Why did you say hi to me?  Don't you know--?"  You know, so there was all of this confusion.   For the first six months it was very confusing to a lot of people because they just didn't know that there were two of us at this school, and they thought we were one person and we actually had a little fun with it, because we ended up making up a story that there were six of us.  And there was--(laughter)--like there were sextuplets.  And we had fake names for all the others who were there (laughter).   And yeah, so we had this story about how we had different names of all the different sisters and stuff, and some people believed us.  It was just hilarious.  But finally, like after six months or so, people got that.  We had our own friends, we had mutual friends.  We were very active in black student groups.  Ah, we were active outside of those groups.  I was a part of the tour company, Crimson Keys Society, which really I loved, because again it was about-- I get to jump up on like these statues and tell these stories about the history of Harvard.   And then you can add your own stories into the mix.   And so we were on financial aid.  So I did everything.  I was a security guard, if you can believe that.  I didn't have, I had a little sash, a little badge that said security and I had a notebook and a whistle (laughter).  It was my job.  I don't know what would have happened if somebody broke in anywhere, because I was just a little thing with a note pad.  But I used to go from, you know--I had some keys, a whole bunch of keys--room to room and I'd lock and unlock and check in all the rooms to make sure that nobody was stealing anything.  So I--but I did security, I was working at the library, we were working at the dining hall, we were working by giving tours.  I mean, we worked.  We really, we did just about anything to keep up our end of the bargain when it came to paying for school.  But it was, I mean, again, I mean I guess my initial impression was I absolutely loved it, because I felt like it was like home, like there was a place in the community where I was just so, you know, you can be inspired by people around you.  Everybody was kind of a little, you know, a little crazy--when I told you I felt like I was a little bit of a nutty kid, trying to take in everything all at once.  There were people who were like that there and it was like Yo-Yo Ma [ph.] you know. (laughter)  People were really good at what they did.  Ah, it was kind of special.
Story_ID: 37004
Speaker 1: Well, who were some of the, were there any special teachers or mentors at Harvard?
Speaker 2: Reverend Gomes, Peter Gomes, at the church.  He was very funny, and I loved his sermons.  Professor Reisman, he was my advisor.  Everybody has passed away.
Speaker 1: Resseman, R-E-S-S-E-M-A-N?
Speaker 2: I don't think there are two 'S's.  It's R-E-I-S-M-A-N.
Speaker 1: Oh, Okay.
Speaker 2: Skip Gates came later along.  I really liked Skip Gates.   But he actually was there after me.  He arrived afterwards.
Speaker 1: Oh, after you left?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.  Yeah.  But I go back to Harvard, and when I go back actually he's one of my favorite people.
Speaker 1: Who is, ah, did you interact with anybody in the Black Studies department, African American Studies?  Ewart Guinier, I think was the chairman before Skip Gates, I believe.
Speaker 2: Umm, no, my major was sociology.  Mary Waters was there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were two--Elie Wiesel--that was one of the most powerful classes I've ever taken, History of Genocide.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was there.  That was one of the most profound--
Speaker 1: Okay.  He was a visiting professor?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he--that really made an impact on me.
Speaker 1: Had you, did you know very much about the holocaust before you met him?
Speaker 2: Well, just kind of you know, basic.  But we did everything.  I mean he took us through the history of genocide.
Speaker 1: So not just the holocaust?
Speaker 2: Oh no.  It was everything, yeah.  Rwanda, Armenia, yeah.
