Story_ID: 349704
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns, observing is Sylvia Reed.  Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Eric McKinnie [HistoryMaker Eric "Ricky" McKinnie] and it's Eric Dwight McKinnie.  Most people call me Ricky McKinnie, it's E-R-I-C, D-W-I-G-H-T, M-C-K-I-N-N-I-E and Ricky I spell that R-I-C-K-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Seven, twelve, fifty-two [July 12, 1952] in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I play drums and I'm the road manager for The Blind Boys of Alabama.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is October the 11th, 2006.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In Atlanta, Georgia at my home, at 198 Warren Street.
Story_ID: 349705
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth there are five lightweight kind of People magazine-ish questions that we always ask and they only require a short answer.  The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summertime.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Australia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I'm not blind, I just can't see.
Story_ID: 349706
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Ed McKinnie] side of the family.  We'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Sarah Francis Shivers [Sarah Sharp Shivers], and that's S-A-R-A-H, F-R-A-N-C-I-S, and Shivers, S-H-I-V-E-R-S.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in McDonough, Georgia and on--let me see, December 31st, 1926.
Speaker 1: Did you say McDonough?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's M-C-D-O-N-O-U-G-H?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side, does it, does it go all the way back to before the end of slavery or how, how far can you take us?
Speaker 2: I really can't go that far back with my mother's family.  My grandfather, his name was Phil Sharp and--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, I'm sorry what was it?
Speaker 2: Phil Sharp.
Speaker 1: Phil, yes sir, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  And he, he worked doing a lot of different things the--in the later years he worked for Sears, Roebuck and Company [Sears, Roebuck and Co.].
Speaker 1: Here in Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Here in Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So the--your mother was born in McDonough but the family moved to Atlanta?
Speaker 2: Right.  My mother moved to Atlanta when she was about maybe fourteen years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, are there any stories in the family of, of life in McDonough at all and what it was like?
Speaker 2: Well, when they were in McDonough they went to school in a one-room schoolhouse, and they were sharecroppers on, on a farm.  And, my, my uncles and aunts I think they picked cotton for a while and, you know, they raised their own food and, and I remember that my uncle Willie Ray Sharp who was my mother's brother, I remember he had some pigs at one time.  And so stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they--rural life, I mean, is there a specific reason that they moved to Atlanta?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, when you, when you're, when you're born in the country they say, you know, it's always good to come to the city.  So, they wanted to, to advance their--get better jobs and, and to be able to, to raise their, their children in a different type of atmosphere so they moved to the city.
Story_ID: 349707
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Sarah Sharp Shivers] talk about growing up in McDonough [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: She spoke about McDonough a little but not, you know, not so much--it was--she was--she had a stepmother and her mother [Sussie Sharp] passed away when she was about five years old.  And, so she didn't know that much about her mother, she was pretty much raised by her father [Phil Sharp] and, and her sisters and brothers.  So it was--that was pretty much the way it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did--when she moved to Atlanta [Georgia] were there a lot of other relatives here from McDonough in, in Atlanta when she moved here?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, not really.  I, I think when they moved to, to Atlanta most of their relatives were still pretty much in McDonough and in that area, South Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, so McDonough is southern Georgia?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, did your mother get a chance to finish school here in Atlanta?
Speaker 2: Right.  She, she finished school in Atlanta and she had an opportunity to do some--I guess you would call it like teacher's aide here in, in the city.  And here in the community at, at Toomer Elementary School [Fred Armon Toomer Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], she did a little teacher's aide at Toomer Elementary School and she was--she sang, she's a singer.
Speaker 1: Now, when did she start singing, was it--?
Speaker 2: She started singing at an early age after, she would tell me, she was about maybe four or five years old.  She opportunity to, to sing with a lot of people.  She had--they'd--she used to be with a group out of the city that was a, a professional group the Gene Martin Singers, as well as the--and other groups that are here, here in the city.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she--was she primarily a gospel singer?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my, my grandfather was a deacon at, at--he was the chairman of the deacon board at Hunter Hill Baptist Church [Hunter Hill First Missionary Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] here in the city.  And so being in the church, he wouldn't--he didn't allow her to, to sing anything but gospel music as far as he knew.
Speaker 1: Okay, so was a deacon at Hunter Hill Baptist Church?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Is there any significance to that name?  Hunter Hill, was that the area that--
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I just know that was--that's the name of the church.
Story_ID: 349708
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My father's name was Ed Lee McKinnie, E-D, L-E-E, M-C-K-I-N-N-I-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth, and place of birth?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  (Laughter) He was born in, in Albany, Georgia.  And he was born on July the, what is it, 6th I think.  But I don't know the year, I'll find that out for you.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is he older than your mother [Sarah Sharp Shivers]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  He was--well, let me add it up, he was thirteen years older than my mother so let's say he was born then in 1913.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay now, now what do you know about your father's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: Not very much.  I know they were out of Albany, Georgia.  Strange thing about that, I don't even know my grandfather's name on that side of the family that I can think of right now.  And, and, I know my uncles and aunts.  I had--I was kind of--we weren't close to that side a the family pretty much.  My grandfather died, you know, way before I was born and I never really--and my mother and father divorced early, you know.  I, I was young, so.  An I didn't ask any questions so, you know.
Speaker 1: So, did, did your father ever tell you about growing up in Albany and what it was like in Albany at all?
Speaker 2: Not really, we, we, you know, we didn't talk about Albany that much.  We had opportunity to go down there and--but I didn't know that much about, you know, Albany and, and that side a the family, actually.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Is--now, what did your father do for a living?
Speaker 2: He worked here in the city at a place that was called Atlanta Envelope Company [Atlantic Envelope Company LLC, Atlanta, Georgia].
Story_ID: 349709
Speaker 1: Do you know the story of how your parents [Sarah Sharp Shivers and Ed McKinnie] met?
Speaker 2: Yep, my, my, my mother was working at a hotel at that time.  And my father was, was working there also, so that's where they met on the job.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, you didn't really--they split up you said real early on?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was about maybe, about nine.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, they were together for a while.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Do you have any brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I have two brothers and a sister.  My broth- my oldest brother's name is Ronald McKinnie, R-O-N-A-L-D, M-C-K-I-N-N-I-E, my youngest brother's name is Willie, W-I-L-L-I-E, Shivers, S-H-I-V-E-R-S [Willie Shivers] and my sister's name is Janice McKinnie, J-A-N-I-C-E, M-C-K-I-N-N-I-E.
Story_ID: 349710
Speaker 1: Talk a little bit about your parents' personalities and who do you think you take after?
Speaker 2: Well, lot of people say I look like my dad [Ed McKinnie].  My mother [Sarah Sharp Shivers], we have the same type of personality because she, she sang, I sing and we pretty much like the same kind of, kind of things.  She, she had a visual problem and I, and I had a visual problem so we could kind of relate in that aspect of it.  So, I must of picked up on a lot of things from my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what kind of visual problem did your mother have?
Speaker 2: My mother has cataracts.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did they--did she get 'em later in life?
Speaker 2: Well, all, all of my mother's life she's been--had problems with her eyes.  As a young child, she had cataracts and coming up through the years, you know, she's always had to, to deal with this type of eye disease, this cataracts.  So, she's always been visually, visually challenged.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so she's had to deal with that for a long time.
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 349711
Speaker 1: You were born in this neighborhood that we're in right now, right, yeah pretty much (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, no, actually I was--when I was born, I was born over in another neighborhood that was called Pittsburgh [Atlanta, Georgia] and that was like off of a street here in the city called McDaniel Street.  That's where they was staying when I was born at Grady Hospital [Grady Memorial Hospital, Atlanta, Georgia] here in the city.  But I been staying in this neighborhood ever since 1964.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well tell us about, you know, oh, do you have an earliest childhood memory?  What's the first thing that you remember?
Speaker 2: Well, I can remember several things when I was coming up, I had a friend by the name of--well, we called him Joe Pot [ph.] (laughter) and we use to, you know, go out--we was staying in a section that was called Carver Homes [Atlanta, Georgia], it was the project, right.  And we used to go out and play in the woods, and, you know, throw rocks in the creek and stuff like that.
Story_ID: 349712
Speaker 1: What were some of the other sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well I lost my sight in 1975, so, I had a lot of, lot of things that come about, you know, just like anybody else I guess.  Just, just being able to, to go and do, you know, I, I've seen, seen pretty much everything.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, can you describe like what it was like, what your neighborhood looked like and smelled like, and what, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, when I was young, you know, in the summertime, you know, you could smell the, the honeysuckles and, you know, and being--living in the projects, it was just a bunch of apartments, you know, we, we didn't, we didn't know one thing from another.  We didn't really--it wasn't like it is today, children weren't so involved in a lot of things that was going on.  We was just being kids.  I can remember, you know, playing baseball and football, and just doing the things that children do, riding your bicycle and, you know, just being a regular little kid.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What about sounds, what kind of sounds did you encounter when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, when, when we were staying in Carver Homes [Atlanta, Georgia], they, they had built a place where the firemen would go and, and they would practice on, on, you know, putting out fires.  They'd built this building an every so often they would sit the building a fire and they would practice on different procedures they would use.  So, it was a lot of things going on.  You could hear the fire trucks and just people talking, you know, just people enjoying themselves.  You could walk down the street and smell food cooking out of people houses and collard greens and chitlins, and chicken, whatever.
Speaker 1: So did you ever go watch the firemen practice in the training facility?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I did it quite a bit.  My aunt used to tell us not to go over, you know, over there but every once in a while we would, you know, like kids sneak over and take a look at in and one day I was standing up there watching it and all of sudden I felt something stinging me like it was a bee a something, it was my aunt beating me with a, with a switch and ran across the creek and she was running behind me and I thought, I say, well, I know if I run cross the creek she can't come cross this creek.  So I ran cross the creek and but to my surprise she could cross the creek too.  So, it was like that.
Story_ID: 349713
Speaker 1: What kind of music did you listen to when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: When I was coming up I listened to pretty much anything.  We didn't have a set thing we were listening to.  The blues was, was really the thing, lot of blues going on, lot of jazz was sort of happening.  Jackie Wilson was big in that day.  I use to like to listen to, to a lot of Jackie Wilson's stuff.  I used to try to imitate Jackie Wilson singing and dancing, and Joe Tex, he was kind of hot back then.  Sam Cooke, all these people.  We used to go to the city auditorium [Atlanta Municipal Auditorium, Atlanta, Georgia]; they don't have that here anymore.  And they would have gospel singing, The Blind Boys [The Blind Boys of Alabama] came to town and the Nightingales [Sensational Nightingales] and the Soul Stirrers.  And we would go to the singing and then when I came home I would imitate what they were doing, you know, at the program.  So, so life was good.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now your mother [Sarah Sharp Shivers] was a--you said she was--she's pretty well known in Atlanta [Georgia] as a singer from what I understand and did she have a group in Atlanta when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: When I was growing up my mother had her own group.  It was call the Dual Gospel Singers [ph.] out of Atlanta and they were pretty well known here in the city and, and they sang in the southeastern region like, you know, the Carolinas [North Carolina and South Carolina] and Florida, and Virginia, you know.
Speaker 1: So they were on the road and traveled and?
Speaker 2: Yeah, did a little traveling in that day, yeah.  And she also sang with like I said the Gene Martin Singers and the Marvin Anderson Singers so she was pretty, pretty well known.  She--when Gladys Knight was at Mount Moriah Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia], they were both there at the same time and sung in the choir together for a moment, and, but, you know, she had an opportunity to sing circular [sic. secular] but being brought up the way she was and having children, she didn't try to, try to reach out and do it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she, she didn't have anything against singing secular music, she just (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nah, nah, no, music is just music. Every song carries a message so, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So did you--so you were a fan of Jackie Wilson.  Did you--when did you--or was there a certain point where you recognized that you had some, some singing talent yourself?
Speaker 2: Well, I always thought I had talent (laughter).  I mean, you know, most people do, I mean.  But when I, when I was younger lot a people would tell--you know, I used to--we used to do a lot a singing at home, in church and just around, so I always thought I could sing a little bit, I mean, so.  I don't know when I really just realized that, that I wanted to make a career out of it, I think it just--it made a--it just came in and, and took over.
Speaker 1: Did you ever travel with your mother?
Speaker 2: When we were younger, we never really traveled with my mom because we were, we were young and we had school, and, you know, we just never really did any traveling like that.
Speaker 1: Now I wondered if you ever went to some of the gospel--?
Speaker 2: I don't remember ever going to any, any of the gospel programs back at that time.  I remember at the city auditorium like here in the city, my mother would be on, on some of the programs here but as far as like going out of the city, I don't remember going out of the city.
Story_ID: 349714
Speaker 1: When did you first start drumming?
Speaker 2: Well, I started playing drums when I was about twelve.  I was--we had moved to an area of the city that was called Pittsburgh [Atlanta, Georgia] and I was going to Crogman Elementary School [W.H. Crogman Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia], and we had a teacher over there.  His name was Mr. Thomas [ph.], he was the band director.  And I started playing drums in the band at Crogman Elementary School and that's where it all started.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, why did you choose drums other than, you know, some other instrument, why not the trumpet or something?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I never thought about it.  It was a time that I guess I was watching a lot of parades and Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia] was hot at that time, and, and Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], you know.  And so I was like, okay, that's what I wanna do.
Story_ID: 349715
Speaker 1: Your sight was, was pretty good up until seventeen, right?  I mean, you were--you could pretty much see until you were seventeen from what I've read, is that true?
Speaker 2: Well, I could see, I, I could see very well until I was about--I had glaucoma.  Lot of people didn't--doctors at that time weren't really into, into that so much cause--so they didn't really know that much about glaucoma at that time.  But, I could see, I could see good up until I lost my sight in, in '75 [1975] actually. I had a lot of different types of operations, but I could still see pretty good.
Speaker 1: Seventy-five [1975] you were what twenty-?
Speaker 2: Twenty-three.
Speaker 1: Twenty-three?  Okay, all right.  So, just kind of happen all of a sudden or--?
Speaker 2: Well, no, I lost my sight all of a sudden, yeah.  What had happened I was traveling the road with a group out of Texas called The Gospel Keynotes [Willie Neal Johnson and The Gospel Keynotes] and we were in Fort Wayne, Indiana, and we, we had done a program that day and, and I went to bed that night and the next morning when I woke up I, I couldn't see anything.  Well, that had happened to me before so I said, well, it'll, it'll, fade away.  And, but it didn't.  But what had happened was I had been without my medicine for about maybe a couple of weeks and scar tissue had began to, to, to, grow, right, or whatever.  And, by me having a operation not to long before I started on the road, this--I needed this medication but my medi- I had left my medication in the van.  Our van had broken down, I left my medication in the van, it had been a couple a weeks and so that was pretty much my fault.
Speaker 1: That's a--yeah.  So, but before that you, you could pretty much see (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, real good.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay, so when you were growing up you played baseball, you did everything and all the other kids did, you didn't have no problems?
Speaker 2: When I was growing up, I did everything anybody else did. (Laughter) And some things some other folks didn't do (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, now what are some of the things or are you willing to tell us, what are some of those things are (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 349716
Speaker 1: Was Crogman [W.H. Crogman Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia] your first elementary school?  Where'd you first go to school?
Speaker 2: I first started in kindergarten at Campbell Elementary School [Fairburn, Georgia] over in the--over--it's right over in the, in the Carver Home [Carver Homes, Atlanta, Georgia] area.  And then from there I went to Crogman, and then to Murphy High School [J.C. Murphy High School; Alonzo A. Crim Open Campus High School, Atlanta, Georgia] here in the city over in this area.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, did you like school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I, I liked, I like school pretty good.  I was pretty popular and, yeah, I liked school.  It was good.
Speaker 1: Okay, said you were pretty popular?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, did you have any--what made you so popular?  Do you have any idea?
Speaker 2: Just me being me, you know, I know how to talk to people and I try to be a friendly person.  I carry myself in a way that, that I try to make friends and in order to make friends you have to show yourself friendly.  And, I was, you know, I, I was an average student, I mean, you know, but I sang, I played and, and people liked that, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you perform any in--well, not in early grade school I guess.  But did you have a favorite subject in, in grade school and--?
Speaker 2: Music (laughter).  I've always been into music pretty much. English was, was not a bad subject for me.  I guess my--I'm pretty good with numbers but, I guess algebra and, you know, it was kind of interesting to me but I worked numbers pretty good, and English and music, and did a little art and, you know, that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 349717
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, and even though people had to sit on the back of the bus, I mean, we rode the bus for years that was just common thing to do.  Go to the back of the bus, you know what I mean.  Didn't nobody just point out, you know we can't sit on the front of the bus.  I mean, I never had to go through that.  They never pointed things out like they do now.  They point everything to their children, you know.  That's a pregnant lady.  We didn't pay no attention to no pregnant lady.  I mean, you know.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You have speed again, Larry [Larry Crowe].
Speaker 1: Okay, we got the tape loaded again so--let me ask you--I was asking did--what was the Civil Rights Movement, you know, were people really conscious of that or the other kids conscious of that when it was going on here in Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we don't--when the Civil Rights Movement was going on Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--everybody knew about Martin Luther King and who he was, and what it was about.  But there were a lot of things that just weren't pointed out to me as a, as a child.  Going to the back of the bus was just the thing to do.  We didn't think nothing about it, we liked riding on the back of the bus (laughter).  I mean, you know, we got on the bus, went to the back of the bus.  It was--and in the back of the bus, it was warmer in the back of the bus than it was in the front of the bus, so, therefore, on a cold day you went to the back of the bus and it was, it was just the thing to do.  Nobody pointed it out.  I remember when we were staying in Pittsburgh [Atlanta, Georgia], it was a restaurant there by the name of--I think it was called the White House Restaurant [Atlanta, Georgia] or the White House Cafe or something like that, my stepfather who was Willie Shivers, his name was Willie Faye Shivers, W-I-L-L-I-E, F-A-Y-E, S-H-I-V-E-R-S, he would pull up to this restaurant and go to the window to pick up the food.  Well, I didn't think nothing about that because it was cool, I, I mean just like the drive-thru far as I was concerned, you know.  So we didn't think nothing about that.  I think segregation and, and a lot of things that happened when I was coming up we didn't have to go through it.  Those who had to live through it, had a lot of things to conquer but today people have a tendency to, to point things out and, and to lead their children in a direction to make them--to program their mind to a certain thing.  And, but as far as segregation and not be able to go here and there, I went where I wanted to go and I did what I wanted to do so I didn't have any problem.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, you never experienced any problems (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you remember when Dr. King died and what the--?
Speaker 2: Right.  When, when Dr. King was killed it was, it was devastating to know that here was a man that was trying to help everybody, not just the black or white, he was just fighting for the right and someone came along and just took his life like that.  It was devastating to the city and the people here.  I had an opportunity to go down and to view the body, and it was lot a people, people crying, lot a people really upset about it.  But it was also devastating when John Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] was killed too, you know, he was a, a great president as far as I'm concerned.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you were a bit younger then, you know, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, about five years earlier, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Story_ID: 349718
Speaker 1: You were at Campbell [Campbell Elementary School, Fairburn, Georgia], I mean, at Crogman Elementary School [W.H. Crogman Elementary School, Atlanta, Georgia] and when you were in high school [J.C. Murphy High School; Alonzo A. Crim Open Campus High School, Atlanta, Georgia], you all moved to this neighborhood here, this side?
Speaker 2: Right.  We moved here when I was in the eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, tell us about high school life, what did--or did you want to talk about your stepsister before we move on, should we do that?
Speaker 2: Well, during, during the time that we moved here to the city my mother [Sarah Sharp Shivers] has always been a foster mother.  We've had a few children to come stay with us, foster kids.  And today we still have one that is in our home.  She came when she was three years old.  Her name is Fatima, F-A-T-I-M-A, Rastley, R-A-S-T-L-E-Y [Fatima Rastley], and she--when she came to the house, she was--she couldn't walk, she couldn't talk, she, she is retarded but she is trainable.  But now she can read the papers, she can do pretty much anything that, that she wants to do.  Her--she's still limited but she's been with us for, I guess, she is forty-one years old now.  So, she been with us for a long time so she's a foster sister.  And just like a sister to, to me, actually--
Story_ID: 349719
Speaker 1: So, your mother [Sarah Sharp Shivers], did she have a--did she stay at your uncle's [sic. maternal grandfather, Phil Sharp] church.  Was that the home church for the family?
Speaker 2: No, no.  My mother was a member of, of Mount Moriah Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia] and the pastor there was Howard Creecy.
Speaker 1: Okay, was church a big part a growing up?
Speaker 2: Church has always been a part of, of growing up.  I sang in the choir. I taught Sunday school, and I've always been in the church.  That was, that's because prayer is always important no matter the situation may be.  And if you train a child in the way it should go, even though if it stray away, it's got something to come back to.  And if you get, if you get that the--that church within you, you get the Bible in you, get the word in you and you know for yourself, see.  A lot a people can tell you a lot of things but you gotta kind of read it for yourself and get your own understanding.  And no matter what happens in life, you always got something to relate to.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a chance--were you like singing in the church, I guess, I know you probably were but--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mother, she started the first young peoples choir at the Israel Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia].  When we moved out here, we went to the Israel Baptist Church, where Reverend William Smith is the pastor and he's still the pastor there.  And, my momma started the young people choir I was about fourteen years old and sang in the choir, and it was a great experience.
Story_ID: 349720
Speaker 1: In high school, you're at Murphy High School [J.C. Murphy High School; Alonzo A. Crim Open Campus High School], right, here in Atlanta [Georgia].  How'd you like Murphy?
Speaker 2: When I first went to Murphy High School, it was--we had black and white students there.  So that was sort of different for me because where I was coming from, we, we had primarily--it was a black school.  And so when I came to Murphy, we had black and white students there, we had white teachers.  And that made it a little bit different, but that made it better because you learned to interact with people, because people are just people you found that out.  And, being at Murphy I learned a lot.  I was--I played in the band and I--we had a band director.  His name was Mr. Hubert Cox [ph.], he had a lot of, he had a lot of--he really had a lot a confidence in me.  And, and he could see that I had talent and he, he nurtured that talent.  He--we--I played on a lot of festivals, went to a lot a drum clinics and won a lot a medals, and had opportunity to sing in the talent shows at Murphy.  Every year while I was there, I sang in the talent shows and before it was over, I was nominated and won most talented in my senior year.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's something.  Did, did you have a specific group that you always performed with or was it?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I start my first band when I was about fifteen, so, we had a band and, and, but in the beginning before the band even came along, my brother Ronnie [Ronald McKinnie] and I, we, we--Ronnie would play the piano and we both sang so we had a Sam and Dave thing going on.  And, Ronnie and Ricky [HistoryMaker Eric "Ricky" McKinnie], so it was like that.  And, we sang on the talent shows together and the band sometime in the later years in my junior year and senior year, the band had an opportunity to, you know, to play on a talent show and I would sing.  And I've always pretty much had my own group.
Speaker 1: That's something, so you all were like Sam and Dave you say.  Did, did you actually sang the Sam and Dave songs or did you?
Speaker 2: Right.  We did Sam and Dave songs, we did, what, Mel and Tim songs, we did a lot of different songs.  We, but, yeah, we did the Sam and Dave thing, yeah.
Story_ID: 349721
Speaker 1: Did you think in high school that you were gonna be a professional musician?  Were you really, you know, envisioning that at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, when I was in high school, my main thing was to--I liked attention, so singing and playing got me the attention and I wasn't really thinking about it so much as being a career, I just liked doing it, you know.  So, because what I really wanted to do was to be a social worker because I like working with people.  And music was my way of just getting attention that I, that I liked and, and that's why I did the music but I really wanted to be a social worker.  But when I was seventeen, I joined a group here in the city called the Soul Searchers [Troy Ramey and the Soul Searchers] of Atlanta [Georgia] and I cut my first major record on a major label.  It was called 'Great Change' by the Soul Searchers when I was eighteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did--was it played on the radio and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: It was played all over the country.  It was a hit.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you play the drums on that one or did you sing?
Speaker 2: I played drums.  I played drums on that record, it was called 'Great Change' and I played drums.  They spelled my name wrong but it was okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: They always do that for some reason, don't they?  Okay, so you got a record out at age seventeen, so, when you're--were you still playing with them when you graduated from Murphy [J.C. Murphy High School; Alonzo A. Crim Open Campus High School, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was still with the Soul Searchers when I graduated from Murphy and, and I stayed with them until I was twenty years old.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what year did you come out of Murphy?
Speaker 2: I came out a Murphy in 1970.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you stayed with them until about 1972 or '3 [1973]?
Speaker 2: Right, '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you all tour a lot?  Were you all touring?
Speaker 2: When I was with the Soul Searchers, we did a lot touring.  We played a lot, well, it was like the furthest I had ever gone with them was to Chicago [Illinois]. Well, and then we also went to New York [New York], we played the Apollo Theater and, and far as like Florida, Miami and, around like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's, that's the Soul Searchers is that the group with Troy?
Speaker 2: Troy Ramey.
Speaker 1: Troy Ramey, yeah.  Okay, yeah.  What was it like being in New York City, you know, Atlanta's not too bad a city but New York is a--what did you think of that?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, when I--when we first went to New York, it was interesting.  Lot of people, lot of lights, lot of things going on, and no matter what time of night you get up it's always something going on.  And is all, you know, you see--you heard about the yellow cabs and you get of opportunity to see the yellow cabs that, that you've heard about so much.  And then you--when you watch TV you see how these cabs of--always people, always in a hurry.  Everybody is always going somewhere and they drive crazy, and it was, it was something to see that, that it really existed what you saw on television.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, so why did you--what happened with the Soul Searchers or why did you leave the group?
Speaker 2: I left the Soul Searchers because I had an opportunity to go with another group out a Texas that was traveling all the time.  They were making a career out, out of music and it was The Gospel Keynotes [Willie Neal Johnson and The Gospel Keynotes] of Tyler, Texas.  They had called me about playing for them; I had played for 'em a couple times when I was traveling with the Soul Searchers.  And I had just--I was in school and I had just had an eye operation a few months before then, and so, when they called me I was like in between and I said, well, I gotta little time on my hands so let me just check it out.
Story_ID: 349722
Speaker 1: So you said you had an operation at this point, I mean, what was it a--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, for glaucoma.  I had just had an operation for glaucoma.
Speaker 1: So it was getting--your eyesight was getting worse and or was it, was it pain, or was the eyesight getting worse or why did you--?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, glaucoma makes you where your eyesight gets real blurry.  And because of the pressure, glaucoma is water pressure behind the eye.  That, that's what it is, and they operate on the eye to release the pressure and that, that's what was going on with me.  Some days I could see good, some days I couldn't see as well because a the water pressure that was pushing, you know, behind the eye.  And so, I had just come--like I said, I had a operation for that so I just (unclear) decided that I wanted to go out and see the world.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you went on tour with the, with The Gospel Keynotes [Willie Neal Johnson and The Gospel Keynotes]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so where did you all go, did you?
Speaker 2: We went everywhere.  We covered some of the cities that, that I had gone to with the Soul Searchers [Troy Ramey and the Soul Searchers] but, mainly, I had an opportunity to go to California.  We went to Alaska and Washington State, and Oregon and, and we just covered the United States.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you think at that time that you maybe, you should've gone to college 'cause you said you wanted to be a social worker?  Did you--were you still thinking about that?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, when I started traveling and I never really thought about going back to school to, to further that because it was time consuming and I never just thought about it like that.
Story_ID: 349723
Speaker 1: So, you're touring with The Gospel Keynotes [Willie Neal Johnson and The Gospel Keynotes] and you said, once you started touring you really didn't think about going back to school, huh?
Speaker 2: No.  Things were moving so fast, time was moving by and, you know, time has a way of moving and if you don't, if you don't, if you not careful it'll pass you by.  And, that's sort of what happened.  As, as time went on, the group won a gold record and popularity got better, money got a little better so I was doing all right doing what I was doing.
Speaker 1: Now what was--what was their hit record?  What was it named, what was it called?
Speaker 2: The first hit record that The Gospel Keynotes had was called 'Jesus You Been Good To Me' and I had an opportunity to, to play on that one.  And then we had another record to come after that was called 'That's My Son Hanging On The Cross' [sic. 'That's My Son (Dying On The Cross)'] and we won record of the year for that record, and it was, it was a good experience.
Speaker 1: Now, were you doing any songwriting in those days too, or, I mean, or arranging?  I know, know you do that but
Speaker 2: Right.  I--while being with The Gospel Keynotes, I didn't do any, any songwriting for that group.  I've always written songs on my own, but not for that group.  No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when did you start writing songs on your own.  I mean, had you started already writing songs, you know, by the time you were touring?
Speaker 2: Right.  I started writing songs when I was real young, when my brother [Ronald McKinnie] and I was singing together as well as being in the band.  We were already writing songs and, and singing, you know, different songs that we, that we had arranged but we had never published anything.  We'd never did a record or anything like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you had--you had some songs you had written and you still were writing but you hadn't really published a song yet?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 349724
Speaker 1: Were you with The Gospel Keynotes [Willie Neal Johnson and The Gospel Keynotes] when you lost your eyesight (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. I was, I was with The Gospel Keynotes when I lost my sight, and, and I stayed with them for another probably about a year and half after.
Speaker 1: Was that a--had to be a difficult transition, how were you able to, you know, make that transition and still perform and--?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, God has a way of using a person and I never really thought about it.  I, I didn't take time out to just sit down and say, wow, you know, I can't see, I can't do, I can't go.  I've always been the kind a person that I've always gone and sometimes you gotta learn to do things in a different way.  I never really thought about the fact that I couldn't see.  Somebody say how, how can that be?  Well, you know, a lot a times when you have seen as long as I have, you have a tendency to have what they call phantom sight.  So some days I would wake up and I could see different things, or least I thought I did anyway, for a long time.  But the doctors was telling me like "No, now, Ricky [HistoryMaker Eric "Ricky" McKinnie], you lost--you, you can't see."  I say, well, I don't know about you but when I got up this morning I saw my hand, and I was in there and I was washing my--and I could see the sink and I could see my drumsticks or, if I'm was working on a--at a mixing board, I could see the knobs on the board.  But, actually, I wasn't seeing them, I was seeing it in my head so by me being able to do that, that really made me feel like within myself that I, I really hadn't lost my sight.  It was just a matter a time so I didn't have time to sit back and wait on it.  I had to do what I had to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So is that where your favorite saying comes from?
Speaker 2: My favorite saying came from my aunt.  I guess I was doing so much going and doing, and never stop, stopped to think about, you know, the fact that I couldn't see.  So, one day she was talking to me, she say, you know, she was writing a--she wrote the first lines to go on the first records that we did, you know, the, the--I guess you would call it the bio for the record, and she told me, she say, "You know, Ricky, one thing I found out about you, you not blind you just can't see."  'Cause see, I found out that when you blind you don't have any direction, and I'm well-directed, well-grounded, and I've always been on my way up.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, so you were able--I'd never heard of phantom vision before but I can imagine, yeah, I guess maybe like seeing something in a dream or something in a way.  You can see--you know where things are and you know what they look like even though you're not able to really see 'em.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's interesting.  It can be good and it can be bad, it just depends on, on the person.  When I say that is that a person that's, that's totally blind that doesn't have what I have, they have a tendency to, to depend more on their ears than I do.  And, and they're more aware of a lot a things, and certain things don't take their attention because they, they never seen things so it doesn't--they don't react in the same way.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you have--you can see light?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You can't? Okay.
Speaker 2: What I see is when I'm paying attention, like now.  I can see it's like colors, it's like orange and yellow and brown and, yeah, orange, yellow and brown.  Like light--it's like a light constant light that's on, right?  But it disappears.  But whenever it does disappear, I don't realize that, that it's gone. Its, it just disappears.  But when I'm just sitting around sometimes that's, that's what I see.  I see this, this light that's happening and then, and I can see different things, it depends on, on my mind and, and what I'm, you know, what it's about.  I mean, like that camera, if I think about it enough if I go and pick it up, I can visualize that camera in my mind.  That's why I can, I can do a lot a things that a lot of people can't do.  That's why I understand a lot of things that, that a lot of people don't understand.  That's why I tell people that anybody that underestimates me is making a big mistake.
Story_ID: 349725
Speaker 1: All right, now, has that ever happened?  Do you have a story about that, about being underestimated?
Speaker 2: I'm always under- underestimated.  I found out that--and that doesn't--not to say that you or anybody in particular, but most sighted people underestimate blind people because we live in a sighted world.  And people feel like if you can't see that they, they got--they have a hold--they have something that you don't have, which is true.  But people don't, don't realize that it's not about what you, what you can see with your eyes, it's about what you know in your mind, in your brain.  See, because, there are people that are losing their sight every day, and, I mean, you could be a doctor and you can lose your sight.  That don't mean you don't know how to operate.  You can still tell somebody what to do. If they can comprehend what you say, you can tell 'em what to do and, and I'm always underestimated.  And the sad part about it is that most blind people, that I've met, underestimate one another.
Speaker 1: Now that's interesting.  You wouldn't guess that would be true but it is, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's true, I mean, you know.  Most times when you, when you--people--I've learned that--it was one guy that I met in my career, he was with the Blind Boys of Mississippi [Five Blind Boys of Mississippi], his name was Lloyd Woodard.  He told me, said, said, "Ricky [HistoryMaker Eric "Ricky" McKinnie] you know," said, "the only thing about, about blind people is that they don't, they don't want to stick together, man, I mean.  They, they underestimate one another, and sighted people they can always paint--they always paint a picture in your head and if you don't have your head on right, they'll screw you up."  And I learned that.  And all that he said, it's sad but it's true.  People, society, it's not about sight, it's not about not being able to see but society has a way of controlling the mind.  I mean, you can go out today and you can see a suit that you don't like and you say--and it'd be the first time you saw it, you be--it come--somebody bring you the suit and you say, ah, I don't like that.  But in a week's time you see ten people with that same suit on, I guarantee you within a few days you'll end up buying that same suit because you have manipulated into getting it.  And that's the way it is, and that's the way people do.  People have a tendency to, to want you to believe whatever they want you to believe.  I mean, you can meet somebody and they could be heavy, and you could like 'em and, and you be happy.  And that's what's wrong with society today.  You can be happy and, and your wife can be fat and you just happy with your fat wife, and here comes somebody, well, what you with that fat woman for.  And as long as they keep telling you that over and over and over, she's gonna get bigger and bigger and bigger.  And sooner or later, you gonna say I got a fat wife.  And you gonna have a problem.
Story_ID: 349726
Speaker 1: So you were talking about the opinion of, I mean, not listening to the opinions of people in terms of what they think you can or cannot do, or what they think you can--you should or shouldn't have and all that sort of thing.  So, you said one of the strengths that you have, that you were able to think for yourself I guess about what can or not do?
Speaker 2: Right.  I think that's the main thing that most people have a problem with me about is that I'll listen to you and I listen to what you have to say, but in the end my decision is gonna be my own, and, because you have to live that, that you decide to do.  Sometimes you make the right decision sometimes you make the wrong decision but the decision is pretty much up to you.  So I try to have my own mindset and then there are times that, that I have gone along with people and it wasn't really what I wanted to do but--and it didn't turn out, you know, the way, the way I thought it should have so I try to, to be my own person.
Story_ID: 349727
Speaker 1: How long did you stay with The Gospel Keynotes [Willie Neal Johnson and The Gospel Keynotes]?
Speaker 2: I was with The Gospel Keynotes for about six years, and then I came home and started my own group, The Ricky McKinnie Singers.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that was about in 1979 I guess?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-eight [1978].
Speaker 1: Seventy-eight [1978], okay.  Now, The Ricky McKinnie Singers, you all were a gospel group, right?
Speaker 2: We were a gospel group and they're still singing today.  And we started the group and we started our radio broadcast--the first radio broadcast came on September, 1978.  And it's been on ever since.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you have an actual show, a radio show?
Speaker 2: Right.  I have a, a radio show that aired every week here in the City of Atlanta [Georgia] at WYZE Radio.  You can get it at wyzeradio.com on the Internet or 1480 AM on the dial here in the City of Atlanta.  And it comes on every Sunday morning from 9:00 until 10:00.  Our original program was on Fridays from 11:00 to 11:15, and this year we decided to, to end that program.  We had been on for a number of years every since '78 [1978] from 11:00 to 11:15, we stopped that program this year on the, on the last Friday in September, 2006.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, how was this show organized?  I heard that your mother [Sarah Sharp Shivers] something to do with the show, right?
Speaker 2: My mother is the host of the show, the hostess.  And she, she plays music, good gospel music.  We play music by all different artists and we have different people that, businesses that are here in the city that help to sponsor the radio broadcast.
Speaker 1: And what's the name of the show?
Speaker 2: The broadcast is called 'Words and Music for Your Soul.'
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, not all black religious music is gospel music but can you tell us like what is gospel music, and, I mean, how do you define gospel music?
Speaker 2: Gospel music is--it's the good news, the good news that God is still alive and well.  And that's, that's what it is.  It's the good news, that's what gospel music is.  And that's how I describe it, the good news.
Story_ID: 349728
Speaker 1: Just tell me a little bit about that.  We were talking about Thomas Dorsey during the unfortunate phone break but (laughter) but, yeah, tell me what you just said about Thomas Dorsey's relatives here in Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Right.  I had an opportunity to, after I came home off the road with The Gospel Keynotes [Willie Neal Johnson and The Gospel Keynotes], I started The Ricky McKinnie Singers but I also played for a while for a church here, it's the Greater Mt. Calvary Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia].  And the pastor there is Reverend B.J. Johnson, Jr.  His mother was Bernice Dorsey [Bernice Dorsey Johnson], and Bernice Dorsey was the sister of Thomas A. Dorsey.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So the big--and I think one point I was trying to see if you agree with it, there's a link between blues and gospel going back to (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  Blues and gospel go hand and hand because, see, you can take any gospel song and take Jesus out and put baby in and it's a blues song.   And you take any pretty much any blues song, take baby out and put Jesus in you can make it out of, a gospel song.  That's why the people had a lot of problems with Ray Charles in the beginning because what he was doing, he was taking that gospel feel and, and gospel songs and changing 'em around, and--but it worked for him because it--both of 'em feeling, it's a feeling, you know.  One of them is a feeling--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay let's pause--
Speaker 2: Okay.  You almost gave us a formula there.  If you substitute Jesus with baby and stuff it's blues, and you substitute baby with Jesus, it's gospel, right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  It depends on the word and pretty much any blues song that, that they have you can, you can pretty much change it around.  Any love song, see, Jesus is love, I mean, you know.  Sometime they go too far.  I mean with rap music and lot of these songs, they go a little bit far but any of the songs from back in the day when music was music and music was clean, that you could take any blues song and change it into a gospel song 'cause if you say I love you, you can say I love you Jesus.  You don't have to say I love you darling, you know.
Speaker 2: Or I love you baby?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah.  It's interesting that Ray Charles was criticized for taking gospel music and making it blues when gospel music came out of blues with Thomas Dorsey.
Speaker 1: Well, the blues came out of the gospel.  The gospel was always first.  Everything came from the gospel.  First there was God, so everything came from, from God everything--all the music stemmed from, from gospel music, the gospel, the blues, the jazz and so on and so forth.
Story_ID: 349729
Speaker 1: When you came back and you founded The Ricky McKinney Singers and established the radio show ['Words and Music for Your Soul'], this was around 1978, you said '78 [1978], '79 [1979] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you've always had The Ricky McKinnie Singers, right?  I mean since that time?
Speaker 2: Every since that time The Ricky McKinnie Singers have been--we recorded our first record that was released on the Southland [Southland Records] music label in 1982.  The group is still singing; we recorded another record in 1988.
Speaker 1: What's the name of your record in--'82 [1982] record?
Speaker 2: The first record we recorded was called 'Here I Am' and then in 1988 we had an album that out, that was called 'I Never Had Love Before.'  And then we recorded another record that was, that was called 'Hold On to God's Unchanging Hand.'
Speaker 1: So basically, a record every four, five years something like that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, pretty much every four years we record a new record, yeah.
Story_ID: 349730
Speaker 1: Now how did you get involved with The Blind Boys of Alabama?
Speaker 2: I had an opportunity to meet Clarence [Clarence Fountain] at an early age.  When he met me, I was about four years old.  My mother [Sarah Sharp Shivers] was singing with another group like I said, and we met at the city auditorium [Atlanta Municipal Auditorium, Atlanta, Georgia] and, and I thought he was real cool 'cause he had a lot of energy and he was sort of like--I'm sort of like he is to a degree.  He knew what he wanted, and he knew how to get, how to get to where he wanted to be.
Speaker 1: This is Clarence Fountain, right?
Speaker 2: Clarence Fountain, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, when I met Clarence I was on the road in the '70s [1970s] playing with The Gospel Keynotes [Willie Neal Johnson and The Gospel Keynotes] and, and ran across Clarence again and he was doing a solo career, and had an opportunity to play with him during his solo career.  And the Blind Boys from Alabama were still traveling, and Johnny Fields and George Scott and Olice Thomas, they were The Blind Boys of Alabama, Billy Bowers and I had an opportunity to play with the original Blind Boys of Alabama so during that time, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, the original Blind Boys, now, they--correct my history if it's wrong but I think they--it started the '40s [1940s] and at the Alabama Institute for the Blind [Alabama Institute for the Negro Blind; Alabama Institute for the Deaf and Blind, Talladega, Alabama], they were students there and they were able to start a group and--?
Speaker 2: Right.  The Blind Boys of Alabama started in 1939 at the Talladega Institute for the Blind.  Nineteen forty-four [1944] they were on the road as The Blind Boys of Alabama--well, when they first went on the road they were called the Happy Land Jubilee Singers.  And it was a promoter in, in New Jersey had a program, it was a group out a Mississippi [Five Blind Boys of Mississippi], a blind group out a Mississippi and the blind group out a Alabama, so he say, I'm a have a program and we gonna have the blind boys out of Alabama against the blind boys out of Mississippi.  And the name stuck, the blind boys out of Mississippi won but the blind boys kept the name Blind Boys of Alabama and that's when it all started.
Speaker 1: And they made the most money, right (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No, no really (laughter).
Speaker 1: Really, I mean, most people seem to know about them and they don't know about?
Speaker 2: You mean in the long run?
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: Well, in the '60s [1960s], see, the Blind Boys of Mississippi went to Europe in the '60s [1960s].  They had a lead singer by the name of Archie Brownlee, he passed away in the '60s [1960s].  He and Clarence were the two original lead singers for the Blind Boys but what happened was, when the lead singer for the Blind Boys of Mississippi passed away, they never got another blind lead singer and they always had sighted guys for the lead singers, and put the blind guys in the background.  That's what I said while ago (laughter).  But, anyway, so, so they never got to be where they was suppose to be because if it's the, if it's the Blind Boys from Mississippi you need a blind lead singer.  So--but the sighted cats always wanted to be the lead singers so they'd put the blind guys in the back and, and they stood up front and the group never really moved to the position where they were.  Not to say they didn't have a good group 'cause they always had a good group, but The Blind Boys of Alabama have always had a blind singer except for a couple of times and at that time when they didn't have a blind lead singer, they, they weren't doing as well as they doing now.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so how many people have been a part of that group over the years you think?
Speaker 2: We've had a lot of people to come in and out of the Blind Boys.  I don't know exactly how many but I know at this point Billy Bowers who was the lead singer for the Blind Boys back in the '60s [1960s] when Clarence was doing his solo career, he's back with The Blind Boys of Alabama.  Clarence Fountain, the original lead singer, he's there with the Blind Boys.  Jimmy Carter, he originally started out with the blind boys from Mississippi but he was in school with The Blind Boys of Alabama.  He went to the Talladega Institute for the Blind also and his mother wouldn't allow him to go on the road when The Blind Boys of Alabama first left school, so he had to stay in school for a while but he's back with the Blind Boys.  He's with The Blind Boys of Alabama and myself, Ricky McKinnie [HistoryMaker Eric "Ricky" McKinnie], we are the four blind guys in The Blind Boys of Alabama today.
Story_ID: 349731
Speaker 1: You met Clarence Fountain back when you were touring with the group from Tyler, Texas?
Speaker 2: Right, but I--really I actually met Clarence when I was four years old, that's when I first met Clarence but I first got my opportunity to, to work with him as a musician when I was with The Gospel Keynotes [Willie Neal Johnson and The Gospel Keynotes] out of Tyler, Texas.
Speaker 1: So they were a group that you were very familiar with?
Speaker 2: Right.  I was familiar with the Blind Boys [The Blind Boys of Alabama].  I knew George [George Scott] pretty good, Clarence and Johnny Fields, you know, I knew them quite well.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the group consists of--now you played drums in the group but is it--you played drums in, yeah?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I played drums for the Blind Boys as well as I'm the road manager for the Blind Boys, singing background.
Speaker 1: How many people, I mean how many musicians are actually with them, I mean, do other people play other instruments too, or?
Speaker 2: Right.  The Blind Boys have four musicians.  They have a guitar player that's out of New York City [New York, New York], Joey Williams.  A rhythm guitar player, he's from North Carolina, his name is Bobby Butler.  And the base player, he just moved to Georgia.  He's from Florida, he lives in Augusta now, his name is Tracy Pierce and I play drums and that's the musicians for the Blind Boys.
Speaker 1: Now, the rest of those musicians sighted or are they blinds?
Speaker 2: All the musicians can see other than--except for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, when did you start touring with the Blind Boys?
Speaker 2: I been with the Blind Boys for about seventeen years.  I managed the group for three years, I managed the group from 1997 to 2000.  And then I realized that we needed somebody to do contracts and royalties so we hired a gentleman out of Atlanta [Georgia] by the name of Charles Driebe and he's the general manager for the Blind Boys.  And his name is spelled D-R-I-E-B-E, Charles Driebe.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell us about how you became manager.  How did that happen?
Speaker 2: Well, what happened was the then manager passed away and, and we needed--we kind of regrouped things because we didn't really know that much about how the business was running and so I turned the Blind Boys into a partnership and now it's a LLC.  So, here we are today.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the other members are partners?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  At least three of them are anyway.
Story_ID: 349732
Speaker 1: I guess you probably did encounter some of the same kind of prejudice and stuff from sighted people that you refer to earlier, people that kind of didn't--thought that they could take advantage of you?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, any time that--it's always something.  Anytime you dealing with people it's always something it'd be--it has nothing to do with being blind or sighted or none of that, and it doesn't matter where you come from, who you are, what your ethnic group is or what your religion is all about.  Any time you dealing with people you gonna always have problems, it's gonna always be somebody say, you know, if you don't do what they--the way things, the way they want you to do it, they gonna always have a problem so, you know, it's always something.  I guess that's just life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, did you have any specific problems like that when people underestimated you and thought that they could get over on the group [The Blind Boys of Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I'm, you know, people--when we first went to Europe, you have to know what you looking for.  If you, if you don't know what you--if you don't--if you can't count the money, if you don't, if you don't put in your router exactly what you want--I mean they have chitlin circuit everywhere.  And, and if you don't know what you want, I mean, if you go to Spain if you don't know to tell them that you want to be in a four or five-star hotel and you got to have some English-speaking channels on your TV set in all the rooms, you know, and, and you gotta have a restaurant in the hotel, and you, and you gonna have to have a interpreter there for you because you don't speak Spanish.  You gonna have to have a road manager to go with you, you'll go to--they'll send you to Spain, put you in a two-star hotel and you won't have a telephone, you won't have a TV and, and you'll be on your own.  And, so, you gotta know exactly what you're, what you're looking for.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I can see that can be--that could make traveling less attractive than it could be under those circumstances, yeah.  Okay, so you had to make sure that all those things were being taken care of?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 349733
Speaker 1: Since you, you been with them, Five Blind Boys [sic. The Blind Boys of Alabama]--I see, I'm looking at four Grammy Awards here, can you tell us about those?
Speaker 2: Right.  We, we have been blessed the last few years; God has given us the opportunity to do something that not very many quartets have done.  Blind Boys have won four Grammy Awards nineteen--in, in 2000, year 2000.  It was for the record we cut in 2000 but the award was given in 2001.  We won our first Grammy on an album that was called 'Spirit of the Century,' 2002 we won another Grammy for a record we recorded that was called 'Higher Ground.'  Two thousand three [2003], we won one for a record that was called our Christmas album ['Go Tell it On the Mountain'] with the Blind Boys we won one for that one.  And then in 2004, we collaborated with a gentleman by the name of Ben Harper and it was Ben Harper and the Blind Boys and 'There Will Be a Light,' and then we won another Grammy for that record.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a lot of success.  So, you primarily--most of what you do is now tour with the Blind Boys, right?
Speaker 2: I do all my touring with the Blind Boys.  I do sing with The Ricky McKinnie Singers when I'm home.  We're currently working on a new record, hopefully that will be out in 2007, only Ricky McKinnie Singers.  I have a website, rickymckinnie.com, and I, I've started a management company, management company.  It's called Quality Sound Management [Atlanta, Georgia].  And we're working on a book.  Sylvia Reed and I are working on a book and we have lot of good things that are going on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what is The Blind Boys of Alabama, it's a quartet now you say?
Speaker 2: It's a quartet, right.
Speaker 1: Okay. So it used to be The Five Blind Boys [The Five Blind Boys of Alabama], right, at one time?
Speaker 2: Right.  We stopped the Five Blind Boys because sometime you might not have but three (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, that makes sense.
Story_ID: 349734
Speaker 1: The Ricky McKinnie Singers, now, what kind of an ensemble is The Ricky McKinnie Singers?
Speaker 2: The Ricky McKinnie Singers is a mixed group.  We have ladies and men in the group.  We have my mother Sarah McKinnie Shivers [Sarah Sharp Shivers], she's in the group.  She's the lead singer for The Ricky McKinnie Singers, and Gloria Meadows she, she sings lead also and she sings background for The Ricky McKinnie Singers.  She's been there since the beginning of the group and we have a young lady that came from Brunswick, Georgia that lives here in the city now.  Her name is Mary Reid, she sings lead and she been with the group about maybe five or six years.  And we have a keyboard player Icanor Jones [ph.], he's been with us about three years.  And our guitar player, he's from Monroe, Georgia.  His name is Arthur Roland and he's been there maybe about fifteen years.  And my brother Chuck [Willie Shivers], he plays bass from time to time and he's been, since we--he started out in the group with us.  So that's The Ricky McKinnie Singers.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite song that you all do?
Speaker 2: I wrote a song one time that it's called 'Don't Let My Living Be In Vain,' that's my favorite song.  I sing that whenever you see The Ricky McKinnie Singers and you see me, I'm gonna sing that song.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you give us a couple a lyrics?
Speaker 2: It says, Lord, I'm striving each and every day, trying so hard to live the Christian way but when I think about Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], all he did was good but people treated him mean.  So I just say, Lord, don't let my living be in vain.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite song with The Blind Boys [The Blind Boys of Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we do a song that I get a opportunity to sing from time to time when Clarence [Clarence Fountain] is not there.  Lot of times when Clarence is out or I get an opportunity to sing a song with the Blind Boys and--I'm trying to think of the name of the song.  I just sang it the other day.  It'll come to me.  But, anyway, 'Amazing Grace' is one of the songs that, that I do like to hear the Blind Boys do.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's like, like a--I think there's a whole television special once on just that song, 'Amazing Grace' and how all different groups of people and different denominations sing it.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Yeah, that's, that's a universal song because God's grace is sufficient.  And that's a song that everybody can relate to.  But the song that I was speaking of what the Blind Boys sing is called 'God Said It and That's Good Enough For Me' ['God Said It (That's Good Enough For Me)'].
Story_ID: 349735
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, only thing that I find that I might would do differently is, is, is have really have nothing to do with the group [The Ricky McKinnie Singers] per se.  But far as my career is concerned I think I just, I just--God has always allowed me to, to be in the right place at the right time.  It's not about nothing that I have done.  I've just--when I wrote my first--the first album we did was called 'Here I Am,' and the lead part to that song 'Here I Am' it said, God, if you use me, I'll go anywhere you want me to go and I'll do anything you want me to do. I didn't have much to say to him, I just said, here I am.  And when I, when I wrote that song, I knew what I was saying but I didn't know the impact of what I was saying.  So my career has not been so much what I have done, it's what the Lord has done for me.  See, lot of people try to, to, to design their life as to the way they want it to go.  And, and I've always been the type of person that has been--God just been good.  He's always moved me from one point to another.  It seems like when, when things--he's gonna--he always have put me in the, in the place where I needed to be.  It's not that I wanted to be with The Blind Boys [The Blind Boys of Alabama] 'cause I had no idea that I would even be with the Blind Boys.  I wasn't trying to get with the Blind Boys.  I wasn't thinking about the Blind Boys when they called me.  When I joined the--when my career first started, I was playing with a choir in the city called the Atlanta Community Choir, and the Soul Searchers [Troy Ramey and the Soul Searchers] came to me and asked me about playing with them.  I wasn't--I didn't even know 'em.  I didn't even know who they were, I had no idea who they were.  And then when I joined The Gospel Keynotes [Willie Neal Johnson and The Gospel Keynotes], I was at home content being at home.  I wasn't thinking about The Gospel Keynotes.  They had come here and asked me to--I was playing for Reverend Johnny L. Jones and the Second Mount Olive Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia], he had a big church here at that time.  And we had a program, Clarence Fountain was on the show and The Gospel Keynotes, and Johnny L. Jones was in the choir.  So I had played for The Gospel Keynotes during that--on that program and they were going to Newnan, Georgia and they said, "Man you--how about going to Newnan with us?"  I said, "Nah, man, I don't think I'm going."  And I didn't go 'cause I had no--I didn't really have no, you know, I wasn't inclined to go because I, I didn't have any--I didn't really want to do that like that.  You know, I was content doing what I was doing with the church and with the Soul Searchers so--but then when I was in the position I had the time and they, they came and asked me about going.  I didn't know any of those guys, you know.  When I left home to join that group, I didn't know anybody, I mean, I didn't know any of them.  I just had seen 'em before.  I didn't know anybody, but that was what God would have for me to do at that time.  	When Clarence called me about playing with the Blind Boys, I didn't go out to play with the Blind Boys, I went out to--they were going to Australia so he had asked me about going and, and helping them in Australia so I said I would go.  And I went over there and, and helped them out over there but I had no intentions of staying with the group as long as I've been there.  But it was meant for me to be there, 'cause God knew that, that the manager was gonna pass away, he knew they was gonna need somebody that, that knew how to manage a group and, and I just happened to be the one that he wanted to use at that time.  And whatever happens, you know, I'm just gonna be used to go in the direction that, that whatever, you know, whatever He have me to do because the management company [Quality Sound Management, Atlanta, Georgia], studio--everything that you, that you see here today--when I was younger I used--a friend of mine was telling me, she say, "Ricky [HistoryMaker Eric "Ricky" McKinnie], you know when--back when you were twenty years old and twenty-one years old," say, "we were talking and you said that one day you were gonna have a house with a, with a office in the front and, and a studio in, in the rear of the house."  Said, "Do you realize that you have that today?"  Well, you know, God did that.  I wasn't thinking about this house when I bought this house.  I came home one day, my momma [Sarah Sharp Shivers] said, "Why don't you buy the house next door?"  I said, "Momma, I don't need a house."  She said, "Yeah, but," she said, "why don't you try it anyway?"  And, I did and I wasn't thinking about buying a house but it was God's will for me to get the house, and so I'm here so whatever happens, I mean, I hope the Blind Boys last a long time but regardless of what happens I'm gonna keep on keeping on.
Story_ID: 349736
Speaker 1: I just want to ask you, there are a few other awards here we didn't mention.  You all received the--was it The Blind Boys [The Blind Boys of Alabama] that received the Dove Award?
Speaker 2: Right.  The Blind Boys, we received the Dove Award for our album that we did, the 'Higher Ground' album in 2002.  We got a Dove Award and we just received another one this year for the record we did that's called 'Atom Bomb,' and also we received the NAACP Essence Award, Image Award?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the NAACP Image Award, right.
Speaker 2: Image Award, right.
Speaker 1: And you also received the Helen Keller Award [Helen Keller Achievement Award].
Speaker 2: Right.  The Helen Keller Award, which was great.  We thanked the people, you know, from the American Federation of the Blind [sic. American Foundation for the Blind] for thinking about The Blind Boys.  God's been good, you know, He's done a lot a great things to let people know that a disability doesn't have to be a handicap.  It's not about what you can't do, it's about what you can do that's important--
Story_ID: 349737
Speaker 1: Now let me ask you a question about drumming.  You know, what kind of drums do you play and what's your--is there a gospel style of drumming?
Speaker 2: Yeah, every, every music has its own style.  We, as a gospel drummer, we use a lot of two four beats and three four beats but the point is that I play a drum set that's manufactured by a company, Taye Drums, T-A-Y-E, Drums and I have an endorsement with them and they been real good.  The drums sound good, it look good, and you can always go to tayedrums.com and see the drums that I play.  And also I use sticks by Vic Firth, they have a--they gave me a deal with them, an endorsement deal.  They have a drumstick with my name on it, [HistoryMaker] Eric "Ricky" McKinnie, Blind Boys of Alabama [The Blind Boys of Alabama].  And I use Sabian cymbals.  Sabian [sic. Robert Zildjian] and Zildjian [Armand Zildjian] are--were cousins [sic.].  Company split up, Sabian started Sabian, Zildjian kept Zildjian [Avedis Zildjian Company] and--but the cymbals look good and sound good and that's what--it's in the sound so I use Sabian cymbals.
Story_ID: 349738
Speaker 1: We always ask this question of people.  You've lived in this same neighborhood [in Atlanta, Georgia] for a long time, though you travel a lot, but what are your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we have to realize that family is important.  It's good, it's good to be able to relate but family, family--we need, we need to, to teach our young people that family is important.  And this black on black crime, man, it's, it's just ridiculous.  It's getting out a hand.  And we need to just take a long look at ourselves.  Turn the news on, take a good look at the news, realize that it's us that's doing it to us.  And if you take a long look at it maybe you'll realize and the reality of it all will come to you and you'll know that you are important.  And what you do is important, so you try to do the best that you can.
Story_ID: 349739
Speaker 1: What's been going on in the black community in terms of church developments of these huge megachurches, do you have any thoughts about those?  It's so many of them now.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we, we--I don't like to get into religion and politics too much but, but when you think about it--see, it takes money.  I mean, anybody, anybody that common sense tell you this, if you buy a Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz] you gotta spend some money.  If you got a little storefront church, your overhead is not as high as a megachurch but any church, any--if you have a business and, and you build a new building, it takes money to keep that building going.  So it's not about--lot of people try to say that it's all about the money but it takes money, I mean, in order to, to do what you do to, to keep the literature out there, to keep the lights on, to build the building, to, to heat the building.  Whatever it takes, it takes money so don't worry about the money, if, if God tells you to give it, you give it and don't worry about what they do with it because you have no control over that.  Only thing you can control is, is what you do and if, and if you do it from your heart, don't worry about it.
Story_ID: 349740
Speaker 1: When you look back over everything that you've done to this point, what are you the most proud of?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, sometimes I, I sit back and I wonder and say, now, what is it that really makes you happy?  I think that the most--one thing that I'm most proud of is that God has given me an opportunity, and has given my mother [Sarah Sharp Shivers] an opportunity to live long enough to, to see her children make a turn-around to a degree.  I mean, we're not perfect but we all have been through something and God has given us an opportunity to, to make a turn-around in her lifetime.  And, not saying that we're not gonna make any other mistakes, but a lot of the mistakes that we did make through the years, they have made a turn-around and at this point everything is pretty good.  Not saying it's no sickness and, you know, because it's always gonna be something but, overall, everything is pretty good.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you tell us something about your family?  Do you have any children or--?
Speaker 2: Right.  I better say this (laughter).  I have a daughter that is thirty years old, she lives in Atlanta [Georgia].  She moved to Atlanta a couple years ago, her name is Erica [ph.] and I have three grandchildren, Renita [ph.], Tony [ph.] and Tia [ph.].  And they're like seven, ten and twelve.  And that's me pretty much.
Story_ID: 349741
Speaker 1: What today would you think would be--would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy.  When you speak of legacy to me, what, what do I--when you speak a legacy tell me exactly what--
Speaker 1: Well, what do you think that you, that you've actually left behind (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, if I die tomorrow, what would be said?  Okay.  I think that my--if, if--my legacy is gonna be the fact that if they had to say anything about me, they would just say, here lies a man that tried to, to help somebody.  Tried to let people know that, that he wasn't blind he just couldn't see.  It's not about what, what you can't do, it's about what you can do and, and I'm the kind of--and he's just a person that tried to, tried to help, you know, tried to help somebody.
Story_ID: 349742
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything that, that we haven't covered that you think that we need to mention before we close?
Speaker 2: Well, let me see.  Sylvia [Sylvia Reed]?
Speaker 1: (SYLVIA REED):  Well now, your, your community involvement.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: (SYLVIA REED):  And, this gentleman wanted to know what kind of--you don't do braille.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oh, I was asking, you have a screen--you use a screen reader probably for, for the Internet?
Speaker 1: (SYLVIA REED):  When you're on the road for your messages and what have you (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I was just curious which one you use.
Speaker 2: But put this in context, as Sylvia was describing--your publicist was describing all the--your capacity with the computer and checking your email, and doing all this stuff on the road.  These are things that people would probably not estimate a blind person would be able to do.  And, and you're able to do it all.
Speaker 1: Right.  I've learned--I took data entry a few years ago.  I had an opportunity to, to do that before the screen readers that they have now came out.  They had one back in the day that was called the Voltrex [ph.] and it was real mechanical sounding but now what I use is a software called the JAWS [Job Access With Speech] program and it, it's a screen reading program made for the blind and it's great.  I can, I can pretty much read, you know, anything that's on the screen that--I can read my emails, I can type anything I want to do, and it makes it happen.  Still has a few, you know, has a ways to go but it's great for what we're doing right now.  And--
Speaker 2: It's more natural sounding?
Speaker 1: It sounds perfect; it has four or five different voices on it.
Story_ID: 349743
Speaker 1: Tell us about your community involvement.
Speaker 2: Right.  We have started a program here in the city and it's called the Family and Friends Organization [ph.].  It was started by my mother [Sarah Sharp Shivers] as well as another friend of ours that is with the Soul Searchers [Troy Ramey and the Soul Searchers], his name is John Carter and my cousin, Kelsey Wyatt [ph.] he's a member of it.  My sister Janice McKinnie, she's in it also.  What we do every third Sunday here in the City of Atlanta [Georgia], they have a program and it's called the Family and Friends Gospel Extravaganza [ph.] every third Sunday here.  And if you go to wyzeradio.com on Sunday morning from 9:00 to 10:00 you can hear our radio broadcast [of 'Words and Music for Your Soul'].
Speaker 1: Go ahead, I think--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Stand by and okay, you have speed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You were talking about the Friends--Family and Friends Organization.  You say that it's broadcast on the--it's part of a broadcast on the?
Speaker 2: Right.  If you want to know more about it, you want to know what's going on with that, you can always listen to our radio broadcast on Sunday mornings and at wyzeradio.com or, if you in the city 1480 AM [WYZE Radio, Atlanta, Georgia] on the dial.  But a few years ago, I was blessed to get a honorary degree from the Carver Bible College [Carver College, Atlanta, Georgia], honorary doctorate in divinity here in the City of Atlanta.  And what I do, I try to help people if, if people have a--I talk to a lot of people every day being that I am the road manager for The Blind Boys [The Blind Boys of Alabama].  I have an opportunity to talk to a lot of people, lot of people come to our shows and, and they wonder how you continue to do what you do being that you can't see.  And I just let people know that, you know, being able to see is, is a physical thing but you gotta know within yourself what the situation is because it's very important that people realize that, that you can be what you want to be if you believe, 'cause faith--faith is what it's all about.  Faith is the key to any situation and if you believe and you have faith, everything usually works out.  But if you really want to learn more about me and what I'm doing, and what I've done, my website is rickymckinnie.com [therickymckinnieexperience.com] or you can go to blindboys.com.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you, sir.
Story_ID: 349744
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Mr. McKinnie [HistoryMaker Eric "Ricky" McKinnie] I just wondered if you would be able to clarify something for me about gospel music and spirituals and the blues 'cause when we were talking about that back in the first tape, I think you were saying that, you know, the blues came from gospel.  Well, everybody seems to say or what I've been taught is that there were spirituals and then there was popular music, including the blues, and that when gospel came and what Larry [Larry Crowe], I think, was referring to with Thomas Dorsey and there was some controversy because some elements that hadn't been part of spirituals were introduced into, you know, praise-singing music.  And then that was the--you know, sort of the birth or something of gospel.  I just wondered if you could clarify how you see all of that fitting into the, the development of, of this form that you've been so much a part of?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Spirituals, that's the gospel.  It's the same thing.  See, gospel--the only--the gospel music is just the good news.  It's the good news of God.  And spirituals are, are the same kind of music.  It's the same thing it's just sung a different way.  You have jubilee gospel, you have southern gospel, you have contemporary gospel, you have spirituals which is gospel music.  It's just sung differently.  It's just a style.  Spiritual is a style but it's all under one umbrella, gospel music.  See, what I'm saying?  It's all gospel music but it just--they have note singing, they have spirituals, they have praise.  But if you put it all up under one big umbrella, it's gospel.  It's like the blues.  They got the Delta blues, you know what I'm saying?  They got different types of blues but if you put it all up under one umbrella, it's all the blues, I mean you know.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  It sounds like you're saying to you that you never made too much out of the distinction, you just--it was all--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's all one thing.  It doesn't matter--if, if they--if you--if they, if they.  Okay, my group The Ricky McKinnie Singers, okay.  I named group The Ricky McKinnie Singers and not The Ricky McKinnie gospel singers because The Ricky McKinnie Singers can sing anywhere.  They don't just have to sing on a gospel show.  It's like The Blind Boys of Alabama, The Blind Boys of Alabama just--since they call it Blind Boys of Alabama, they can sing anywhere and they not--even though people know it's a gospel group they don't look at it the same way.  You know what I mean?  It's in--but if they'd said The Blind Boys of Alabama gospel singers, a lot of shows that we were on, when we'd be on, a lot of people wouldn't think our music would fit.  That they would of--it would of in the long run back when they first got started, it would of been a stumbling block in their way because they would of said, oh, gospel singers they belong over here.  They would never thought about putting 'em over here.  See what I'm saying?  And, and that's like the Soul Stirrers and the Nightingales [Sensational Nightingales] and even though people know that these are gospel groups, but, but they can--they fit in anywhere.  So that sort of what, what makes the difference.  But, I, I would never, I would never--it's like, you know, it's like Aaron Neville, he can sing anywhere he want to sing and nobody care but once they, once they put--they label you it's hard to move from one point to another.  That's why a lot of good gospel groups don't get the break that they, that they deserve because people look at them as gospel groups and a lot of times the gospel community can't handle how they singing, you know.  So, it's all under that same umbrella.  Spirituals, rap music, contemporary, long as it's--long as it's got that gospel on it, it's the same thing.  It's all under that one big umbrella.  'cause we won our Grammys [Grammy Award] for soul, traditional gospel.  You see what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And up under that soul traditional gospel, soul--that word soul--it--we had people like Shirley Caesar and [HistoryMaker] Donnie McClurkin and people like that and Donnie McClurkin, he sings sort of spirituals sort of, you know.  But they didn't have a category for spirituals so they put it all up under that gospel thing.  That one umbrella.  Make sense?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Um-hm, thank you.  I appreciate that.
Speaker 2: Okay, thank you very much.
