Story_ID: 638812
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  Would you please state your name and spell it for me?
Speaker 2: My name is John Edward Moore, J-O-H-N, E-D-W-A-R-D, M-O-O-R-E [HistoryMaker John "Deacon" Moore].
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born on June 23, 1941.
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in New Orleans, Louisiana, in my mother's [Rilda Augustine Boudreaux Moore] house in the front room.  And those were days when the doctors would come out and deliver the babies at your house.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation or profession?
Speaker 2: I'm a musician slash entertainer.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: It's at my house in Uptown, New Orleans.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is June 11, 2010.  It's my mother's birthday.  She would have been a hundred years old today.  She was born in 1910, but I have my godmother who was my mother's best friend.  She was born in 1910, and she's still alive.  She's 100 years old.
Story_ID: 638813
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you some, (cough) excuse me, what I call pa- People magazine-ish type questions.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.
Speaker 1: What is it?
Speaker 2: I have it on me right now.  It's blue (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase?
Speaker 2: Favorite what?
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  A favorite phrase?
Speaker 2: Phrase (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or saying?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I do.  It ain't easy in the Big Easy [New Orleans, Louisiana], (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I say that all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What do you like to eat?  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is seafood (laughter).  I'm particularly--I love Maine lobsters.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is Christmas.
Speaker 1: And what about vacation?  What's your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination is in the Caribbean.  I like to go island hopping (laughter), like the Bahamas, Jamaica, Cuba, the various islands in the Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 638814
Speaker 1: Let's begin by talking about your family and I'd like to begin with your mother's [Rilda Augustine Boudreaux Moore] side of the fa- your father's side of the family.  Tell me your father's name, and when and where he was born.
Speaker 2: My father's name is Frank Peter Moore [Frank Moore].  He was born in New Orleans, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: And do you know what year?
Speaker 2: He was born in 1907.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me about your father.
Speaker 2: My father was a, sort of a entrepreneur and businessman.  When he first started out, he and his father had an ice and charcoal business.  They used to deliver ice and charcoal in Uptown, New Orleans.  They had a large route, and they were quite prominent and successful, you know, as businessmen.  But my father was forced into a life of hard labor with the invention of the refrigerator and the gas stove, because they delivered ice and charcoal.  So, you can imagine what happened when they invented the refrigerator and the gas stove.  There wasn't very much need for their services anymore, and so, my father who dropped out of school to help his father in the family business around eighth grade, he was a very intelligent man but, he didn't pursue any higher educations because he went to help his father in the family business.  And later on when he married my mother, he was forced into a life of hard labor even more because he and my mother had thirteen children.  And we were raised primarily in the mist of the Depression [Great Depression] and the war [World War II, WWII] years, and years of WPA [Works Progress Administration; Work Projects Administration].  So, my father had to do just about anything he can in order to feed his family.
Speaker 1: Do you--he was born in New Orleans.  Did he talk about his growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, his growing up was Uptown, New Orleans.  And he was, like, helped his father in the family business as I said, you know.  He--his father and him had an ice and charcoal business.  They delivered ice and charcoal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, when he was coming up, you know, he--that was his primarily occupation at the time, you know, was helping his father in the family business.
Speaker 1: What was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: My grandfather?  His name was Frank Moore, also, but he had an assumed name of Frank Moore Blossom [Frank Blossom].  So, it was kind of peculiar, but his ancestors had an assumed name because they got in some trouble with the law and had to use an assumed name for fear of getting put in jail (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you know what they did?  Do you know what the story is?
Speaker 2: I think the story was, he got into some trouble--fight with a white man.  And during those days, you know, they were very hard on blacks who had the nerve, you know, to engage a white man in a fist fight or whatever he did.  Maybe he stabbed him or something (laughter).  He had to flee for his own safety, and so he had to use an assumed name.  So, that, you know, they wouldn't be able to find him.
Story_ID: 638815
Speaker 1: And what is the family background?  Are you considered Creole?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I'm what they call an African American Creole.  I have mixed heritage throughout my family.  My father [Frank Moore] looked like a white man (laughter), and his sister was so white looking, 'til when she was born, they put Caucasian on her birth certificate, because they just took one look at her, and, oh.  So, she--all through her life, she would show you her birth certificate, and it had Caucasian written on it.
Speaker 1: And what about your grandmother?
Speaker 2: My grandmother, same situation.  She was almost white, too.  This is my father's mother.  She was a very gorgeous woman.  She was like the matriarch of the family when my father was being raised, you know.  And my father's father, well, he was kind of a real sweet guy.  And she ruled the family, you know.  So, my father came up under this matriarchal family, and his mother was very strict with him.  Of course, you know, they had a background of Catholicism, and so, they kind of raised their children to the letter of the religion almost.  You know, not as strict as on my mother's [Rilda Augustine Boudreaux Moore] side but, you know, they went to church every Sunday.  And they sent 'em to Catholic schools.  And my father had a sister and she was one of a twin, but the twin died when she was younger.  So, my father's sister and my father were the only two surviving members of the family.  They both lived to be a ripe old age of eighty-nine and his sister lived to be ninety-one.  And my father's sister, she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Elma [Elma Moore].  And one of my sisters [Elma Moore Rush] was named after her.  Of course, we had, you know, so many people in the family, we could name them after close relatives (laughter).
Speaker 1: What was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side, was Marie.
Speaker 1: No.  On your father's side?
Speaker 2: On my father's side, my grandmother's name was Marie [Marie Kindler Moore].  Yeah, that on my father's side.
Speaker 1: So, Marie and Frank [Frank Moore] were married?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any other information about your family tree on your father's side?
Speaker 2: Well, my father's sister was one of the first women to open a dancing school for Creoles of color.  She taught toe tap and ballet all of her life.  She had--didn't have any children so, she had a dance studio in her home, and she would give dancing lessons to most of the prominent Creole families in New Orleans [Louisiana].  And every year she would have a dancing school revue.  And she also gave free lessons to some members of my family.  Like one of my brothers and several of my sisters took toe tap and ballet lessons from her.
Speaker 1: Do you know where she was trained or was she trained?
Speaker 2: I don't know if she had any formal training in the schools, but she was very good at mathematics in school.  But as far as her training, I probably could research that, but I just can't come off, you know, with where she got her training at.
Speaker 1: So, the studio was at her home?
Speaker 2: At her home.  And then she would rent other facil- larger facilities, you know, when she had, you know, a bunch of students.  She would, like, have a few at her home.  But she had a larger facility, you know, where she could train more than just a few students.
Story_ID: 638816
Speaker 1: Anything else about that side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, my father's family was primarily engaged, you know, in raising animals.  They had hound dogs and chickens like everybody else at the time.  They raised chickens in the backyard, and they had fresh eggs.  And my father [Frank Moore] would help his father [Frank Moore], you know, they would raise dogs and sell the puppies and things like that.  And he had homing pigeons that he would raise and sell.  So, they would go around, you know, collecting scrap iron and things like that to make extra money with, you know, and newspapers and rags and stuff.  And my father continued that practice, you know, when we were children, you know.  When we were coming up, my father keep fifty chickens in the backyard and he had turkeys.  He raise hound dogs.  He had ducks.  He had a goat, 'cause he would milk the goat because he had ulcers, and they say the goat milk was good for his stomach.  So, instead of buying milk from the store, he got his own goat and just milked the goat (laughter).  My father was a very practical man.  He was very stern, you know.  And he ruled the house because I came up under a patriarchal system as opposed to my father with the matriarchal system.  'Cause, my father, he had to be a very strict disciplinarian, 'cause he had so many kids, you know.  If he was soft, you know, you know, they would run all over him, you know.  My mother [Rilda Augustine Boudreaux Moore] was just the opposite.  She was soft, and he was hard.  So, we had a good balance coming up with parents.  My mother, well, I'll talk about her later.  But my father, he had to run the household like a drill sergeant, you know.  Everybody had chores to do; you had to come in at a certain hour, and, you know, he had--he was more of a strict disciplinarian 'cause he knew my mother was soft.  And so, he had, he had, you know--I always thought my father was mean.  But he used to tell me, he said, "When you get to be a man," he said, "you're gonna--I'm--you're gonna come back and tell me."  And that's exactly what happened, you know (laughter).  "You gonna come back and tell me I was right."  And I--when I got to have children of my own, I came back and said, "Daddy, you know what?  You were right," (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, your mother.
Speaker 2: But getting back to my father's side of the family--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I--my father's mother [Marie Kindler Moore] didn't have too much knowledge about it because by the time I came along, she was elderly and in a nursing home.  So, I didn't, you know, have the experience of talking to her, having a close relationship with her.  Because, by the time I came along in the family, I was number five.  She was elderly and was mostly confined to a nursing home.  And my father's father died at an early age.  He had a heart attack when he was around fifty or so.  So, I never got to knew--know him either.  But it's a little different on my mother's side of the family.
Speaker 1: And you talk about your, your father, your grandmother, and grandfather being Creole, and can you expound on that more?
Speaker 2: On my father's side?  Yeah.  Well, my father, his heritage was Creole.  He was--he could be considered white, you know, because he, he looked like a white man and his mother look like a white woman.  His sister [Elma Moore] looked so white, she had Caucasian on her birth certificate.  And his father had Irish heritage from the Moores--the Moore name.  So, he was like more white than black (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, do you know where the great-grand- the Moore--where the, the relationships, you know, with black came into play with the Irish ancestors?
Speaker 2: I don't know very much, you know, about my Irish ancestry except for a few anecdotes I've gotten from my older siblings who were fortunate enough, you know, to have been raised around my father's mother.  But there's very little that we know about my father's side of the family as far as the Irish heritage is concerned.  It's just a few people, because you have to remember back in those days, there was little documentation of mixed relationships, you know.  If someone have--sit--a typical white socialite had a child from a black man, this child would be raised by a Creole family, because, you know, they couldn't bring him into the white society.  So, you had a lot of that going on back then.  So, it's very difficult to trace your ancestry, because there was very little documentation of this.
Story_ID: 638817
Speaker 1: Ready to move on to your mom?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Tell me her name, where and when she was born.
Speaker 2: My name--my--not my name (laughter).  My mother's name was Rilda Augustine Boudreaux [Rilda Augustine Boudreaux Moore].
Speaker 1: Can you spell that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Everybody called her Augustine by her middle name.  But her first name was Rilda.  Very few people called her Rilda.  They called her Augustine most of her life and her nickname was Teeny, from Augustine.
Speaker 1: Can you spell her name?
Speaker 2: R-I-L-D-A Rilda, Augustine A-U-G-U-S-T-I-N-E, and her maiden name was Boudreaux, B-O-U-D-R-E-A-U-X.
Speaker 1: And where and when was she born?
Speaker 2: My mother was born on June 11, 1910, which is today's date, expect for 1910.
Speaker 1: And she was born in New Orleans [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: She was born in New Orleans.
Speaker 1: Tell me about your mother.  Did she share any stories about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, she had a lot of wonderful memories growing up.  She was an only child.  My mother was an only child, and her mother [Viola Borsky Boudreaux] was from Zachary, Louisiana, and her father was from New Roads, Louisiana.  They were married when they were teenagers.  I think they were like, sixteen and fifteen years old.  But it was very common back in those days for people to marry very young because by the time you were in your twenties, you were considered an old maid.  So, they married and moved to New Orleans, and when my grandfather moved to New Orleans, he couldn't speak a word of English because he was raised speaking French from his ancestors in New Roads.  My grandfather's father [Jean Boudreaux] was white.  And he was from Paris, France.  He was the jailer in Pointe Coupee Parish [Louisiana], and like many a Frenchmen, he had a black family and his white family.  And that was accepted during those days, you know, the wives just would let the men have their way.  And he fathered a lot of children from different women in Pointe Coupee Parish.  And there're a lot of Boudreauxs running around that I have--some of 'em I know, and some of 'em I don't know that are probably related to me, because he--my grandfather's mother [Emma Michelle (ph.)] worked in the jailhouse with him.  She was the cook and he was the jailer.  So, they--he fathered children from her.  And my grandfather was one of 'em.  His name was John Boudreaux, and I was named after him, 'cause my mother's father was also a musician.  He was a banjo player, and he played traditional jazz.  When he came to New Orleans, he played with many of the famous jazz musicians like A.J. Piron [Armand J. Piron], Peter Bocage and he played primary group was called the Creole Moonlight Serenaders.  And he played music mostly on the weekends.  And his day job, he was a shoeshine boy at the Victory Barber Shop in downtown business area of New Orleans.  So, he came into contact with many of their prominent social businesspeople who worked in the district because he was their shoeshine boy.  So, I just--my supposition is that, you know, it was a source of contacts for him to get jobs playing music.  But anyway, I have very fond memories of my grandfather.  'Cause I was named after him.  I get a little emotional, because he was such a talented man and he had to shine shoes for a living, and his wife was a domestic.  She worked in the white people's kitchen.  Cooking and cleaning and taking care of the young for them.
Story_ID: 638818
Speaker 1: And they [Moore's maternal grandparents, Viola Borsky Boudreaux and John Boudreaux] had one daughter, who's my mother [Rilda Augustine Boudreaux Moore], and so, we found out later on in life why my mother was an only child (crying).  When my mother was born, these doctors were going around sterilizing black women without their knowledge to keep 'em from having children.  And we didn't find this out until later in life when my grandmother was in her eighties and upon a gynecological examination, it was all then (unclear) that she had been sterilized.  And 'cause, you know, my grandmother always had a good attitude and, she said, "Well, I don't know what I could've done if I had more than one with all of y'all."  'Cause my mother had thirteen children (laughter).  She said, "I don't know what I could've done if I had another one like Teeny," (laughter).  But they were one of the first tenants in the public housing projects in New Orleans [Louisiana].  And we would go and see them every--almost every Sunday, 'cause my mother had a very close relationship with her parents.  And through the years, you know, we would go there and have Sunday dinner with my grandparents.  'Cause, by the time I came along, you know, my father's father [Frank Moore] and mother [Marie Kindler Moore] had--were deceased.  So, we spent a lot of time with my mother's parents.  And one of the sad things in my life is that, I was named after my grandfather, but he never got a chance to hear me play as a musician.  'Cause he had a heart attack when I was a teenager before I learned how to play music, you know.  And that's where I got, probably got all of my talent from.  My mother played the piano and she was classically trained.  She went to Catholic schools.  She grew up Uptown, New Orleans, and she went to religious schools all of her life.  She was the valedictorian of the first graduating class of Xavier University [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana].  So, my mother had brains (laughter), and she passed it down in progeny as we have a history of valedictorian and salutatorians in my family.  Anyway, back to my mother.  My mother played the piano and organ and she was trained to teach school.  And the sad part was that, once my mother got married, they wouldn't hire married persons to teach school.  So, she lost her gig.  And she was the choir director at Holy Ghost Church [New Orleans, Louisiana] where she went to elementary school.  And she taught briefly in Port Arthur, Texas before she got married.
Story_ID: 638819
Speaker 1: My mother's [Rilda Augustine Boudreaux Moore] side of the family was the side where we had most of the social contacts with.  My grandfather [John Boudreaux], had fond memories of him.  He would come down religiously almost every Sunday, catch the bus and come downtown.  And he would have a pocket full of silver 'cause he would get these silver dime tips when he was shining shoes.  People give him a silver dime.  And when he got off the bus, we would just make a beeline and run to greet him at the bus stop.  And he'd give everybody a silver dime.  So, that meant we could go to the movies and buy an ice cream cone (laughter).  And he was very good to my mother.  He bought us our first television set when I was a teenager.  We didn't have television until I was seventeen years old, because my father [Frank Moore] wouldn't let us have a television.  And he couldn't afford one either, you know, 'cause my mother never worked throughout her whole life.  She never learned how to drive, 'cause her primary concern was the rearing of her children.  And she lived her life according to the letter of her religion which was Roman Catholic.  So, the nuns just adored my mother.  So, we all had free tuition at the local Catholic schools, and there was music talent distributed throughout the family.  You know, my oldest sister [Consuela Moore Provost] played the viola.  My mother played the piano.  I played the guitar.  My grandfather played banjo.  I have four other brothers who also play guitar in different styles.  My younger brother, Raymond [Raymond Moore], who's about a year and half younger than me, he plays flamenco style guitar, Spanish guitar.  And I have another brother, Philip [Philip Moore], who lives in California now, he plays rhythm and blues guitar.  And I have another brother, Charles [Charles Moore], who plays in the band with me now.  He's plays classic guitar, and he plays bass, and he also plays blues, and rhythm and blues guitars.  So, he's very active musician in the community right now.  He played with a lot of the great local bands.  But back to my mother, I had a very close relationship with my mother 'cause I was, like, her favorite son.  She named me after her father, and I was, like, her favorite son, because she recognized my music talent at an early age.  She said, of all her thirteen children, I cried the loudest.  So, she knew I was gonna be a singer (laughter).  And to solidify her belief that I would be a singer, she--there was an old Creole superstition back when I was coming up that, if you cut your child's nail under a fig tree, that child would grow up to be a singer.  So, we had a fig tree in the backyard (laughter).  So, she cut my nails under the fig tree, and lo and behold, that's why I grew up to be a singer.  And she played the piano and she would make me sing.  She'd invite her friends over, and a lot of her friends were nuns and priests.  And she named some of her children after her favorite nuns and priests.
Story_ID: 638820
Speaker 1: Before we go, go on, can you tell me your great-grandmother's name; the one that was the cook at the jail?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Let me recollect my--the camera's rolling now?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh.  My great-grandmother on my mother's side, she was a cook in Pointe Coupee Parish Jail [New Roads, Louisiana], and her name was Emma Michelle [ph.].  She was a Creole woman, very fair complected with red hair and freckles.  And some of my siblings and my mother [Rilda Augustine Boudreaux Moore] have freckles, and some of my siblings came out in genetic groupings.  So, I have a sister who's a redhead [Juliet Moore].  One who's a blond, several of my sisters and brothers are brown skinned with straight black hair.  And other's look like me.  We're light skinned with--I had red hair.  I was born with red hair, and my older brother was a redhead too.  So, those genes came out, you know, in my family.  We, like, came out in genetic groupings.  And I have one of my younger brothers, he has more African features than the rest of us, 'cause my mother's mother [Viola Borsky Boudreaux], well, she was, her parents was actual slaves and she was about as black as the ground (laughter).  And my grandfather [John Boudreaux] who married her, on my mother's side, well, he was kind of what they call cafe au lait.  He was light browned skinned.  And so was my mother.  She was cafe au lait also.  And my father, was--he looked more white than black.  So, when you put the two together with their mixed heritage, you came out with a family of, like, genetic groupings.  And I could go on, and on, but.
Speaker 1: But the jailer, the jailer who had the children with Emma, what was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Jean Boudreaux, too.  But he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Jean Boudreaux.
Speaker 2: --spelled it the French way, Jean, J-E-A-N.  His name was Jean Boudreaux.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he fathered several children with Emma.  So, my grandfather had a lot of sisters and brothers in New Roads [Louisiana].  And he had some half sisters and brothers in New Roads because he fathered children with other Creole women in Pointe Coupee [Pointe Coupee Parish, Louisiana] besides my maternal grandmother.  No, great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: Great, great-grandmother you said.  Do you know the names of your great-grandparents on your mother's side?  It could be--well, let me see.  You were talking about the, the woman who was a slave.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me, who was she again?  'Cause--
Speaker 2: She was--
Speaker 1: I'm trying to make sure I got the genealogy straight.
Speaker 2: My maternal grandmother's mother.  So, she was my great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm thinking that your great-grandmother was Emma.
Speaker 2: No.  That's my great-grandmother on my grandfather's side.
Speaker 1: On your grandfather's side.  Okay.
Speaker 2: My grandfather's mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right.  And do you know her name; your great-grandmother on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side.  I do, I just can't recall it right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have a picture of her, too.
Story_ID: 638821
Speaker 1: Now, you're talking about, you were talking about your brothers and sisters.  Let's get all of their names.  If you can remember how they were born, it's fine.  If you can't, you know, that's okay.  You already told us their occupations, but let's get all of their names down.
Speaker 2: Okay.  The first born in my family was my oldest sister.  She was named Consuela [Consuela Moore Provost].  The second one, was my sister, Marie [Marie Moore Boyd], and she was named after my father's mother, Marie [Marie Kindler Moore].  And my third sister who came next, her name was Augustine [Augustine Moore]; obviously, named after my mother [Rilda Augustine Boudreaux Moore].  Okay.  The next sibling to come along was my oldest brother, and we named him Frank [Frank Moore], after my father [Frank Moore].  So, there's a whole history of Franks in the family.  And my oldest brother Frank, he had two sons, and he named both of, two of his sons Frank, too (laughter).  So, it's a lot of Franks in the family (laughter).  Anyway, and I was number five.  I was born the fifth child, second boy.  Of course, they named me after my [maternal] grandfather whose name was John [John Boudreaux].  And next came my brother, Raymond [Raymond Moore], who was named after one of--a priest that my mother was very close to.  His name was Raymond.  And next to come was, Philip [Philip Moore], is another brother of mine, and after him, it was my next sister, which would be my fourth sister.  She was Marian [Marian Moore Cottles], and she was named after a black nun that my mother was--grew up with in her childhood and went to school.  And next to come along was my other sister, Elma [Elma Moore Rush], and she was named after my father's mo- sister Elma [Elma Moore].  And next was another brother, Anthony Moore, and, after him, followed Charles Moore.  He was named after a relative also.  I have a cousin named Charles.  And next was my youngest brother, Jerard [Jerard Moore].  And then finally, I hope I didn't leave anybody out.  My--the youngest in the family is my youngest brother; his name was Jerard.  So, he was, like, the last boy, and then following him was the last member of the family and she was a girl.  And she was the redhead.  So, my mother named her Juliet [Juliet Moore] after one of her childhood friends who became a nun.  And her name as a nun was Sister Juliet.  So, she and my mother were like very close friends coming up, and she named my youngest sister Juliet.  I think that's thirteen right now (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 638822
Speaker 1: Tell me, is there a story about how your mother [Rilda Augustine Boudreaux Moore] and father [Frank Moore] met?
Speaker 2: My mother and father met at a wedding reception.  My mother told me, her cousin Etisha [ph.] was getting married.  And of course, my--both my parents were in the same parish, the church, Holy Ghost Church, Uptown, New Orleans [Louisiana] on Louisiana Avenue.  The church is still there.  They met at a wedding reception, and my mother told me, she said, she took one look at my father and he was a very handsome man.  And she said he had these deep set eyes with a blue tinge on 'em.  She look at him and fell in love with his eyes, you know.  And of course, they went through a courtship, 'cause my father at the time, you know, he was very prosperous 'cause he and his father [Frank Moore] had the ice and charcoal business.  So, he would drive around in his Model T Ford [Ford Model T], and he would wear the chic suits like Valentino.  And he was, like, going out and hanging out to all the dances.  And the--listen to all of the popular bands, you know, where they had the dime a dance thing.  And he had a very active social life, you know, as a bon vivant. And he could hang out at night, and he'd come, told me he would come home, get a little sleep, and he had to wake up at the crack of dawn, you know, to go help his father with the ice and charcoal delivery.  And said, after he got through with that, he'd come home and take a long nap, and get ready to go out at night and party (laughter).  But anyway, he and my mother met at a wedding reception, and some mutual friend introduced them, I think, on my mother's side.  And they began to date, you know, and eventually they got married.
Speaker 1: Do you know what year they married?
Speaker 2: I can't remember, because my mother didn't get married until she was in her late twenties and so did my father too, so.  They weren't married very young, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause my mother had finished college [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] and was teaching school at the time, you know, when she met my father, and he was three years older than her.  He was born in 1907 and she was born in 1910.
Story_ID: 638823
Speaker 1: Do you remember the first neighborhood in which your family lived when you were born?
Speaker 2: Well, I was born downtown in the 8th Ward [New Orleans, Louisiana].  My mother's aunt, her name was Julia [ph.]; she was a sister of my mother's father.  And she had a house downtown and it was like one of these shotguns doubles, and she had moved out to California with her husband, and she had a piece of property downtown.  So, my mother moved in around the time right before I was born, because they lived uptown and when this house became available when my aunt moved to California, well, my mother moved in with us.  And that's where I was born on Tonti Street in my Aunt Julia's house.  And so, I was born and raised, you know, in that house, and the only time I left there was when I got married (laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you remember the address?
Speaker 2: It was 2252 North Tonti Street, T-O-N-T-I.  Tonti was an Indian name, a Native American name, Tonti.
Speaker 1: Do you know before your move to that house, they were living somewhere else?  Were they living with the grandparents?
Speaker 2: When my parents [Rilda Augustine Boudreaux Moore and Frank Moore] first married, they were living with my father's parents [Marie Kindler Moore and Frank Moore], and they were living uptown and then they moved after that.  And then the second time they moved, they moved downtown in my mother's aunt's house.
Speaker 1: Do you know whether your grandparents on either side owned the property that they lived in?
Speaker 2: My grandparents on my father's side owned the property they lived in.  They lived Uptown on Toledano Street, and they had, like, a house with--where you could bring in the carriages with the horses and all, but they owned their property.  But on my mother's side, my mother's parents [Viola Borsky Boudreaux and John Boudreaux] never owned any property.  They lived in the housing projects most of their lives.  At that time, the housing projects were a whole lot nicer then (laughter). It's a nice place to live.
Story_ID: 638824
Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Coming up on downtown [New Orleans, Louisiana].  I was a child with a lot of curiosity and was always asking crazy questions.  And I would do things like, throw a cat up in the air, because they said, "If you threw a cat in the air, he would always land on his feet."  So, I would throw a cat in the air to see if he would land on his feet.  And I'd be looking up in the, looking up in the clouds all the time.  My mother [Rilda Augustine Boudreaux Moore] said, "What you looking up there?"  I said, "Well, I'm looking to see if I see God," you know.  And she said, "Well, did you see God up there?"  I said, "Yeah."  I said, I said, "He didn't tell me nothing, so I didn't tell him nothing either."  And I (laughter), I was a child, you know, that--I was very active, you know, 'cause when I came up, you know, we were very poor.  And so, I did things like make kites, flying kites, and the things, you know, playing marbles and collecting insects in the backyard.  We had a huge backyard, so we would do things like plant corn, and radishes, and had a little garden in the back.  And it was like a kind of a rural situation.  'Cause my father [Frank Moore] kept fifty chickens in the backyard, because he would feed his family with the chickens.  Every Saturday night was the biggest night of the year, night of the week, 'cause that was the night when daddy gonna kill the chickens (laughter).  So, he would buy the chickens and he would fatten them up, you know.  Because, you know, he would buy the chicken feed and then he would supplement their diet.  'Cause on the way home, he kept a sickle in his pickup truck and he would cut grass and bring it home to feed the chicken besides the chicken feed.  So, he would get the chickens when they were real scrawny.  And some of 'em he raised from the eggs, you know, 'cause every day we had fresh eggs.  He say, "Go out in the yard and get some eggs."  And boom, lift up the chickens and bring some eggs back inside for my mother to cook.  And on--we had chicken almost every Sunday.  We had fried chicken, baked chicken, roast chicken (laughter), and Saturday night was the big night of the week because, that's when daddy gonna kill the chickens.  So, all the boys would gather around my father, and he had this huge barrel in the backyard where he would burn trash.  And so, he would search the chickens and feel their breasts to see if they had, you know, plump meat or whatever.  So, he would select the chicken.  Usually, three or four of 'em, enough to feed a lot of people, you know.  So, one by one he would wring their necks (laughter).  And you know, being a little kid coming up, oh, and we just loved that, you know.  The chickens would go, (makes sound) (gesture) and die, and the blood spurting out.  And we would help my father, you know, pick the feathers off.  And he would take 'em and hold 'em over the fire to singe the little feathers that you wouldn't pull out.  Then, he would show us how to gut them and cut 'em up and my mother would cook them.  So, we had, like, fresh poultry, and my father raised turkeys also.  And every Thanksgiving, Christmas, we had turkey.  He'd go out in the yard and feel the turkey's breast and say, "Ah, this one's ready," (laughter).  Then, when he kill the turkeys; that was even a bigger event (laughter).  So, we had, like, turkeys and, he had ducks.  He would raise ducks, 'cause we had the duck eggs and the chicken eggs that we would eat.  And he also raised rabbits so, he had rabbit hutches in the backyard, you know.  It's just like we were living on a farm.  He kept a goat.  He would milk the goat, but his goat milk for his ulcers in his stomach.  And he would raise hound dogs and sell the puppies.  He would collect scrap iron, and sell the scrap iron and collect newspapers, sell the newspapers.  So, he had to do just about everything he could, you know, in order to make money to feed such a huge family, 'cause the family kept growing by leaps and bounds.  Most of us are only a year or two apart, you know, coming up.  Some and year and half, maybe two, 'cause my mother was a very strict Catholic and she lived her life according to the letter of the religion.  So, consequently, she didn't believe in any birth control, so.  She said, "Well, I'll just have as many children as God sends."  And he kept sending them (laughter).  My mother was a very religious person, you know.  We had to go to church every Sunday.
Story_ID: 638825
Speaker 1: We went to a Catholic school.  There was Mass every day before you went to class, and the nuns and priests taught us, primarily nuns and some lay teachers in elementary school.  And then I went to a Catholic high school [St. Augustine High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] where the Josephite priests taught us.
Speaker 2: Okay, let's, let's go to elementary school.  Tell me about elementary school.  Which school was it?
Speaker 1: I went to Corpus Christi Elementary School.  It was in the 7th Ward in downtown New Orleans [Louisiana], and this was like the largest Catholic Creole parish, you know, and primarily in the whole South, you know.  And there were other Creoles of color, you know, that attended school there, you know, so.  It was, like, you know, the cultural mecca of downtown; the Creole society.  And I went there from first to eighth grade.  And I sang in the boys choir [Corpus Christi Boys Choir] and my mother [Rilda Augustine Boudreaux Moore], you know, made me join the choir (laughter).
Speaker 2: Do you remember--was there a teacher or a nun who was inspirational or encouraging (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, primarily the one that most inspired me was my sixth grade teacher, because she directed to choir.  So, I had a lot of contact, you know, with her because she was the choir director as well as my teacher.  She taught me through several grades, and her name was Sister Angela Merici, and she was my choir director as well as my teacher.  And we had an all-boys choir when I went to school there.  And we got to around sixth to seventh grade, they let the girls join the choir.  And it was, "Oh no, girls in the choir, ugh," (laughter), you know.  At that time in your development, you know, you're like prepubescent so, the girls were like your enemy (laughter).  So, we just hated it when they let the girls join the choir, but anyway, we had to accept it, you know.  And--but I was the principle soloist in the boys choir.  I had the loudest voice in the choir so, they would give me a lot of solos, and me and another choir member, they would pull us out of the classroom occasionally to sing for funerals in the morning.  While we were in class, they, "You, you, come on to the church, y'all got to sing a funeral."  Okay, so, I knew all the, the cere- the church ceremonies for--they're all in Latin.  So, as we did glory in chant--and all of the church services were conducted in Latin.  So, you had to know all of the hymns and responses to the liturgical services in Latin.  So, I had memorized all of 'em being in the choir so long.
Speaker 2: I bet you still remember.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, I still remember a lot of the songs.  And we had, you know--'cause when I was in school, a lot of my time was focused around the boys choir because you had to stay after school for rehearsals, and you had church services on Sunday.  You had the High Mass you had to sing for, and then there was all these holy days of obligation that we had to perform services for.  Like the, the services for Holy Week preceding Easter Sunday.  You had the Christmas services, and the Lenten services, and the Easter services.  So, a lot of my time was spent, you know, in the church and school that I attended.  So, one of my favorite teachers, of course, was the choir director, you know, 'cause she took a special interest in me, and I got a lot of my vocal training, you know, by being in the choir because they taught us how to sing correctly, and breathe from your diaphragm, and how to use your mouth to make your syllables correct.  And it was good training for me because, you know, I still have the advantage of it now when I sing, 'cause all those steps are engrained into your consciousness.  It's just something that stays with you for life, you know, when you're taught, you know, how to sing correctly.
Speaker 2: What part did you sing?
Speaker 1: I was a boy soprano so I had like a really high voice.  Of course, my voice changed, but at the time, you know, I had a boy soprano.  And I could be--they said, I could be heard over the whole choir 'cause my voice was loud and strong, so.  And a lot of, you know, my vocal training, as I said, came from me singing in the boys choir.
Story_ID: 638826
Speaker 1: When I came at home, my mother [Rilda Augustine Boudreaux Moore] used to make me sing too, 'cause she played the piano and say, "Come on now John [HistoryMaker John "Deacon" Moore].  This is a song I want you to sing, 'cause I'm having some friends over on the weekend, and I want you to sing for 'em."  And I was shy, you know, at the time.  "Oh, darn, I don't wanna sing.  Oh, no."  Said, "Now, you got to sing, you know, 'cause they're coming over and it's around Christmastime and I want you to sing this Christmas carol.  And I'm gonna have some of the nuns and priest come over."  "Oh, no, I don't wanna do it."  But anyway, she'd play the piano.  She kept a piano in the house almost my whole life.  There was always a piano in the house.  And my mother, every Christmas, she would have a reenactment of the nativity, and she would write out a script and a play.  And she would pick all the family members to be characters in the play about the nativity.  Say, "Okay, you're gonna be the shepherd.  You're gonna be the Wise Men.  You're gonna be the Blessed Mother.  You're gonna be St. Joseph."  And we would rotate these characters through the years.  And every year, almost every year, we would have a new baby Jesus (laughter), a real one (laughter).  So, there was always disputes about which characters we were gonna play every year.  "I don't wanna be the Wise Men, I wanna be the shepherd, 'cause they don't do nothing, they just sit there" (laughter).  And my mother had costumes, you know.  She would take robes, you know, and take all of the Wise Men, had these robes, and she would dress up, you know, one of my sisters, you know, in the blue and white, like the Blessed Mother.  And there was St. Joseph and he had his rod and his staff, and she had the whole things worked out.  And she'd invite all of her friends and nuns and priests to see the reenactment of the nativity.  And she had the script written out just like it came out of the Bible.  And we would have rehearsals, and she'd play the piano, and we'd sing the Christmas Carols to accompany the, the reenactment of the nativity.  And that happened every year until my mother was too old to, you know, to handle it.  And the kids had grown up, you know, and we were like, "Man, that's for the young kids, we're too old for that," (laughter).  But Christmas was my mother's favorite time of the year, because her father [John Boudreaux] was born on Christmas Day.  So, Christmas in our life had a whole lot of significance coming up, you know, and her family when she was a little girl, and she carried that tradition over into her family when we were coming up.  And you can say that most of our lives coming up was centered around the Catholic church and school.  And we were able to go to Catholic schools because the nuns just adored my mother because she followed her religion to the letter.  And so, they gave us free tuition to go to the parochial schools, but in return for that, you know, my brothers were altar boys.  I sang in the choir.  My sisters would stay after school and sweep up the classrooms, and wash the blackboards, and run errands for the nuns, and stuff like that.  But in return, you know, the nuns helped my parents because a lot of the white nuns were from very rich families.  And they would have their parents send my mother clothing, items of clothing and jewelry.  And they would also give us government surplus commodities that the nuns and priests would receive in the institution side, so.  They would use this to supplement, you know, the food that my father [Frank Moore] would purchase in the grocery stores and all.  And because my father really had to do just about everything he could to support all of these children and keep up with the clothes and the food.  Primarily, he was the breadwinner 'cause my mother didn't work.  She said, "Well, I can't work, 'cause who am I gonna get to watch all of these little ones" (laughter)?
Story_ID: 638827
Speaker 1: So, you go to the eight grade at Corpus Christi (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At Corpus Christi Elementary, I went from first to eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then what school did you go to next?
Speaker 2: Well, after graduating from Corpus Christi Elementary School [New Orleans, Louisiana], I won a four year academic scholarship to go to St. Augustine High School [New Orleans, Louisiana], which was in its infancy right then.  I felt that a privilege and honor, you know, to be able to go to St. Augustine High School.  Because they--those Josephite priest, it was a training ground, you know, to make boys into men.  And looking back on that, I kind of hated it when I was going there, but looking back, it was probably the best thing, you know, that I ever done, you know, was to go to St. Augustine High School.  Because having an academic scholarship, you know, I was forced to take, you know, all of the, the most difficult subjects in high school, 'cause we had a very diversified curricular.  They would separate the boys into, you know, the A, B, C, D classes according to their abilities.  So, I was in, like, the top of the class.  And consequently, you know, I had to take algebra, trigonometry, solid geometry, physics, chemistry, French, and all kind of subjects, you know, that was to my advantage to have taken, because later on when I got to college [Louisiana State University in New Orleans; University of New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana], I found out, you know, that a lot of people weren't really prepared for collegiate university.  Because they came from high schools where they weren't properly trained in academic wise, you know.  They didn't have enough math and science when they got the college level.  They just found it hard to compete with people who had a background from better high schools.  Anyway, St. Augustine High School was where I attended, you know, on a four year academic high school so, I was like on an honor roll student, you know.  But I also was the class clown, you know, and even when I was in elementary school, I was always getting in trouble because I would begin the class--making all these wisecracks and asking all these ridiculous questions.  And it would anger some of my teachers, like the nuns and the priests to the point where they said, "Young man go home and get your mother [Rilda Augustine Boudreaux Moore], and you have to come back and apologize to the class before we'll let you back in.  Go sit out on the steps," you know, "you're disrupting the class," (laughter) 'cause I would make wisecracks and everybody fall out laughing.  Well, I did not know those were the seeds of an entertainer, 'cause I had a sense of humor.  I was going around the house telling jokes all the time.  Laughing at my own jokes (laughter).
Story_ID: 638828
Speaker 1: When did you began to play an instrument?
Speaker 2: Well, I took up the guitar in high school [St. Augustine High School, New Orleans, Louisiana], but prior to that, you know, I was primarily a singer.  And when I got to be, like, in middle school [Corpus Christi Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana], like, seventh and eighth grade, well, a group of my friends and boys, we started up a little rhythm and blues band, you know.  'Cause this was the way to get attention from the girls (laughter).  "Man, if I play in a band, I know I can get me some girls," (laughter).  'Cause I was kind of shy and none of the girls would dance with me, and I was like a social outcast 'cause I came from the poor side of town.  And many of my friends, you know, were middle class Creole families, you know, and socially I didn't kind of fit in.  But I was--academically, you know, I fit right in, because, you know, I was always at the top of the class.  I was one of the smarter ones.  And--but, anyway, I spent a lot of my younger years as a quote, unquote chaperone to my oldest sisters who were attending high school dances, and they had, you know, live bands playing for the high school dances.  So, my mother [Rilda Augustine Boudreaux Moore] couldn't go as a chaperone.  'Cause she said, "Who am I going to get to watch all of these children while I go to chaperone you at the dance?"  She said, "Take little John [HistoryMaker John "Deacon" Moore] with you.  Take this one," and so (makes sound) (laughter).  They reluctantly took me, you know, to be the chaperone and that was my exposure, you know, to real musicians.  'Cause my [maternal] grandfather [John Boudreaux], you know, he had stopped playing music, you know, when I was coming up.  And so, I never got a chance to hear him play.  He never got a chance to hear him--me play.  And that was really one of the most saddest things in my life, because (crying) that's where I got all my talent from and he never lived long enough to see me.  And my grandmother [Viola Borsky Boudreaux] told me, she said, I asked her, I said, she said, "If only," say, "if your grandfather were alive now," she said, "he'd be following you everywhere you go," (laughter).  I said, "Well, he ain't, but I know his spirit is following me around," you know, 'cause that's who I was named after.
Speaker 1: Now, did you listen to the radio to hear music?  What music are you listening to now?
Speaker 2: Well, when I was coming up, the most popular rhyt- music for teenagers was, you know, rhythm and blues music, you know.  And of course, my mother was classically trained in the symphonies and operas, and she'd be mopping the floors singing the arias from 'Aida' [Giuseppe Verdi] and (humming) (laughter).  So, she let us listen to the radio for, like, popular music, you know, the popular songs.  But she wouldn't let us listen to that rock 'n' roll.  "Turn that stuff off.  I don't want y'all listening to that."  She said, "That woman sound like a cat on a hot tin roof," (laughter).  So, what I did, you know, was I just fell in love, you know, with blues, and rhythm and blues.  People like, Howlin' Wolf, Muddy Waters, and Little Richie, and Chuck Berry, and Fats Domino.  My mama wouldn't let us listen to that crap (laughter).  But later on in life, you know, my mother became very fond, you know, of rhythm and blues, blues music and she'd be dancing with us and all but.  But when we were coming up, you know, she said, "I don't want y'all listening to that devil music."  But anyway, to get around that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You would chaperone your sisters?
Speaker 2: Well, that was my exposure to live music.
Speaker 1: Live, live music.
Speaker 2: But as far as listening to the radio, I bought me a crystal radio with the headphones.  I couldn't wait 'til my parents went to sleep, turn out the lights, I'd put on my headphones and I'd tune into WLAC [WLAC Radio] from Nashville, Tennessee.  And I'd listen, you know, to Big Maybelle singing 'Hound Dog,' and Howlin' Wolf 'Moanin' at Midnight,' and all those classic blues, and rhythm and blues.  They'd play Chuck Berry and Little Richard, you know, man, and I was hooked (laughter).
Speaker 1: And this is in the early '50s [1950s] right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The early '50s [1950s], right, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's when I was cutting my musical teeth.
Story_ID: 638829
Speaker 1: And with the exposure to live bands, you know.  Whenever I would go to one of these high school dances, something like a magnet just drew me to the guitar players.  Man, I was just fascinated by the guitar players.  I'd--most of the whole night I'd just sit right--stand up right in front of the stage watching the guitar players.  Something 'bout them guitar players, you know, 'cause most of the people in my family are string players, you know.  And I didn't know anything about genetics at all those things, you know.  But you know, I was probably genetically programmed, you know, to be a guitar player 'cause my [maternal] grandfather [John Boudreaux] was a banjo player.  My mother [Rilda Augustine Boudreaux Moore] was a piano player, and my oldest sister [Consuela Moore Provost] played the viola and the violin.  So, I grew up in a musical environment.  My mother kept a piano around the house and she'd sing and play the piano.  But once I saw the live bands, you know, I was hooked, you know.  So, at about that time is when Elvis [Elvis Presley] came out, and it was some people out on the street, you know, he bought, his daddy bought him a guitar so he could be like Elvis.  And so, I used to borrow his guitar and take it home and try to pick out little melodies on it.  My mother had a ukulele around the house and I would try to pick out melodies on it that I heard on the radio.  And I'd go to the piano and try to, you know, do things with the piano.  And then, you know, I decided, you know, that I wanna be a guitar player.  At the time, I was in high school [St. Augustine High School, New Orleans, Louisiana].  I had been singing, you know, with a little band when I was in elementary school, middle school [Corpus Christi Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana].  But when I got to high school, I just became fascinated with the guitar.  So, I had a little job, you know, on Saturdays, stock boy in the grocery store and delivering groceries on a bicycle.  I made $2.25 a day, plus my little tips, you know, so.  I'd saved up my little money and then had another job.  I used to go during the week, after school, and deliver pharmaceuticals, you know.  People call in prescriptions, send a dude out on a bicycle, you know, with the prescription and people would give you a little tip.  I used to make nine dollars a week, so.  I saved my little money up and I went down to the pawn shop with my oldest sister and bought me a guitar (laughter).  And I went to the local music store, World Lines [ph.], and bought some instructional books on how to play the guitar.
Story_ID: 638830
Speaker 1: Of course, I would listen to the songs on the radio and look in the books and learn how to make the chords and run the scales.  And so, I kind of taught myself how to play the guitar.  And my mother [Rilda Augustine Boudreaux Moore] say, "Boy, you go to sleep with the guitar on your chest."  I just played until my fingers were bleeding.  And I really put a lot of time into it, and studied the books and tried to play it just like the record, you now.  If I hear a song on the radio, I'd grab my guitar and try to play along with it, you know.  And that's probably only how I taught myself, you know, how to play the guitar, you know.  And depends on how much practice you put into it, is how soon you'll be able to go out a make a gig, so.  I'd just practice, and practice, and practice, you know, until I was--I learned enough songs where I could go sit in with other bands.  And then, I would go over to other guitar players who were better than me and pick up little pointers, and they'd show me this, show me that, "How you do this?"  And between that, you know, and the books, and listening to the radio, and buying phonographic records, learning how to play these songs.  Well, that's how I taught myself how to play the guitar.  And then, you know, I had a hiatus, you know, from singing with bands because I made up my mind, once I went back into playing music, I was gonna be double trouble, 'cause I would be playing and singing.  So, I figured, you know, people would hire me faster because I could play and sing, so you kill two birds with one stone.  So, I bought my first electric guitar, because I just wasn't satisfied with the acoustic guitar.  They couldn't go loud enough (laughter).  So, I went and got me an electric guitar with a little amplifier and I was just rocking and rolling, and whaling (makes sound), you know, so.  I kept getting better and better 'cause I used to practice all the time, you know.
Speaker 2: Did you learn to read music?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I learned how to read music.  And--but I concentrated more on playing by ear than by music, you know, because you play by ear you could play all those hip records you heard on the radio, if you play 'em by ear, you know.  'Cause they didn't have them kind of things in the books (laughter).  So, the only way you could learn them songs is you had to play 'em by ear, and you hear on the speaker mount, you know.  'Cause you couldn't buy the music for those kind of songs.  Little Richie [Little Richard] and Fats Domino, they didn't have charts where you could go and learn how to play (laughter) the songs from the music.
Story_ID: 638831
Speaker 1: But during this time, how is school [St. Augustine High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] for you?
Speaker 2: Well, school was very challenging for me because, you know, in order to keep my academic scholarship, you know, I had to make, you know, I couldn't make bad grades, you know.  So, I had to keep those As and Bs rolling, you know.  Besides, you know, spending enough time practicing my instrument to get good enough, you know, where I could go out and make some money.  So, I kept practicing and, you know, I got pretty good and I got noticed by some of the, the older boys in high school, and one of 'em invited me to come out and play on a gig with 'em, you know.  So, man, that was exciting, you know.  And of course, there were other people my age, you know, that I associated with.  Other--one played the saxophone; one played the drums.  So, we got a little band together and we start practicing in a garage and one of the neighbor's houses.  And we were playing all those little rhythm and blues songs.  And one thing led to another, you know.  We got our first gig playing for a fish fry.  And went in there, soon as we start playing, it was outside, it start raining, boom (laughter).  And the lady that hired us said, "Well, since it's raining, I'm gonna have to knock y'all off."  And all I got is two dollars for the whole band (laughter).  So, we had two dollars for the whole band.  It was four of us.  So, man, we had like what, fifty cents apiece (laughter) to go get a sandwich or something with (laughter), but--
Speaker 1: So, you had really no time for anything else?  I mean, what--did you have any time, I should say, for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I didn't have much of a--
Speaker 1: --any--
Speaker 2: --social life, you know, because primarily--
Speaker 1: --or extra act- extracurricular activities?  You never belong to any organizations--
Speaker 2: Well, I abhorred extracurricular activities because when I was in elementary school [Corpus Christi Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana], that's all I did after school was choir practice, so.  When I got to high school, the principal found out that I sang in the choir and he said, "Okay, we're gonna draft you into the glee club."  I say, "Oh, no," you mean I'm gonna have to stay after school and practice and all this.  And I didn't wanna be concerned with that, you know, staying after school and practicing with the glee club, you know, because when I was coming up in the boys choir [Corpus Christi Boys Choir], you know, we had to dress up in these gowns and cassocks and, you know.  That was--had that image, you know, of being a sissy and all the little other little boys, "Ha, ha, ha, look at them little sissies with their little gowns on, ha, ha."  And I hated that kind of image, you know, and when I got to high school, they wanted to draft me into the glee club.  So, what I did, I pretended that my voice was changing.  And when they came to audition me, I just kept cracking those--I say, "My voice is changing, father.  I don't know if I can cut it now."  "Come on, come on, try it again."  And I just kept faking and so finally, they--, "Ah, get outta here," you know, so.  I was so glad I didn't have to sing in the glee club, you know, so.  I could devote more time, you know, to playing my guitar after school and practicing rather than being--staying after school singing with the glee club.  'Cause I didn't like what they were singing anyway.  I wanted to sing that rock and roll (laughter).
Story_ID: 638832
Speaker 1: Tell me who was in charge of the school while you were there?
Speaker 2: The principal at St. Augustine [St. Augustine High School, New Orleans, Louisiana]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Is Father Matthew O'Rourke.  A lot of the priests were Irish priests, and they were really strict, you know.  They would tell you up front, you know, that they believe in corporal punishment.  So, if you don't want your boy to get spanked, don't send him here, 'cause we gonna be (laughter).  And you know, so, you had to be very careful with how you behaved.  And of course, being adolescent boys, you know, we were always making mistakes.  Like, getting into paper ball fights around the room between classes and, you know.  We wouldn't do our calisthenics correctly.  Instead of doing the jumping jacks, we just do that, to see if anybody watching.  And the priest be going up and down like he's reading the Bible and he see somebody out of line, bam!  (Laughter) He'd sneak up behind you.  Or, if you start cutting up in class, you know, sometimes he'd hit you in the head.  Act like we're go to sleep or something, bam, "Wake up," (laughter).  That was--
Speaker 1: Now, you talked about the makeup of the school, even your elementary school [Corpus Christi Elementary School, New Orleans, Louisiana] that it was made up of Creoles and were there any other students that went there that were not Creole?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, you know, it was primarily the Creole cap but, you know, there were other, you know, African American students there.  It was well integrated.  You know, it wasn't just all Creoles, you know.  And the Creoles came in all different shades, you know.  They weren't all just look like me.  They were, like, different shades of brown and black.  Some had straight hair.  Some had curly chair.  Some had blonde hair.  So, it was just like a big mix, you know.
Speaker 1: Right.  I was just trying to get the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --the culture of the school.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Story_ID: 638833
Speaker 1: So, were you thinking about going to college or, was this a given that you would go?  Had any of your siblings gone to college before you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All of 'em did, you know, primarily my older sisters.  I had three older sisters [Consuela Moore Provost, Marie Moore Boyd and Augustine Moore], and they went to college right after high school.  And so, I was expected, you know, to go to college after high school.  Primarily because, you know, I had such a good academic record.  So--and I attended a really fine high school [St. Augustine High School, New Orleans, Louisiana], you know.  I mean, I got my behind beat too, you know.  I remember one particular incident, you know, that really sticks out in my memory.  There was only one female instructor in the whole school.  She taught, I think, library science.  And she came to teach the class.  It was all boys, you know, we all looking at her, you know.  And I sat up in the front row and she accused me of undressing her with my eyes.  And I say, "What?" I said, "I'm just looking at--I can't help but look at 'cha. You're standing right in front of the class."  "Go down to the principal's office young man.  I don't like the way you're looking at me."  I say, "What (unclear)."  I went down to the principal's office.  He said, "I heard you were undressing her with your eyes."  I say, "Father [Matthew O'Rourke], I wasn't doing that.  I was just paying attention.  I sit right in front of the room.  She was writing on the board," and blah, blah, blah.  And he said, "Bend over and hold your ankles."  And he had a big paddle, and he went, whack.  Bam, and hit, boy, I said, "Oh, Lord, man."  And I never got over that 'cause, you know, I really thought it was unfair, you know.  Because you know, well, of course, all the young boys, adolescent young boys--the only female in the whole school, you know.  Well, yeah, we were looking at her, you know, but, she didn't like the way I was looking at her for some reason.  I couldn't figure it out to this day, but you know, I got my behind beat.  You know, I got my behind beat for other things too, you know.  Getting in fights, and making them wisecracks (laughter).  Some of the priests didn't like that.  Or, if you didn't turn in your homework in on time, they make you run around the block ten times (laughter).  Or, they'll tell you to stay after school, and write out the entire epic poem, 'Beowulf,' by hand.  And you couldn't go until you finished it; start getting dark outside (laughter).
Speaker 1: Who was your favorite teacher, and what was your favorite subject in high school?
Speaker 2: Well, I liked a variety of subjects, you know, like, French.  I was very good in French, you know, 'cause I had a French heritage, you know, so.  I was real good in French, and I liked geometry, because it didn't involve much math.  It was like figuring out things, deducting things, from different ang- and you didn't have to do all these formulas.  They had some formulas, but it was more like figuring things out deductively and without having all those algebraic formulas and stuff to plug in.  Because when I went to high school, they hadn't invented calculators (laughter).  The hippest thing we had was a slide rule, and you couldn't use 'em while you were taking a test, so.  The test was based on speed and accuracy so you had to figure out square roots, cube roots, and nth powers, you know, by hand.  And the math courses were real cumbersome because, you know, even if they did have calculators, they wouldn't let you use a calculators, you know.  That's not a true test of knowledge.  So, math was not one of my favorite subjects.  I was more inclined, you know, to the arts, you know.  Well, you know, most musicians are.  So, it was like language and English, and politics, and stuff like that I was attracted to.  And I made the best grades, you know, in sciences particularly, like chemistry and physics.
Speaker 1: Were you in student government at all?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Or, did you have one?
Speaker 2: The closest thing we had to student government--I wasn't really involved in student government, and we didn't have any student government association, 'cause the priests ruled with an iron hand, you know.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They didn't want any dissension from the ranks, so you had to do what they told you to do and no back talk.  But we took things like civics, and they'd teach us how the government operates, sociology, things like that.  But we didn't have any political scene on the campus, you know.  Maybe we had to write papers about different politics of the day.  And they'd tell you to summarize a certain magazine article, or write a paper on this subject and that subject that involved the politics in government.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But that was the closest thing I came to that in high school.
Story_ID: 638834
Speaker 1: Let me see, you graduated high school [St. Augustine High School, New Orleans, Louisiana] in 1958?
Speaker 2: Fifty-nine [1959].
Speaker 1: Fifty-nine [1959].
Speaker 2: I still have my class ring (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. One other thing I wanted to ask about, you said you took French and I know that your [maternal] grandparents [Viola Borsky Boudreaux and John Boudreaux] spoke French.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did they speak--you said at first your grandfather when they moved from New Roads [Louisiana]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --he didn't know how to speak English.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But he did learn how to speak English?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  He--
Speaker 1: Did they--But did your family continue--did they teach you Creole French?  I should say.
Speaker 2: Curiously enough, you know, this Creole language was kind of suppressed.  Because you know, they wanted their children to speak English and not Creole.  Because there was kind of a stigma attached to people who spoke Creole.  They say, "People ain't gonna be able to understand you, man.  What you wanna speak that stuff for?"  You know, "You need to speak the language, you know, everybody else speak, if you wanna get ahead in life.  And that Creole's a dead language anyway."  Ain't nobody--and so, a lot of families didn't teach Creole to their family because they wanted them, you know, to come up speaking proper English.  And there was some kind of a stigma attached to it, like, "Oh, you're from the country, man," all that kind of thing.  "Speaking all the patois, man, people ain't gonna know what you're talking about," you know.  So, the language was kind of suppressed, you know, in the era when I was coming up with.  My mother [Rilda Augustine Boudreaux Moore] knew a little of it, but she would very rarely speak it around the house.  She'd just used some of the expressions, you know, like, "It's gonna be tanpi for you."  "Tanpi, what's that?"  "Oh, that's bad luck," (laughter).  Used some of the Creole expressions in everyday language but, she wouldn't just speak Creole or French Creole.  "What you saying, Ma?  What you mean?"  So, the Creole language, you know, as a whole was kind of suppressed when I was coming up, because the accent was on speaking proper English.  And you know, you're considered, like, countrified.  "Oh, you from the country?  You don't know how to speak English, man?  What's wrong with you?"
Story_ID: 638835
Speaker 1: You knew what college you would go to?
Speaker 2: Oh, pretty much, I knew I wanted to go to the first integrated college, 'cause when I came out of high school [St. Augustine High School, New Orleans, Louisiana], you know, that's when the whole segregation walls were falling down and integration was coming about, you know.  And I thought it would be beneficial for me to go to an integrated school with--because I thought--well, first of all, I didn't have the money, you know, to attend a private college, you know.  'Cause the tuition was outrageous and I didn't have that kind of money, so the cheapest place to get a superior education was go to state colleges and there were just opening one called, LSUNO [Louisiana State University in New Orleans; University of New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana].  It was, like, a branch of LSU [Louisiana State University] that they opened in New Orleans [Louisiana] and they was like in--the campus was military barracks (laughter), which later they converted into the modern classroom.  But when I went there, the school was just opening up.  It hadn't been opened up but maybe a year or two.  So, when I got out of high school, I enrolled at LSUNO.  And we were going there right when, this is, like, pre-civil rights so, we were caught up right in the civil rights era, you know, when the protests and the sit-ins all were happening.  So, I went to LSUNO which was integrated at the time, but when I went there it wasn't fully integrated.  I mean, we could go to the same classes with the white students and all, but the cafeteria on the campus was segregated, and so, it had to go through the courts to get the cafeteria on campus desegregated.  'Cause you had, you know, a situation where you could--the school was integrated but some of the facilities on campus weren't, and those had to be taken to court to breakdown the doors and open 'em up to all the students, so.  When I was going to school, you know, integration was really coming to the forefront there and you had all these demonstrations, you know.  I'd get off the bus and they had people with picket signs out there chanting, "Two, four, six, eight, we don't wanna integrate. Two, four, six, eight, we don't wanna integrate," and they started throwing rocks at you, and spitting on you and stuff.  And the police were there for security but, police is on their side, you know (laughter), so.  There was a lot of abuse, you know.  You go in the bathrooms, and they would write these racist slogan on the wall, you know.  You go in the bathroom and they had stuff on the wall, like, "Mirror, mirror on the wall, who's the fairest one of all?  Snow white you black bastards," (laughter).  And then underneath that somebody write, "Your mammy," (laughter).  I mean, it might seems a little funny now, but they would call the, well, there was a black private college [HBCU] called Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana] then.  And LSUNO took the, the white students would call it Dillard by the Sea.  Because it was bordered the lakefront, you know, the campus was the military barracks which was right on the lakefront area.  You could go right out the barracks and you'd be right on the lakefront looking at the water, so.  They called the school Dillard by the Sea (laughter).  And you know, hearing stuff, you know, being the pioneers or something like that, you know.
Story_ID: 638836
Speaker 1: Birds of a feather kind of flock together, so you go in the cafeteria, the black students sit here, and the white students sit there and very seldom they would've thought to really mingle.  Because out in the street, they have what they call anti-mingling statutes, and when I was in college [Louisiana State University in New Orleans; University of New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana], I'll tell you a little story.  The beatniks were like, you know, something like the hippies were.  Well, the beatniks were like the cool people to hang out with because they were like, real liberal, and they had this cool jazz music.  But anyway, some of the black and white students, you know, who were, you know, came socially involved we decided to throw a beatnik party.  And people came up, dressed up, you know, in their little berets and stuff, all in black.  Anyway, has the black and white students were at this party and some of the neighbors saw these white kids going in the house with the black kids and they called the police (laughter).  And the police raided the place (laughter), took us all to jail, 'cause it's against the law to--anti-mingling statutes (laughter).
Speaker 2: Was this in a private residence?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: And so, the police came and the white students were climbing out the windows, running down the street (laughter).  So, we got--I got arrested with--'cause I was one of the musicians there (laughter).  So, we had to go to night court and guess how our lawyer was?  A.P. Tureaud, the famous (laughter) civil rights lawyer was our lawyer (laughter), and the judge name was Judge (Unclear) (laughter).  We had to go to night court.  Anyway, he got the charges dismissed.  They dropped the charges and let us go (laughter).
Speaker 2: How did you get him as a lawyer?  Who called him to be your lawyer (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, some of the students knew his children.  And one through the other called, said that was the guy to get to spring us out, you know, represent us in court.  Of course, all of the lawyers would--really wanted a case like that because they were contesting all of these so called segregation laws, you know.  So, they couldn't wait to get their chance to go in a court to fight things like that, you know. Especially, where there were students involved, you know.
Story_ID: 638837
Speaker 1: What about your teachers, did you have any problems with a teacher who you might have thought treated you differently because you were black?
Speaker 2: Oh, at--in college [Louisiana State University in New Orleans; University of New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana]?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well, it was some of the teachers, you just had a gut feeling, you know, that they were racist.  But you know, it was a kind of a subtle thing that you couldn't really put your hand on and bring 'em to court or anything like that, but you could tell by the way, you know, they carried themselves that they didn't like the idea of you coming there.  And so, I felt, and a lot of the black students felt that they purposely made the curriculum so difficult that that would kind of force black people to drop out of school.  Because they were so obsessed with academic excellence to the point that they knew that most of the black students were ill prepared for the college curriculum, so they would go overboard in making, you know, the assignments and the tests so difficult.  So, they knew that, you know, about time the next semester came, you know, most of the black students would flunk out.  And, of course, we couldn't really do anything about that because, you know, well, they say, "Well, if you're not smart enough, you're gonna flunk.  You're doing your homework.  You're not doing this."  'Cause the white kids, you know, some of them were flunking out too (laughter), you know.  But there was so many--so much more of the white students than the black students.  And the fact of the matter was, that most of the public high schools weren't training their student academically enough to compete in the college curriculum, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But you felt you were prepared?
Speaker 2: I felt--obviously, I was prepared, you know.
Speaker 1: So, you did pretty well during the--well, did you?  I--that should be the question.
Speaker 2: Well, I did pretty 'til I fell in love (laughter).  I start cutting classes and dropping courses (laughter).
Speaker 1: What was your major before you started all of this (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well, when I first went to college, you know, I was very good in chemistry in high school [St. Augustine High School, New Orleans, Louisiana].  So, I decided I would major in chemistry.  And I got a big shock the first day of class.  I walk into the, the professor said, "Well, you can forget about all that stuff you learned in high school.  This is big league, you know.  This is a brand new things now."  (Unclear) talking about all it was.  I said, "Oh, my god.  Wow."  He said, "All that other stuff, high school."  He say, "'Cause science is a thing that constantly changes and all.  This is the way we look at it now.  Forget all that stuff you learned in high school, and this is the way we're gonna do it now."  So, I say, "Oh, my god," so.  Anyway, I wasn't really prepared for that, you know.  They explained that the nature of science is constantly changing, so it became more of a challenge to me, you know, this--to get adapted to this new science way of thinking from the old way I was thinking in high school.  Plus, the fact that, I was playing music at that time, you know.  So, the music took up a lot of my time, you know, away from my academic studies, because when I was in college playing music, I was making more money than my father [Frank Moore].  And so, I became, like, one of the primary bread winners at home, you know, 'cause I was contributing to the household through the money I made playing music.  And I found myself, you know, less involved in academics and more into music.  And then when I fell in love, I dropped out of school and got married (laughter).
Story_ID: 638838
Speaker 1: So, how long did you go to LSUNO [Louisiana State University in New Orleans; University of New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: I went to LSUNO about two and a half years, or something like that, you know, before I just couldn't wait.  I had to get married.  Because in those days (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tell me how you met your wife.
Speaker 2: Well, I met my wife at school, you know, in college, you know, 'cause one of her friends from high school was dating one of my brothers.  And he'd come out the campus to meet with her and then I would be there.  And she introduced me to her friend, and we starting dating, and one kiss lead to another, and another, and another (laughter) and--
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: Her name was Janet [ph.].  And, of course, during those days you have to remember, the only honorable way to leave home was to get married, because people frowned upon kids who had their own apartment.  "Oh, that boy got his own apartment.  Oh, unh-uh.  He left his house and his mom and all them and go get his--you know what he gonna be doing."  And then girls, oh no, a girl couldn't out got--and get her own place and be--oh, no.  You ain't doing that.  So, you know, the only honorable to be able to leave home was to get married.  But I couldn't wait because, I was cooped up in the family with all those brothers and sisters.  I didn't have my own room and no privacy, and my mom [Rilda Augustine Boudreaux Moore] was looking in my wallet, and, "What you coming home at this hour for?"  So, didn't wanna--I just wanted to have my own little place and just me and my old lady, where we could be grooving and so in love (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, what year is this that you get married?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-two [1962].  'Cause I graduated in '59 [1959].  So, I entered college in the fall of '59 [1959].  And about two, three years later, you know, I had dropped out, started cutting class, hanging out with my girlfriend (laughter).  And I didn't (unclear) (laughter)--
Story_ID: 638839
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You talked about, that you were the primary breadwinner by playing your music.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Tell me who you're playing with and when was it (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) During that time, I played with various pickup bands, you know.  You know, they call 'em pickup bands, you know, 'cause a guy would hear about you and they say, "So and So told me to call."  He say, "I got a gig tonight."  And he'd pick you up on the way to the gig.  And then his next stop, he'd go pick up the sax player and everybody pile in the car.  And then he gotta pick up the drummer.  So, he just picking up cats on the way to the gig, you know.  And a lot of time, we had never played before together before, so we were just out making the gigs.  And some guy would get the gig and then he'd call up this player and that player and say, "I'm coming around to pick y'all up."  A lot of people didn't have cars too, so the guy, the band leader was using the guy who had a car or a station wagon (laughter).  So, I played with various pickup bands because everybody wanted me because I could play and sing.  So, they didn't have to hire a singer.  They'd just get me and I could play and sing.  So, I was making a lot of gigs, you know.
Speaker 1: How much money were you making?
Speaker 2: Oh, back then, you know, the union scale was eight dollars (laughter).
Speaker 1: Were you a union member?
Speaker 2: I joined the union when I was in high school [St. Augustine High School, New Orleans, Louisiana], yeah, I think, yeah, in high school, yeah.  'Cause I started playing the guitar, like, 1957 and by the time I got to be a senior in high school that's when I joined the musicians union.  I've been a member ever since.
Speaker 1: What was the benefit of joining the--did you have to join the union (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, well, we joined the union primarily because we thought we would make more money.  And we'd get better jobs, and we'd be in the hookup in the network with all the rest of the musicians were, you know.  We could network with other bands and other musicians and get more work and earn, you know, more money.  Because you know, we had a minimum scale wage, you know, and most of the gigs, you know, were paying at least a minimum scale which was eight dollars a man, and the leader got time and a half.  I remember one of the first jobs I played as a band leader, I had a four piece band and I think, yeah, I paid the cats eight dollars and I made twelve dollars (laughter), and I thought that was big time, you know, wow.  'Cause the union scale was based on, you know, the standard of living in the black community.  'Cause they had two separate unions; the white union [American Federation of Musicians Local 174; American Federation of Musicians Local 174 - 496] and the black union [American Federation of Musicians Local 496; American Federation of Musicians Local 174 - 496].  Of course, our scale was lower than the white union.  We couldn't join the white union.
Speaker 1: And you couldn't do anything about the, the scale?
Speaker 2: Well, when you're in the union, your scale is the rock bottom price.  You can charge a lot more, if you can get it (laughter).  That's the way it works, you know, we have a minimum price that you're not supposed to play under, but the sky is the limit, you know.  You can charge as much as you think you can get, so.  Usually, the case was with other bands are getting, you tried to get the same as them.  And depend on who you were working for, some people had more money to spend on entertainment than others.
Story_ID: 638840
Speaker 1: And do you know who formed the union or who might have been some of the union presidents or union bosses during that time?
Speaker 2: Well, I can give you a brief history, you know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --of the union.  The white union [American Federation of Musicians Local 174; American Federation of Musicians Local 174 - 496] was here first, you know.  And a curious dilemma occurred, as most of the better paying jobs were on the steamboats that traveled up and down the river.  And you couldn't get those jobs unless you were in the union, and so, the black musicians, you know, felt they were getting cheated out of the good jobs because you couldn't play on the (unclear) steamer boat line and some of the better paying jobs unless you were in the union.  And you couldn't join the union because there was no black union at the time.  It was only the white union, and it was against the law.  You couldn't join the white union because of the segregation laws.  So, in order to get around that, a group of the most prominent black musicians, they appealed to the parent organization in New York [New York], the American Federation of Musicians was the parent organization, and they issued out the charters of the geographical jurisdictions.  Now, this was another dilemma because the geographical jurisdiction of New Orleans [Louisiana], the charter had been given to the white union.  And so, the African American musicians wanted these good paying jobs, especially on the steamboats, and they realized they had to be in the union.  They couldn't join the white union, so they say, "Well, we're gonna start our own union."  But the big problem there became the geographical jurisdiction was already awarded to the white union.  So, what are we gonna do now?  So, in order for us to get a charter, what the black musicians did at the time, they applied for a charter with the geographical jurisdiction in Mississippi which was bordering New Orleans.  So, they got the charter, you know, for that geographical jurisdiction, and some of the musicians had summer homes in Mississippi so they used that for their headquarters [American Federation of Musicians Local 496; American Federation of Musicians Local 174 - 496].  And when they got the charter, they moved their headquarters to New Orleans.  And so, the federation cast a blind eye toward the situation.  "Oh, just let 'em go," just like that.  So, they wouldn't do anything about it so they just let 'em have the black union and the white union.  'Cause it was that separate but equal doctrine was out at the time, so.  That way the black musicians were able to secure better employment because they were in the union.  Even though they wasn't in the white union, they were in the black union, so.  The white and the black unions didn't merge until they were forced to merge in the--around 1970 after they passed the Civil Rights Act of 1964, they refused to merge with the black union.  And so, they had to take 'em to court and it was a forced merger with the black and the white unions.  'Cause they didn't wanna quote, unquote mix the white blood of their ancestors with the black blood of the musician--the Negro musicians.  And I--but, you know, beneath all that was, "We don't want them niggers taking our jobs," (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: Because there was a rule, you know, if you played an engagement for white people, you had to charge them the white scale to play for them.  Because it would be unfair competition to the white musicians if, you know, we played for the white people under the black union scale, which was cheaper.
Story_ID: 638841
Speaker 1: And then curiously enough, there was some other things that came about.  The--there was a bunch of British musicians who wanted to relocate in New Orleans [Louisiana] because they were so enamored with the jazz scene down here, the traditional jazz scene.  So, they joined the black union [American Federation of Musicians Local 496; American Federation of Musicians Local 174 - 496] because they wanted be associated with all the great black musicians, you know, like Papa French [Albert "Papa" French] and Satchmo [Louis Armstrong] and all the great jazz people in the black union.  They didn't wanna join the white union [American Federation of Musicians Local 174; American Federation of Musicians Local 174 - 496] (laughter).  They wanted to join with the black union, 'cause you know, it wasn't a--I don't think a case had been brought to the courts to test it.  So, we had white musicians in the black union.  And then at the same time, the New Orleans Symphony [New Orleans Philharmonic Symphony] was primarily white.  Well, they were forced to hire black players in the symphony because, you know, of the civil rights legislation in '64 [Civil Rights Act of 1964].  So, there was, I think one black guy in the white union, 'cause he had to join the white union 'cause he was playing with the symphony.  And so, we had, you know, a couple of black people in the white union, and they had some white people in the black union.  And this was all prior to the merger, and so, how are we gonna get 'em all together, became the problem of the parent organization [American Federation of Musicians].  And so, they, they had to have a whole series of meetings, you know, to find out how we're gonna successfully merge the two union, 'cause they didn't wanna merge with this one.  And you know, in a sense the black union felt that, you know, if we merge with the white union, we'd be so vastly outnumbered.  We would never have any representation in the office, like board of directors, secretary, treasure, president, so, we'd be so vastly outnumbered, the chances for us to ever get an elected position would be almost nil, which proved to be kind of true.  So, when they came about with the merger, another reason why the black union felt that they were being submerged.  Because we had to give the white union all of our money from the banks and property that we owned, and turn it over to them, and this was kind of, like, ugh.  The black musicians got madder, "If--when we merge, they're gonna take all our money, our building, and then very little change that we're gonna have any representation as far as being officers in the union."  So, when they had the transition period, they had, like, some of the black officers sat on the board of directors for a certain transition period.  Well, they had, like, they had so many members on the board.  Well, they had, they brought the same board from the black union, so they had a big super board on the, the merge local.  And as time went on, you know, the transition period was over so, you saw the board of directors, the president of all of our office, they were all white because when people vote, they tend to vote on racial lines.  So, the union was integrated but the power structure was lily white.
Speaker 2: But didn't you have more black members to be able to vote in--
Speaker 1: No.  We didn't because there were more white musicians in the union than black musicians.  Because you have to take into consideration, they had the symphony orchestra, which is comprised of almost a hundred people right way.  Then all of Bourbon Street was primarily white musicians, so the white musicians outnumbered us in the union.  But maybe on the street, there were more black musicians but, they weren't members of the union.  So--
Speaker 2: What was the scale for the white union?
Speaker 1: Well, at the time of the merge, I don't kind of remember, but it was higher than the black union because, there were periodic raises to the scale throughout the year, 'cause they had to keep up, you know, with inflation and cost of living.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but, what I mean is, if the scale for blacks was eight, was the scale for white ten or twelve?
Speaker 1: I think--
Speaker 2: You don't remember?
Speaker 1: There were more, like, almost double ours.  They would be like fifteen.  If we had eight, they had like fifteen.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: So, then they were all categories for engagements, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That was the casual engagement scale, but all the lucrative jobs like the Mardi Gras carnival balls on Bourbon Street were primarily white musicians.  And for us, you know, to get those kind of jobs was almost impossible, 'cause the strippers was on Bourbon Street, they wanted the white bands to accompany them, 'cause the black patrons couldn't come into the joints where they were playing.
Story_ID: 638842
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you said, the merger wasn't fully realized until 1970, and then, they wanted to have one union [American Federation of Musicians Local 174 - 496], but they still wanted to have two different scales.  Why is that?
Speaker 2: Well, because the African American musicians said that the economy in black society was different from white society.  They enjoyed a lot more money in white society so they could afford pay more for their music, but, the black social and pleasure clubs and the black organizations at the time, the economy was still saying the living was so much less than white counterparts.  So, in order to still--what the argument they was making say, well our people can't afford to pay that kind of money that the white people can.  So, what they did to address that situation, they had like, a A and a B scale.  So, the A scale was like mostly for playing in the white venues, and then they had a whole list of all the black venues where the B scale, which was a little cheaper price would apply.  And that went on for a considerable time until they decided, "Hey, wait.  This just ain't right.  We just ought to have just one scale for both, you know."
Speaker 1: How much were the union dues?
Speaker 2: Well, the union dues were fairly cheap, you know, at the time, but they kept going up, you know, because, you know, the membership was dwindling and the amount of revenue coming in to support the organization and the cost of living, so all those factors taken into consideration resulted in higher membership dues.  So, there were these periodic increases in membership dues throughout the years.
Speaker 1: But during that time, do you remember what it might have been?
Speaker 2: To the best of my recollections, to join the union at the time of the merger it was less than a hundred dollars.  It was probably around fifty or sixty dollars.
Speaker 1: What are the dues today?
Speaker 2: Today, the membership dues are, like, close to 140.  That's a year, the annual dues--
Speaker 1: And, and--
Speaker 2: --but they've been having increases over the years.
Story_ID: 638843
Speaker 1: And eventually, you were really involved politically in, in the union [American Federation of Musicians Local 174 - 496] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Well, I became politically involved in the union at one period in my life.  There was a certain incident that happened at the union that just made me furious and that's when I got more involved in union politics.  'Cause I was so apolitical back then, and most of the musicians are, they're so apathetic toward political things.  "I just wanna play my acts, man, I don't wanna be bothered with all them politics and all this union stuff, man.  I just wanna play my acts and get my little money," and all this, you know.  But there was an incident that happened.  The secretary treasurer at the union who had been in office for almost what, thirty years and they had a president that been in office for just about the same amount of time.  So, they kind of ran the union, and they get reelected every time, almost, sometimes with no opposition.  Well, anyway to make a long story short, the secretary treasurer died in office.  He had a heart attack or something, and then the questions became, "Well, who's gonna take his place in the interim until the next election?"
Speaker 1: Do, do you remember his name?
Speaker 2: Who, the secretary treasurer who died?  Yeah, his name was John Sherman [ph.].  And he died while in office, and you know, the bylaws stated that, you know, his interim replacement has to be chosen from the rank and file of the members by the board of directors, so, an unusual situation occurred.  The board of directors who strong armed by the president then, they said that the best person to appoint to this position was his secretary who worked in the office.  She wasn't a musician, wasn't a member of the union, and so, they appointed her to the second highest position.  The one who controls all the money in the union.  And that just infuriated me because they--what about me?  I have a college degree.  I have the time to do it.  I'm one of the rank and file, how come, you know, I didn't get considered or anybody else in the union?  How come you're gonna pick the girl who works in the office and give her, that's the highest position in the union?  'Cause they said, "Well, she worked here up under his tutelage all these years, and she knows all the in and outs of the office and how to run it, and she know all the connections with all the other people."  And I said, "Well, that doesn't amount to a hell of beans.  You supposed to follow the bylaws and appoint somebody, you know, from the rank and file members, by a vote of the board of directors."  They didn't see it that way.  So, I launched a big campaign to unseat her (laughter), 'cause I just felt in my heart this was the most heinous crime that they could ever commit.  Appointing somebody who was not a member of the union, nor a musician, to the second highest position in the union.  The one who handles all the money.  What are they trying to do?  We're trying to hide something, you know?  And how come, you know, they didn't appoint me, or anybody else in the union who were eligible?  And so, they thought that when I went and appealed the case and brought charges against the whole white organization, you can image how they felt toward me (laughter).  They say, "Who is this guy," you know, 'cause I had been so apolitical all the time.  But that thing just infuriated me.  Because I had been a member of the union, continuous member since I was seventeen, eighteen years old.  And for them to do something like that, you know, I just thought it was abhorrent.  So, I became involved in union politics.
Story_ID: 638844
Speaker 1: Was she unseated?  Were you successful?
Speaker 2: No.  They did something even worse than that.  They let her join the union [American Federation of Musicians Local 174 - 496] as a tambourine player.  "Oh, now she's in the union now," but she couldn't run for reelection when it came available because the bylaws said, you had to be a member for at least two years before you can run for office.  So, to circumvent that, they passed a resolution to suspend the election laws for two years.  So, so nobody could run.  Not even me.  I went to the labor board.  I said, "Wait a minute, you can't suspend labor laws for the benefit of one person who you--."  And I brought my case to the labor board.  So, when she ran for election when the time became available, it was illegal.  Because you can't suspend federal labor laws for the--especially for the benefit of one person.  'Cause she was so popular by working in the office.  Everybody knew her and everybody thought she was the right person for the job because she had been working there so long, and she knew all the bookkeepers and everything and how to run the office.
Speaker 1: So, what eventually happened?
Speaker 2: Well, what eventually happened, she won the election.  I ran against her.  Course I lost, 'cause she was more popular than me.  "Oh, yeah, well, he can't run like she--she got more experience."  I said, "Yeah, but, she ain't a musician," (laughter).  And they put her in purposefully, you know, to circumvent the democratic process.  And I proved it, you know, I took my case to the head of the parent organization [American Federation of Musicians].  And of course, you know, they told me that I had to file an appeal to the local first, and then if I didn't get satisfaction to go to them.  And I said, "I beg your pardon, I read in the bylaws that if anything pertaining to election laws are violated, I'm supposed to take my case directly to the federation."  And their lawyers got together and say, "No.  It's the other way around."  So, I went the other way around and, of course, they turned me down.  And I went to the labor board after that.  And I had the labor board overturn the election.  Oh, Lord, they didn't like me then.  "You gonna make us hold another election, just because you think you--."  I said, "She gonna win anyway."  Why you gonna make us spend all this money having another election, go to the labor board, and have them come over here and examine all our records, and all this mess with the federation?  Why you wanna do something like that?  Say, "You ain't gonna win anyway."  I said, "Because I want justice to be served," (laughter).  I said, "I'm standing up for what's right."
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: Oh, trying--it was in the, I think the '80s [1980s].  I can't remember the exact year.
Speaker 1: But eventually you become president.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Eventually, I became president but, it took a while.
Speaker 1: What year was, what year, what year did you become president?
Speaker 2: Right after Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], in 2006, I think, yeah.
Speaker 1: But we'll talk about--
Speaker 2: Prior to that, you know, I had served on the board of directors, and I got my way up to be vice president and now the next step was to be president.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We'll talk more about that.
Story_ID: 638845
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But let's go back to 1962.  You just got married.  Tell me what happens once you get married (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: And who--where and who you're playing with?
Speaker 2: Well, when I got married, I had started my own band, because all these pickup bands, you know, we were just playing this one and that one.  So, I decided, you know, well, I ought to get my own band together.  And I was--the band that I played the most with, was a group called The Ivories, named after the piano keys, you know.  And I was playing with them like in '59 [1959], '60 [1960] and while I was in college [Louisiana State University in New Orleans; University of New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana].  And the guy who was the band leader, he moved to California, the band broke up, some of the guys went this way and that way.  So, I retained the name of the band and reorganized the band with some of the same musicians and some other musicians that I'd been playing with in other bands.  So, I reformed the group and--'cause we had a lot of gigs under that name, you know, as The Ivories we were playing fraternities and sororities and social and pleasure clubs, did a lot of work.  So, we organized--reorganized and then we were having a meeting one night and that's where I got the name Deacon John [HistoryMaker John "Deacon" Moore], 'cause before that, I didn't have, you know, a stage name.  They used to call me Red, or Little John, or whatever, you know, just plain John, whatever.  Some of 'em called me Red because I had red hair.  And they used to call people Red, people--that was the nicknames of Creole people who had brique, hair like red brick, you know, and they had fair skin so they called 'em Red, and that was a common name in Creole community, Red, and that signified that you were light skinned with kind of reddish hair.  Brique, that's a French name for like red bricks.  Anyway, we were having rehearsal and the guys in the band said--it was real popular at the time, they have a front man with the band, 'cause they had all these groups with some person's name, followed by the name in the band, you know: Hank Ballard and The Midnighters; Art Neville and The Hawketts; Sugar Boy and the Cane Cutters [sic. Sugar Boy and His Cane Cutters]; Tommy Ridgley and the Untouchables; Danny White and The Cavaliers, so here comes me, you know.  Everybody's sitting around saying, they're looking at me, and they say, 'cause I was the front man 'cause I was the singer and the guitar player and the band leader.  So, say, "What we gonna call him?"  (Laughter) "What we gonna call him?"  And they kept looking at me.  I say, "I don't know."  And they start pulling names out of the hat.  And the guy was a drummer at the time, Al Miller, he used to play with Roy Brown when he was playing trumpet.  He also played with Professor Longhair.  Well, he was like the senior member of the band.  He was the oldest guy in the band.  And we're just tossing names around.  No, I don't think that one.  And he came up with this name, Deacon John.  Say, "Let's call him Deacon John."  And everybody say, "Yeah! I like that.  Yeah, let's call him Deacon John.  Yeah, brah."  I said, "Man," I look at 'em, I said, "Man, you guys are crazy.  What you wanna call me Deacon John for?"  I said, "We'll never be able to get our records played 'cause people gonna think we got a gospel group."  I said, "That's stupid.  Deacon John?"  I said, "We won't be able to get hired in the clubs and the fraternities 'cause people will think we got a gospel group.  Man, you can't do that."  And they just kept laughing.  And (laughter) they thought it was a cute name, a nice name, say, "Yeah, he look like a deacon.  Let's call him Deacon John."  (Laughter) I said, "Ah, no man, don't do that."  And I started crying.  I said, "Man, we ain't gonna never get no gigs like this.  With a name like that, people gonna think we in the church," (laughter).
Story_ID: 638846
Speaker 1: Well, somehow or another that name stuck, you know.  Because at the time, the most popular entertainers were the guys that did a lot of preaching.  Like, James Brown, Ray Charles, they had a preaching style of singing.  And that, you know, of course, I jumped on the band wagon, you know, and I started singing with that preaching style, like Solomon Burke and James Brown, Jackie [Jackie Wilson].  They would all come out on the stage and say, "Let me see all the hands of the good Christian in the building tonight, everybody say yeah, everybody say yeah.  Don't just say yeah, say oh, yeah," (laughter).  And they get down like the preachers in the church.  And James Brown had his thing, you know.  He'd come out and do his preaching.  And then of course, Ray Charles was the high priest then, you know.  And he said, "Let me hear you say, 'Yeah, ah yeah.'  I wanna know don't it make you feel all right?"  And then so, I incorporated into my style of singing too 'cause it was popular at the time, so.  I guess, they took that into consideration and the guy in the band said, "He look like a deacon."  I said, "Man, I don't look like no deacon" (laughter).  He said, "Yeah, he does, man."  They say, "He's up there preaching the blues."  And then I found out that the name came from a song.  And the song was popularized by Roy Brown, the guy the drummer used to play with.  And there was a line in the song talking about Deacon John.  And Deacon John was a mythological character.  And so in this song called 'Good Rockin' Tonight,' there was a verse that said, "Deacon John [sic.], Elder Brown, two of the slickest cats in town.  They'll all be there just a wait and see.  Rocking and a stomping at the jamboree.  I heard the news, there's good rocking tonight."  (Laughter) so, that's where that name came from, you know.  And so I guess Al Miller, the drummer, he just popped it out of his head, said, "Let's call him Deacon John [HistoryMaker John "Deacon" Moore]."  Everybody say, "His name is John anyway, so, Deacon John and The Ivories.  So, once they tagged me with it, I couldn't get rid of it.  'Cause I was starting to be known as Deacon John everywhere I went.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: I tried to get rid of it once in my career and I was playing at a club and I told the guy, "I'm changing the name, don't call me Deacon. I'm gonna change the name of the band to Rhumboogie."  He said, "Well, I can't hire you here."  He say, "If you use that name, ain't nobody gonna know you're playing here."  (Laughter) I said, "Oh, that's a no brainer."  (Laughter) So, but later on, you know, I became to realize, it was a God given name.  Because most of my life, you know, I bring joy to people in times of celebration and events in their life.  And I also comfort people in times of sorrow when I sing at their funeral services.  And so, I figure it was a God given name because, it really suits me well now, because most of my engagements are weddings.  And what better name to have to play at a wedding than Deacon (laughter), like the rabbi, the people you get married.  And so, the name suits me well now.  But anyway, I love the name now because it's very few people running around with a name like Deacon John.  So, it's unique.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And in a sense, you know, I guess they were right after all.  Even though I protested it, you know.
Story_ID: 638847
Speaker 1: So, what music were--are you playing with The Ivories?  What, what type of music?
Speaker 2: During that day, the most popular music was rhythm and blues.  So, we were playing, you know, what they called the top ten records.  You had to know all the current hit records, you know to compete with the other bands.  Because that was like the barometer who was the best band.  The one who could play all the latest records.  So, you had to be versatile entertainer in order to do that, to switch from Chuck Berry to Little Richie [Little Richard], to Fats Domino, to Jerry Lee Lewis, or Elvis [Elvis Presley], or whatever, you know, the popular--Supremes [The Supremes] or something.  You had to be adaptable.  So, through the years, you know, I was able to constantly reinvest myself in order to compete in the marketplace.
Speaker 1: So, you didn't know comp- no composing of music at that time?
Speaker 2: Mostly, I was just playing other people's music--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --trying to keep a popular band in order to secure engagements, you know, from the marketplace.  And I found out quickly that versatility was the key to it all.  Because people will call you up with different types of engagements.  "Well, we want you to play our carnival ball and you have to know how to play a waltz.  You have to know how to do the second line.  You have to know how to play some standards, some old music, as well as the popular music."  So, versatility came in again.  And then when I got into the nightclubs, you had to be able to put on a show, like a floor show, and so, I went along those lines too.  We did skits with the band and, you know, became more professional, wearing band uniforms.  That time when I had to organize Deacon John and The Ivories, we had a different uniform for every day of the week.  'Cause we primarily wore tuxedos.  And so, what we would do, we'd go down to the tailor shop and we'll have custom tailored tuxedo jackets.  So, we'd have a blue one, a red one, a green one, a yellow one, a stripy one, you know, so we could switch around all the time.  And a favorite thing, when we're called for an engagement, say, "What we gonna wear tonight Deac [HistoryMaker John "Deacon" Moore]?"  "We're gonna wear the yellow coats," (laughter).  "What we gonna wear tonight?" "Wear the blue coats."  Or we're gonna wear the plaid coats, you know, so.  That was real popular with all the competing bands, you know.  You had to dress up, you know.  It wasn't this dress down stuff they got going on now.  Everybody--you really had to dress up, you know, 'cause that was your competition.  So, we had a whole different set of uniforms, one for every day of the week.  And we had to have, you know, variety, you know, playing a whole variety of music in order to be competitive in the marketplace with the other bands, you know.  'Cause you had different types of engagements that you had to adapt to all the time.  The common phrase people had on their business cards, the bands had was, "Music for all occasions."
Speaker 1: So, how long did this band stay together?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm still retaining the name today, Deacon John and The Ivories.  And that's the primary--sometimes I'll just use my name, Deacon John the entertainer.  Or through the years, I've had different incantations of Deacon John.  I had--I changed the name, you know, from The Ivories to the Electric Soul Train, or the (makes sound), things like that, you know, to signify what kind of music we were involved in at the time, 'cause Deacon John and The Ivories connotes nostalgia and a lot of my clients are older people who remember me from the past, when I was playing all of animal house gigs and fraternities when they were young going to school.  So, that name stuck with me throughout the years so primarily that's the name I use.  But I have, you know like, Deacon John's Jump Blues, Deacon John and The Ivories, Deacon John, Deacon John Moore, Deacon John's Electric Soul Train when I was playing psychedelic music.  And whatever was popular in the day, I realized in order to survive, I had to jump on the bandwagon with that, in order to secure a place in the marketplace, so I could make a living playing music.
Story_ID: 638848
Speaker 1: But you also did other things.  I mean, you had other streams of income--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that afforded you--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --not to be like other musicians who--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --had day jobs.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You never had to take a day job, right?
Speaker 2: Well, I realized you know that, the secret of my success was playing multi markets simultaneously.  Besides playing the gigs, I got into playing recording sessions and playing on television commercials, radio jingles, renting out equipment, putting out photograph records, putting my services out as a music teacher, giving private lessons, renting out equipment.  So, all these kind of other revenue streams came about, you know, in order me--to enable me to make a living playing music. 'Cause sometimes, you know, the gigs don't come in as well as others.  It's a seasonal thing.  You have a lot of gigs and all of a sudden they ain't as many, and then pops back up, and your popularity will drain, and it comes back up and it--then it start doing like that, riding the waves.  And so, you have to have other sources of income, you know, to sustain yourself if you wanna make living playing music.  So, I did other things besides just playing the engagements, the gigs.
Speaker 1: You mentioned jingles.  Do you remember some of the jingles that you played on?
Speaker 2: Well, they were like radio jingles, like Pontchartrain Beach [New Orleans, Louisiana] and some of the furniture stores and all.  They would hire musicians to come up with a little jingle and a little slogan.  And I did those and--
Story_ID: 638849
Speaker 1: I made more money playing guitar on phonograph records.  You know, like being a session, recording session musician, you know.  I was playing at the Dew Drop Inn [New Orleans, Louisiana] was one of the, the premier of black nightclubs in town, and in walks Allen Toussaint.  And at the time, he was producing a lot of local artists and he was a songwriter as well as a band leader, and--but he primarily did recording sessions.  He would record various artists from the local community and write their songs, and hire the musicians to play on the records in the studio, so I met him at the Dew Drop.  He liked the way I played the guitar and he just said, "Would you like to come make some recording sessions with me?"  Of course, my eyes lit up like they were on fire.  I said, "Wow, here's my chance," you know.  'Cause that's the most coveted job there is, playing on a recording sessions, 'cause you don't have all the pressure of playing for a gig, and you can take the songs, you stop, play 'em over 'til you get 'em right, and there's no audience out there, you know.  So, that was like the cream of the crop of the gigs because they paid more than live engagements, and you could get fringe benefits too.  Like pension fund contributions and overtime and all kinds of other goodies that came about as a result of playing on a recording sessions.  Plus, all the notoriety that you would get, because I soon found out that if you played on some of the hit records, other record companies and other producers will seek out your services, because they think you got the magic touch. "Oh, he played on his hit record and that one sold.  Let's get him to play on this."
Speaker 2: Have you played on some hit records?
Speaker 1: I played on a lot of 'em back in the '60s [1960s], because Allen Toussaint was a prolific writer and arranger and producer for several record companies.  And besides him there were other people, like, [HistoryMaker] Harold Battiste with AFO Records.  It was Eddie Bo, and it was Dave Bartholomew; they also would call me to do dates too, in the studio.  So, and there was a bunch of independent producers that came up like, Parlo Records, they're the ones who produced Aaron Neville's first big hit, 'Tell it Like it Is.'  Well, I knew the band leader and guitar player is my best friend, George Davis; he was a composer of 'Tell it Like it Is.'  So, he hired me to play guitar on--that was one of the big smash records.  I also, with Allen Toussaint, I played on many of the hit recordings that came out of New Orleans [Louisiana].  I'd just call off a few of the names, like, 'Mother-in-Law,' 'Land of 1000 Dances,' 'Ride your Pony,' 'Working in the Coal Mine,' "Sitting here la la, Waiting for my Ya Ya," ['Ya Ya'], 'Ooh Poo Pah Doo,' the 'Fortune Teller,' 'Lipstick Traces,' 'It's Raining,' 'I Know,' it's just--'Barefootin',' 'It Ain't My Fault,' and there was, like, Lee Dorsey's 'Lover of Love,' Ernie K-Doe's, 'Waiting'--Aaron Neville's, 'Waiting at the Station.'  There were regional hit besides the national hits that I played on that enabled me to enhance my reputation as a studio musician as well as on live performances.  And some of the same audience that I backed in the studio, I would back them up on live engagements to promote their recordings; like Ernie K-Doe's, it was Chris Kenner's who did, 'Something You Got,' and 'Land of 1000 Dances,' 'I Like It Like That.'  And there was K-Doe with 'Mother-in-Law,' 'Te-Ta-Te-Ta-Ta,' and 'A Certain Girl,' and he had a whole string of hit records.  There was [HistoryMaker] Irma Thomas and 'It's Raining,' 'Hitting on Nothing,' and 'I Did My Part.'  And then there was Lee Dorsey with 'Lover Of Love,' 'Ride your Pony,' 'My Old Car,' 'Working in the Coal Mine,' and, you know, I was, like, playing on a whole lot of, you know, hit records, you know, so that was another revenue stream for me.  And besides that, you know, I had, you know, my band [Deacon John and The Ivories], and I had, you know, the radio jingles.  And then I got into acting a little bit.  I did live music theatre.  I was in some of the theatrical productions around town.
Story_ID: 638850
Speaker 1: Motion pictures, you were saying?  Or lo- you said--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: Well, at one point in my career, you know, I thought I'd try my hand out at acting, since I had a little background in theatre.  Playing, you know, in the orchestras and little bit parts in live music theatre.  So, I thought, maybe I'd try my hand at acting.  So, I began to audition for various parts in movies and television commercials, and it was rather difficult because in--video, you know, it's not the same as audio.  A lot depends on how you look, and I soon found out that the industry seeks out stereotypes, you know.  And they were looking, you know--you have to look a certain way in order to get a certain part in a movie or a television commercial, depending on what product they were selling.  So, I went to school at the Contemporary Arts Center [New Orleans, Louisiana] and took some acting courses, and courses on, you know, how to do television commercials and sell a product.  And I began to know some of the local production companies who would get these television commercials and movie parts and theatrical things, so.  And to get into that, you have to audition.  So, I went to a lot of auditions, and one thing I remember about television and movies is that, you have to get used to rejection, so, 'cause it happens all the time.  And at first, you know, I was kind of miffed at all the rejections I was getting because primarily there it depends on how you look, you know.  If you get turned down for a part, it wasn't too much to do with your ability to act and memorize lines.  It had a lot to do with how you look, and some of the replies I got at the audition was, things like, "I'm sorry sir, but this part is for a black man."  "How old are you son?  We're looking for an elderly gentleman.  Somebody with a tattoo, or somebody with gold teeth.  Or somebody, you know, with brown skin.  Somebody who looks gay."  They had all different kind of roles, you know, and you have to get used to all this rejection, because there's gonna be a ton of it before the right part comes along for you.  And I was almost moved to tears one time, because I was at an audition for a Miller beer commercial [Miller Brewing Company], and I thought they were looking for older black musicians, and I saw what the competition was.  And I said, "Oh, man, I'll never get this part."  I don't look black enough, and I'm not old enough and look at all these people I'm competing with.  I know they're gonna get them.  And somehow another, you know, I got the part.  And I sat there, I say, "Man, why you pick me?"  He said, "Look."  He say, "It ain't your color."  He said, "We like your smile." (Laughter) That was it.  So, I almost cried 'cause, I said, "Wow, at last."  Somebody said, we like your smile.  And that's why we chose you.  It wasn't because of your color or nothing.  He said, "We like the way you smile," (laughter).
Speaker 1: What commercials have you done?
Speaker 2: I've done Miller beers, Snicker's candy bar, Lincoln cars, Southern Comfort whiskey.  I did something I can't recollect right now.
Story_ID: 638851
Speaker 1: Got a part in a movie called 'Angel Heart.'  I had to audition for a lot of roles, you know, 'cause the part I wanted, you know, I didn't get because I didn't look old enough, and I didn't look black enough (laughter), so.  Anyway, the producer was so impressed with me that, he gave me a part as a slide guitar player, because I learned how to play bottleneck slide Delta blues guitar and they had--the movie had a part for somebody that could play bottleneck.  'Cause Brownie McGhee, the elderly blues musician, he got the part that I wanted.  I could speak the lines and do everything, but I just didn't look right for the part (laughter), so.  But anyway, the producers liked me so well until they gave me another job, you know.  They put me in charge of music consultant.  So, I would organize the blues band for the particular scene that I was involved in, and playing in the bar with a blues band.  So, I got to, you know, almost to hand pick all the musicians and I was in charge in doing all the contracts and I wind up playing some parties for 'em on the side.  And I did a lot with the movie but, I didn't have the speaking part that I wanted because that's where the big money is (laughter).  If you could land a speaking part, you get residuals.
Speaker 2: So, you got no residuals for any of the movies you have done?
Speaker 1: No, because I didn't have speaking parts.  The--but I do have a television show that I was in recently called 'Treme,' where I do have a speaking part.  I'm one of the principals.  So, I'm just waiting for the mailman now (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.  Now, you play--
Speaker 1: But some of the television commercials I did were national television commercials, and I was a principal and I made some decent money off the television commercial, because I had a, like--I was classified as a principal.  And once they classify you as a principal, you're entitled to revenue from royalties every time they play it, you get residual and royalty checks.  And you multiply all those markets all over the country, and you get money from the Screen Actors Guild [Screen Actors Guild - American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)] which is--pays a lot more than the musicians union [American Federation of Musicians] (laughter), so.
Story_ID: 638852
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You talked about a bottleneck guitar.  Do you own one?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  That's one of my avocations.  I just love playing that slide guitar, but unfortunately, I can't make a living as a slide guitar playing blues man (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What is a slide guitar player?
Speaker 2: Well, a slide guitar, they call it a slide because, you use a bottleneck.  This is really the bottleneck (demonstrates), 'cause it's the end of a bottle, and they cut it off and you slip it on your finger.  And you slide it across the strings rather than pressing down on the string and playing (unclear) style.
Speaker 1: You wanna show us how it's done (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So when you play slide guitar, you have to think in different tunings.  'Cause the guitar maybe tuned to an open chord (playing guitar).  And then you can't let the strings touch the keyboard, 'cause you want be able to slide all over the place.  I love the slide guitar, because it, it kind of imitates human emotions.  You can make the guitar cry and talk, and all that stuff.  And there's all these emotions that come out from blues, you know.  'Cause blues is the parent of leg- all legitimate jazz.  It's at, you know, the base of rhythm and blues, and rock and roll, blues and gospel music that started it all.  Then, blues, jazz, and gospel are the only American forms of music.  The rest of the stuff was imported from Europe and other countries, but blues was born right here in America primarily through the suffering of the African Americans who came over here and came up with these songs that imitated the kind of lives that they lived.  But getting back to playing the slide guitar, when you play the guitar normally, you have to (plucks string) press in between the frets and press the string to the fret to get the tone out.  But when you play slide, you can't let the strings touch the keyboard.  And you have to play on the fret, instead of in between the frets.  And then you have to adjust your thinking to thinking in an open string tuning versus the standard way you play a guitar.  I can do it in both, but to get the real country blues, Delta blues sound, you have to play it like the masters (playing guitar).
Story_ID: 638853
Speaker 1: You're gonna (playing guitar).  That's for tuning like a country blues setting, you know.  (Playing guitar and singing), "I'm going down to Louisiana, I gonna get me a mojo hand.  I'm going down to Louisiana, I'm gonna get me a mojo hand.  I'm gonna fix my woman so she can't have no other man.  Cold ground was my bed last night, rocks was my pillow too.  Cold ground was my bed last night, rocks was my pillow too.  I woke up this morning, I was wondering what in the world am I gonna do?  But I laid down thinking, buy me a mojo hand.  I laid down thinking, buy me a mojo hand.  I just wanna fix my woman so, she can't have no other man.  Now, we're gonna boogie woogie, now.  Oh, let's boogie. I'm gonna boogie for the doctor. I'm gonna boogie for the nurse. I'm gonna keep on boogieing 'til they roll me in the hearse.  I got the boogie, the boogie woogie disease. Come here doctor. Give me a shot of that penicillin. Oh, keep on boogieing.  You know my mama didn't allow me to stay out all night long.  My mama didn't allow me. Just to stay out all night long.  But I don't care what mama don't allow. I'm gonna boogie woogie anyhow. Oh, let's boogie now." Now, this is the country blues (laughter).
Story_ID: 638854
Speaker 1: Now, we're gonna get low down, and this is the Delta blues.  It's a little different (playing guitar).  It's a different tuning, and this kind of music come from out the Delta country in Mississippi where the people pick cotton, and work on the railroad, (playing guitar).  And the blues is sometimes to have the man/woman thing, you know.  My baby don't love me (laughter).  My baby left me, but the Delta blues is a little different from the little country blues like that, because it has a little different rhythm.  You can recognize this (unclear). Oh, let's ride. Just like riding a horse. "I'm gonna get up in the morning. I believe I'll dust my blues.  I'm getting up in the morning. I believe I'll dust my blues.  Out with the best gal I'm loving, now my friend's gonna get my room. I believe, I believe my time ain't long. I believe. I believe my time ain't long.  I got a letter this morning. It's gonna break up my happy home. All right. Oh, let's ride now. Here's one for you.  Come on, baby don't you wanna go? Come on, baby don't you wanna go? Back to the never light city, sweet home, Chicago [Illinois].  All right baby, can you ride with your daddy tonight? Ah, baby, can you ride with daddy tonight? I want you to ride with me baby, while the moon is shining bright. Oh, let's ride. Oh yes, going back to Chicago." See, I could play this stuff all night, you know (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, thank you.  Thank you.  That was great.
Story_ID: 638855
Speaker 1: We talked about your different streams of income, right?  I guess, we should say.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The revenue streams.
Speaker 1: Well what, what else are you involved in as far as playing your music?  Are there parades, and festivals?  And I wanted to ask have you played behind any of, you know, maybe well known signers?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I've been a backup band for a lot of singers and acts, you know, through the years.  I could call of a few, like, Etta James.  I've played with Etta James.  She came down here to do some shows over at a local club called Tipitina's [New Orleans, Louisiana] and I was the backup band, you know.  Etta James was sitting right where you're sitting right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we did a rehearsal here, went out to eat, and played the gig with her.  And I got to know a little bit more about her and her personal life.  And we really, really connected, you know, as musicians (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you ever meet--have you ever met Wilson Pickett?
Speaker 2: Wilson Pickett.  I played behind Wilson Pickett at the college in Thibodaux [Louisiana] in the '60s [1960] before he was Wilson Pickett.  He sang in a group called The Falcons.  And they had a song out called 'You're So Fine,' and he sang that and several other hit records, so.  That's when I met Wilson Pickett before he was a big star.  I also met Marvin Gaye before he became a really big star, 'cause he used to tour in the South, playing through the Chitlin' Circuit and stuff like that, as an artist and he'd come by himself without a band.  Of course, I was backup band, and I played with him.  I remember on night in particular, I played with him and he came on the gig, you know, and said, "Hey, Deacon [HistoryMaker John "Deacon" Moore], we play a little drums before I start singing," you know.  So, he played a little drums, and he said, "Play a little piano."  And he came out and sang 'Pride and Joy.'  And he came out there and then he did 'Hitch Hike' and all that stuff, yeah.  He did his little steps and stuff; that was Marvin Gaye.  I played, man, with some of the real big artist because at the time, you know, I was like an opening act too.  I played Tulane's homecoming dance [Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana], backing up [HistoryMaker] Dionne Warwick before she came really big.  'Cause they brought her down her because one of her hit records was (singing) "Spread your wings to New Orleans" ['Message to Michael'] (laughter).
Speaker 1: "Kentucky bluebird," yeah.
Speaker 2: "Kentucky bluebird, fly away," so.  I played with Solomon Burke's backup band; Bobby "Blue" Bland [Bobby Bland], Little Junior Parker.  I played in Fat Domino's band for a while.  I played some gigs with--as an opening act for James Brown, [HistoryMaker] B. B. King, Ray Charles, Major Lance, The Impressions, [HistoryMaker] Jerry Butler, it's a whole slew of people back in the '60s [1960s].
Story_ID: 638856
Speaker 1: I actually met Curtis Mayfield when he was a backup singer with Jerry Butler and The Impressions back in, I think in '59 [1959].  I had a gig with Jerry Butler and The Impressions at the National Guard armory in Mobile, Alabama [Fort Whiting Armory].  And I was living with my mother [Rilda Augustine Boudreaux Moore] at the time.  So, they drove in from Chicago [Illinois], they had rehearsal at my mother's house, in the back room.  So, Curtis Mayfield walk in there with his big long leather coat and he had his hair all processed.  He had that rag tied around, du rag, you know.  The cat walked up and my mama said, "Oh Lord, where them people come from?"  (Laughter) I said, "Ma."  I said, "That's The Impressions, [HistoryMaker] Jerry Butler."  She said, "Who?  I ain't never heard of them."  And Curtis was sitting out in the back room and he had a little composition book, you know, and I peeped over in there and he was writing songs.  You know he's a prolific song writer.  I don't know if Curtis Mayfield, he wrote for Jerry Butler, Billy Butler, Major Lance, he had his own record company, started The Impressions and--but, anyway, I got to meet him, you know, before he got to be The Impressions or Curtis Mayfield.  They was like the backup singers for Jerry Butler and, Jerry Butler and The Impressions, and he was playing the guitar and singing.  But anyway, how he sat, when he was sitting down, man, I peeked over in that book.  And I saw the words of the 'Gypsy Woman.'  He was writing it out, and he was writing out 'I'm So Proud,' all them hits.  It was in his little tablet.  He hadn't recorded them yet.  And I was just kind of peeping out at 'em 'cause I was fascinated with it 'cause, he had a gypsy tuning on his guitar.  So, when he played his guitar, it was like nobody else's, 'cause he had a gypsy turning to it.  Have you notice whenever you hear Curtis Mayfield play the guitar, it's like nobody else.  He has a particular sound from the way he tunes his guitar, and people were trying to play, "Well, how does he do that?"  You know, and then I saw it right before my eyes I said, "Wow."  It just kind of floored me.  And I actually saw him sitting down playing that.  I say, "Man, how did you do that?"  And he showed me how he tuned the guitar.  I say, "Ah, that's how he did that."
Story_ID: 638857
Speaker 1: And later on when I played with Bo Diddley, I found out how Bo Diddley tuned his guitar.  He did the country blues tuning, but Bo Diddley had that beat straight out of Africa, and he used that open G tuning.  So Bo Diddley, I played with him, you know, over at the local club.  He came in this very room, rehearsed with us, went out to eat and all that.  But he--his sound came from that tuning, you know, he had (playing guitar).  So, I'm sitting right next to him (playing guitar and singing), "Bo Diddley bought his baby a diamond ring. If that diamond ring don't shine, he gonna take to a private eye. If that private eye can't see, he better not take the ring from me."  But I learned a lot, you know, from, you know, playing with different people, find out what their secret of success is (playing guitar and singing), "Mojo come to my house, a black cat bone, and take my baby away from home. Ugly ol' Mojo where's he been? Up to your house and gone again."  I was in heaven, when boy, I met Bo Diddley.  I said, "God, Bo Diddley, my hero," (laughter).  He had some of the funniest stories.  At the time I met him, you know, he was just really kind of bitter because he never gotten his rightful place in rock and roll history, which later on he did.  But he was really astute businessman on top of all.  Anyway, I learned so much from playing with all these different celebrities.  I got to hang out backstage with 'em, and when I was playing over at the Dew Drop [Dew Drop Inn, New Orleans, Louisiana], they'd all come and sit in, and we had these jam sessions 'til six, seven o'clock in the morning, you know.  I got to meet all these famous people 'cause that was during segregation.  You know, they only had a few places they could go to, and like the Dew Drop was the premier nightclub with a floor show, so everybody went over there.  If you was anybody in rhythm--like Ray Charles, Little Willie John, (Unclear).  They all came to the Dew Drop.  So, if you were hanging out there, you got to meet all the stars, you know, and hang out with 'em.
Story_ID: 638858
Speaker 1: Bring me up to today and, and some of the things that, that you're doing today.  Before you do that, we stopped where you had gotten married.  Did you have children?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell me your--who your children (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah. I got married and I had two children.  A boy and a girl, my first wife.  The girl was born first.  That's Lisa [Lisa Moore], and my son [Keith Moore] was about a year after her.  So, every year they were the same age for two weeks (laughter).  They were so close together.  I'm real close to my daughter now.  She's the only child I have left, 'cause my son was murdered a few years ago.  He was an artist, and they never found his killer.  It's, it's really tragic.  And I had another son [Jude Moore] from my second marriage.  He died when he was three months old, died in my arms when I was feeding him his bottle.  He turned blue and that was it, you know.  And everybody has some kind of tragedy in their lives, you know, and I've been through a lot of tragedy in my life too.  So, my mother [Rilda Augustine Boudreaux Moore] got killed from medical malpractice when she was in the hospital with her kidneys.  And that was really, like, one of the most tragic events in my life.  I had to sit there and saw her slowly deteriorate and die from medical malpractice.  We sued the hospital and won, but it was a pyrrhic victory because, I couldn't get my mother back (crying).  My mother was everything to me, you know.  I was her favorite son.  That's where I got all my talent from her side of the family.  She named me after her father [John Boudreaux].  And I used to, I used to take care of my mother when she became elderly.  And I would go cash her checks for her and bring her to the grocery store.  And I'd go over to her house, and she say, "Now, John [HistoryMaker John "Deacon" Moore] it's a song you better learn, 'cause if you're playing those weddings now, you better know this one."  And she get the piano and start playing 'Smoke Gets in Your Eyes.'  She knew all the classics and my mother was so dear to me.  To see her die and go in the hospital and never come out alive, you know.  Just was really (shakes head).
Story_ID: 638859
Speaker 1: Tell me about some of your other milestones.
Speaker 2: Well, the biggest milestone, milestone was the thing I'm most proud of out of whole career in music is been the fact that, I was able to support myself entirely by music.  I never had a day job (laughter).  So, I've done rather well.  I've had a really blessed career in music, but, just the fact that I was able to survive, you know, with just music alone is really a testament, you know, to the many blessing I've received out my life.  'Cause to tell you the truth, people ask me, "Where'd you get all those gigs?"  And I say, "I don't know, they just came from the sky," you know (laughter), 'cause my brother told me all the time, he said, "If you good at what you do, people will always seek your services."  And I guess that's a good rule of thumb, you know, because I always strive for excellence and a high degree of professionalism.  And I kept continually upgrading myself throughout the years, you know, to be more professional, to sing better and play better, and do more with my music.  And become a better professional and being able to be self-supporting and learning all of the many facets of business, you know, that enable you to be successful.  I have degree in business administration and, you know, it's been helpful to me in my--advancing my career.
Speaker 1: When did you go back to school?
Speaker 2: Well, I was married and then dropped out of school for twelve years.  And after I was married, and divorced, I went back to school, because my mama [Rilda Augustine Boudreaux Moore] kept telling me, "Now, son, you know this music all right, but you better have something you can fall back on, in case this music don't work out for you."  And I say, "Yeah mom."  And so, she encouraged me to go back to school and so I went back to school when I was in my thirties.  And I finished Southern University [Southern University at New Orleans, New Orleans, Louisiana] in 1977.  I got my degree in business administration.  I was playing music the whole time and I had my two kids [Lisa Moore and Keith Moore], you know.
Story_ID: 638860
Speaker 1: Have you played for--well, I understand you have played at the White House [Washington, D.C.] and other places.  Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: Well, to begin with, the White House, it's just a story a lot of people find hard to believe.  I was playing at the New Orleans Country Club [New Orleans, Louisiana] for a wedding, and the groom was from Texas.  And so, there was a lady from Texas came up and, "Oh, you guys are great.  Can I have a card from you?  And blah, blah, blah," and you know, people, so many people tell you all the time.  It just goes in one ear and out the other.  So, I said, "Oh, yeah, here's my card."  And there's a lady came up behind her, she said, "Do you know who that was?"  And I said, "I don't know."  I say, "I just gave her my card."  She said, "She might be calling."  And she said, "That's Laura Bush's best friend.  They went to school together.  They talk on the phone all the time."  She said, "You watch, you're gonna be getting a call from the White House."  And I said, "Ah, come on," you know.  And sure enough, the White House did call me (laughter), and, they invited me to play for the congressional ball at the White House for all the members of [U.S.] Congress and their distinguished guests.  So, I got a chance, you know, to actually play at the White House.  And one thing I found out, they said, "Oh, the White House never pays for entertainment.  We pay your expenses," (laughter).  So, you're in a position where you can't say, no (laughter).  Well, anyway, it was a, a really rewarding experience, you know.  I got my picture with the president [President George Walker Bush], and--
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: It was in 2005, right after Katrina [Hurricane Katrina].  And I think a couple years later, I got to sing for the inauguration of the first colored person, governor of Louisiana [Bobby Jindal] was Indian American, a brown skinned guy.  And they chose me to sing for his inauguration ceremonies.  And just this year, I sang for the inauguration ceremonies of Mayor Landrieu [Mitch Landrieu].  And I've made history somewhat by becoming the first elected African American president of the local musicians union [American Federation of Musicians Local 174 - 496].  They call me, the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] of the union (laughter).  And I've been getting--
Speaker 1: There--and what, I'm sorry.  What year was that?
Speaker 2: Two thousand and six [2006], right after Katrina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just wanted to make sure.
Speaker 2: I've been president ever since.
Story_ID: 638861
Speaker 1: --I've gotten some more honors and awards, you know, when I did my project called 'Deacon John's Jump Blues.'  This was like, the best thing that ever happened to me in my whole career.  I finally met up with the right people.  I met a producer that I had known throughout the years.  He was a--come from a family of prominent lawyers.  His parents owned the television station and the newspaper in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], and he was a musician himself.  And he had a vision of a special project where he wanted to pay a tribute to all of the great songwriters, artist, producers from New Orleans [Louisiana], from the period in music call the jump blues period.  Jump blues is the transition music that occurred between the demise of the big band swing era and early rhythm and blues.  It's--you can tell it right away, because it has the boogie woogie bands bassline and the rhythms that accompany rhythm and blues, the shuffle beat, and it has the horn rifts and all those characteristic things that came out during that period between swing music and early rhythm and blues.  They call it jump blues because the style of dancing that went along with the music was the lindy hop and the jitterbug.  And if you've ever seen films of the dance steps from the lindy hop and the jitterbug, the people actually jumped in the air.  They, jump, jump, everybody jump.  Please would jump and they would do splits, and come underneath each other, and flips and all that.  That was the popular style of dancing for the jump blues music.  So, my producer, he was the right guy.  He had enough money to do this in first class and he hired the best people in the business, scripted out the entire three part thing of--he had an amalgamation of gospel music, rhythm and blues, and it was all to pay a tribute to all of the people from New Orleans who made this special contribution to rhythm and blues music during the jump blues period.  People like pioneers in music like, Dave Bartholomew, Allen Toussaint, and he actually had some of the seminal performers to perform with me in this project like Dr. John, Allen Toussaint, Wardell Quezergue had like, a twenty-one piece orchestra with background singers and we did everything in a grand style.  We had a revolving crew of piano players, Henry Butler, Davell Crawford, Allen Toussaint, Dr. John, and he kept bring them on and off stage during the production.  And I had duets to sing with one of the ingenue, Sister Teedy [Teedy Boutte], and we did dance steps and a routine.  And the whole things was just like the highlight of my career.  He did a studio CD, a live concert DVD in high definition, and he also did a documentary film to document the history and culture of New Orleans using my life as a backdrop to tell the story.  Of course, you know, what really draw me to this whole production was that, he selected me to be the star of the show.  I said, "Man, why me?"  You know, he said, well, he said, "You the guy that can put it all together."  And what really got me excited about the whole things, this was the first producer that I met, he said, "Well, I'm really not really concerned with making a whole lot of money."  He said, "I'm more concerned with leaving a legacy behind as a producer and leaving something behind for future generations to enjoy and listen to, because this music needs to be preserved while the major performers are still alive, you know, to celebrate it."  And he followed through on everything that he promised, and he delivered and first class, you know, everything was done first class.  We had choreographers, emcee, we had dancers.  We had the best musicians he could find, and it all came together just like it was a labor of love, like--it was like, magic.  And that's the first time it ever happened to me.  And that was called the jump blues project.  And it's still around because it's the kind of music that will never die.
Speaker 2: And this project was done, what year?
Speaker 1: Two thousand and four [2004], right before--
Speaker 2: Right before Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) the hurricane.  Right before Katrina, yeah.  Well, we actually started in 2003 but, it was about a, it took about a year in production to get everything all lined up and put on tape, and it won a lot of awards.  It got played on PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] network all over the country.  And it got a lot of good publicity out of it.  And it's still not over with yet, you know.  But that was probably the biggest thing I ever did, you know, as far an artist is concerned, the jump blues project.
Story_ID: 638862
Speaker 1: And then the next year Katrina [Hurricane Katrina] hits New Orleans [Louisiana].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How does this affect you?
Speaker 2: Well, fortunately, I lived in the area of New Orleans where I wasn't severely impact my Katrina, 'cause I lived Uptown close to the Mississippi River, and the ground that I'm on is above sea level.  It's one of the few places in New Orleans--it's the ridge along Mississippi River on both sides, but--that weren't too severely impact my Katrina 'cause there was no flooding in my neighborhood.  I mean, I experienced some wind storm damage, like a, a hole in my roof, but I wasn't--I have, like, survivors guilt because, I really didn't suffer too much of the negative impacts of the hurricane because of where I lived in New Orleans.  I wasn't in the low lying areas and fortunately, my insurance covered whatever damages I had to my house, but I was able to move right back into my house right after Katrina, because I didn't suffer all the flooding damages that was prevalent throughout the city.  So, I was able to move right back in and fix my house up, fix the roof.  All through Katrina, I never lost phone service.  My electricity was on when I came back home, and my cable TV was working.  So, the only thing I had to do was clean out my refrigerator 'cause of the power outages.  But I was really blessed, you know, that I wasn't so severely impacted by Katrina, and I was able to resume my life rather quickly, except for the fact that many of my musicians were displaced by Katrina.  And it really became rather expensive, to keep the ball rolling, as far as, you know, keeping all of the musicians, bringing them back and forth, housing them to play the various engagements that I still had.  Some of them were cancelled, some of 'em weren't.  Some of 'em were relocated to other cities.  And I had the immense problem of, you know, my bass player was in Memphis [Tennessee].  My drummer was in Texas, and somebody else in Florida.  And I had to transport these people back and forth to honor all the contracts for the engagements that weren't cancelled, so.  Besides that, I just wasn't that severely impacted by Katrina as other people were in New Orleans.  So, I was able to resume my life pretty quickly compared to some other people, and I was fortunate enough to have bookings that weren't as apt to be cancelled, like weddings (laughter).
Story_ID: 638863
Speaker 1: What's gonna happen next for you?  What do you wanna do that you haven't done?
Speaker 2: Well, what I haven't done, I wanna get more involved in acting in movies and also have some little inkling to be a comedian.  Because, you know, everybody that knows me, knows what a prankster and joke--I'm always telling jokes and making people laugh.  And I've been like that ever since I was a kid, you know.  Even my mother [Rilda Augustine Boudreaux Moore] said that I'd be around the house making all my brothers and sisters laugh, telling them jokes to the point--I laugh at my own jokes, and I'd get put out of school for making wisecracks and telling jokes in the classroom.  But I maybe like to explore that but, right now, I'd like to get more involved into movies and television as an actor, and as a musician too, you know, actor slash musician.  And of course, I'd like to continue, you know, doing the--serving on the boards of organizations that help musicians.  I'm currently, I'm the president of the local musicians union [American Federation of Musicians Local 174 - 496].  I also serve on the board of directors for a group called Sweet Home New Orleans [New Orleans, Louisiana], which organized right after Katrina [Hurricane Katrina], to address the problem of the dislocation of the members of the indigenous culture, and taking care of their health needs, and organizing efforts to bring them back to the city where they can continue the promotion and preservation of the indigenous culture.  Because many members of our indigenous culture were poor people, and they lacked the resources to bring them back to New Orleans [Louisiana].  And so, this organization came into being to help people with their transportation needs, their health issues, housing, and create jobs for them, and various things like that.  I sit on the board of directors for them.  And I'm at the point in my life where, you know, I really had a blessed career as a musician, entertainer, and I want to give something back to the community that nurtured me and helped me be a success.  Particularly, to help the proponents of the indigenous culture are so important to New Orleans, and they help promote and preserve the culture in New Orleans that we all love so dearly.  A thing like the Mardi Gras traditions and this music that's so special, and I realize that if we want to keep things going, we have to be able to teach this special kind of music and culture to the young people coming up.  And it's almost like an obligation to the elders in the community; to teach this special culture and music to the younger generation coming up so that, when we pass, the culture will still be alive; to just have the younger people come in and take over and keep the culture alive.
Story_ID: 638864
Speaker 1: So, you talked about your producer and what he wanted his legacy to be.  What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Well, like, Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], I want my legacy to be, I spent my life trying to help people, and I've been doing that all my life.  I gave all these musicians good jobs which helped them to get a better standard of living, supplement their income and create opportunities for them as well.  'Cause some of the people who played with me in years past, have their own groups now and were able to sustain themselves making a living playing music as a result, you know, of my tutelage and inspiration and example that I set for them.  I've also been an educator too.  I taught blues in the schools throughout the State of Louisiana and elementary, and high schools.  I would give lectures and demonstrations on the, the--how blues music started and its influence on popular culture and how, well, this music came from and traced the development through the development of the guitars and the electric guitars, dobros.  And I bring all these instruments to my lectures and demonstrations and workshops and show the kids exactly where this music came from and let them see all the instruments and all of the stuff that I've accumulated, my knowledge and experiences ad pass it on down to the kids that are coming up.  'Cause, you never know, there might be some out in that audience gonna be the next Deacon John [HistoryMaker John "Deacon" Moore] (laughter), or the next Wynton Marsalis, you know, 'cause when I was doing this, there was a young guy who, I went to the elementary school on career days and he was the nephew of Sugar Boy Crawford [James "Sugar Boy" Crawford].  His name is Davell Crawford, and he said, "I remember you."  He said, "You came to my class when I was in sixth grade."  And he said, "I look up at you, and he said I modeled myself after you."  Now, he's one of our up and coming stars. Davell Crawford is a pianist and singer.  And he said he remembers me, so, from coming to his school and talking and telling 'em about the careers in music.  And you know, I've gotten so many rewards, you know, from the kids I've taught and showed them, you know, the truth about music.  Where it came from, and how it evolved and all how this rock and roll came into being.  And who were the people who started all this stuff and traced the development of how it started and how it evolved into hybrids and how the blues influenced--like, Bo Diddley said, "The blues had a baby and they called it rock and roll," so, (laughter).  I feel like I've contributed something to help people, and I want my legacy to be as someone who spent his life helping people and I think, you know, my life would've not been in vain if I help somebody.
Story_ID: 638865
Speaker 1: Is there anything that we have not spoke about, that you'd like to talk about?
Speaker 2: Well, there are, but I guess--
Speaker 1: Well, tell me--
Speaker 2: --under time constraints, there's so many things, you know, that I haven't talked about--
Speaker 1: Like what?
Speaker 2: You know.  Like all of the discrimination I went through during the--coming up playing music.
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about it.
Speaker 2: It was, it wasn't easy, you know, coming up during segregation of being a musician in this town [New Orleans, Louisiana], you know.  Having to--being denied some of the best jobs because of race and color.  And even the color discrimination within my own people, you know.  To be a person of color, you know, you often hear the plight of the tragic mulatto.  He's hated by one race and despised by his own people some time.  Because, people look at your skin color and they think that, you have advantages over them.  They say things like, "You couldn't've gotten where you are if you didn't--if you were black like me."  And of course, you know, those things are not true, you know, 'cause true talent rises above that, and--but still, you know, there were all of these negative stereotypes that were heaped upon me when I was coming up playing music.  Like, "Oh, he sound like a white boy.  Look at 'em, he can't sing real soul music.  He's too white looking."  You know, things like that, like in--during my career coming up trying to get recorded, you know.  I keep wondering, why, why I have the hottest band in town [Deacon John and The Ivories] and hardly anybody wants to record me as an artist?  And somebody whispered in my ear who said, "They don't think yellow niggers have soul."  That kind of hurt me, you know, 'cause, you know, and I started making some observations.  I said, "Well, I guess there are people who feel like that because, look at the record industry, and most of the people, you know, you are in rhythm and blues, you know, my chosen occupation, a lot of 'em don't look like me.  And then, you know, some of this occurred, you know, I can't prove this, you know, it's just some of the, the things I feel, you know, 'cause, I've never played in foreign countries.  I played one time in Mexico City [Mexico], but I've never played in Europe, Japan, and all those cities and never been on tour all over the country.  And I primarily just made my living being local and regional, making little one night stands.  Maybe I'll fly out to a gig, come back the next day, and stuff like that, but I never had any hit records enough to be touring the country and setting the world on fire and playing at all these foreign countries.  And sometimes I feel like, you know, I'm probably wrong but, people have told me, you know, "Man, unh-uh."  But I noticed that most of the people who went to play in these foreign countries, they have one thing in common, they don't look like me.  Usually, they have dark skin and I know for a fact that most of Europeans, they, they like their coffee black (laughter).  They don't want no cream in it.  They're purists and they think, you know, that because the color of your skin, you can't play the music authentically, which is not true.
Speaker 1: Well, do you think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I can't help but feel that way because I've--very few people have approached me about playing in foreign countries and, you know, it just makes you wonder why sometimes.  Especially, when you look at most of the people who go over there, they don't look like you.  And the music business, you know, especially in movies, it's all based on how you look.  And people have these stereotypical notions about, you know, music like blues, jazz, and gospel that, you know, it--you're gonna profess to be those kind of things, you gotta be black or a Baptist (laughter).
Story_ID: 638866
Speaker 1: Well, I guess people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean, you know--
Speaker 1: Well, if you look at--well, gospel, you know, didn't come out of the Catholic church, you know.
Speaker 2: No, right.
Speaker 1: So, and then the blues, from my understanding and you can correct me if I'm wrong, the blues came from the Mississippi Delta--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --here, you know, to New Orleans [Louisiana], and--
Speaker 2: Well, New Orleans had its own kind of blues.
Speaker 1: --that--well, yeah.  I mean, I guess everybody can sing the blues (laughter), sing the blues.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, maybe that's why.  You know, because the Mississippi blues players, you know, but, as you were saying before, when people can just hear you and not see you, it's different.
Speaker 2: Right.  It's different, yeah.  But and it's just--those, the whole color thing, you know, people don't give much credence to you unless you look like your music (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, you sounded like the music, I think, that you were trying to get across in--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in different ways.
Speaker 2: But you know, you know, during my career, I have faced a lot of discrimination and I came up during segregation when, you know, the law wasn't on your side, you know.  I can tell you some stories, like being stopped by the police in Mississippi and then tell you things like, "Nigger, get your black ass off them white shelves."  And I played one gig, one time, in Hazlehurst, Mississippi.  I played for a graduation party for some rich white kids, and we got ready to leave and I look on the windshield of my van and it was a card, a card, a little business card, something that had two eyes on it.  And the inscription said, "The eyes of the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] are on you."  And they let the air out my tires, and this was like in someplace in rural Mississippi where you turn off the highway and you got to go out a few miles.  You don't see nothing but trees and open fields so it's kind of scary, you know, to go out there.  And soon as you walk in all the waiters and cooks say, "Man, y'all the first black band ever to play here."  And you know, I showed the card to one of the parents, she said, "Oh, that's just them kids trying to play a prank on y'all.  Don't be--take that nothing too serious to that."  But still, you can't help but feel that, you know, here this a cruel joke to be playing on somebody, you know.  Especially, at a climate like it is now, in civil rights era, you know.  And then there were things, you know, like, I was playing at a white nightclub--this was right after the civil rights bill was passed [Civil Rights Act of 1964]--and in order to circumvent the public accommodation laws, many of the white nightclubs feared that their businesses would suffer if they let black people in the club.  They would lose all their business.  So, to get around the civil right laws, they would make these quote, unquote key clubs where you had to be a member of the club in order to get in.  And I was playing at one of the most popular ones called Soul City [New Orleans, Louisiana].  And we were playing the soul music at Soul City, a primarily white clientele.  And God bless her but, my wife at the time, Janet [ph.], she was a civil rights activist, the first one to pick up a picket sign, sit-in demonstration, all this.  She was like "Hey," (laughter).  So, she walks in the place one night, pushed her way through the door and said, "I'm Deacon John's [HistoryMaker John "Deacon" Moore] wife," sat at the bar and ordered a drink.  And the club owner said, "Man," he said, "man, can't you talk to her?"  He said, "Man, all the people talking around here," and said, "Tell her they got plenty booze and you got the dressing room, she can go in there.  We got plenty food and beverage, you know, have her drink (unclear) but, don't let her go sit at the bar.  People are talking, man."  He said, "Can't you tell her something," you know.  I look at him and I said, "Man," I said, I said, "man, my mother [Rilda Augustine Boudreaux Moore] came in here, you wouldn't let her come in here."  I say, "I quit."  And I walked off the job.
Story_ID: 638867
Speaker 1: You can tell us a few more stories if you'd like.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, you know, it just really infuriated--I got to the point where I say, "Hey, I ain't taking this no more, you know.  My wife comes in here, y'all won't let her sit at the bar and get a drink, and tell her to go in the back room and all this kind of crap.  And I'm making all this money for you and you got this Soul City [New Orleans, Louisiana] name up here, and you know, my people can't come in here, and the civil rights law has been passed long time ago.  Why don't y'all comply?"  You know, all those issues, you know, when they're all brought right in front of your face, you know, you snap.  And you know, and I was forced to take a position, you know, 'cause the guys in the band were looking up to me, you know.  "Man, what you gonna do?"
Speaker 1: Was the other guys in the band, were they light skinned or did you have dark and light skinned?
Speaker 2: Dark and light skinned in the band.  Yeah.  I just pick the best musicians I could.  It didn't matter what color they was.
Speaker 1: No, I understand that.  I was just wondering, because if you came by yourself into a place like that, people might not necessarily know that you were black.
Speaker 2: Well, they wouldn't know me because of who I was, 'cause, I'm instantly recognized when I walk in place, everybody, "Oh, that's Deacon John [HistoryMaker John "Deacon" Moore]," you know.  But there's some that might not know me.  I'll tell you an interesting story, you know.  This happened at a club, Tipitina's [New Orleans, Louisiana].  I was sitting at the bar and they had two guys sitting right alongside me.  They didn't know who I was, and they were arguing about whether I was black or white.  And one said, "Man, Deacon John is black, man."  The other said, "No.  Man, he's white, man.  You don't know what you're talking about."  And I was sitting right next to 'em and they didn't know who I was, you know.  I had a hat on and I had a beard and all disguised, you know.  But anyway, I was just laughing my behind off, 'cause here I was right next to 'em and they arguing about whether I was black or white (laughter).  And I had experiences like, white girls calling me up and telling me that, "I'm sorry but we can't let you play for our prom because the, the venue that we rented won't let black musicians play there."  Or things like, people used these veiled discrimination stuff, you know, like, they had these real successful white clubs but they only hire white bands.  And you go try to get a job there and they will tell you, "Oh, it's not anything about black bands singing.  It's the kind of music you play.  See, bands in here, we play nothing but rock and psychedelic music, we don't hire no rhythm and blues band.  It's not 'cause you're black or nothing, you know, it's just that's the kind of music we get in here," (laughter).  And then there's some other perplexing things, like, you know, back in the, I think the early '80s [1980s], I played a fraternity party.  And during that time, you know, it was real popular to have salt and pepper bands, you know.  So, I had some white guys in the band, you know, and we started playing the gig and the guys said, "Hey, take a break, I need to talk to you."  And he say, "What's with all these white boys?"  He say, "We thought you had a all-black band."  He say, "These salt and pepper bands are dime a dozen, man.  We thought you had something different, man.  That's why we got you.  We thought you were like Motown [Motown Records], an all-black band, then you show up with these white boys."  He say, "Man, this is not what we want."  And it just took me by surprise.  I said wow.  I thought I was being hip, you know, 'cause all the rest of the bands, you know, in order to be politically correct, you know, you had to have a mixed band.  A salt and pepper band, they called it back in those days.  And then, then you look at the other side of that, I couldn't get a job on Bourbon Street because--and a guy who was a club proprietor told me, he say, "Well, you know why?"  He say, "You gotta have a salt and pepper band to get on Bourbon Street.  You can't have an all-black band, 'cause people see a all-black band, they think all black people are gonna come in the club and then no white people gonna wanna come in." Who, (laughter) ain't this (laughter).  So, I just, it's just so many things in music business is so perplexing, you know.  You think you're doing the right thing, then all of a sudden then somebody tell you, "Well, you gotta have a salt and pepper band to get on Bourbon Street, 'cause people are afraid to hire an all-black band."  And then the other guy before you just told you, "Man, well, we don't want no salt and pepper band."  Say, "Them bands' a dime a dozen.  We thought you were the real thing.  We hired you 'cause you thought we had an all-black band." I said, "Oh, wow (unclear)," (laughter).
Story_ID: 638868
Speaker 1: What were some of the other things that you wanted to talk about?
Speaker 2: Well, it just, the discrimination, you know, that was in the music business, you know.  The better paying jobs were kind of reserved for the white musicians, and people in general, white people in general, they'd put more value on white musician than black musicians, you know.  And that, it's something hard to prove, you know, it just, but, you just notice things from observation.  Say, "Well, how come this white entertainer can get all this money, and then the black guy comes along and they put a ceiling on the black entertainers?"  "We not gonna pay them no more than this."  But the white guy comes along and they'll pay him a lot more because they're looking out for their own people, you know.  And they'll cut deals with him that they won't cut deal with you.  And they'll give him prime spots, prime times, and better dates than they would, you know, somebody else, and I experienced this personally, you know.  And then, then just some other st- I have so many stores I can tell, you know.
Story_ID: 638869
Speaker 1: There was a bust of Professor Longhair issue.  You probably don't know about this 'cause you're not from New Orleans [Louisiana].  Well, there's a nightclub called Tipitina's [New Orleans, Louisiana].  Well, I don't know if I'll get any lawsuits for this.  But anyway, it was called Tipitina's because the club was named after one Professors Longhair's songs.  And he was, like, supposed to be the founder of Tipitina's nightclub.  It was all based around him as an entertainer and an icon of the rhythm and blues people that typified New Orleans music.  But anyway, when he died, a sculptor had a bust of him on a pedestal at the--that they kept at the front door to honor his legacy, and they started a practice of rubbing Fess on his head for good luck.  And so, I took offense to that, you know, because they were coming in there rubbing Fess on his head for good luck.  And then they starting taping marijuana cigarettes to his lips, start putting coke spoons out his nose, and they were rubbing him on the head for good luck.  And so, I brought this to the forefront of the proprietor and I told 'em in a meeting, 'cause I was on one of the advisory boards of the club.  And we had a meeting and I told 'em, I said, "Well, my opinion, you should stop this practice of rubbing Fess on the head for good luck."  And I told them why.  I said, "This is a throwback to slavery.  It's an insult to all African American patrons who enter this establishment, because historically when a white man would rub a black man on the head for good luck, you know, that came from slavery."  And he acted like he'd never heard of that before.  I say, "Well, if you haven't heard, I'm here to tell you.  That's where that came from."  And I said, "This is--offends people, especially African Americans to see people coming and rub this man on the head for good luck."  And I said, "And personally, it offends me because I'm up on stage and I gotta watch this shit all night," you know.  And I said, "It's denigrating to the legacy of Professor Longhair."  And I said, "If he's y'all patron saint, he should be elevated to a position of honor where people can't touch him and draw mustaches on 'em and rug him on the head like a coon dog."  And he--and I said, "You can do what you want.  But you know, I just telling you, I don't like it."  And I said, "If you rub me on the head, I'm a punch the fuck out you," (laughter).  And you know, and besides that, I say, "What really offends me is you perpetrating a negative stereotyping of black people, and to top it all off, you using this as a tool to make money, 'cause you're selling t-shirts promoting this racist practice."  The t-shirt says, "Come rub the head."  And they got a picture of the bust below it.  I said, said, "Now you're making money off this stuff," you know.  You get on the Internet, click Fess' head for good luck.  I said, you know, "I'm just telling you the way I feel."  I say, "You can do what you want, this your club," you know.  But personally--
Speaker 2: Did they ever change it?
Speaker 1: He never change it.  His defense was, people feel a spiritual connection when they touch the bust of Professor Longhair.  I said, "That's just a smokescreen for racism," (laughter).  He said, "It's a time honored tradition that was established in this club and we intend to continue that because it promotes the club."  And you know, I said, "Man, I don't care what you say in your place, and I'm just telling you the way I feel about it, and I think you ought to stop that, you know, because you're denigrating the legacy of this man.  And you're reducing him to a coon dog, and you're perpetuating a negative stereotype in the black people."  And I said, "In this day and age, we shouldn't be in the business of perpetuating (unclear) that word, you're making money off this stuff," you know.  And of course, he said, "Well, you should have come to me in my office so we could have a one on one discussion.  Why did you have to bring it up in an open meeting?"  I said, "Well, I thought that this was the proper forum."  He, said, "Well--," (laughter).
Story_ID: 638870
Speaker 1: Let me ask you one last question.  And that would be, what advice do you have for students coming up, for the future generations?
Speaker 2: The advice I have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That--especially if those who wanna be in music.
Speaker 2: The advice I have for students coming up is that, you are really gonna have to study your craft and be the best of what you can be.  Learn how to read music.  Learn the business of music.  Join a professional organization like the musicians union [American Federation of Musicians].  There's so many myths about the musicians union.  But the musicians union is a valuable resource for information into the inner workings of show business.  What goes on behind the scenes?  What about publishing?  What about video, audio, technology?  You're gonna have to be really well versed in a variety of things besides just playing your instrument.  You're gonna have to learn, you know, how to negotiate song writing, publishing rights, and know the business, business of music.  If you wanna be successful as a musician, you're gonna have to realize that you just can't make it doing one thing, you know.  There's just so many of these superstars out here that are good enough, that just make just being an artist, just singing and dancing.  But even behind the scenes with those people like Michael Jackson and all, they have mastered the business of music, but you don't see that when they're out on stage.  But behind the scenes Michael Jackson has got his lawyers, and he's telling what he wants, and how to do it and this one and that one, and how to pick the best people, and all that goes on behind the scene.  And you have to be aware of what's going behind the scene and not just what's up there on the stage, and how to dress appropriately; how to be able to speak the language of the business of music; how to deal with competition, because the competition is gonna get worse and worse as the years go by.  Because the schools are turning out a plethora of really talented musicians that you're gonna have to compete with in this world.  And it's also, you're gonna have to look at how technology has been displacing musicians.  That's one of the biggest threats to musicians now is the technological displacement of musicians.  We're getting replaced by machines, and these are the monsters that we have created, and now they're threating our very livelihood.  And then you're gonna have to learn how to deal with these broadcasters, and publishers, and record companies, and things, you know, that I didn't have to deal with when I was coming up.  But technology and all this stuff has had a profound impact on the music business.
Story_ID: 638871
Speaker 1: So, if you wanna be established in a career as a musician or entertainer, artist, or singer, you had better learn your craft, and learn the business of music if you wanna be successful.  Because there--wherever you see fast money, there's gonna be a lot of crooks hanging around.  So, you had best be prepared, you know, to know what a good record deal is, what a good publishing deal is.  Who are the good guys who are lawyers, and who are the shysters who are the, the people that are out, you know, to exploit you?  And how to avoid, you know, all the pitfalls of show business, like drugs, and sex, and things that are used to manipulate people.  And you had best, you know, be aware of what's going on.  And the best way to do that, you know, is through education, and to talk to the elders.  Talk to the people, you know, learn from the masters.  Talk to the people who have been out here, and have been successful.  Surround yourself with excellence.  And music, you know, sometime can be a very cold, calculating business because your competition is people who would do anything just for an opportunity to be heard.  There are a whole breed of musicians out here that believe in, by any means necessary.  And people who live by two maxims, a little something is better than nothing, and if I don't do it, somebody else will.  And as long as you subscribe to those survivalist tactics, it's very difficult for us to make progress as a group of musicians.  'Cause it's this cutthroat mentality that exists in show business.  It's a pandemic.  It's all over the country, and you have to learn how to establish some kind of code of ethics to cut through that dog eat dog mentality in order, you know, to make it not better for yourself, but for all of your fellow musicians and artist.  I realize, you know, that these goals, you know, are kind of difficult to achieve.  And given the climate of show business, you know, people will do anything, you know, just for an opportunity to be heard.  And make yourself, you know, aware of, you know, show business.  Like I said, of course, I'm joking, you know.  But I make a big joke out of this, you know.  If you wanna be successful in show business, you have to remember three things: you have to keep your nose brown, your teeth white, and your lips shiny (laughter).
Story_ID: 638872
Speaker 1: This photograph is of me when I sang in the Corpus Christi Boys Choir.  I'm in the front row with the man with the biggest mouth (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is my father, Frank Peter Moore [Frank Moore], when he was a young man right before he got married.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next one.  All right.
Speaker 1: This is me when I graduated from high school, from St. Augustine High School [New Orleans, Louisiana], 1959.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next one.  All right, ready.
Speaker 1: This is my mother, Rilda Augustine Boudreaux [Rilda Augustine Boudreaux Moore] before she got married.  Brick house (laughter).
Speaker 2: She was a pretty lady.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Who is this?
Speaker 1: This is my great-grandmother.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Do you remember her name?
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: We called her Maman Meme [ph.], (laughter), which is Creole for great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And do you know her actual name?
Speaker 2: I can't remember her name--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: --right now.
Speaker 1: Didn't you give it to me earlier?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay.  This next person is my grandmother, my maternal grandmother.  Her name, maiden name was Viola Borsky [Viola Borsky Boudreaux].  She married my grandfather, John Boudreaux.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next one.
Speaker 1: This is--okay.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is me again, little John [HistoryMaker John "Deacon" Moore] on his way from school with his school books.  I must have been about six years old in this photograph.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.  Okay. Who are these folks?
Speaker 1: This is me with my first band I organized, Deacon John and The Ivories.  I'm the guitar player.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is me during the 1970s.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is me during the 1990s (laughter), when I was losing my hair.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is my family photograph of my parents and my twelve brothers and sisters.  I'm the one standing against the wall on the extreme left (laughter).
