Story_ID: 238550
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers, our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Well my name is Quentin R. Mease.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Q-U-E-N-T-I-N, R., is initial, M-E-A-S-E.
Speaker 1: Now what does the R stand for can you tell us?
Speaker 2: Ronald.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Well my date of birth was October 25, 1908.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where were you born?
Speaker 2: Buxton, Iowa.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well until I retired I was a YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] executive.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Uh.
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date oh this is January I mean, (laughter).  November 2, I should remember being (laughter) an election date--November 2, 2004.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: At my home at 3321 Calumet [Street], Houston, Texas.
Story_ID: 238551
Speaker 1: Okay, now before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions we always ask, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And the first of these lightweight questions is: sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Well, the entree or the main course (laughter).
Speaker 1: Whichever one.
Speaker 2: I guess it's steak, and my favorite dessert is well pie and ice cream.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Color?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I guess blue.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Well fall, winter in Houston [Texas] because of the climate (laughter).  I prefer the, the cooler cold months down here because I came from the North where we had the four seasons, but down here you just practically have one season.  So I prefer the, the cooler months - fall and spring.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well I'm--I like to travel, and when I get out of Houston--I don't do it extensively now as I formerly did, but I always--the latter part of the summer starting with August or in September I would--one year my wife [Jewell Mary Mease] and I would, would head for the West Coast where she had a number of family members.  And the other year we would head east going to-going up to Chicago [Illinois] where I lived for some years.  And to New York [New York] and Washington [D.C.] and then double on back home.  And then before she passed, whenever it was possible we would go abroad. But she died relatively early age.  And so, since that time, I've been so preoccupied with things here in Houston till I don't travel as extensively.  But we would drive to the East Coast one year and then the West Coast and even before that we used to take the train. That was before flying became so commonplace.  And--but I would like to just--well I have visited forty-seven of the fifty states.  I always have like to visit the various states and capitol. I had a travel companion who worked at the statehouse back home in Des Moines, Iowa.  And when we drive he'd make a point of visiting the capital and the statehouse there, so he had to meet them.  Due to my [U.S.] military experience and all and with my own, my own predilection to travel.  I've--not only the forty-seven states, but I've been in four of the five continents.  And it's only one more that I've got to visit before dying (laughter).
Speaker 1: And now can, can you give us--the last question in this series is--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite phrase (laughter) I don't know if I do (laughter)--no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Story_ID: 238552
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you about your family history.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: And I'm going to ask you about your mother's side and your father's [Charles Mease] side (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Uh-hm.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes. Her name was Cornelia that's C-O-R-L-E-I-A [sic. Cornelia] Frances Mease.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: M-E-A-S-E. No, no well her maiden name wasn't Mease it was Tate.
Speaker 1: Tate?
Speaker 2: Yeah if you want to get it.
Speaker 1: T-A-T-E?
Speaker 2: Uh-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was after she married.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Well her place of birth was Charlottesville, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was the date?
Speaker 2: (Unclear).  Let me see, she died when she was sixty-four.  And that was in 1960, so we gone have to quickly recalibrate, go back and get--
Speaker 1: Yeah 1896, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yes that's probably it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, couldn't be let's see. No that would make her too young to have you I think.  She'd to be too young to give birth to you I think if that was the case.
Speaker 2: I was the youngest in the family in 1908.
Speaker 1: Yeah but she would-she'd have to be born in--she was older than sixty-four when she died I guess (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, no, no, no she was ninety-four.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah ninety-four yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, that puts--
Speaker 2: That was--she died in 19--let's see she died 19 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sixty-four [1964].
Speaker 2: Sixty-four [1964], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was ninety-four when she died.
Speaker 1: Okay, that puts it about 1866 I guess?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause just somewhat accredited my (laughter) longevity--'cause my father [Charles Mease] died when he was in his early fifties, fifty-three or fifty-four during World War I [WWI].  When the German flu was so prevalent.  And he died 'cause he was in good health at that time, so--
Speaker 1: Yeah, from what I read, I read two different dates in the material.  I read one where it said 1918 and the other date was 1920?
Speaker 2: For the war?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: For whom?
Speaker 1: For, for your father's death was it 1918 or 1920?
Speaker 2: (Unclear) World War I was from 1914 to 1918.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And he died before the arms (unclear) so that would make it, yeah--
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighteen [1918]?
Speaker 2: Yeah 1918.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-hum.
Speaker 1: All right, now in terms of your mother's side of the family, how far back can you trace the ancestors on your mother's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, a niece there living in Maryland, she's doing the family--she's doing a lot of family research and history.  And she's compiled quite a bit of information. I can't do it--the only one that I can really--had any experience with was her father, my grandfather [Joseph Henry Tate].  And he, he was after I--well now his wife who would've been my grandmother for whatever reason she never came out to Iowa.  Maybe she had deceased before then.  But then he, he would at that time, you know, he would rotate among the different children because there were--she had two brothers, three brothers there in Iowa.  And a sister [Layther] Elizabeth [Mease], but two of those brothers and my mother were there in Buxton [Iowa].  So my grandfather he would rotate staying with one and then the other.  And he would--when was staying with us with the nieces oh he would--we benefited from a lot of the experiences during the Civil War and during the slavery days.  And also we learned a lot of the history from him. Now this niece, Yvonne Edwards [ph.], in Maryland, she has gone down to Virginia and other places where there was--where some of the families, family now resides to get this history of the family, and she's compiled a lot of information.
Story_ID: 238553
Speaker 1: What stories did your grandfather [Joseph Henry Tate] tell you about slavery and about those days? Can you remember any of the stories he told?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  Well, there's been so much told about it recently, but he used to tell me about how the slave owners and the overseers would treat them and all. And so much of it--that I don't recall, but it was some of his Civil War experiences.  And at dinner table on Sundays he would refight, refight the Civil War.  And he'd have a knife (laughter) he would be pointing as if it was (unclear) (laughter) a gun.  And then and, strangely enough, I don't know if they called a draft then but he was in the Confederate Army.  And he was a carpenter like two of his sons, in Iowa. They were carpenters.  And he would tell 'em--but say that during the later days when the Confederates at the South was losing then they armed a lot of the-- you know, in the early days of the Civil War in the South they wouldn't induct the slaves or black into the military as fighting men, as soldiers. Now, they were there, doing a lot of things there to serve the soldiers and hiding in the background.  But as the war became a losing cause to them then, then they gave these former slaves arms, that is guns, and bayonets, and swords or whatever to fight on their side.  And so that's how he got into it but he was on the--he was a member, part of the Confederate Army.  And oh he used be--(unclear) lessons sometimes my father [Charles Mease] would listen to him sometimes.  He would say all now (unclear)--you were you ain't you weren't doing anything there but just waiting on those just a service.  And that was it (laughter).  And he with this knife pointing as if it was a weapon of how he would do (unclear), but yeah.  It was very interesting how he would narrate about some of the things that happened during the Civil War (telephone ringing).
Story_ID: 238554
Speaker 1: Did your grandfather [Joseph Henry Tate]--first of all well how did he say slaves were treated? Did he talk about how--?
Speaker 2: Well it all depend on the--
Speaker 1: 'Cause he was a slave right?
Speaker 2: --the slave owner and the overseer that was the one who the slave owner--lot of times he was a businessman now while he had owned land probably.  But he might've been a banker, or he might've been working on something else.  And there wasn't too much contact with the slave owner.  He had these overseers and some of them, depending on the nature (laughter) of the individual, were nuts.  Some of them, when I mean were halfway civil and decent in their treatment of the slaves.  There were the others who felt the fact that they were free and, and superior to the slaves and used whatever authority they had to mistreat the slaves.  You browbeat them, and you've seen (unclear) stories about how they would strip 'em up to a post or something and just with, with those whips there just beat them, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did, did your grandfather talk about that, did he talk about that?
Speaker 2: He would tell us some of the--that have been yes oh yes he would tell and they--
Speaker 1: What did he--what--I'm trying to get at what did he tell you specifically himself about what happened?  Did he talk what, what did he say about it 'cause you got something here valuable--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You got the testimony--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --of a former slaves.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  Yeah, I was rather small at the time and sometimes I would listen and sometimes I wouldn't be listening.  But the thing--the points he would make is that the, the conditions under which the slaves lived it all depends on the owner and these overseers, the ones who really--they were the straw bosses.   And I say it just depends on the nature of the beast. Now some were very cruel, very vicious in the treatments of slaves.  They figured that these slaves were, were animals to be driven and gloried in the fact that as free human beings they were superior to the slaves who were brought out of Africa primarily as a beast of burden just to work.
Speaker 1: But how was he treated? Did you get an impression of how he felt that he was treated?
Speaker 2: He was treated a little better because as a slave he was a carpenter on the plantation where he was. Incidentally, two of his sons became carpenters even down in Iowa.  And he would do carpenter work. Now, you know, during the slave time there was a level of treatment of the slaves.  Those who work out in the cotton field and did the other backbreaking work under the hot sun and all, they were the lowest rank.  Now there were the others who worked around the big mansion on the plantation.   I mean depending on the, the fancy of the overseer and the owner.  The female slaves some of them worked at the mansion at the slave house they were cooks, maids and did other things around there.  But there were other female slaves who were out there picking cotton all day long, so that was that sort of gradation work.  And, of course, depending on the status of the owner, how much property he had, the same was true of the male slaves.  Those who were considered this big and burly spent all day out there picking cotton and doing other things out there.  But now there were the butlers and the cooks and the others who were at the ranch house, at the slave owner's mansion.  And see I've been in Texas so long I could (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess what I was trying to get at is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --was there a specific story he told about slavery that you remembered?  That you could pass on 'cause is--you know, I was just trying to find something very specific that he said about it, you know, that, that you might be able to pass on to us.  I mean one thing that's interesting is that he served in the Confederate Army, you know as a cook and so forth.  And then actually he said he fought in battles as a, as a Confederate soldier?
Speaker 2: Well yes that was as I, stated as the [Civil] War was going against the South, they ran everything (unclear).  That was when the slaves were there who were there mostly doing domestic things.  If there were offices, they were just like orderlies.  If you know, the military what a orderly would do.  There were others who if it was a cavalry, they attended to their, the horses, the mules or whatever things like that.  And, but they weren't allowed to engage in combat, in other words, they couldn't do it until the last year or so of the war and then that's when they were considered soldiers.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: In the fed- in the Confederate Army.
Speaker 1: --all I was trying to get, get at is what did he tell you about what, what happened.  'Cause I know all that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah sure, well yeah.
Speaker 1: And we can all read about the history.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: If he had a story about--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --about the Civil War that, that he told that you can remember.  But if, if you can't it's all right, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah sure, yeah.
Speaker 1: I guess.
Speaker 2: Well.
Speaker 1: Did you?
Speaker 2: He, he--as I say I was quite a youngster.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then, he, he might've told us something that I don't retain.
Speaker 1: But, you know that he was excited about it every time you'd talk about it right?
Speaker 2: Uh-hm, Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how long did your grandfather live?
Speaker 2: Pardon.
Speaker 1: How, how long did your grandfather live?
Speaker 2: Oh let's see I'm thinking, if I can remember.
Speaker 1: Did he die when you are still a little boy?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was still quite a youngster.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah that, that's sufficient.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I, I just wanted (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause I know he died before my father [Charles Mease] did.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's prior to--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: --nineteen eighteen [1918].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 238555
Speaker 1: Any other relatives talk about growing up, and did they all grow, grow up near Chancellorsville [Virginia] or did they all live around Chancellorsville, Virginia.  On your mother's [Cornelia Tate Mease] side?
Speaker 2: Yes, well on my mother's side they, they lived in Charlottesville [Virginia].
Speaker 1: Charlottesville, I'm sorry, Charlottesville.
Speaker 2: Charlottesville, and on my father's [Charles Mease] side it was Staunton, Virginia.  And he had one brother, Jack [ph.], but he never came to Buxton [Iowa], he remained where the first mine was Muchakinock [Iowa] which was oh about twenty miles to the east, so I never knew much about him.  Occasionally he would come over and visit but he never did migrate to Buxton.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did your mother talk about growing up in Charlottesville, did she talk about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but she was rather reluctant, she didn't like to talk much about it.  She just met him, of course, my father they well they came out to Iowa both of them when they were quite young.  Probably in their early twenties but they did remember some of the conditions--you see the [Civil] War ended in '64 [sic. 1865].  So see they'd been--they'd be quite, quite small.  Quite young and wouldn't have too much recollection of it.
Speaker 1: Well I was asking how did--if they talked about growing up, not about the war, about growing up whether they--I mean what did your mother say about going to school?  Did she have a chance to go to school in Charlottesville or you know (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: Yes she did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, now the two brothers, her two brothers, no three brothers--when I knew them they had already married and had families.  And so they didn't live with us, and then there was one sister and I don't know how she got there but she lived in Des Moines [Iowa] for some reason.  And she had a family up there, so never did get much out of them.  'Cause they didn't live with us, and so I didn't know anything. But my mother, she was rather reticent about talking about 'em because she said there was so many unpleasant or bitter things that she just didn't want to talk about it.  But my father and my grandfather [Joseph Henry Tate]--whatever information I got, I got it from them.  But as I say that I just--most of the time at the dinner table when my grandfather and my father would be refighting the Civil War, then I would learn some of these things, but I didn't get too much of it then.
Story_ID: 238556
Speaker 1: So is there--is there a story about how your parents [Cornelia Tate Mease and Charles Mease] met?
Speaker 2: I don't recall because they, they met before they came to Buxton [Iowa], in that first coal mine that was in Muchakinock [Iowa].  As this the railroad company consolidated, they owned all of these mines.  When one mine would play out somewhere or there was no more coal was around, then they'd come on and moved to another.  Now Muchakinock was the first one I had recollection of--they became acquainted there, and the county seat was Oskaloosa [Iowa].  And my mother, she didn't want to live there in Muchakinock.  So it must've been just a few miles apart where it must--I don't know--that's where they moved and he would somewhere other would go to the mine.  And she was quite enterprising because she was a dressmaker, seamstress, and yet at a rather young age she was engaged in her sewing and all.  And I don't know, know if any of his income but she purchased three houses there properties there in Oskaloosa.  And I recall as a just a young (unclear) probably not ten years old we'd go over there in the fall of each year and go to the courthouse and pay the taxes and all.  And she owned that property and then she bought some property there in Redbird, Oklahoma.  And that was when--excuse me when the oil business was booming in, in Oklahoma, and I went down there with her once or twice to pay taxes.  And she lived in the vain hope that oil would be found on that property.  And I don't know maybe it was but she was way up there in Iowa.  And she was never notified but she, she was unusual in that way she was a dressmaker seamstress and yet she owned the property there in Oskaloosa and also in Oklahoma.  And yet she was a person of--I don't know what level I know she'd never went to high school because there wasn't any high school in Buxton.  And I'm sure wasn't in any in Muchakinock but with those things she did. And she was in the poultry business (laughter).  She had two big hen houses, one was for the, the hens would roost and the other one was where we'd collect the eggs and where they would be hatched and so forth.  But she did all of those kind of things. She was a marvelous person from that standpoint.
Story_ID: 238557
Speaker 1: Now what was your father's full name?
Speaker 2: What was his name?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Charles Henry Mease.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I haven't--
Speaker 1: You say he was born in Staunton, Virginia?
Speaker 2: Beg pardon?
Speaker 1: You said he was born in Staunton, is that what you said earlier?
Speaker 2: Staunton, Virginia.
Speaker 1: And he was in his early fifties when he died in 1918 right?
Speaker 2: Yeah I think he was in his early fifties or somewhere.
Story_ID: 238558
Speaker 1: That's myself there when I--yeah this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the middle was who?
Speaker 1: Is William C. Craver my predecessor the man I succeeded.  And this is Thornton L. Manpley [ph.] he was on the staff at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association].
Speaker 2: Graber's name is spelled C-A-R (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: C-R-A-V-E-R Craver and Manpley M-A-N-P-L-E-Y.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay now.
Speaker 2: You ready, ready?
Speaker 1: What about this one?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: This right here--myself on the left number then the other one is Jay Hanson Jamison [sic. Jim Jemison] we're out there when the Astrodome [Harris County Domed Stadium, Houston, Texas] was under construction.  We went out there, and I'm pointing out to some of the--some of the work that's going on there.  That was the Astrodome when it was just that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's Barbara Jordan I think.
Speaker 1: Okay tell me about this one.
Speaker 2: Now this right here is Congresswoman Barbara Jordan whom I invited to speak at this occasion.  And I was welcoming her at the entrance.
Story_ID: 238559
Speaker 1: Sir, well tell us about your father [Charles Mease], your father's side of the family.  Did he talk about his ancestors?  Or do you know very, very much about his relatives?
Speaker 2: No I don't 'cause none of them came to Iowa. And I don't recall--he may have but I don't have any recollection of him.  And his brother who was one of those young blacks who were brought out to be coal miners.  He never came to Buxton [Iowa], he stayed over there in Muchakinock [Iowa].  And I think he eventually moved to Oskaloosa [Iowa], which was the county seat at that time considered a big town at that time compared with the coal mine.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your, your father moved to Buxton to join his brothers?  Were, were his brothers there already when you moved?
Speaker 2: No my father he was there in Muchakinock and then when the mines began to play out and all and, and the coal company then they're the ones who would move the miners to the more new mines whatever their purposes served.  So that's how he came to Buxton, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I guess what I'm asking was how did he get to Iowa in the first place.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: So what year--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --did he come to Iowa?
Speaker 2: Oh, he was--the, the company, coal company United Coal (unclear) they would go into these southern states where young blacks were.  And when I say recruit them just whatever they did to induce them, you know, to join to come out there.  Now I don't recall just how they did get them to enlist or sign up to do that.  Never heard that discussed but all I know is they, they brought them out by literally the thousands.  Because Buxton had (unclear) had about six thousand population.  And they often said that a good 80 percent or more were, were black, African Americans or as they were called then, Negros. And these miners--and as they married and, of course, had families.  But now the whites there then they were--some of 'em were in their business some of 'em--a few of them were miners.  But others they were in business, of course, had to be a business community just to serve the touring communities over there.  They were there in business operating the markets, the stores, the bakery.  It was a bank there and some other things all of em, you know, went to serve the population, and they were there.  I don't recall many of them being in the mines never heard much of that so but I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what--do you know what year it was that they moved out there to Iowa?  Or about what year it doesn't have to be exact but, you know was it before the turn of the [20th] century or?
Speaker 2: Now, now I know my father died, and we continue to live in Des Moines [Iowa] (laughter) I mean in Buxton for about two years.  I think it was about 1920 when my mother [Cornelia Tate Mease] decided--because the coal company then were recruiting and moving a lot of the, of the miners and their families to the new mines.  In about 1920, a mine called Haylock [ph.], and she didn't want to do that.  And she had a sister living there in Des Moines.  (Unclear) and her family and at times I'd go up there with her being the baby of the family.  And so I got to know when--well anyway she decided that she and the rest of the children she was just going to move to Des Moines.
Story_ID: 238560
Speaker 1: We talked about your father [Charles Mease] off-camera, but we never talked about him on camera.  In terms of what he was doing with the union and with John [L.] Lewis and him being the justice of the peace.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Can, can you talk about that some before we have your family move?
Speaker 2: About my father?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well he originally came to Buxton [Iowa] as a part of a large contingent of black young men for the sole purpose of men workers there in the coal mine, the mine United Coal (unclear).  But he like my mother [Cornelia Tate Mease] was quite enterprising and he and some other young men, Jacob Wilson [ph.], I remember that name, and others.  They got into business they operated--owned and operated a laundry and a bakery.  And then because of his I don't know drive and enterprising issue he became justice of the peace in addition.  Then he was also--the biggest building in Buxton was the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association].  And the coal company built that it's a kind of a community center and that.  And it was a three story building, and it had a big auditorium, a gymnasium, meeting rooms and all.  And that was really the center of the focus of the community life they the only builder there.  And he was chairman of the board of the YMCA for most of his life for about they say about twenty years.  And he did that--he was chairman of the deacon board at the church until he died about that time.  So he, in fact, he quit the mines, I mean as a coal miner.  When he got involved, you know, I mean this bakery and the laundry.  And then the justice of the peace and other things.  So on one side he was doing that and the other side my mother she was a dressmaker and doing her thing.  So that's some background for the parents.
Story_ID: 238561
Speaker 1: You said your father [Charles Mease] knew John L. Lewis?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, he knew him, yeah--they as young men both of them were--my father he was a miner.  But being very enterprising, with John L. Lewis they became organizers.  Some of the other mines they would go there that there were non-union and would organize.  And that's how John L. Lewis got his start as an organizer.  And eventually--well the--but not only there in Iowa but southern Illinois, which was a coal (unclear), Indiana, you know, as far east to Kentucky.  I used to hear 'em when he'd come back telling about some of those things.  And they became very close friends due to that experience.  But I say sometimes when the coal company would charge Lewis with an engagement into something a big old activity we reckon.  And, and preferred charges my father was the justice of the peace or town (unclear).  And he'd have to hear it, and that's why he'd be on one side of the fence John L. Lewis on the other.  And yet they had the background where both of 'em being miners (laughter).  So it was quite interesting to have them arguing 'cause sometimes I'd be all ears listening, but I didn't know what was who was right and who was wrong (laughter).  But I guess my father was interpreting them all but then and (unclear), (laughter) but that's just some of the background I had.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I'm meant he wasn't content to be a miner as I say he was in these businesses, he was active in the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], down at the church.  And then he was there when--with Lewis organizing miners in the (unclear) so then he died.  As I say relatively old age, I mean young age, he only out he was in his early fifties when the German flu was a raging epidemic then.  And of course, medical science hadn't developed to the point it is now.  And you don't hear of it anymore like that those raging epidemics but medical science has come up with the various things.  But in those days when the German flu--then later on I can remember which ya'll said there was Spanish influenza, and they were called epidemics.  Well, I think medical science reached a point now they know how to--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 238562
Speaker 1: You said in 1920 your mother [Cornelia Tate Mease] moved the family to Des Moines [Iowa]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay you were about--let's see 1920 or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was, I was--yeah.
Speaker 1: --twelve--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --years old, yeah.
Speaker 2: I was, because when I got to Des Moines I was in the eighth grade.  And, you know, the highest was--now there in Buxton [Iowa] where the--there were two-they called 'em grade schools, now they're elementary.  And we lived on Second Street right close to downtown just one block and that school was called Fifth Street Grade School [Fifth Street Elementary School, Buxton, Iowa].  And then further south was the Eleventh Street Grade School [Buxton, Iowa].  And that was interesting because of the population might been eighty-plus percent.  But all the teachers in the Buxton schools were black (laughter).  Plus the postmaster was black, one meat market we used to call it the butcher shop it was owned by blacks.  And well that was then now most of the white population lived in the east part of Buxton, and we used to call it Swede Town I guess about a word the Swedish background and that's where the Swedish Lutheran church there.  And they had they own industry but anyway as I say there weren't any it wasn't a municipality.  So we didn't have any mayor or judge or city counselor or anything but whatever the official capacity including the postmaster. And the teachers, the principal of the two schools they were, were black. And then when I came to Des Moines, which is largely a white city when I moved.  At that time, the black community owned about six percent of the population in Des Moines.  And but the schools were open, no segregated schools there.  And the--but the teachers including the principals of all the schools were white.  And it wasn't until it happened around '40 [1940] in the early '40s [1940s] 'cause I remember the first time I came home on a furlough, the first black teacher in Des Moines was hired.  Now see the way these things are. Then I remember--
Speaker 1: That's not until the '40s [1940s], mid-'40s [1940s].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was, I was inducted in the [U.S. military] service in '42 [1942].
Story_ID: 238563
Speaker 1: And then I remember when I got out of [U.S. military] service, and that was '46 [1946] and I went over to Chicago [Illinois], because I'd been accustomed to going to Chicago as a youngster.  So I knew the way there. That was when the Savoy Ballroom [Chicago, Illinois] was a big thing, and the Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois] (laughter) was all out there on the South Side.  And we used to go downtown but I remember [Ottaway O.] Morris was executive of the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], and I knew him from St. Louis [Missouri] before the war [World War II, WWII].  He told me he said, "Well [HistoryMaker Quentin] Mease we made some changes here." He says, "Now you can sit anywhere at the theaters.  And most of the hotels you can go and stay at the YMCA."  Now Wabash YMCA on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] and the industry branch in Evanston [Illinois] were the so call the two colored YMCAs.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now you couldn't join any other YMCAs in Chicago at that time.  And when he says now things are moving up.  Says that our men and boys 'cause women didn't, didn't weren't members of the YMCA (laughter) and anything.  As far as staying in the residency nothing.  And he says that our men and boys don't have to come to Wabash or Evanston Street, they can go to any YMCA and said some of the hotels had open, not all of them.  But say they gradually coming in and he went on to tell me I how it came.  He says this is something we worked for some of us who are inclined to do that.  And--but says that a sword of the pendulum swinging both ways.  Says that here we and the YMCA glad of it but at Wabash and it's affected our membership some.  And say the residency they're gone which way want.  Say that we used to didn't say for all the times they now they didn't see any others.  And then the big YMCA Hotel [Chicago, Illinois] down there than was on Wabash [Avenue] just south of the Hilton [Hotel].  Was the biggest was the second biggest in Chicago was about eighteen or twenty stories close to two thousand rooms.  And he says you can stay at Wabash, you can stay at the South--what was it called-all, any of the branches that had residents.  And he said one time he has separate camp for the white boys they went to a camp they had two or three of them.  For the black boys, it was around the lake there where Wabash had a branch.  And he said now we have to work to fill up our camp because our youngsters (laughter) had another camp.  So he said it works both ways--that it's cost us something.
Speaker 2: Can, yeah--
Speaker 1: I mean we experienced that in Houston [Texas].
Story_ID: 238564
Speaker 1: Can you tell me like what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Growing up you said, well where do I begin if you say that?
Speaker 1: I think at the beginning.
Speaker 2: Sights?
Speaker 1: Yeah, sights.
Speaker 2: In Buxton [Iowa] or Des Moines [Iowa]?
Speaker 1: Either one, you know, just let, let us know which one.
Speaker 2: Well in Buxton as we said before it was an unusual community.  Being predominately black, I didn't, we didn't know what segregation was there because there weren't enough whites there to make it profitable, you know, to have any, so it wasn't until I went to Des Moines that we, we experienced it.  Now in Iowa had gone back to the early days.  Had a civil rights statute as a state law, and segregation was illegal there. But I've often said in Des Moines like a lot of northern cities that did have morals forbidding segregation, but yet de facto, they practiced it.  Now Illinois they did Chicago [Illinois] for instance (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now in terms of sights and sounds and smells what were the--so you saw different--when you were in Iowa?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean when you were in Buxton.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You saw black people in charge of things and doing things that you didn't see in Des Moines?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah right.  But then I saw that there now when I got to Des Moines the school.  Ada Franklin Grade School [ph.] there were a few black youngsters there, but most of them were white.  But the principal and the teachers were white.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And that continued when I entered high school [West High School, Des Moines, Iowa] there were no, no black teachers, the principal and all of them, but there was a marked difference then what I had experienced in Buxton (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, well what did they look, you know, I guess we, we're asking about sights and sounds and smells.  We want to get a sense of what it looked like and what it smelled like. I've never lived in Buxton.  I don't know what it looks like. I don't know what smells you smell every day, what, I mean what do the people look like, what kind of streets did you have, what kind of, you know, what was around you?
Speaker 2: Well, Buxton, 'cause as I would say there been a number of books been written about Buxton.  How unusual it was, it was a mining town, 90 percent black.  Where blacks were in position that at that time was unknown to a lot of the much larger cities and all, because whatever leadership there was largely black.  And so we came up with that feeling of complete abandon of freedom as far as I go anywhere and, you know, do anything.  We didn't experience any form of it. It wasn't until I got--arrived in Des Moines I began to experience it.  Although it was illegal, but the, the facilities and all, except public facilities were closed.  Or open on a segregated basis (unclear). But the unusual part growing up in a city like that, I grew up rather--well all of us did rather free spirit.  Yeah because usual circumstances of the community and all we didn't experience it until we, we'd go out of the city to visit other places that we experienced it.  Now not only Des Moines but that was true when we would go up to Chicago, or Kansas City or St. Louis [Missouri], any other cities.  We experienced segregation and of course, we knew it was there, and there was some things there that were open but real contrast to what we were experienced back home.  And when the word came that the mines were closed and that the town-meant the town was going to literally close to there was a lot of lot of sadness and disappointment.  But our people like my family moved to Des Moines, others moved to Cedar Rapids [Iowa], to Waterloo [Iowa], some moved to Chicago, up to Detroit [Michigan], Milwaukee [Wisconsin].  They just spread all out, so you said the sights and the sounds.  The thing was there was just a feeling of complete freedom and abandon that was back there then.  Until we went to the other places that we experienced it and while it didn't come as a shock, but we sensed that we left something that was maybe you would say unreal at that time.
Story_ID: 238565
Speaker 1: What kind of a little boy were you, what did you--what were you like what did you like to do and what was your personality like?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  I have to be rather subjective to say what I was.  I don't know if I was--just a typical youngster (laughter).  I was the youngest in the family.
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 2: I have three brothers [Henry Mease, Edward Mease, and Leo Mease] and one sister [Layther Elizabeth Mease], and since I was--I dwelled on that my mother [Cornelia Tate Mease] was a dressmaker.  And my sister grew up to be her assistant she became a seamstress too.  But also my mother wanted all of us to be more than just, you know--she insisted that my sister be a musician.  So every Friday I think it was, her name was Bertha Gaines [ph.], I think would come there and give her a music lesson.  Now as far as myself I became--because of my father [Charles Mease] though I became very active as a youngster hanging out around the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association].  And they had the big building and then there was a small building just to the left of it, it was quite big, it was called the boys building.  And so the boys couldn't be a part of the, of the men's YMCA 'cause they had the swimming pool in the gymnasium and then on like that.  So and maybe that's what led to my being in the YMCA as a career by experiencing that as an early thing.  But as I said I was a free spirit because of the conditions in the community there, no segregation.  And my father was very active, my mother was very active in things.  And I came up with that feeling that I didn't want to be yeah well I maybe shouldn't say that because I would have to be subjective to say what I was (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well now I'm asking you to be subjective actually.
Speaker 2: It helped me a lot.
Speaker 1: This is, this is your story, about your life, so--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: I, I'm asking you to be subjective actually.
Story_ID: 238566
Speaker 1: (Unclear) yeah, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Let's say because of the leadership qualities of my mother [Cornelia Tate Mease], I mean my father [Charles Mease] as I told you not only justice of the peace, a businessman, a YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] chairman, church and all of that, I always felt that there--I should educate myself, that is grow and develop so that I could be something or make--be a worthwhile person in the community and I do some lecturing.  Now, my older brother, my oldest brother he was--he had a business, mail order business. And he always had the hope that I would stay there with him in Des Moines [Iowa].  But because of that background and much more I wanted to be in some kind of get educated and have a professional career and background so I could make a contribution to society.  And I was encouraged since I was there at George Williams [College] in Chicago [Illinois] and doing a part-time with the YMCA.  The--when I finished, got my degree and all, I had offers from at least six other cities Detroit [Michigan], Los Angeles [California], Louisville [Kentucky], Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and one other.  And I was working part-time at Chicago YMCA, so I was induced- well encouraged by the executive down here to come up there and interviewing like other cities to come to Houston [Texas].
Speaker 1: (Unclear) Well we got (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had never lived in the South.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And but he did something that the others didn't do, he offered me (laughter)--I made not only--he, he had a airline reservation for me to come down there.  He says "Come down and see what it's like it's not like some Atlanta [Georgia], Birmingham [Alabama] or some of those other cities in the South," mainly Houston.  And we need someone to come there and can get the black community energized to the point to put up a building.  At that time, the YMCA here was in the downtown--not downtown, near downtown building and just had three rooms and offices and to other rooms.  It was the only YMCA in the country where there's a large black population that had oh what they call comprehensive building.  A big building that had offices, community rooms, gymnasium, residents and all that and said that the community here then the black population was something in it- about 150,000.  And yet just three little old rooms down there and they said that they needed, and my predecessor had already reached sixty-five and at retirement age and wasn't going to retire say "Well Mr. Craver's [ph.] gonna retire now.  We need someone to come down and overcome the feeling in the black community that they had been cheated out of their right to have a building."  'Cause a prior campaign they had raised money and with the World War II [WWII] coming on well things were frozen materials, and they could build it.  So anyway, I came down on, on my first trip I think and, and visited with them.  Now I had been in the South before, and so it wasn't any doubt with me about segregated city and all.  But I figure I could come here and in about three years we could get a building program going building.  And then I was either headed back north or headed west 'cause I thought I could go to California to them.  And--but it took longer than that. I came in, in '48 [1948].  And we didn't get the building campaign going until '52 [1952].  And didn't get the building complete until '55 [1955], so it took much longer.  Well, we got the building open but I got in about--I got married my wife [Jewell Mary Mease] was a San Antonio [Texas] girl.  And had family over there and her brothers all out in California and she was reluctant to be here 'cause she wanted to be close to the family.  Well with that one thing, and secondly my folks up home they were quietly opposed to my idea of coming south.  So 'cause they figured I'd come down here and, and just out of the [U.S. Military] service and I was a free spirit I might just do or say something, get me in trouble.  And my rationale for coming here, now, I say, Houston, Texas, I say they're south, but they're southwest.  Not like the old South and they're segregated.  But I said it's not that vicious spirit here so far, so I come here (laughter).
Story_ID: 238567
Speaker 1: Okay, when you were a youth what did you want to be?
Speaker 2: Well I had learned that in Des Moines [Iowa], that--I was in Buxton [Iowa], that there was a man who--he was a football star and all at The University of Iowa [Iowa City, Iowa].  But, but he graduated as a civil engineer named Archie Alexander, which was unusual in those days.
Speaker 1: Was, was he, was he black?
Speaker 2: Beg pardon?
Speaker 1: Was he black?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah, (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Go head.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He was the first black civil engineer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause he graduated from the University of Iowa.  And his native home was Des Moines, so he came back to Des Moines and formed his own firm, Alexander & Repass and another fellow with him incidentally this was a white fellow.  Also, he graduated from the university (unclear).  And they became--it's unusual at that time, a black civil engineer and they did some small jobs.  And then his fame--it was unusual then for a black person--man to be a civil engineer and got jobs in other cities.  And then in Washington, D.C.  One of the big overpasses or dams there name the--I once went over there to see it. A big project in Washington D.C.   But Archie Alexander became very unusual for that day and time a civil engineer.  And so I decided I was going to be a civil engineer.
Story_ID: 238568
Speaker 1: Did you pursue that [civil engineering] in high school [West High School, Des Moines, Iowa] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, when I got, yeah when I got in high school I started taking courses.  I took all the math courses from algebra, geometry on up through the trigonometry.  And I--for some reason though I took a lot of Latin.  In the back of my activity, they say you take a lot of Latin if you going to be a doctor.  But I had to go up through Cicero, Cicero and I forget that other, but I think third year.  But my mind was all time was to be a civil engineer.  And but my brother that older brother I had in mind I would join him.  Well anyway, but there was a small branch YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] in Des Moines [Iowa], and I would hang around there a lot because of the background there in Buxton [Iowa].  And these were [Great] Depression years and when I finished high school and entered Des Moines University [Des Moines, Iowa], which was the two universities there.  The Drake University [Des Moines, Iowa] and Des Moines I figured that I would go there until I had whatever resources necessary to be able to either go to Iowa City [Iowa] where the University of Iowa is, and they had a engineering school. But in those early years when the, the Depression occurred--let's see it's the during World War I [WWI] and things were all turbulent.  And I didn't know where we were, I didn't go, and so I got some little small jobs.  And finally though when I entered Des Moines University and finished there then I came out.  And I was hanging around the Y [YMCA] anymore they had this little small branch.  And things were so difficult with the YMCA in Des Moines, it just hopelessly in debt--I mean with the big YMCA, the white YMCA.  That they couldn't employ an executive where they use to call 'em then the secretary of the Y.  And we kids hanging around there, and somebody on the board come up with the idea that to keep that branch open they said well [HistoryMaker] Quentin [Mease] he grew up around the Y in Buxton.  And his father [Charles Mease] and Al Spriggs who was an older feller that worked with some of the clubs told us to work part time.  Share the experience my, my starting salary working there at half time during the day and then he come in the evening from his other job was fifty dollars a month.  And (laughter) and did that, and that was in about 1931.  And I stayed there until '42 [1942] when I was inducted in the [U.S. military] service.  So because of that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you were there ten years?
Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughter).  And the salary increased so when I left to go in the service my salary was $150 a month (laughter).  But that was good, considered pretty good money then.
Speaker 1: Yeah it wasn't bad for you and, and were you (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But then it was interrupted with the four, nearly four years in the service--three years and ten months.
Speaker 1: But you got a, you got a degree from University of Des Moines [sic.] during that time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah undergraduate degree there and went into military service.
Story_ID: 238569
Speaker 1: Now before we leave--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Des Moines [Iowa], were there any teachers or mentors in Des Moines that you remember that helped you out?  Any teachers or mentors or people that you remember that really were important to you when you were?
Speaker 2: In Des Moines?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember well one who was interesting because of her I guess I was getting good grades. I was able to skip one year. Now her name was Mrs.-- Miss or Mrs. Wadsworth [ph.] I don't know if she's married.  But she was a big lady, and she recommended I skip a half of year which would be kinda amount to a semester here.  A semester now, and it was another one who used to help me a lot.  I can't I know it, it was in Latin.  I'm trying to think of her name but--after we finish I'll probably think of it, and it's been so many years ago.  But I used to remember Ms. Wadsworth.  She, she was a big, jolly lady.  And she--'cause I was getting good grades that's when she recommended my promotion, half a year.  And then I was out of school for a few years before I entered Des Moines University [Des Moines, Iowa].  Helping my middle brother. He had a maintenance business and I would help him downtown and some other places where he had maintenance-did maintenance work.  Now I don't know if I'm skipping, but when he moved to Omaha [Nebraska] with his family, he turned over these jobs to me.  And so I was doing those while working part time at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association].  But I didn't mind it 'cause I was then earning more money than a lot of married men with families (laughter).  Well, that's another story. I don't know now if I'm digressing and getting off of track.
Speaker 1: No, that's, that's true you, you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you're right--
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: --for those days that's, that's pretty good money.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but how I got in Y [YMCA] work I said that because of the [Great] Depression they couldn't afford to bring in a trained secretary, executive--to be the executive.  Al Spriggs and I were induced to, to keep the, keep the branch open, to keep the doors open (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you were about--?
Speaker 2: --to do that.
Speaker 1: --twenty-four years old I guess then?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: You were about twenty-four in 1931?
Speaker 2: Well I think I was in my late, my later twenties then, um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: Twenty-four, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 238570
Speaker 1: When the war started, you had been there [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA), Des Moines, Iowa] ten years or eleven, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: About eleven?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: About eleven.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: When World War II [WWII] broke out.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So that--by that time you were about thirty-four, thirty-five, I guess?
Speaker 2: Well, you're right I think I was thirty-four.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So what--how did you-tell us about the war?
Speaker 2: Well, I was there at the Y [YMCA], and when that had happened a lot of the youngsters were of that age, I mean were over twenty-one.  And they would say--and, I say over twenty-one, some of them were maybe later twenties, you know.  But they were all talking about enlisting.  And the reason for that was they would say if you enlist you can get preferential treatment. That is you could choose their armor service whether it was [U.S.] Army or [U.S.] Navy, or [U.S. Army] Air Corps it was called then or whatever.  And then if you do that early you could get a chance for promotion more rapidly and so forth and all that.  And they would say the same thing to me, "Well, [HistoryMaker] Quentin [Mease], why don't you enlist?"  And so, so with your YMCA background, you know.  Well, I told 'em then that, that I didn't volunteer in anything.  That if they needed me, they'll call me in due time.  And which I did, and it wasn't until I was drafted that I went into the [U.S.] military.  And well that's another story about my military life.
Story_ID: 238571
Speaker 1: I was--got, got the--I call it kidding, the summons.  But I got their draft notice there in, in late August.  And I started to then arrange to close up things.  And I--at the appointed time I reported out at Camp Dodge [Iowa].
Speaker 2: Now you were married by this time right?
Speaker 1: Oh, I didn't marry till I came to Texas (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, okay alright, alright this is not--okay I don't wanna get you off.
Speaker 1: I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Alright.  So--?
Speaker 1: Went out there that induct, induction process it took about three days.  And then we were allowed to come back home to get affairs back there all arranged to close and all.  And then of--we reported back Camp Dodge for, for active duty.
Speaker 2: Now you started off as a private and ended up--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --becoming a sergeant, right?
Speaker 1: I was a, I was a straw above private (laughter).  We and three, two other young black fellas and I--we were assigned to a--but we didn't know it--air base in Florida, Dale Mabry Field [Tallahassee, Florida].  And we in due time after we got all of the shots and everything else and did that.  Then went home for a few days then came back and were assigned there, so we hopped the train and then came on into Des Moines [Iowa].  And either the northwestern or rock island [Davenport, Rock Island and North Western Railway Company] to Chicago [Illinois] and from there we went down to--I forget the place there in Bower, Illinois [ph.]. And that was my first experience with the Jim Crow train (laughter).  I said Jim Crow, now going on down there was in very southern part of Illinois, Evanston, not Evanston, Illinois in Chicago I forget.
Speaker 2: Cairo [Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Naw.
Speaker 2: Cairo (unclear) or?
Speaker 1: I can't (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Carbondale [Illinois]?
Speaker 1: No, it wasn't that.
Speaker 2: We were down to three.
Speaker 1: After we finished we--probably it'll come to me.  Well, that was the jumping off point to head to Florida.  And that's when everything was alright then I mean to no, there's no segregation.  But when we got on that L train [Louisville and Nashville Railroad (L&N)], the L & N we rode Louisville [Kentucky] and Nashville [Tennessee] whatever it was that was when we were directed to the to, to the car coach, it was called, and that was a novel experience.  I'd been in the South before but always driven by car with someone.  But then we got on there, and that was before the days of air-conditioning.  And of course, in the practice then was for the Jim Crow car to the colored were they would be right up next to the engine to the locomotive.  And here see that was late August, and that meant it was, was plenty warm or fairly hot.  The further south I got, and with those windows open and everything and the smoke from the locomotive and all that it was hotter then.  Now we got there--when at different points 'cause it wasn't the express train or anything that different places where Negros would get on there.  And, of course, they had experience, and they got on there with bags of food (laughter).  Bags and all that, wasn't long before you could hardly walk 'cause you were doing that.  That was where it was because after all they, they had to be fed, you know.  And then all the other coaches, of course, consisted of the white person.  It was rather interesting to--'cause as we got close to Florida at some point I don't remember it was some German prisoners were also on the train.  And here they were prisoners, and I think they were in the car next--behind us anyway (unclear) of that.  But they were there along with the other white passengers but here we were soldiers and [U.S.] military (laughter).  But we had to be, you know, (laughter) oh it was a crazy one.  But anyway in time we--we had arrived on--let me see the L&N first and with some others called the Georgia Seacoast Train [ph.] over to Tallahassee [Florida].
Story_ID: 238572
Speaker 1: And we got to Tallahassee [Florida], we were taken out to this air base at the, at Dale Mabry Field [Tallahassee, Florida]. And it wasn't long before we were given inspections (laughter).  I don't know if you were in the [U.S.] military, but the old famous short arm inspection (laughter), you know what that was?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That was when they checked down here to see if you had any kind of (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)  And that's the story even after we been assigned to barracks and everything.  And been there sometime, at least once a month in the middle of the night or sometimes we'd be sleeping in, in the barracks.  And then lights are on, and somebody would holler "Ten-hut."  And here would be where the officer on duty and the non-concur (unclear) there.  We'd all jump out of the bunk and then, and then in (unclear), I mean short arm inspection.  So you'd come along here with this medical officer, and he'd go down there and inspect to see if, if going into town everything we'd picked up--(laughter).  Well anyway after being there and getting (unclear) in and assigned to barracks and all that they looked at our form 20s [DA 20 enlisted qualification record], our qualifying papers and everything.  And I was assigned to personnel because of my background with the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association].  I was pretty good at clerical work and all, and I, I was assigned as one of the clerks in the personnel office.  And the commanding officer of this battalion he and his--I forget what his name was--they would go over the records.  And they found out that my background I had college training and all that.  And they assigned me to be as a personnel clerk, you know, when the sergeant major of the personnel department had applied for OCS [Officer Candidate School] this officer candidate school and he left.  And because of well my background work I was then promoted to sergeant major and in charge of personnel department.  Now, that made my rank improve from private to corporal, then buck sergeant on up to tech [technical] sergeants.
Story_ID: 238573
Speaker 1: But Captain Yourhein [ph.], by that time he was a major.  And I forget this lieutenant was next to him, they'd gone over my record and everything, and they kept insisting that I apply for Officer Candidate School [OCS].  There's a shortage of the black officers, and all and I should do it.  Well, I had such a good thing as sergeant major 'cause it meant I was office personnel.  Didn't have to get up in the morning there to meet any reveling, didn't have to line up for chow and everything, would go over to the company store.  And I had oh so many things in favor till I had become quite content.  But it was embarrassing, and he says well, [HistoryMaker] Sergeant [Quentin] Mease says that the officer, I mean the [U.S.] Army or the [U.S.] military needs some (unclear) black officers now.  Now one interesting thing involving the barrack to--they had the, the company theaters on the base.  One nearest out of them.  And at the time we were there they--352 or 362 squadron there at Tuskegee [Army Air Field; Sharpe Field, Tuskegee, Alabama] of the, you know, the black (unclear).  And they came down to Dale Mabry Field [Tallahassee, Florida].  It's one of their training missions down there the trail there.  And we'd go to the theaters in the evening and we, we had we knew we had to sit in segregated in the rear of the theater.  But when they came not only all of them that were commissioned officers. It was Major Young [ph.] then who later became, you know, a general.  And he, he was in charge, he and others but there were others who--captains, and, and lieutenants but they all had to sit in the rear of the theater like we were (laughter). Oh that was an abominable thing.  And I told some of the fellas when Major Yourhein [ph.] were insisting I go, and I said well what's the need of doing that if you get in the Army you still gonna be segregated.  I mean certainly you they have ranked and perfect and things I just didn't see it.  But I felt that if I didn't--and then I learned to that some of the kids around the Y [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)] who had listened had gone to OCS and, and had become commission officers.  Bobby Hodge [ph.], Charles Johnson [ph.], oh two or three others.  So I said now if I just stay here maybe I should. So anyway I signed up for [U.S.] Air Force administrator 'cause I was a little over the age for flying personnel.  And in due time I received a notice that I had been approved.  And to--and when it came down I was (unclear) I had been-'cause all the [U.S.] Air Force--[U.S. Army] Air Corps administrative officers there in Tampa, Florida, where they had a school were already filled to capacity.  And I was assigned to armor force.  I don't even I don't know if you (unclear) what armor force is (laughter) that's attacks.  And so I say now what have I gotten in, but anyway I went to Fort Knox, Kentucky.  And did time and boy that was a nightmare but (laughter) I finally got over that and got reassigned to, to the Air Corps.  You know, went there and went on over to the--in time to the South Pacific Theater [World War II, WWII] and spent oh nearly two years there and different things. That's another story of course.
Story_ID: 238574
Speaker 1: But the one interesting part of that story that you, you were in Hiroshima [Japan] as part of the [General Douglas] MacArthur's administrative staff (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's like 19--now that's a week after the [atomic] bomb, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah that was '45 [1945]. Yeah, but what it was--went first--was in New Zealand for a while and then transferred to New Guinea.  And to a base up in the northern part of New Guinea there and stayed there a while. Now--and then we went to Milne Bay [Papua New Guinea] but at that time the war [World War II, WWII] was still blazing and while we were in New Guinea, that base was bombed about every night.  It was the northern part because you see, the Japanese were driving toward Australia.  That was their big objective, to capture Australia.  And so we were there and due to the movementm, when MacArthur then moved further north on up to--what was that northern base there in New Guinea?  It'll come to me.  We moved with him up there and then gradually moved to the Philippines and prepared for invasion.  It was when we were there for some months that the word came down that there--the bomb had been dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki [Japan].  And overnight our orders were to prepare for the occupation.  So, when we then headed for Japan, arrived at the southern port there, just south of the Hiroshima, and stayed there in time.  And then we gradually move on up to Luzon [Philippines] as MacArthur moved on northern and then finally on up to Sydney [Australia] and Yokohama [Japan].  So it was just a natural progression, but after the war ended, then I was assigned to Air Force [sic. U.S. Army] quartermaster, handling all materials and everything.  And that was interesting, but before I mean while we were in that, that northern-I knew the name of it so well, the last place where Amelia Earhart was seen or heard [sic.] of, and she was somewhere in there--I don't know, and I wanna say Nagasaki but where it's fine. But anyway when you no longer--I mean after the bomb dropped it was my job to be a material expediter.  To see about--well while I was before the bomb.  That's what I was doing flying all around to different bases seeing about material where there were shortages,  or where they needed this, and that and so forth and that included not, not only Japan or the Philippines and New Guinea and all that but it also included the bases in, in what was called CBI--China- China, Burma, India.  And that proved to be quite interesting, and everything, far more than I thought would entail.  And it was dangerous then because the Japs with their planes and Tonys [Kawasaki Ki-61] and Zeroes [Mitsubishi A6M] they were flying all around Europe there.  And all at once here one would come out of the skies and started zipping on you (laughter) but personally got through all of it.  But that's just some experiences over there.  I don't know how much of that's interesting, but that's just some of the things yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, I read something about you being on the administrative-you were part, part of the administrative detail assigned to MacArthur or how--I mean did you work (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) About what now?  MacArthur?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well I would see him often 'cause he was there at headquarters at the Tenth [U.S. Army] service command of the Fifth Air Force.  And my--I was--since I was in the--and that kind--when I got over there I was assigned to air, [U.S.] Air Force called [U.S. Army] Air Corps then and had me in quartermaster corps in charge of all material.  There was four classifications of food, clothing, machines, and I forget the other one and to do that.  And so I was in and out of that building, and I would see him at times.  You know, in passing. Never had any what you call close--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --intimate relations with him.  That wasn't part of his particular command.  But it was at his command headquarters, and that's when I got to see Strutting Doug (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was something.
Story_ID: 238575
Speaker 1: Oh that's my sister when I have it--give me the other two.
Speaker 2: Yes, we've given you (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Henry U. Mease, that's--he's there, and that's my sister Layther, Layther Elizabeth Mease and then myself.
Speaker 2: Okay, (unclear).
Speaker 1: Me, [Cornelia Tate] Mease (unclear), and then that's my wife over there on the right.
Speaker 2: Well, what's her name?  What's your wife (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, oh, Jewell [Mary Mease].
Speaker 2: Okay next, okay how about this one?
Speaker 1: This was when had the groundbreaking for the Astrodome [Harris County Domed Stadium, Houston, Texas].
Story_ID: 238576
Speaker 1: --The Saturday morning that I was asking you about the radiation and so forth. And you were going to tell a story, yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh I said this yeah, I say we arrived there [Hiroshima, Japan] yeah this is on a Saturday, and after we got them in (unclear), everything was temporary we knew we were gonna move on further up.  As commanding officer, it was my responsibility to take our rookies and everything up, up to the Tenth [U.S. Army] service command, I mean yeah the headquarters of [General Douglas] MacArthur's camp.  Headquarters there in town, 'cause he hadn't moved up there too in northern.  And I was already assigned, assigned the Jeep.  And I had a, I don't know one of the sergeants to go with me, and that was from that base there on into the headquarters to see--it was about I'd say not over ten miles if, if it was that far.  But what was so unusual here this was just only about a week after the [atomic] bomb had been dropped.  And of course, there weren't anything but just buildings, and everything just laid flat, you know, it was nothing but just devastation.  But anyway this, this road though this street that went on into town there all we'd gone was I don't know maybe five miles or so before we hit the city limits.  And when we got there here were Japanese police on either side of the, the street of the road leading on into town, fully equipped and everything, I mean uniforms and all that they could get.  But all the way in 'bout every--I'd say fifty feet it might've been more than that.  With their backs turned they weren't supposed to look upon American soldiers yeah American military, yeah.  They were there I guess, I guess to--oh everything was so chaotic, but I don't know if this keep the citizens from doing something because here we were the enemy, you know.  And they didn't know what if the bomb had just been dropped and destroyed everything and they think that maybe some citizen some citizens might react-civilians I'll call them and do something.  So they were there but all the way in the here were the Japanese police.  In full uniform but with their back turned they never did look at us (laughter).
Story_ID: 238577
Speaker 1: I was asking though too--so you weren't afraid of getting sick or anything like that they--the [U.S.] military didn't tell you about radiation or--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah we were, we were I won't say educated, but we were filled in on that.  There were some don'ts what to do, you know, the early days we, we had to wear gloves all the time.  And of course, as officers most of the time we wore gloves anyway.  But they issued gloves to the men and all that was when they--and then the--all the Japanese at that time--now that was another thing.  We were there [Hiroshima, Japan] in that at--I forget how long at least several weeks or maybe a month.  Other than those who were interpreters or assigned to the military for something we didn't see the Japanese female.  Now, you know, the Japanese is a very mountainous country, and we were there I don't know two weeks, or before we said moun- you can see those mountain trails.  And this happens for a number of weeks, of some men but older men and women and children streaming down from those coming down those mountain trails coming back into the city and so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So they really fled up into the mountain?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  'Cause as I say Japan is very--two-thirds of it is mountains, you know, it was very mountainous.  And we look at the trail and see the humanity just streaming down and coming back.  But prior to that other than some Japanese who spoke English, could act as interpreters or were assigned to do office work and things, we didn't see any Japanese civilians at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 238578
Speaker 1: So when you came back from the war [World War II, WWII] in '40 [1940]--was it '47 [1947] or '46 [1946]?
Speaker 2: Forty-six [1946], yeah.
Speaker 1: Forty-six [1946]?
Speaker 2: Uh-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you went to Chicago [Illinois] right I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you worked on a master's degree?
Speaker 2: How's that?
Speaker 1: A master's degree?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay well tell us about that?
Speaker 2: To me isn't--I was just a (laughter)--well not too much.
Speaker 1: Is there a relationship between George Williams College [Chicago, Illinois] and the YMCAs [Young Men's Christian Association] at all?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when I was at that time there were the two schools, George Williams and Springfield [College, Springfield, Massachusetts].  Now there were students there who when they graduated went to other forms of social work.  Some went to Boy Scouts [of America], some went to oh I don't--the Hebrew what is it called--the labyrinth. 'Cause a close friend of mine, he's still in Chicago.  And when I was there last October, he came out to this place where they had this thing here because he learned I was going to be there.  Well, Dave Growsome [ph.] but they were going to other farms but primarily it was for the training of students who were going to enter YMCA, and some had already entered.  Were had been YMCA people and after the war they wanted to take advantage of then the [G.I.] Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944]--they called it [G.I.] Bill of Rights and so forth.  And to further their education because some maybe hadn't finished the undergraduate.  And that others who taken advantage of the graduate degree to take top paying graduate degree.  But quite a few of them scattered around--three of us and that was unusual three of that class that graduated came to the Houston [Texas] YMCA.  Myself Pinky Parker [ph.] and Bob Vernon [ph.] oh and Mill Ms. Millicent [ph.] there were four of us.  Chose to come to Houston.
Story_ID: 238579
Speaker 1: Is there anything about your stay in Chicago [Illinois] that really stands out?  You were used to going to Chicago you said? Is there anything--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah very--it was like a second home.
Speaker 1: Yeah, is there anything about your stay in Chicago that really stands out that you can tell us? If not then we just get you in Houston [Texas] (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well I was rambling youngster, and I would go to New York [New York] at least once a year.  (Unclear).  But I would come back to Chicago and New York to get him.  And I preferred Chicago to New York for the reason Chicago wasn't then as it is now as congested. It had all the features of New York.  Two major league ball clubs I--and I like that, all the theaters not only movies but the new cinema theater.  And the orchestras, Civic Orchestra [of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], so they had that.  All these things that I like it had them there and yet it wasn't, you know, about New York and how it's all congested.  And especially at that time when I would go in early our people blacks--see Harlem [Manhattan, New York, New York] was formerly the Jewish community of New York.  And then after World War II [WWII] with the migration of them to the South the Jews moved further North to what is now the Bronx [New York, New York].  But they left those old tenement apartments their building and originally when they were built there for, for the Jews there--you go up eight and ten stories.  Each floor was supposed to house one family and what happened we the--this not only--I mean they would sell their European to you, you know.  Immigration coming in, but with all of the blacks and they were just piling in by the tens of thousands through all these northern cities.  They had to be somewhere so I guess the city found some-'cause they were let's put 'em by house, housing, I mean in Harlem.  And the Jews and the Jews move on up here too, to the Bronx.  Some, few went over to Brooklyn [New York, New York], but, but the hoards went there.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: And, and the, these tenement houses the little apartments that were built all over Harlem, each floor was supposed to accommodate a family.  And be--and when blacks moved in and all, and the landlord were able to make money they had at least two or three families to each floor.  And I knew that now, I had friends because I--through the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] and all that and when I came back out of the service that was still true.  I mean he [Hotel] Theresa [New York, New York] and what was that other hotel, it, it was on Eighth Avenue the Theresa's on Seventh [Avenue].  We're the only two hotels that you felt that you could stay in.  Because the big hotel downtown, and so I had friends though who lived up on what was called the Riverside [Drive], Convent Avenue, you know, and up there.  And then Mount Vernon and all, and, and then I start staying with him.  But it was later on before going to New York.  Oh yeah, I did stay at the Theresa, I think the other one on Eighth Ave---Bradford Hotel [sic. Hotel Braddock, New York, New York].  And that was a mecca of black folks, I mean those who could afford it and all and didn't have to go and things like that.  But I experienced all that then and yet they had big times then because the Apollo Theater [New York, New York], I forget that other one.  It was just closer back there and the Renaissance Ballroom [New York, New York], the Savoy Ballroom's [Savoy Ballroom, New York, New York] all over there it was a (laughter) jumping place then.  When I go there now Harlem, Harlem to me appears dead.  Now when I go to Chicago, there's no longer the Savoy [Ballroom, Chicago, Illinois], the Regal Theater [Chicago, Illinois] any of that and the other one was on the West Side of--man and it was called South Parkway [Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive] there now.  And oh what was that famous club?  Not--[Cafe] Zanzibar [New York, New York] was in New York, but this other one.
Speaker 1: In Chicago?
Speaker 2: Huh.
Speaker 1: In Chicago?
Speaker 2: [Joe's] Rhumboogie [Cafe, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Huh.
Speaker 2: Rhumboogie?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah Rhumboogie.  Yeah, that was it, and all that we would hit those.  And then there was on 43rd street I think was it an Iowa club [ph.].  Yeah, whoever it was a former Iowan set it up so lot of us we'd head there, too.  Go there one night and then they had good music and all.  But (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you had a pretty good time going, going to college [George Williams College, Chicago, Illinois] in Chicago?
Speaker 1: Huh.
Speaker 2: You had a pretty good time going to college in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Well some of this was before that, though.
Story_ID: 238580
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the teachers at George Williams [College, Chicago, Illinois]?  Any of the instructors there or were any of them memorable?
Speaker 2: George Williams?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You said?
Speaker 1: Where any of the teacher at George Williams (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh teachers?
Speaker 1: --memorable?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I can remember a number of them.  Dr. [Arthur H.] Steinhaus, he was a famous, a famous--I'd go, go-physical scientist.  So much so that in World War II [WWII] he would get released to, to the government to train the, the [U.S.] military off- I mean officers and different things.  He, he, Doctor Edgerrin [ph.], doctor--though there are several others that come to mind yeah, and I go---it's no longer there but last time I was there I visited, and I got something up there.
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: Well that's the fraternity but it's something else up.
Speaker 1: It's quite a few others up there, I've seen about three different awards--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --associated with George Williams.
Speaker 2: But yeah, I miss it because oh I just think it's sad a lot of us who had went there when it was a part, you know, of the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  The social works college and then when--at down here I don't know what caused it but then when they decided to move westward to out there to Aurora [Illinois] and then became it's Aurora College of the U--I mean (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's a part of the--
Speaker 2: George Williams College of Aurora University [Williams Bay, Wisconsin]--
Speaker 1: Right. Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 238581
Speaker 1: You talked earlier about how you got to Houston [Texas] after you graduated [from George Williams College, Chicago, Illinois] after you got your master's [degree] you moved to Houston.  To become a head of the Y [(YMCA) Young Men's Christian Association], you know, in the black community--what, what was the name of the Y here?
Speaker 2: What's the name of it?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Y here in Houston that you came to join to become (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well it was then known as the [YMCA] Colored Branch (laughter) YMCA downtown.
Speaker 1: Or the South Central [YMCA, Houston, Texas], they didn't call it the--
Speaker 2: No, no this not the same system.
Speaker 1: South Central, no not, not yet?
Speaker 2: And that's one thing I was able to, to bring around to change it to Bagby Street.  'Cause it was on Bagby Street and I did, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you changed it from being the Colored Y, to the Bagby Street Y?
Speaker 2: I didn't change it I mean I induced the board and all that to change (laughter).  I figured no need of having that stigma on there.  And I don't know how much I've already covered, and I don't want to be repetitive but--
Speaker 1: Well how did you build--how you raised the money to complete the, the renovation of the building?
Speaker 2: Well let, let me put it--I don't know if I answered your question I'll, I'll hurry up and come to that, but I thought when I got here for a while that I made a grievous mistake.  'Cause being young and impetuous and you hear me, I thought I could come down here and just do things. Get out here and get people aroused to do it.  Now I think I told you that I found out that there had been a prior campaign in 1939 to build a new downtown YMCA which was right in the heart down in Louisiana where it is now.  And then a building for the colored branch YMCA and the war [World War II, WWII] came along froze all materials, so they didn't finish that, but they never started a colored branch YMCA.  And our people had raised quite a bit of money way back then.  And now here this was '48 [1948] when I got here they had built the Y downtown but no moves here have been made on building this one.  And our people had given quite a bit of money.  And so a lot of them felt that they had used the money that was to go on the colored branch on the one downtown.  So I encountered that quite a bit of antipathy toward the YMCA, you know.  And the board then was rather stagnated, it was made up primarily--. And that's a thing that I quickly moved to change that to more professional people that were teachers, doctors--it wasn't many attorneys here, I think maybe one attorney on the board.  And postal employees at that time if you were postal employees you were a status person (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right it was a big-a job that had a lot of benefits.
Speaker 2: It was way more of that, and the board was eighteen and that was after my predecessor retired out there.  I was able to bring him around we expanded the boards to thirty.  And by that time I had learned well I knew before coming here that Houston was an industrial city that had second largest seaport.  I mean the first it was the big oil industry here and, and on.  And then it was the second largest seaport and then there were other industries and all.  Not quite common like Dallas [Texas] and all that.  Dallas doesn't have those kind of industries--it's mostly. But at that time it had the it was a banking center of Houston, a insurance center of Houston, the (unclear) motorboats, Sears and Roebuck's [Sears, Roebuck and Co.], Montgomery [Ward & Co.] had their big distributing basis for the Southwest.  But Houston it had those things all of it there.  And so I knew it was--had a lot of our men who were employed in industry.  And some of 'em--a lot of 'em were making a better incomes than these professional people were (laughter).  And so I say we need to get some of those on the board.  And the only way I could do it was--had to be careful 'cause I didn't want any of these to feel that I was rocking their status quo, they were comfortable on the board.  But still expand the board from eighteen to thirty.  And the rationale was--then it hadn't become as prevalent, but we had rotating boards that are still done in that case.  You know, one-third of the board go off each year and have save for a year and all that.  And sometimes they come back then you could to bring in new brother.  So I did that, and I got to bring men in from some of them from the ship channel where those refineries were.  One or two big steel companies brought some of those men in and some other industries and I got them.
Story_ID: 238582
Speaker 1: Incidentally when I came here [Houston, Texas] that, that fall they [Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA)] were just setting up for the membership campaign, and their goal was $1800 (laughter).  They, they were just--
Speaker 2: Eighteen hundred [1800 dollars] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They did because with their branch they'd get money from the old community chest and some other and that's why they'd be content and, and downtown Y [YMCA] too.  They would I don't know what the subsidy was I don't recall but give 'em a few thousand dollars.  And so they--and they had a little small staff and all.  And all they have to do was pay rent on those rooms and so forth.  And their whole program was based on school clubs--High Y, Junior High Y, and Gray-Y.  Now at that time there were about fifty so-called colored schools in the city three high schools and about four or five junior highs the rest were elementary.  And my predecessor Ed Cubs [ph.] and all was one of those and everything but that wasn't much (unclear).  So I gradually got to padding that board and out of these that big old members board that is were from the, you know.  And we got within a few years our membership goal was $10,000 and when I left it was $60,000.  And well we had to do this we had to bring people in there who didn't feel was too proud to go out (laughter) (unclear).  Now that $60,000 about a third from that came from what we organized as the first city club--first-century club that was person who, who bought a hundred dollar memberships and up.  And when I left it, it had the grown to 360 members.  So I say easily more than half of that came from that.
Story_ID: 238583
Speaker 1: Now this last thing touching on that 'cause I'm--I tend to ramble.  When I came, I found that was that feeling that, that colored people who had (unclear)--who had been cheated out of their building and what that raised money.  Then secondly I encountered this--oh I see he's no longer a filming, so--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: He's filming.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: It's rolling.
Speaker 1: No but there was one or two strikes against me.  First strike I mean, when the word got out that I was coming I mean, now none of 'em told me about it, but I didn't cultivate or rather acquire some friends who confide in me.  Say, you know, [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Quentin] Mease, say you're energetic, and you got some good ideas.  And I mean, but some of the people don't appreciate the Y [(YMCA) Young Men's Christian Association] bringing in somebody from up North down here.  Say we've got our own young men. They're there graduating from Prairie View [A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] from Wiley [College, Marshall, Texas], from Bishop [College, Marshall, Texas] all like that I mean.  And says that they're trained and why didn't, why didn't that--. Now on the white side Brad Swanson [ph.], who was the general secretary who sold me on coming to Houston [Texas].  So the board down there didn't appreciate it that no one north might be heading no young (unclear) as they call us (laughter) here to do the job there.  But he was a former George Williams [College, Chicago, Illinois] graduate some years back, and anyway I say four of us came down from George William that year.  But when the whites would come here to Houston and other cities from the north and east, you know, they were known as damn Yankees, you've heard that term.  And they had, and they had encountered that kind of resistance.  But I had this added stripe I was a black damn Yankee (laughter).  And, and some of our people they didn't want it to say that here's one of our own give that job to one of the boys because I'll say the last thing.  Well, we had young men graduating from, from Prairie View, Wiley, Bishop, (unclear) and all of that but they had two choices.  Now they had about fifty schools here, high schools, junior all of that.  But only a few of them had black principals now they had some black teachers of the young men coming in.  But do you have any idea what the main purpose of their job was?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: To, to take care of these bad boys who was misbehaving that if they got unruly they could take em in the closet and put the strap to 'em (laughter).  But they were in these class but mostly all the principals were females and one or two yeah.  And, and all and virtually all, virtually all the teachers only at the high school level there were some, some male teachers there.  But it was all of those kinds of things that we, we encountered and had to work.
Story_ID: 238584
Speaker 1: Hadn't been here very long before with an oil man and the fellow who was head Ted Freeman [ph.] of the Jewish community center and Bob Childress [ph.], he was a young businessman. We formed the Houston Community Council and that was before any other organization--
Speaker 2: About what year was that?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: The Houston Community Council what, what year was that?
Speaker 1: Oh that had to be around 1951 or so it was right after yeah, yes after I been a while.  And I got appointed Bob through the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association].  He and Plinty Shole [ph.] the oil man, Ted Freeman, who was the executive of the Jewish community, Southwest Houston and all that.  We got together and formed a Houston Community--not council but forum.  And we started to quietly holding meetings and bringing others in and that was really the first integrated organization in Houston [Texas].  And it grew as they found out of us because Houston hadn't changed then.  But it was a, there was change was in the air then 'cause you see I'm, I'm talking about 1951, way before '55 [1955] and '56 [1956].  When the circuit court ruled first and then the in '56 [1956] was the other that (unclear) hit on, education first and then the civil rights.  But this was there, and we had organized them and then we had quiet meetings and worked at things.
Story_ID: 238585
Speaker 1: And I--that and some other things we set the climate so that in the '60s [1960s] when the sit-in started and that grew out of the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association].  I think that you get some of the material about it--how the chap, who became the sphere head of that was working first at the Y [YMCA].  And, you know, Eldrewey [Joseph] Stearns, and that tape about the DMIs it tells all about it.  I'm not going to hold you here but would you care to take it with you and play it and play it and then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, sure we'd like, yeah.
Speaker 1: --return it?  Yeah, but don't let me forget but it (unclear).  How he--when that had started now he was a law student at TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 2: What's his name again?
Speaker 1: Eldrewey Stearns.
Speaker 2: Okay, Druid, D-R-U-I-D?
Speaker 1: Huh.
Speaker 2: His middle name was D-R-U-I-D, what was it?
Speaker 1: Yeah it was E-L, D-R-E-W-E-Y [sic.], and then S-T-E-A-R-N-E-S [sic.].  One day when he just-'cause he worked part-time in our youth department.  He came down to the job, and we were setting up for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] dinner in the gymnasium, that was the biggest area.  And see you couldn't go to hotels, then churches had no community buildings all of those and what not.  So that was a building there I mean, that gym would hold it all of five, six hundred, 700, 800, you know how big it was a regulation gym.  And we had all of the tables had set up the loud speaker, I mean, the public address system and everything 'cause we had day or something.  You know we'd done all that.  And all of those tables and chairs and had put the linen all on them and the silver on the thing we had been working since morning (laughter), you know and that.  When he came in he went on up there to the platform that the desk where the, where the microphone was and start to reciting either the--I don't know if it was from the [William] Shakespeare, Shakespeare or it was the Emancipation Proclamation or something 'cause he was feisty.  He said, "[HistoryMaker] Mr. [Quentin] Mease how does that sound?"  Well, I was kinda saying he ought a jumped in and helped like the rest of the staff (laughter) you know, work around it.  'Cause it was only, not only the kitchen staff but some of our staff up front would be back there doing that 'cause I mean it-I was like oh Eldrewey that sounds alright but I wish you were doing something else.  And he said, "Well what is that?" I say, "You know, what students are doing over there in North Carolina."  You know, the sit-in had begun then, and, and it had moved on over to (unclear).  And I say here in Houston, nothing is happening. All you kids up there at TSU and--
Story_ID: 238586
Speaker 1: When he [Eldrewey Joseph Stearns] came back to work [at Young Men's Christian Association, Houston, Texas] he passed by my office.  And he stuck his head in the door.  And he said, "[HistoryMaker] Mr. [Quentin] Mease you busy?" I said, "Well, not particularly."  He says kind like Napoleonic-like, "Meet the president of the PYA."  And I said, "Eldrewey, what is PYA?" "Progressive Youth Association."  So I say, "Well now who are they progressive youth?" And, "We're the newest sit-in movements in Houston [Texas]."  Well, I say, "It's about time," but I say, "other than that it's an esoteric title," (laughter).  I say and you say sit-in movement, but I say what are you doing?  He says you'll hear from us.  And the next day or two they had no that was from TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas].  Almetta [sic. Almeda Street] then was one of the main streets out this way for, for Jewish business places.  'Cause all of this over here that was Jewish community, (coughing) excuse me.  And there were two big supermarkets up there, Weingarten['s] and (unclear) there was a big drug store, Maddox [ph.], drug store.  And other Jewish business, delicatessens, Jewish (unclear)--all of that was Jewish.  Well anyway, they went over there and began the sit-in.  Sat--in these supermarkets had, had counters in them where they served the tray they had lunch counters.  Went to those counters there Maddox drug store had, had a counter where they had a soda fountain and food and some other of those Jewish places.  And naturally I don't know if that started it, but there were three papers in then the-[Houston] Chronicle, the [Houston] Post, and the [Houston] Press.  And they heard about it, and they were out there and they--chief of police at that time, well maybe he was just doing his duty but they showed up.  And these kids were at the counter but in all three places they were refused service, they wouldn't serve them.  But they just kept it--and they did that oh at several other places too for, for maybe oh I forget the time.  But they were there sitting there all during the middle part of the day and all at those counters but they weren't served.  So our job is that we had a food service at the Y [(YMCA) Young Men's Christian Association].  But since they couldn't go to the hotel, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the Harris County Council of Organization[s], there were other groups that we'd serve.  Big banquets in the gymnasium like you know, so at first get it and it served the-not only the Y members but had the dormitories or residents.  So it was an all-day thing, and they were quick to do it.  And then we would have them fix up sandwiches and other things and take them up there to keep them is action at these counters.  And, they did that, and it, it wasn't long (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You actually had to serve them at the lunch counter?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: You had to serve the sit-in demonstrators at the--
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh yeah to keep them in action there you see.
Speaker 2: They couldn't get served at the (unclear).
Speaker 1: That's right, they couldn't do that.
Story_ID: 238587
Speaker 1: And we had a--name Herman Short [ph.], rather, but we used to call redneck.  And he was determined, and the mayor at that time was determined to break it up.  Well, it went on but it wasn't--they, I don't know maybe it was a couple weeks or so.  Getting a word from the govern--I mean the state (unclear) of up there in Austin [Texas].  And the university and all, the president [Dr. Samuel M. Nabrit] of TSU [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas] got word that too, to get 'em off of the TSU grounds.  Don't let 'em meet there anymore.  They were meeting and organizing there and then doing that.  So the dean of men (unclear) that was Dr. J.B. Jones and Harkina Boden [ph.] was of (unclear) both of them on one of those afternoons or whenever classes wasn't in, came out there and told 'em they could no longer meet on, on state ground.  That they just got word from Austin that they, that they weren't to meet all that.  So I didn't know at the time but later on about six or seven of 'em with [Eldrewey] Stearns in front came down to the Y [(YMCA) Young Men's Christian Association] and came to my office.  I mean came there to speak to me, and I didn't know what had happened.  And they told me about the two deans had told them that they could no longer assemble or hold any meetings or anything all because of them.  And could they meet at the Y, well you know, the Y I must--you that term non-violent but it's not that kinda organization, you know, you can't say controversial things, you know.  I mean NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and the [Harris County] Council of Organization[s] that are, that one working in the field of to get out of legal rights, council organization was a political organization.  You know that there no YMCA in that.  I thought in my mind, and I say now, I say you sure that you wanna be here or we just playing for time.  Well, we can't meet at the school Stearns say, "Well [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Quentin] Mease you're the one who egged me on urging me to do this."  I said oh boy so I agreed to let them meet at the Y.  And that, that brought some problems.  I don't want to go into that but, the general secretary at that time-Bras Munson [ph.] had left and gone back again, but Bob Maloney [Robert Maloney] was here.  And he told me he had heard from the United [Negro College] Fund [UNCF], when it came out in the papers that they were meeting at the Y.  And that the YMCA doesn't involve itself in controversial things like that.  And, and it shouldn't do that. And then some of our people they were opposed to--chairman and the secretary of the--I called the Houston Negro Chamber of Commerce [Greater Houston Black Chamber].  They said that I don't see why Mease is sticking his neck out negating and then.  And then the NAACP's--he's still in Houston [Texas] although the national office kicked him out of the job.  He said that I don't see why Mease isn't in the business. Said the NAACP is supposed to handle these things (laughter), so.  And I was getting that criticism, but anyway to making sure in time they kept I mean what it was yeah, they did that.
Story_ID: 238588
Speaker 1: And we eventually threw a--Jesse [H.] Jones, he was Mr. Houston [Texas] the big one.   And then he died, and his nephew 'cause Jones and his wife had no children and he was just about considered the heir.  And he had been a prisoner of war during World War II [WWII].  And in the German prison camp he-where there were some black soldiers he got acquainted with them and when--and he christened the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] that it was like the [American] Red Cross, you know, used to have workers there in these camps.  Prison camps, during World War II he claimed they helped him to maintain his sanity, so he felt (unclear). So I knew about that now Hobart [T.] Taylor [Sr.] was one of our prominent black businessmen.  He active in the Y [YMCA] and he was in politics and everything.  He got the--he knew--got acquainted and well he got acquainted with Jesse Jones before Jesse Jones, did I tell Jesse Jones was such a successful operator.  That during Franklin D. Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] the thing that got America moving again the economy and business was called the Reconstruction Finance Corporation.  And Roosevelt brought Jesse Jones to Washington [D.C.] to head that up.  And then--'cause that was during the [Great] Depression days and then after that he--Roosevelt appointed him the secretary of commerce.  So he spent a lot of his later years in Washington not in Houston [Texas].  But some of the old-timers are veteran around here when I was talking about Urban League they say well Jesse Jones had said that there'd never be an Urban League in Houston long as he lived.  He was the one that came from rural Tennessee.  I don't know if he had a high school education or not but he just had a knack for business and he was the biggest businessman in town here, and he controlled the political machinery here.
Story_ID: 238589
Speaker 1: So anyway he [Jesse H. Jones] died, and John T. [Jones] was considered his heir apparent and when I learned---when I say Hobart [T.] Taylor [Sr.] right when Jesse was still here when Dr. Frederick [D.] Patterson of Tuskegee [Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] during that time it was a one man United Fund campaign, did I say United Fund?
Speaker 2: Um-hum
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Not the United Fund, United Negro.
Speaker 2: College Fund [United Negro College Fund (UNCF)]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, college yeah.  He after he left Tuskegee and went to New York [New York] Phelps Stokes Foundation [sic. Phelps Stokes Fund].  And he conceived the idea of the United Negro College Fund.  And he would go around the country, and contact some prominent white businessman or something that he, he had got acquainted with in Washington [D.C.] and others, and that was all the campaign.  And Hobart Taylor and Fred Patterson had both been students in the early days at Prairie View [A&M] University [Prairie View, Texas] than it was called college [Prairie View State Normal & Industrial College, Prairie View, Texas] then, but anyway they were both there.  So when he had come to Houston [Texas], he would get in touch with Hobart.  And Hobart and his, his politics and all he had become acquainted with Jesse Jones and they too would go up there, and Jesse Jones were expecting them.  And Fred Patterson would tell 'em about the college fund.  And what good thing it was doing getting a lot of young blacks paying their way through college and he--while he's there, he just sit down and called some of his colleagues or sent letters to others now that's was the way the money was raised in Houston there wasn't any exam.  So, Hobart, is he was in the hospital couldn't go and he called his wife Jenny [Virginia Dunlap Taylor] and said Jenny I can't go Fred Patterson coming so call [HistoryMaker] Quentin [Mease] and see if he can go with Dr. Patterson and that's how I got to meet Jesse.  And he was very--well kind of a girl fellow cause he was that way but that how I met him and he was quite a character.  Now his nephew when Jesse died became, and we had the kickoff for our building upon the Y [(YMCA)  Young Men's Christian Association] I knew about his experience in that prison camp.  And that he felt somewhat kind of exposed to YMCA so through Hobart I got him to invite John T. to, to (unclear) and that's how that relationship came.  Now when we came for the desegregation, and we had kids working, and all that Hobart went to John T. and told him what we were trying to do here.  And that Houston, you know, ought to set an example and all when we have that he became interested.  And after they had been sitting into all of these places and all of that Jesse Jones had called Hobart, and I went along with it, and we met with him.  And he got busy and called Loews Theaters headquarters in New York [New York].  They operated about five or six of the theaters here two of the biggest downtown.  And the tri-state I think they call it tri-state in Dallas [Texas].  He contacted them then he contacted the president of the restaurant association and then contacted the Jones owned these hotels.  And there were several others owned and simultaneously with no publicity and all.  I called people to the YMCA, on the hotel opening and told him what John T. Jones had done.  And told 'em to say what it's a certain day and I'll be opening to go to the box office, the ticket office, and they would be admitted.
Story_ID: 238590
Speaker 1: Now if they weren't, if any of these young men (unclear) to then call me and we'll call [John T.] Jones, you know, we did the same thing.  The hotels and the same thing with the restaurants and with no publicity and that was considerably a marvelous thing on a certain day they have to have these meetings.  Oh well now we bought hundred dollars' worth of tickets with that time you know this wasn't no.  And when these people would meet there with one I'd distribute the tickets.  And then the restaurant didn't do that we give them the names of the president of the restaurant associaiton and the same thing with the hotels.  They go and in any case they would refuse to call me then I'd get in touch with the head of these, you know.  That's way we worked out the opening without any as I say writing or any civil disturbance or anything.  It was just a quiet thing one thing about it there was no publicity to it 'cause Jones was criticized by this.  And the time we knew he'd tell us about how he got the commitment from--you see he his father I mean his, his uncle [Jesse H. Jones] owned the biggest newspaper the [Houston] Chronicle.  Then he got in touch with the Hobbys, who owned the [Houston] Post at that time, and I forget who the owner of the [Houston] Press (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's who the airport [William P. Hobby Airport] is named after.
Speaker 1: Uh-hum.
Speaker 2: That who the airport was named after here?
Speaker 1: Who?
Speaker 2: Hobbys.
Speaker 1: Yeah the Hobby family.  Yeah, the Hobby family the first Hobby [William P. Hobby] was governor of [Texas]--Houston one time.  And then his son [William P. Hobby, Jr.] became later on years became lieutenant governor.  And then his wife [Oveta Culp Hobby] she--after the Hobby got up in age, she took over the management of the paper.  And then she became [President Dwight David "Ike"] Eisenhower appointed her as the first officer when the WACs were formed.  That's the Women Army Corps, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And that was a story 'cause when that first class graduated--anything that happen I would just, I caught a street car and went out to Fort Des Moines [Iowa] and saw that first class of, of (unclear).  I didn't know that was on a Saturday morning, and this Monday morning I had to head for Camp Dodge [Iowa] for my own induction (laughter).  But it was--and I got to know the Hobbys.  Now when I saw them, saw her at Fort Des Moines when they had their first class that graduated never did think I'd get to know her or anything here in Houston [Texas].  And I got to know the Hobbys and worked with them on several things and this whole business of getting things open, so it's a, it's been quite a bit.  And the, those things kept me from leaving Houston.  I got so involved in some of these things that I was an integral part of it all.  And that, and that--but I was thinking of going because my wife's [Jewell Mary Mease] disinclination to leave Texas and her folks and all I didn't get away.  So my three years have gone into, let's see I came here in '48 [1948].  Yeah, I came here in '48 [1948] and that's fifty-two, fifty-six years (laughter).  So yeah, but anyway though I found so many things that I, that need to be doing and that I don't say it depended on me, but I was an integral part of it.  That we were able to get these changes done, and it change, transformation of them.  Dallas [Texas] and San Antonio [Texas], Fort Worth [Texas] and all of those were typical southern cities, just strictly segregated.  We were--now Dallas had, had rioting up there during that time.  Well, all of the major cities from Los Angeles [California] to New York [New York].  You know, Chicago [Illinois] had it, Detroit [Michigan] had a terrible situation there and all around.  But we didn't have any semblance of it and but that tape I'm going to give you don't let me forget (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) All right, all right. Okay.
Speaker 1: It, it covers all of this and about John T. Jones he's in there. All of us is in there.
Story_ID: 238591
Speaker 1: You retired from the Y [(YMCA) Young Men's Christian Association] in what year?
Speaker 2: In '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-six [1976], yeah.
Speaker 1: That's a long time that's almost long enough for another career, you know.
Speaker 2: Well I (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You served on the boards of a lot of organizations, right?
Speaker 2: I--due to some people saying that we're somewhat of liberal government then [Texas] Legislature had enacted a bill providing for multipurpose human research centers.  And then he thought [Dolph] Briscoe [Jr.] was named in the legislature at the time, and [HistoryMaker] Anthony [W.] Hall [Jr.] had struck up an acquaintance with him.  And Anthony grew up around the YMCA and was a member of our board and was active.  He just--Nay P. Brown [sic. HistoryMaker Lee P. Brown] he served with Nay P. for six years as a city attorney, and now he's administrator.  Well, I don't know if Anthony got into it with Briscoe or not but he came to work office, and he said well Mr. Lee say you gone leave the Y now and you, you know.  And say Governor Briscoe is gone take advantage of this legislation creating more purpose on it.  And establish the first one that is Houston and then we gone be Dallas [Texas] and Fort Worth [Texas] and San Antonio [Texas] and say how you--now I had offers from several other opportunities.  The biggest developers here and now he's one of the biggest in the world he has to develop big buildings over 650 of em around the world.  Including downtown on Randolph [Street, Chicago, Illinois] and I don't know if it's Randolph and State [Street] or Randolph and Michigan [Avenue] he's been all over the world.  Gerald [D.] Hines, he got interested in his career during these things, and he was a member of that first hospital [Harris County Hospital District; Harris Health System, Houston, Texas] board.  I was member the only Negro member that (unclear) and after a board meeting one day he only stayed one term cause because his business wouldn't permit him maybe still wanted to.  And one day after a board meeting that was during those '60s [1960s].  He says [HistoryMaker] Quentin [Mease] hurry up and gone on out to get our cars there it's parked in front of the office.  I said well not particularly Jerry [ph.] I said I'm going on back to the office.  He says well Dan, Dan or Gerald I mean, Harold Fairfield  [ph.] says we've been talking about something that's needed here they said, you know, with these other things that we need an organization who will open up things.  And get up on the minds of the business community because, you needs, we're educating young blacks and everything, but they don't--they can't get any white-collar jobs.  They said we need some way to do that.  So I don't know if I gave my answer then or called em the next day.  I say, Jerry, I think one thing this missing here he says what is.  I said well now that we have the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] we have what's called the Harris County Council [of] Organization[s] but this just a political thing.  The Urban--I mean the NAACP, you know, all the way back there then, you know, what their main goal was to get the--to get an anti-admission bill (laughter) past (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Go way back and--?
Speaker 2: Yeah that what (unclear) did but get that anti that was a big thing the wall so white.  And then Roy Wilkins, Thurgood Marshall and all of them that what the service was to get that anti-it's a national league.  Then in Texas, of course, there was effort to give the, the poll tax repealed so that Negros could vote in the Democratic primary.  Now you could buy this poll tax and all, and you could vote for the national in the national elections in all but you couldn't vote in the Democratic primary.  And if you were running on the Democratic ticket in those days that was tantamount to your election.
Story_ID: 238592
Speaker 1: So you were trying to tell us how you got I guess involved with the hospital [Harris County Hospital District; Harris Health System, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 2: Beg your pardon?
Speaker 1: I think you were trying to get at how you got involved with the hospital--with the county hospital?
Speaker 2: What about the hospital?
Speaker 1: Well, well weren't you heading towards that?
Speaker 2: Well yeah, yeah we were coming out of that meeting yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We got to--okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I told 'em when I said so I called Jerry [ph.] back the in next two days I said tell the fellas that I suggest that we need the National Urban League here.  Well, they had heard of it because Whitney Young was the head and he was on Time magazine they was making all over him about a wonderful job he was doing, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This was in 1962?
Speaker 2: Yep, so they heard of him, and I said that well I said that I said we need the Urban League here.  They say how can we get it here?  I said we have to--now I have been told that some of the people, people who had been here some had tried to get the Urban League.  Said it was Jesse [H.] Jones had said there'll never would be an Urban League long as he was in Houston [Texas].  Now that might not be on the saddle with some people they didn't mind then but when they'd see me come.  Thinking figured just trying to get in and out, you shouldn't be long they would go up there the way the congress was there it would never happen so there it were.  But the Urban League main thrust, you know, is for upgrading the economic never all of our people and all.  Now I told them said will now what is missing here is the Urban League we have a Negro Chamber of Commerce [Greater Houston Black Chamber] and these others.  But we need the Urban League to come in here and work at the job of getting the different businesses and industries opening up positions for young blacks.  And I said that they coming out of universities and college every year with no privileges other than becoming teachers or something like that or something.  So they bought the idea and said well how to go about it well I wrote to New York [New York] I had met Whitney Young.  And I told him that I think we've got some people here young business people, you know, who were sold on the idea the Urban League coming to Houston.  And I said that--well he say oh good this is what we've been wanting 'cause they the only major city that doesn't have the Urban League.  I said well we want it I mean we're interested, and we need somebody come down here and tell them what the first steps are toward getting it.  So he sent the head of the southern regional office in Atlanta [Georgia] came in then, and he came over and talked with them.  And he was happy, and he signed the man but some of them their name was Joe J.R. Kirby [ph.], Harvey Kern [ph.] to come here and set up.  And then we--he told them that was the man and then we sent for Whitney, and he came pronto.
Story_ID: 238593
Speaker 1: And we arranged for a meeting and oh we selected and had about ninety to a hundred businessmen at this breakfast meeting [to organize Urban League Houston, Texas chapter].  And then see the hotels over The Houston Club [Houston, Texas] that's the big businessmen from downtown we had this meeting then.  And--oh yeah one thing that's interesting Whitney [Young] came, and so somebody asked well not how do we get started on this thing.  He said well then he said is that his first or second trip.  Well, he said you gotta set up the headquarters, and that needs money, and someone said well how much he said well $52,000 for that first year.  Then he said a thousand dollars (laughter) away.  And so he said oh well then you know we could easily do that then although money was $1000 worth a lot more.  And we met all the successes out at Jerry's [ph.] place several mornings and each one would have a sheet of names and check and all.  Now I want all this money coming from the white community and white business associates.  We had a business professional men's club, and I was a long time--in fact I organized it during my, my first year here '47 [1947], '48 [1948].  And '48 [1948] and I sold them on what we were doing.  And of course then it worked, so I told them now I said that these other fellas they, they can raise $60,000.  But I think we ought to have some, and so I said well I don't know if I stated it but one of each one and then the president he bought it.  And he said each one of us ought to give at least $100 to this and that and so (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Go ahead.
Speaker 1: So anyway they raised, and I forgot how much but the $60,000.  And then after we had all of that going and well then we had Whitney to come back to address at a big meeting at the Rice Hotel [Houston, Texas] in, in the biggest ballroom there we had about eight or nine hundred people in there.
Speaker 2: This was 1962 when you started that?
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.
Speaker 2: This is '62 [1962] right?
Speaker 1: Oh no, no.
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-two [1962].
Speaker 1: No that was this was around '67 [1967].
Speaker 2: Sixty-seven [1967]?
Speaker 1: Yep, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and I know one of the papers it got out the word.  Well, maybe that was after he spoke that night and we had that grand ballroom there--virtually filled that night.
Story_ID: 238594
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this question, now you're ninety-six years old now. What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: What are my hopes?
Speaker 1: Hopes and concerns, right, for the community today?
Speaker 2: Is it rolling?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh I didn't know. Well my hopes are that all of the effort and struggles of the leaders of the past worked to achieve and open society.  And open opportunities, open access and all of that will be taken full advantage of. Not only our young people be encouraged to obtain the highest level education that they can possibly do to train themselves for these new opportunities, these new openings that are being developed or created for their benefit.  And that we will not only from the standpoint with their own economic betterment, but for the black society as a whole.  And that they will return to the community that is not only the things that they have learned and have been educated to do,  but will return to the community to share that to them not to just use it for their own betterment or improvement.  And that is in any society, leadership is never an excess quantity. They're always seeking new leadership and especially as the older leadership passes off the scene.  And they must be willing if it means a sacrifice to them or not that they will pick up their reins and continue that.  Now one of the phrases being used so often is that we "return something back to the society."  Well, we've got to do that and not only financially (unclear) that but say will give of their own on time as well as their resources to seek for the highest level in the community as possible to achieve.  For instance in Houston [Texas] we have--we go into most stores and places, offices now you see people of color behind the desk and behind the counters and all.  And that's a benefit we worked for but some of these of the younger generation with these good and well-paying positions have left the community.  Now it's nothing wrong if they want to move out in an area where housing is better or something but that doesn't mean that they should leave the community.  They should return to the community and, and share with the community some of the things that they have achieved and improve the society as a whole.  So that that's my concern about the young people. Thinking of young 'cause the older generation they've done whatever they could.  But the future lies in the hands of young people, the coming generation.  And we're faced with this you know.
Story_ID: 238595
Speaker 1: I mean some of my (unclear) especially in the South (unclear).  One time it was just a dual society--white and blacks.  But with all of this immigration coming in, now here we all near the border and we've got Hispanics coming in.  And not only from Mexico but from South America coming up here but not only that from Asia we have 'em come in from Asia in large numbers and, and other ethnic groups.  And then the competition was just between black and whites.  Now we have to compete with these other ethnic cultures and which means that not just competing against white-ism they used to call it and, and knocking on his door but we've got to work to measure up.  In Houston [Texas], and it's all over the country where Asian is there. The young people are finishing higher level educations not coming out with the higher grade levels, you know.  But not only that but they are moving in based on their race proportionally speaking more of them are in attendance then we are.  And, and they're achieving higher economic levels than we are.  Well, that's something that not just to get a passing grade so they can get out and say well I got my piece of paper, I got my diploma.  But to, to do it at the point that they will be able to operate in a competitive society based on what they have learned.  And what they are equipped to do and not just wave that diploma and say oh man I got it made now.  I, I got this one no that won't do anymore it's not just as I say compete against whites.  But you got the Hispanics you got the Asians, and you've got other whites who have are still coming in here.  And I said I said who making this far more competitive world in which we operate or function.  So those are the things some of us in the older generation didn't have to do it--our only competitor was, was white.  And he had things--all the bars and restrictions set up, so we really couldn't say we were able to compete.  But now that society has opened up to the point that we can compete somewhat.  But we have to compete not only against him but against all these other cultures.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 238596
Speaker 1: Tell me this, when you look back on your career, and all the things that you've done, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: What would I do different?
Speaker 1: Yeah, is there any major thing that you would do different, sir?
Speaker 2: Well I often think, well I said to some of my colleagues that recently--I wanted a businessman. I said because growing up in the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] and so much urgency to stay with the Y [YMCA] and all. But if you want to be viable or in a position to really be in leadership and in the community, state or nation it's in the business world.  You have politicians, but who backs, who backs world politicians and they do just (unclear).  You have professional people, but they are trained for service. Now we pride especially people in our race and culture, we've always look up with the highest respect on the professionals.  The doctors, the lawyers, the educators and we on in.  And, and we need them it's no question about that, oh we need them.  But I'm talking about if you want to be a real factor in providing leadership you be in the business community. That's why I often encourage young people now all right to go to our universities.  And, and to become educators 'cause then you're being trained for service.  But if you want to be a leader in the community and be in the position to make real changes you'll be in the businessman 'cause the businessman, he hires these people, and he controls 'em.  And we want to be in a position so we can make our contribution at that level.  And we're moving toward that, but I mean encourage more of them in that.  And yet I'm a so called professional myself (laughter), and I say my intent wasn't--but I figured there was a need at that time.  But if I had to change now, I would be doing some of the things I've done, although some things aren't necessary now.  But if I would go back to school now I, I would get an M.B.A. (laughter), or I would be--it would depend.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I feel that I could provide a larger service--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --doing that.
Story_ID: 238597
Speaker 1: Likewise when you look back at all the things you've done over the--over these many, many years of service, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: You know, I have to be would I be a little subjective that (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Well you should be.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's too hard to answer make a very appropriate into thinking that I tried (laughter).  But anyway I mentioned that my original intent was to be a businessman.  And I know there's a need, and we are getting far because I read not only Ebony and Reader's Digest but Business Enterprise and all.  And I subscribe to all of 'em you'll see 'em got 'em right there.  And, and see now what young people are now not only moving up there now there at Wall Street there active they're heads of some of the business corporations now.  And, and I could go on but not that I'm bringing to the point that I want to that, but I think I could have probably made maybe a big contribution as a businessman.  But now we've got other people who are doing that.  So, I hope as I guess my legacy I just hope that other people I mean, you know, what they call him will give of themselves not only get a good paying job or position.  And, and live so they can take cruises and that they can do all these other things.  If they turn it back that they will share some of that in the community to those who are not less fortunate or don't--haven't been given the opportunity to do it.  But the overriding thing we need now is young people now leaders spending time and effort to share with the oncoming generation.  So they'll get in view with that spirit of service whether it's in the secular world and all but the good, good book based on that if you were to read the Old Testament and New Testament all through it.  To really live a Christian life I mean to live, well we say Christian life 'cause we in that conscious it means--I know some in that's very familiar oh yeah I'm serving the Lord.  But what are they doing to their fellow man it's service that you can only live a truly make that your new religion a servant if you can do that you serving the Almighty cause he doesn't need you (laughter), you know, what I'm saying (unclear).  And that's why he sent his only begotten son down here was to train us how to serve.  And so if we keep that in mind I think we'll serve our mission on earth.
Story_ID: 238598
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Cornelia Tate Mease] get a chance to see you become successful?
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: Your mother.
Speaker 2: My mother?
Speaker 1: Yeah, did she get a chance to see you become successful?
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did she think about your--
Speaker 2: I don't know if I'm successful (laughter) but (coughing), excuse me.  See she died in '64 [1964] I think it was. Well some of the things that I have done then yeah.  But I think she one thing there never be quiet--forgive me for coming South (laughter).  But I think yeah she, she approved of some to think oh yes.  I think that and, of course, I being the last one in the family all the immediate members in my family have passed on.  So now I've got one grandchild, one son out in California and--
Speaker 1: You have a daughter out there.
Speaker 2: Uh?
Speaker 1: You, you have a daughter in California.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my daughter yeah but I meant and the--yeah my daughter and I have well nephews and nieces scattered around and here.  I'll say, unfortunately, but it's none of 'em live in Texas, I'm the only one live in Texas (laughter).  And I go back home, so I was there in September, and I'm, I'm leaving here Thursday going back.  Long-time friend of the family and all who passed but at the Iowa State University [Ames, Iowa] they had dedicated one of the big new housing units or dormitory to these two people.  And they invite me to come they sent me a whole lot of material about the background of this and so I think I'll hop up there in Iowa State University.  That's only thirty miles north of Des Moines [Iowa]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and share this experience with them and all.
Story_ID: 238599
Speaker 1: Now the last question is--this is the last question, similar to legacy but not quite the same thing. Now this is the last question, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) As I said a while ago, "He tried," that's trite isn't it?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's good enough.  Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know if I've given much thought about (laughter)--I mean the past--I think it's a selfish motive that you do these things so you can be memorialized or something, you know, that kind of thing.  I think twice things have been done to name things after me, and I think in the (unclear) your notice that the hospital district the hospital naming I refuse that twice.  And I told 'em that I'm the chairman of the board, and it would be construed to some people that, that I engineered that.  But I didn't get it I turned it down, and when it came to a vote, there were a seven-person board they went on and voted anyway.  And the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] up there that's this one I would to the [South Central] YMCA it's over on Wheeler [Street, Houston, Texas].  When we were to dedicate it on Sunday, so we had a board meeting on the Friday to acquaint them of what the procedure the programs were gonna be and all of them.  And two of the board members Dr. Parrington [ph.] and Dr. Cunningham [ph.] he, he was principal of the school.  They came early and I kind of wondered because they had never done that before.  Says, you know, what Cunningham spoke and said [HistoryMaker] Mr. [Quentin] Mease said that open up this building, and all and say that Dr. Parrington and I we think we ought to make a motion at the board meeting to name it after you.  And I told him I said that would never do.  I said because I work here and I'm compensated for my work, but there have been other people in the community who have really labored, and all they made this possible too.  So I don't think my name ought to be on it--because when I came here I found a number of the schools in the black community were named after black principals.  I can name at least a dozen of them, and they were hired to do the job they hadn't done anything.  And I figured not only people here in the community but could name them after Ralph Bunche, Roy Wilkerson [ph.], Chatti Dubai [ph.] a whole lot of 'em, Thurgood Marshall all that and most of 'em had these names on 'em.  And a lot of the whites go the same way I guess that's a southern tradition but I don't think that's right.  But I told 'em I refused to have the hospital name but they went on it anyway and I was on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is the Quentin Mease Community Hospital [Houston, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was only black member of the board, and you see back then they outvoted me six to one, so they went and did that.  And then the Y [YMCA], I turned that down, and that was another building here that their core organization--the Urban League you should see our Urban League yeah 'cause the--it's the finest in the country.  Have you seen it?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: It's down on Texas [Avenue] oh it's, it's surreal--if that building had to be duplicated now it would cost well into thirty million dollars or better it's now down they all fine.  Well then someone said that since I was a--they considered responsible for that and all and serving as chairman in America's--.  But not that I'm all that anymore.  But it's now there, and I know, you know, it's, it's known now at the name I gave it.  The Houston [Texas] area Urban League.
Speaker 1: But how do you want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well I guess (laughter) that's hard to say.  I haven't given it any thought; I'm not gonna I guess.
Speaker 1: Is to somebody who served, somebody who gave a lot of services, I mean gave the community a great deal of services all of these many years?
Speaker 2: (Sighs) I, I, well I think those who knew of the things that I've been involved in and some of the things that we brought to fruition, while I'm satisfied with that, but what my legacy will be, what I'll be remembered for, I can't say (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay. Thank you.
Story_ID: 238600
Speaker 1: Can you describe this one for us, sir?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Can you describe this photo for us?
Speaker 2: Tell us who's in the photo, and what date it was taken if possible.
Speaker 1: Oh, I can't always tell the dates now (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I know that was taken in 1948, just prior to leaving Chicago [Illinois].  And that was my first civilian suit after I got out of [U.S.] military service.
Speaker 2: Alright this is you when?
Speaker 1: Oh, that, that had to be taken about seven or eight years ago.  This is, let's say this is '94 [1994], 1994 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: That's a--this was taken when I was in the military service, so it had to be taken in--let's see where was I then I don't know then.  It can--I think, this was taken in 1940--'47 [1947], let me see.  No well I mean, I mean 1940--let's say '45 [1945].
Speaker 2: I wonder if you could see the license plates.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was taken in, in Japan.
Speaker 2: Okay, and this one.
Speaker 1: Well, this one is after I came home so let's make it '46 [1946].
Speaker 2: Very good, next.
Speaker 1: This is before you went to the military.
Speaker 2: Well this is a babyhood picture, and I don't think it couldn't be a year old (laughter).  Yeah, that's, that a babyhood picture.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know how many months I was then.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.  And here a caption go right here.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a picture of the old homestead there in Buxton, Iowa, 20 E. 2nd Street.
Speaker 1: Okay, now please remove the caption.
Speaker 2: Lighting, like magic.  That's him in front, age ten years old.  Can you get a close-up of it?
Speaker 1: Up closer.
Speaker 2: Buxton, Iowa.  Okay, the name sounds like it's related to [North] Buxton, Canada, you know.  'Cause that was a free black town in Canada.
Speaker 1: Seem like it.
Speaker 2: Too much of a coincidence.
Speaker 1: Next.  Okay, tell me about this one, sir?
Speaker 2: I know this was taken in 1990 when I left as chairman of the [Harris County] Hospital District [Harris Health System, Houston, Texas].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was held at the doctors club.
Speaker 1: And this one?
Speaker 2: This was taken in Las Vegas [Nevada] when we were on a trip out to West Coast.  And that right there is, on the left, is Dupree, Clarence Dupree [ph.], and my wife, Jewell [Mary] Mease.  And then his wife, Anna Dupree [ph.].  And on the far right is myself.
Speaker 1: Next, tell me about this one, sir.
Speaker 2: Well that one there is when I was--with some Japanese youngsters, so it had to be in '45 [1945] or '46 [1946] and that, that must have been taken in Tokyo [Japan].
Speaker 1: Okay next, what about this?
Speaker 2: That a west--now you know a long time ago on names but I know the fellow on, on the left.  Well, I give in.
Speaker 1: So you gotta (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is the left isn't it?
Speaker 1: Yeah (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And then the fellow in the middle his name is Clark [ph.] from Detroit [Michigan].  I think his name was, was let me see let's say, Harold Clark.  Now, the youngster he was a non-call sergeant or corporal from Tennessee.
Speaker 1: 'Bout this one?
Speaker 2: This was here when the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Here you are right here.
Speaker 2: Okay, tell me about this one, sir?  Do you remember?
Speaker 1: Yeah, this was when we were observing a second year overseas, and so that had to be in I think it was the second year when I was--
Speaker 2: Forty-five [1945] right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, let's see '45 [1945].
Speaker 2: How about this one?
Speaker 1: This was when I graduated--
Speaker 2: From.
Speaker 1: --from George Williams College [Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --in 1948.
Speaker 2: Good, next. Go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is when a dinner was held for me, and I'm trying to think of the year.  This right here on the left is Clifton Smith [ph.]; he's at that time was with one of the TV stations here and with channel two.  The master of ceremonies, I mean for that dinner the Toastmasters.  The keys to a car that was given.  And A.E. Warner is a salesman who arranged for me to get this car.
Speaker 2: And who's on the right?  Okay, next.  How 'bout this?
Speaker 1: Have we seen that before?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Have we seen that before?
Speaker 2: No, tell us about this one.
Speaker 1: Well this right here was the twentieth anniversary of the hospital district.  I was chairman and receiving something from Doctor Michael [E.] DeBakey famous heart surgeon on the left.  And the gentleman in the center the president of Baylor College of Medicine [Houston, Texas].  And then this is myself on the right.
Speaker 2: Okay, tell me about this one.
Speaker 1: Well, that's me trying to keep from being frightened.  When I was that age, I don't know they were having fun.  Until my (laughter)--.  Yeah, sorry.
Speaker 2: The things you could get a little kid to believe.
Speaker 1: Organizations I founded.  Houston (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was wonder (unclear).
Speaker 1: Houston Business and Professional Men's Club.  Rotary [International] and Kiwanis [International] were for the white men.  But there was no place for Houston business and professional men.  So we argued that I mean organized it, and I served up to a few years ago as the executive secretary and program chairman.  And these right here are members, here I, I am just barely seen right through there.  And this is chief of police at that time, they were invited out to the club 'cause we were concerned about some of the things that were happening and how the police were maltreating some of our suspects.  This right here I received--this is a congresswoman here from, from Houston.  Our--only had one now but at the election today we'll have two, two congressmen.
Speaker 2: What's her name, can you give her name on--?
Speaker 1: Her name is Sheila Jackson Lee.  Yeah, congresswoman, she's presenting me with something there.
