Story_ID: 126404
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: William Vince Moore.  W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Vince, V-I-N-C-E, M-O-O-R-E.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And Sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 23, 1933.
Speaker 1: And Sir, what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: Occupation is retired part-time adjunct professor at a community college.
Speaker 1: And you are retired.  Are you still shooting as a, would you still consider yourself a photographer?
Speaker 2: No.  I teach a video class at a community college.  Whenever there is something to shoot, I take students and kind of talk them through it.  But I don't consider myself a working photographer anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  But you were a professional photographer?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Alright, okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is November 7, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in San Francisco, California.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask that only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The first one is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: Italian.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Green.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The Caribbean.
Speaker 1: And the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: A favorite phrase.  I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 126405
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and then your father's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then we'll put them together.  So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Isabelle, I-S-A-B-E-L-L-E, maiden name Logan, L-O-G-A-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Moore, right?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Probably 1895 in New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.  New York City?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them, and are there any stories about them?
Speaker 2: Can't trace it back too far, don't even know my grandparents' name.  I did go on-line and did some searching with Ancestry.  I found my mother's census report when she was eight and her sister was--she was six, and I think her sister was eight.  They were given to an aunt and uncle.  All it said is their parents were in Virginia.  They went there.  They lived with them awhile in New York and then went from New York to Boston [Massachusetts] and lived with the same family members there before they came to California.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, did they come to California once they were of age, or did they--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were of age.  My mother came to California about 1910.
Speaker 1: So, so, something happened to her parents, is that right?
Speaker 2: Yes, and she never talked about her parents.  She did once.  I remember--being the youngest child, you didn't hear a whole lot--that one, my mother was born on Ellis Island, so my grandparents might have worked there.  I think what was normal in those days, they might have had other children, and gave these two younger ones to an aunt and uncle to raise, and went back home to Virginia or someplace, wherever they were from.
Speaker 1: But your mother, when she went to Virginia, did she connect with her--were her parents still alive?
Speaker 2: She never connected with them.  I don't even know their name, you know, other than her maiden name was Logan.  I wouldn't know their first or last name or anything about them.  I just--that information I got from a census report in New York City.
Speaker 1: So, she never talked about--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --talked about the situation.  Did you have a sense that it was something that she didn't know anything about, or it was something painful that she didn't want to talk about?
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't anything painful.  She didn't seem bitter about it.  It was this aunt and uncle that, you know, raised her, brought the family, brought them to California.  You just, we just lived with--that was your relatives, and that's what you lived with.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, was your mother raised primarily in New York City?
Speaker 2: Until she came to California.  She was born in New York City.  The next census, ten or twenty years later, was from Massachusetts... and stayed in Massachusetts.  And then the family she was with came to California.  And I don't know if she came with them, or they came and she came later.  But then, she came to California.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, alright.  Any stories about your mother's side of the family, the Logan side?
Speaker 2: Not really.  The man that she came here with was an uncle.  He came to California; I think he opened a restaurant somewhere in Oakland.  And my mother and sister, her sister, came out and worked in that restaurant.  But I didn't know too much about them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, that's significant.  He owned a restaurant, you know, which is--
Speaker 2: A small restaurant, no big--(laughter) just a little--
Speaker 1: Well, it's still...
Speaker 2: --you know--cafe or something like that, yeah.
Speaker 1: I never sneer at ownership, you know.  Somebody that has their own business is doing something.  So, nothing is big, we're just trying to get a sense of history.  So, he had a restaurant in Oakland.  And did your mother ever talk about what life was like for her growing up in New York or Boston?
Speaker 2: No, not really, not to me; maybe to my siblings, but not me.
Speaker 1: Did your mother have a chance to finish high school?
Speaker 2: I don't think she got much above middle years--maybe eighth, ninth grade, somewhere in there.  I don't think she finished high school.
Speaker 1: What did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well, for the first part of our lives, she was a housewife and took care of the children.  And then I guess when we got old enough to kind of watch out for ourselves, she just did domestic work--housecleaning.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Did she ever talk about some occupation or profession that she wished she had aspired to, or wanted to do, something that she wanted to do when she was growing up?
Speaker 2: No, nothing.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Did she have any special talents or anything?  Like, could she sew or sing, or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, a good, she was a good mother.  She had five children.  One died shortly after it was born.  But she was very loving, took very good care of us.  And I think when she had four children that became her life.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 126406
Speaker 1: Alright, now, I'm going to go to your father's side.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Edward--common spelling--S. Moore.  I think his middle name was Seymour, S-E-Y-M-O-U-R.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Probably 1890 in Barbados, British West Indies.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Now, what do you know about your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: I know he was born in Barbados.  I know his family migrated from Barbados to the Canal Zone, probably to help build it, and later on work there.  He lived there until he came to San Francisco [California], working on a ship.  Got off the ship and never went back to Panama, never became a citizen.  Had a brother, his brother went to New York City.  To my knowledge, that brother never went back to Panama.  There was a sister in Panama that my mother [Isabelle Logan] used to write letters to.  We were kind of related to a famous baseball player, but when I made myself known to him he thought I was a fake, so I didn't push it any further than that, and just left it alone.  But he was really--you know, from our letters we knew that he was related to us.
Speaker 1: Which one?
Speaker 2: He played for the Minnesota Twins.  I think his name was Rod Carew.
Speaker 1: Rod Carew, the first baseman, yeah.
Speaker 2: He would have been probably a first cousin.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, I remember Rod Carew was an all-star baseball player, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was.
Speaker 1: --a hitting champion of the American League a couple times, right?
Speaker 2: We'd known about it, and I was covering an A's [Oakland A's, Oakland, California] game one day.  And they were playing the A's, and I went in to--and there was a point to, you know, just do a one on one with him--like, I could mention who I was.  But he seemed kind of--you know, he probably got that--being a baseball star, probably got that from every third black person he met.  And so, he didn't seem very interested, and I didn't pursue it anymore.  I'd gotten along that far without Rod Carew, and I figured I could continue the rest of the way without him.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, alright.  Yeah, I guess he was on guard, I guess.  But, okay, that's interesting.  Now, so your father, you know, came here after he had lived in the Canal Zone and had worked on a ship?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, did he have a chance to go to school or anything?
Speaker 2: I don't think he--I don't know what kind of school he had, but having probably worked ever since he was a small child, he was very bright.  He spoke, not fluent--a lot of languages, but enough for enough conversation.  He--I know he spoke Spanish because Panama is a Spanish-speaking country.  He spoke a little French.  He even spoke a little Cantonese and Mandarin, probably more Cantonese.  But he could, he could always utter a few phrases in a few languages, and I was always thrilled by that.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, now what did your, did your father ever tell you stories about growing up, or what it was like then?
Speaker 2: He told me of growing up in Barbados.  His parents worked for some government, somebody with the government.  And he just remembered having to stay with his parents where they--wherever they worked he was with them, and not much more than that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when your father came to San Francisco and decided to stay, what did he do?  Or, what did he do for a living?  What did he start doing?
Speaker 2: Initially when he came here, I don't know.  I know he did--he spent most of his career working for the Southern Pacific Railroad.  But before that, he worked at a restaurant in Palo Alto, California called Dinah, like in Dinah Shore, "Dinah's Shack."  And as far as I can remember, it was like a restaurant where they probably had all black waiters and the women had to go around looking like Aunt Jemina.  I just heard family tell stories about the Dinah Shack.  I never went there.  I knew where it was, I knew where the spot was, but I never went to the restaurant.  You know, I think it closed maybe twenty years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  But he spent most of his life working for the railroad?
Speaker 2: Working for the railroad.
Speaker 1: This is Union Pacific?
Speaker 2: Southern Pacific.
Speaker 1: Southern Pacific, okay, Southern Pacific.  Okay, alright.  Now, what did he do for Southern Pacific?
Speaker 2: He was a waiter.
Speaker 1: Waiter, okay.
Story_ID: 126407
Speaker 1: And now, is there a story about how and when your parents [Edward S. Moore, Isabelle Logan]met?
Speaker 2: How they met?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Probably met at the restaurant where my mother worked.  I don't know what kind of courtship they had.  I do know when they got married, before his honeymoon, a bunch of his friends kidnapped and took him away.  You know, I guess they were having a post-bachelor party instead of a pre one.  They took him out, and kept him out all night on his wedding night.  But they don't talk--didn't talk much about a courtship.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It doesn't sound like it. (laughter).
Speaker 2: It might have been a marriage of convenience, you know.
Speaker 1: I mean, did they, did they get along fairly well?
Speaker 2: I think they got along fine, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 126408
Speaker 1: So, now when you think about your parents' personalities, their sense of humor, how they walk, how they talk, how they--what they were interested in, you know, what they looked like...  Who do you think you took after the most?
Speaker 2: Probably a little bit of both: my warm, kind, clean, gentle side from my mother [Isabelle Logan] and my arrogance and evilness from my father [Edward S. Moore].
Speaker 1: So, even-handed--
Speaker 2: Yeah, kind of even-handed.  It wasn't, it wasn't really--I don't think it was evil.  But I think when you grew up and your father was West Indian, there wasn't as large a population of West Indians on the West Coast as it was the East Coast.  There were a few.  And I remember when the West Indian men came over to talk, you couldn't understand them, because they talked too fast.  And you mistook it for, for being evil, but I don't think it was.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 126409
Speaker 1: Now, do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I had two brothers, both passed, and one sister who's still alive.
Speaker 1: And where do you fall in the--?
Speaker 2: I am the youngest.  I am the fifth of five children.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: My mother [Isabelle Logan] had five children.  The first child died before he was two years old.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  And can you name your brothers and your sister and--
Speaker 2: The oldest of the surviving children would be my sister, who is Olga, O-L-G-A, Moore.  Next to her would be my brother who passed, Owen Moore.  Next to him would be my other brother who passed, John Moore.  And the last one would be me, William Moore.  The first child that died at two years old was an Edward Moore, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  What did your brothers end up doing for a living?
Speaker 2: My oldest brother was a chemist for Dow Chemical in Pittsburg, California.  The second brother was a musician.  My sister just raised children.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 126410
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can remember being maybe eight years old.  I lived all my childhood in the family home that my sister still lives in.  And... someone coming in?  Hello.
Speaker 1: They went back.
Speaker 2: Well, I should lock it then, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Can it be locked from--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Can it be locked--
Speaker 2: Belva?  Was it her?
Speaker 1: I didn't see--I didn't see them.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I do remember early childhood from, you know, maybe eight or nine years old.  We lived in a big house.  My sister had her bedroom.  My brother had a bedroom, and I shared a bedroom with my second brother close to me.  And that's what I remember.
Story_ID: 126411
Speaker 1: What neighborhood did you live in?
Speaker 2: I lived in the neighborhood in Oakland [California] now they call West Oakland.  But when we grew up, it was North Oakland.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As the demographics changed, it became--as the neighborhood got more black they just made it West Oakland.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Now that's the historic name of a black neighborhood, and they just made it like that after--
Speaker 2: Well, it was a mixed neighborhood when we grew up in it.  I had, we had three Japanese families on our street that went to interment camps that I didn't understand too much in 1941.  We had white families.  We didn't get black families from the South until '45 [1945], '46 [1946].  Some of my best friends came from the South, and I had to interpret for them in the grocery store because their southern accents were so strong.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, now, was church important when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: It was probably important to my mother that we go to Sunday School.  It wasn't important to me, you know.  You grew up--you didn't care about going to church.  You went to Sunday School and you came home.
Speaker 1: Alright, alright.  Now, was, now what was the neighborhood like, I mean in terms of...  I know who lived there, but what was some of the features of the neighborhood that you remember?
Speaker 2: What was it like?
Speaker 1: Yes, Sir.
Speaker 2: It was a pretty good neighborhood.  It was mixed--white, black, Asian.  We were one block from the main approach to the Bay Bridge, so that was kind of nice.  You know, you walked around the corner and, you know, it was one of the busiest streets in the neighborhood.  Had a lot of nice old people, and you had a lot of friends to play with, you know.  We had playgrounds, and the park wasn't far away, school wasn't far away.  So, it was a good neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Now this is, like, you're born in '34 [1934].  So--
Speaker 2: I was born in '33 [1933].
Speaker 1: Thirty-Three, [1933], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright, alright.
Story_ID: 126412
Speaker 1: So, and so where did you start school?
Speaker 2: I started school in Oakland [California], went all the way through high school in Oakland.  I was drafted and did two years in the Army.
Speaker 1: Now, I don't want to get you that far.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Like, what was the name of your grade school?
Speaker 2: Grade school--grade school would be Longfellow [Longfellow Elementary School].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Middle school would be Woodrow, Woodrow Wilson [Woodrow Wilson Junior High School].  High school would be Oakland Tech [Oakland Technical High School].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, at Longfellow--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Now, when you started Longfellow, did you start in kindergarten or--?
Speaker 2: Kindergarten.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you like school?
Speaker 2: It was fun, it was okay.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite teachers or activities?
Speaker 2: I can't remember, I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So, in those days, you had like--there was no television, right, when you were growing up?
Speaker 1: No.  We were entertained by radio.
Speaker 2: Alright.  Did you have favorite radio shows?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  We kind of liked the old "Gangbusters" and "Mr. District Attorney" and "The Shadow" and, you know, the popular radio shows that came on.  And in those days you only had one radio, so you had to all kind of huddle around the radio and listen to radio stories.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Did you have any favorite activities as a kid in grade school?
Speaker 1: Baseball, played baseball.  That was the easiest thing to play.
Speaker 2: I read somewhere that Joe DiMaggio played here, I mean--
Speaker 1: All of the DiMaggios--there were three DiMaggio brothers that played baseball.  There was Joe, who became the famous one and went to the Yankees [New York Yankees].  But he had two other brothers that played in what we called our Pacific Coast League, which was a minor league that was in California.  And so, you had both--I think Vince DiMaggio and I forget--Dominic DiMaggio--
Speaker 2: Dominic.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  They, they all, they played in baseball, too.
Speaker 2: Were there any, did you see any black baseball when you were growing up?
Speaker 1: Well, we had a Pacific Coast League that was-- the baseball park was close to us.  And I would listen to the game at night.  And if the game got tied you'd get on your bike and go down, because you could go in free after about the seventh inning.  And if you really wanted to hustle, you could stay around and pick up cushions.  And if you picked up cushions, then they would let you in the next game, give you a ticket for the next game.  And it was perpetual.  If you kept picking up cushions, you kept going to the game.  And I remember an exhibition game where a black team came to play, and we went and we saw that game.  That was the only, only Negro League we saw, because it was a pretty well established Pacific Coast League.  There were teams all the way up and down the Pacific Coast.
Speaker 2: Right.  Now, that's before Major League Baseball came to--
Speaker 1: It was--yeah, before Major League Baseball was here San Francisco had a team; Oakland, Sacramento [California], San Diego [California], two in Los Angeles [California], one in Seattle [California], one in Portland [Oregon].  And that was the Pacific Coast League.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I don't think it was Triple-A.  It might have been a little bit below Triple-A, or something like that.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  So, you liked to play baseball, and--
Speaker 1: Well, baseball was what we had; we had a baseball field.  We didn't have much of a basketball court.  And we didn't know anything about volleyball or other sports.  But baseball, we knew about baseball.
Story_ID: 126413
Speaker 1: Did you have, did you have any favorite teachers at Longfellow [Longfellow Elementary School]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: None that I can remember.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And so, in middle school--now, you were in middle school in--what was the name of the school?
Speaker 2: Woodrow Wilson [Woodrow Wilson Junior High School].
Speaker 1: Okay, Woodrow Wilson, okay.  Now, did you start gravitating towards any particular subject at Woodrow Wilson?
Speaker 2: No.  It was--my mother was afraid that if she sent me to the normal middle school in our neighborhood, that I would get in trouble; I was pretty mischievous.  So, she decided that I needed to go to Woodrow.  I did not want to go to Woodrow.  And I didn't like it when I got there, because it had maybe five black students, and it was pretty racist.
Speaker 1: Can you give us an example of the racism?
Speaker 2: Just generally the way the kids talked to you and the way the teachers talked to you.  It just didn't have--you know you're in a minority, and they kind of reminded you of it all the time.
Speaker 1: Did they call you the 'N' word in the school?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  We were probably called that and, you know, whatever other kind of derogatory name could be--you could be called.  If you were with five, or four or five other young white kids and they all got in trouble, you were the one they took to the principal's office, and they told the other four to go to class.  Those kinds of things, you know.  But it wasn't nowhere near the racism that people was going through in Mississippi and Alabama.  So, we lived with it.  We said this is, you know, this is bad, but it's not as bad as what we know it is, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you hear stories from your, the newly arrived people from the South, about--
Speaker 2: When people started arriving from the South, you started hearing stories about segregated water foundations, not being able to ride on busses.  And then you knew--yeah, there were still places here--we had segregation here, but there was no sign that said "Whites Only."  They had different kind of code words they used that basically said the same thing, you know.  And they still--you can find the sign on almost any restaurant in California now that says, "We reserve the right to refuse service to anyone."  When you saw that sign when you was growing up, you knew that they didn't want you to come there, and they weren't going to serve you.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, alright.  So, they called it de-facto--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --segregation--
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: --instead of straight-up segregation.  So, okay.  Now, did you have any idea of what you wanted to do when you grew up, when you were in middle school?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I think by that time I was just, you know, trying to get by, and figure out how you got by in a middle school, and how to keep up.  And my grades weren't very good, so it was hard to keep up.  Again, because you didn't get that personal attention that the slower or troubled student needed.  And so, you knew that you were being kind of pushed aside, and that was tough.  And so, I just tried to--as best I could--just survive, and get through the school and get on with what I had to do.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, high school, you went to Oakland [California]?
Speaker 2: Oakland Tech [Oakland Technical High School].
Speaker 1: Oakland Tech High School.  And what was the demographics of Oakland Tech?
Speaker 2: Much better by the time you got to high school.  Now, we had some diversity.  Had white students, but had a lot of Asian students, a lot of black students.  So, you really felt you were--most of the black students that I would have went to in the other high junior high came to that high school.  So, you had black friends.  But more diversity in that school; you felt a lot easier there.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 126414
Speaker 1: Alright, alright.  Now, you came along around the same time as some of the great athletes that came out of Oakland, like Frank Robinson, Vada Pinson, Curt Flood, Bill Russell, right?  Now, they all went to McClymonds, I guess?
Speaker 2: They went to McClymonds High in Oakland [California].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And you had a story about Frank Robinson, right?
Speaker 2: Well, he was a great baseball player, and he was one of those baseball players that got drafted right out of high school, like they did in those days.  And he was going with a, like a cousin of mine, a nice sweet girl.  And they had planned to get married, they had sent out the wedding invitations.  And then I think he got drafted, and decided maybe a week or two weeks before the wedding, he wasn't going to get married.  And he didn't, he never married her.  It broke her up.  I don't think she ever got married.  And that was--you know, I never--you know, jilting a cousin--I never had a lot of respect for Frank Robinson, even the time he was here and served as the manager of the Giants [San Francisco Giants, California].  I never brought it up to him, but I was still a little pissed.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And you said like Bill Russell was like a super star around here, right?
Speaker 2: He, I can remember him playing basketball.  But, you know, in those days nobody knew who was going to be as great as they were going to be.  He went on--he probably got more fame at the University of San Francisco [San Francisco, California] when he played college ball than from high school.  And that's when we really knew that we had a hometown guy that was really going somewhere.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Because you said you didn't know Vada Pinson, but--
Speaker 2: I didn't know Vada Pinson, no.  I covered him, you know, in covering sports, but didn't know him growing up.
Speaker 1: And Curt Flood, of course is a person who revolutionalized--
Speaker 2: Curt Flood was probably in that same era along with Frank Robinson.  And I knew Curt Flood, and not as well as Frank Robinson, but I knew of him.  And once... and when he did what he did, I had no idea how significant it was going to be for baseball.  But as the years went on and I realized the sacrifice he made, I just, I've always had a great respect for Curt Flood.  I mean, he put himself out there for--so baseball players today could make millions.  And he didn't get, he didn't get it, you know.  But he's, in my book is really a hero [Flood v. Kuhn, 1972].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Anybody else in school with you that you think would be, that people would know today that--?
Speaker 2: There was a--when I was in high school, we had a football player, a white football player, who was like a quarterback for the high school football.  And he went on to Stanford [Stanford University, Palo Alto, California].  And then from Stanford, he went to play for the 49ers [San Francisco 49ers, California].  His name is John Brodie.  And I knew him from high school, and I didn't know he remembered me from high school.  But I remember one day covering a game at the 49ers game.  And I was walking to the dressing room to do some interviews, and he walked by and said, "Hi, Bill Moore, how are you?"  And that was really great.  It wasn't anything but just, that he knew who I was, and I felt good about that.
Speaker 1: That was in the old Kezar Stadium [San Francisco, California]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, I don't think I covered--by the time I started working they were already, I think, playing at Candlestick [Candlestick Park, San Francisco, California].  They weren't playing at Kezar.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Now, I don't know about--well, of course, I think, like, Ron Dellums is older than you, right?
Speaker 2: Ron Dellums is a couple years, maybe a year younger.
Speaker 1: Younger, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you know him growing up?
Speaker 2: I knew him--maybe not in--I knew him after he grew up and after he got out of college, and when he first ran for public office in Berkeley.  I knew him from there.  I knew his wife and family.  So, I knew him that way.
Story_ID: 126415
Speaker 1: I mean by this time had you been introduced to photography at all?
Speaker 2: Just a little bit, by the--maybe eleventh grade.  There was a photographer across the street from us who was a fairly good photographer.  And I went over and he was teaching me how to, you know, I got to watch him in the darkroom and watch him take pictures.  And I kind of got kind of fascinated by it, and I thought it would be an interesting--interesting thing to do.  I didn't think of it as a career then.  I just thought learning how to take and develop pictures would have been fun.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, did you learn the process at that point?
Speaker 2: By the time I was out of high school I had learned enough about film where I could take a camera, load it up, take a picture, take it into the darkroom, develop it, and make a print.  But I couldn't tell you what I was doing.  I didn't know what the chemicals were, or what they meant.  I didn't know what kind of paper I was printing on.  But to do the process, yes, I knew the process.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's interesting.  So, did you learn any of it at Oakland Tech?
Speaker 2: No, didn't learn any photography there.  I learned most of my photography with my mentor, who was Chuck Willis, a photographer, and then later at Oakland City College [Laney College].
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, Chuck Willis.  Now, so, you met him when you were in high school, Chuck Willis?
Speaker 2: No, he was a neighbor.  He lived across the street.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, that's the photographer you were talking about.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright, alright.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so he was really a big mentor for you?
Speaker 2: He was a big mentor.  I remember working for him and at that time, there was maybe--Oakland had maybe three professional serious black photographers.  Chuck Willis was one, another was a guy named Joseph, E.F. Joseph [Emmanuel Francis Joseph].  And another one, who didn't work quite as much as those two, was a guy named Morgan.  And they all asked me what I wanted to do in photography.  And I had no idea what I wanted to do in photography.  It took a while to figure that out.  But they were the serious photographers that were here.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 126416
Speaker 1: So, what did you, did you major in, well, when you were growing up?  Oakland Tech High School [Oakland Technical High School, Oakland, California]--were you involved in some kind of technical field that you were studying?
Speaker 2: By the time I got to high school, I think the middle school did a lot of damage on me.  My grades weren't that well.  I had no way--I was no way prepared to go to a college.  So, what you did then was try to get out of school and find a job, try to find a trade.  But by the time I graduated I did want to be a photographer, but didn't know too much about photography schools.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But because of Oakland Tech, did you concentrate on a certain area, technical area?
Speaker 2: No, I just took General Ed [general education] courses.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, alright.  So, you didn't have any plans to go to college or any idea--
Speaker 2: No, I had none.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, alright.  So, so you graduated from--now, were you involved in any activities at Oakland Tech?  I mean like--?
Speaker 2: My brothers before me had both participated in track.  I didn't want to, but it was expected of me, since my older brother had held the city record for a quarter mile.  My other brother... who was a pretty good sprinter... so I went out for track.  And I was fair, I wasn't that great.  I was just fair.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, you know--did you have a camera at this juncture?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't have a camera.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Didn't have a camera.
Story_ID: 126417
Speaker 1: So basically hanging out with your neighbor, Chuck Willis, you were able to learn the process?
Speaker 2: I learned the process.  But him being a professional photographer, in those days, you used a four by five camera, and you didn't really have--film was very expensive.  You couldn't really--you could play around with the camera but you couldn't play around taking pictures, because you didn't have that much film.
Speaker 1: Right, okay, okay.  So, did Mr. Willis take photos for the local papers--I mean the black papers?
Speaker 2: He shot for black newspapers, he shot for black publications.  He did a lot of stringer stuff for Jet Magazine.  Mainly, he shot, you know, functions--weddings, parties, stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Did he do like high school photos and that sort of, you know?
Speaker 2: No, he...  Later on I went to work for a photographer that was, you know, a photographer that did high school photos.  But no black photographer had that kind of business.  In those days, that was a real big cash cow.  Because if you got a contract to photograph a high school yearbook, you were, you made a lot of money off of it.  Because in those days, it was, it was usually the first time anyone ever saw a formal portrait of themselves.  So, people bought a lot of portraits.  So, that was kind of rare that--you know it was kind of controlled by the white photographers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you remember how you met Mr. Willis?
Speaker 2: Well, I think his father was a West Indian, like my father [Edward S. Moore].  And they'd come over and drink and talk, and when they moved in the neighborhood I just kind of met him from there.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  How did he do, business-wise?  Did he do pretty good or was he struggling?
Speaker 2: He struggled.  He wasn't, he wasn't that great a businessman.  He was an excellent photographer.  He was probably far superior to the other photographers that worked--the other two black photographers--because he had, he had gotten out of high school and he had studied at the California College of [the] Arts [Oakland, California], I think.  I know he had an art degree, and he had a very good eye.  And he was, he didn't, he didn't have the opportunity to really develop into the photographer that he really should have been.  He had a family he had to take care of, so he had to do the weddings and the parties and that kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  What was he shooting with?  You said--
Speaker 2: What was that?
Speaker 1: What was he shooting with?
Speaker 2: What was he shooting with?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: In those days you shot four by five film.  So, you shot with a speed graphic.  We started to go into smaller cameras, the Rolleiflexes.  So, you're using 120 film that gave you a little more variety, and your film costs went down.  But primarily you were still shooting a lot with speed graphics then.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Those are the ones you see in the movies with the big flash on the side?
Speaker 2: You had a holder that held two sheets of film.  You put it in, pull the slide shot, take that out, turn it over, and pull another one.  We had maybe six--six holders, so that was twelve shots.  When he shot six of them, I would unload them in a box and reload some more film, and he would shoot some more.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you became his assistant early on?
Speaker 2: I became his assistant, yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.  So, this is your job in high school.  And then after you graduated--
Speaker 2: After I got out of high school I really started, you know, working with him as an assistant.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, alright.  So, you're getting hands-on, on the job training?
Speaker 2: Good hands on.  He was--he would let me do almost anything.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he lived not too far away?
Speaker 2: Right across the street.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  No long commute to work.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: (laughter).
Story_ID: 126418
Speaker 1: Alright, so you graduated from high school then in what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen Fifty-Two [1952].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Nineteen Fifty-Two [1952], alright.  Now, did you have to worry about being drafted in the Army?
Speaker 2: I was drafted.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was drafted in '53 [1953], and was in the Army for two years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were you able to pursue photography in the Army?
Speaker 2: Every attempt I made to go to photography school in the Army, I was kind of bamboozled and turned down.  I was told that if I re-enlisted they would send me to photography school.  I said, can you guarantee it?  They couldn't guarantee it, so I wouldn't re-enlist.  And they would come back again in six months with the same re-enlistment approach.  And every time they approached me--I knew where the photography schools were in the military.  They had one in California and one on the East Coast.  I said, "If I can go to photography school, I'll be more than happy to sign up."  They would never--they would never guarantee that I could go to photography school, so I never re-enlisted.  Had they sent me, I would have re-enlisted.  I probably would have had a, would have spent a career in the military as a photographer.
Speaker 1: They kind of sort of kept you out of it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is the Army, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: The United States Army.  Did you spend any time overseas?
Speaker 2: I spent sixteen months in Korea.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is, this is towards the end of the Korean Conflict?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  By the time I got to Korea, there was a truce.  But it was still like a war zone.  And there wasn't any combat, but you were still operating like you were in a combat zone.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Any stories from Korea?
Speaker 2: Oh, there are a lot of stories.  Korea was just, you know, it was a God-awful place for anyone that was born in California and had never been in snow before.  So, that was freezing ass cold.  You had to get used to that.  You were away from home, and you didn't think you'd ever get back.  You lived in a foxhole in the ground, and that was hard to--you know, it's tough enough just being in the military.  But you're in the military, and then now you're in a foreign country, you know.  And so, it--all of it was pretty rough.  I didn't have--I didn't have anybody to mentor me, or to tell me how to get by in the military.  So when I was drafted in Oakland [California], they brought me to San Francisco [California] for the process to take you to Fort Ord for your training.  And I looked around the room, and I saw an old black sergeant.  And I went over to him, and I said, "I'm going to be drafted.  Can you tell me anything that will help me survive, to help me get by?"  And he took aside and said, "I'll tell you two things.  And if you listen to this, you'll be okay."  He said, "Whatever they tell you to do, regardless of how ridiculous or insane it sounds, you must do it.  You can't refuse anything."  And I said, "Fine."  And he said, "Then the other one, it sounds a little silly, but you'll still come out okay on this.  Whenever they need a volunteer, raise your hand."  And I took them as the gospel.  I did whatever they told me, and whenever they wanted a volunteer, I raised my hand.  And I found that if you volunteered for ten things, they were absolutely lousy.  But the other three were just wonderful.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, he told you the right thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He told me, he told me right.  I wish today I knew who he was, or what his name was.  He really--they were two tips, and they were my survival tips for the two years I was in the Army.
Speaker 1: Now, how were race relations in the Army?  Were they still a little edgy?  Because this is the beginning of the integrated Army.
Speaker 2: They were just starting to integrate the military.  And I remember when we got to Fort Ord, which is in Monterey [California] where most of the training went for people on the West Coast--all the black guys kind of congregated to one barracks.  And without telling us, they just came along and picked off so many black guys and spread us out, so that we were integrated in with all the others.  Not knowing what they were doing, I kept asking questions.  Why was I moved from the number one building to the number four building?  And finally after pestering them for a month or so, they said they had to, they had to integrate the service that way.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, you came--any other stories before we get you back--
Speaker 2: In the military?
Speaker 1: --in the United States, yeah.
Speaker 2: I moved around a lot in Korea, because as the war effort was over, they kept bringing more troops back.  But they would just transfer you to another company to fill out your time.  So, it meant I would have to volunteer again.  And I would volunteer once, and I was put on a KP [Kitchen Patrol or Kitchen Police].  I volunteered once, I was a permanent guard.  And then, but the best volunteer I did--I volunteered once and I became the bartender in the officer's mess hall.  So, some of them were good, (laughter) and some of them were lousy.  I didn't--by that point, I didn't--knowing that the military wasn't going to send me to photography school--so I had no desire to make a career in the military.  I wanted to get out without getting into trouble as best I could, and I did that.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, alright.  So, you're out and by 1950--
Speaker 2: Fifty-three, [1953] probably, '53 [1953].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Fifty-Five [1955] or '53 [1953].
Speaker 1: Because you graduated from high school in '52 [1952].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I was out in '55 [1955].
Speaker 1: Alright, alright.
Story_ID: 126419
Speaker 1: Alright, so you're out of the Army in '55 [1955].  And so, what did your prospects look like?  Did you think about going to school on the G-I Bill [Serviceman's Readjustment Act, 1944] or something?
Speaker 2: Well, I first thought about getting a job until I realized I had a G-I Bill, and decided that I was going to use it to study photography.  And so we had what is now a community college, but then was a trade school, where you just went and studied for whatever trade you were interested in.  And so, I went to Laney College [Oakland, California] which is a regular community college now, but at that time was a trade school.  And I just studied photography.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, alright.  So, you had a jump on other people because you already knew how to--
Speaker 2: I had a big jump.  When I walked into the school, they could have handed me a camera and said take a picture.  I could have taken a picture, I could have went and developed it and printed it.  Not knowing what I was doing, I could have done all three of those things.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you say you didn't know what you were doing, but you knew how to do it.
Speaker 2: Well, when I say didn't know what I was doing, I didn't know what the chemical--I didn't know what the makeup of the chemicals were--because in the early days, you didn't buy pre-mixed chemicals.  You physically had to make them yourself.  You had to get the chemical and mix it up yourself.  I didn't know what we were putting in, or how much you put it.  I didn't know why you washed the print as long as you washed the print.  I didn't what the ASA [American Standards Association], or what the speed of the film was.  I just knew how to load it up, shoot it, develop it, and print it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, at Laney you learned--
Speaker 2: At Laney, I learned what the chemicals were.  I learned what depth to field was.  I learned what ASA--I started to learn what photography was, you know, what it was made of.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were you able to buy a camera at this point?
Speaker 2: I bought a camera when I was in the Army, and I took a lot of pictures in Korea.  And once I got a chance to go back on R and R [Rest and Recuperation] to develop a few--and they were okay.  It was just a small twenty lens Rolleiflex.  It wasn't a great camera, but it was all a PX [Post Exchange] had.  And that was my first camera, and it was okay.  It was limited in what it could do, but I felt good having, you know, owning my own camera.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember what kind it was?
Speaker 2: All I know, it was a, it was probably a Japanese model that was a copy of a Rolleiflex.  The most famous twenty-lens reflex was a Rolleiflex.  It certainly wasn't a Rolleiflex, I know that.  It was probably called a First Flex or something like that.  And again, it was okay.  It wasn't a great camera.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, when you get back to--you had that camera when you started at Laney, then?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I came home and I--yeah, I still had that camera.  But when I started photography, they didn't--they only worked in a four by five format.  We did not work in two and a quarter square film; we didn't work in thirty-five millimeter film.  We worked in four by five, or five by seven--you know, only cut film.  That's what they taught us to, you know, how to work.  That's what the industry used at that time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you had like a speed graphic, or a graphic flex--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or something like that?
Speaker 2: Or a view camera, yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright, okay.  Did you--what did you get a chance to shoot as an assignment, you know, in photography?
Speaker 2: You mean in school?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: They had really simple basic assignments.  But because you were in a photography school, you not only had to shoot it, you were, you had to develop and print your stuff at the same time.  And that was hard, because you kind of worked in a community darkroom where everyone was in the darkroom together.  And you had to be careful that someone was--if someone was sloppy, they could--their sloppiness could ruin your black and white prints.  We had an older Chinese woman who was just kind of taking up photography for fun.  And she wasn't really interested in doing anything.  And she always had the tendency of putting her prints in with everyone else's, because all our prints were washed in a bath together.  But she would never run hers through the proper chemicals.  And so, your prints would come out stained.  And we would end up--we knew it was her.  We end up calling it "Jung tone."  (laughter).  But it was because of the sloppiness.  It wasn't, it wasn't like having your own individual darkroom.  You worked in a group darkroom, and you printed your own prints.  But once it went into the chemicals it went through--it went through wash and dry, then you just went around and found what was yours.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, alright.  So, okay, did you do any film?
Speaker 2: Never got to sixteen-millimeter film.  It was kind of like at the end of the course.  It was like a two year course and most of us--there were some students that actually got to it, but they were kind of the students that just came in and rushed through every project just to get through it, and I don't think ever worked in photography.  There wasn't, there wasn't a big desire for motion picture film to be shot then.  It wasn't until I was outside working in a commercial photo store that I shot my first sixteen-millimeter film.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Any color photography then?
Speaker 2: Not a lot.  We didn't--because of the cost to develop and print color photography, we didn't do any of that.  For even the cost to shoot it and send it out and have it processed, we didn't do any of that.  We basically worked in black and white, because that's what the industry--if you went to work in the industry, that's what you would be working with.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 126420
Speaker 1: Now, so did you get a job in photography when you graduated from Laney [Laney College, Oakland, California]?
Speaker 2: No, racism was right there like it was before.  I came out of two years of photography school probably as well educated as everyone else.  But I couldn't get an interview.  No one would even talk to me about a job.  So, I went back and worked a couple more years with Chuck Willis before I finally--through some friends--found a job in a camera shop in Berkeley [California], working in a lab.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, you're in a lab in Berkeley?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Was that good enough to sustain yourself in terms of trying to make a living?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was, it was a great job, because it was a--it was an upscale camera store, although I just worked in processing and printing film in the darkroom.  But they sold all the top line cameras.  They encouraged all of us to take them out and use them.  So it was the first time I had a chance to shoot with Leicas, Nikons, Hasselblads, Rolleiflexes.  You were encouraged to take these cameras out and use them, and see how they operate.  And for that, it was nice; it was really good for that.  It was the first time I worked with Ag film, which was very important, very good--German products, German film, and German paper.  So, the job wasn't that great, it was just a job working in a darkroom.  But having the exposure to all the top of the--top of the line equipment was.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I mean, it would be hard to imagine how you'd get that exposure otherwise, right?
Speaker 2: Not--there was another camera store right across the street.  But, you know, they didn't sell Hasselblad, they didn't sell Leicas.  And, you know, I got to use a Hasselblad very early.  And I just fell in love with that kind of photography--cameras that really were the top of the line, had the great optics and, you know, were diverse, and they did a whole lot.  So, that--that was valuable to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is--we're at now, about what, 1957, '58 [1958]?
Speaker 2: No, we're probably up to the sixties now.  Because--let's see, Kennedy was assassinated in '63 [1963]?
Speaker 1: Uh huh.
Speaker 2: And I remember trying to take a picture of him going by one day, and I missed it, because I wasn't very good at press photography then.  So, I was still working at the camera shop then.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Did you, you came out of Laney by...
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: You were out of Laney in a couple of years, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I'd been maybe two, three years--two and a half years at Laney.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 126421
Speaker 1: So, this is the early sixties, and you're working in the lab at Berkeley [California]?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Now, is, during this period of time you met your wife [HistoryMaker Belva Davis], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Could you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Well, I met her before, when I was working for my neighbor, Chuck Willis.  He had a studio and he had finally got enough--saved up enough to open up a studio.  And I was there as his assistant and shooting a few things, but mainly still doing my darkroom work and assisting him on shoots.  And my wife came in to hire us, the studio, to do some work.  And that's where I met my wife.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, did you hit it off right away, or--?
Speaker 2: Not right away.  But we started courting, and later on we got married.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now your wife was--now she became the first black reporter on television here, right?
Speaker 2: She got into television in maybe a year, maybe a year and a half earlier than I did.
Story_ID: 126422
Speaker 1: Well, tell us how you got involved in television.
Speaker 2: Well, one photographer that I went to photography school [Laney College, Oakland, California] with, a guy named Will Sobey.  And of all the maybe thirty students that I was in photography school with, he was the only one who would call me up or come by and see me.  We remain friends.  He got an opening job in a small camera shop, and I would go and visit him.  And he got a job working at the local television station in Oakland [California], and it only had three photographers.  And it was 1968.  The television station had no black people working for it.  And they literally were going to just--the first black person who walked in, they were going to get a job.  And he said--
Speaker 1: This is '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen Sixty-Eight [1968].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he said, "You should come down and apply for a job as a photographer."  And by that time I was still pretty good in still photography, but I didn't want a television job.  It looked too hard, it looked too complicated.  I said, "I'm not interested."  He said, "You better come down, because the first guy that walks in, they're going to hire."  And so, I said okay.  And I went down and made an appointment to see the news director.  I walked into his office and sat down.  He looked at me and said, "Come to work tomorrow morning at eight o'clock."  That's how I was hired.
Story_ID: 126423
Speaker 1: Alright, okay.  So, alright, 1968--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --is a pivotal year.  Dr. King's [Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassinated that year.  There have been some riots in some of the major cities, and proceeded--I mean the years prior to Dr. King's assassination.  Do you remember what you were doing when you found out about Dr. King's assassination?
Speaker 2: Was he assassinated in 1968?  What time, what year?
Speaker 1: April 4th.
Speaker 2: I probably had just started working.  I was hired in '68 [1968].  And I was hired at an independent station in Oakland [California].  So we, we didn't do much national news, we were really a local station.  I cannot tell you how we covered it or, you know, how intense we went into it.  I know how hurt I was like the rest of black Americans that knew that someone was shot down like that.  That was kind of shocking to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I was asking you off-camera if you thought that your hiring was a result of the fall-out after Dr. King was assassinated.
Speaker 2: I think--
Speaker 1: But you think you were already there.
Speaker 2: I think I was already there.  I think that the story was that some black leader came and toured Channel 2 and said, "You have a wonderful station, but nobody works here but white people."  And they decided, "Well, we can fix that up, we'll just go find some black people."   And that's basically what they did.  They found--I don't know how the other three people were hired--how they found out about the job and how they got their job.  I know I was--I got my job through Will Sobey, who was at that time a very close friend.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 126424
Speaker 1: Alright, so what were your assignments as a photographer at the television station?
Speaker 2: When I went to work for Channel 2?
Speaker 1: Right.  This is what, KDIA?
Speaker 2: No, this is KTVU.  KDIA is a radio station my wife [HistoryMaker Belva Davis] worked at.
Speaker 1: KTUV.
Speaker 2: We covered basically local news here in the Bay area [California].  We were a small television station.  They'd done a half an hour news at noon or 11:30, I can't remember what time.  And then they had done another half an hour at night.  And eventually they, I think they dropped the noon news and just went to a full one-hour news.  Our staff was so small that one of the anchors had to double as a reporter everyday.  They would kind of rotate it.  The sports guy would anchor sports, and he would do some reporting.  One of the anchors would anchor, and he would do some reporting.  That's basically--there was one really field reporter who did all the rest of the reporting.  So, we had a small staff, but I think that we did, you know, a fairly decent job.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Alright, so did you shoot--I mean were you shooting stills, or were you doing--?
Speaker 2: We were shooting--every television station in the Bay area was shooting black and white film.  And we shot most of our pictures with a silent black and white camera, Bell and Howell.  We had a sound camera that was primarily used for interviews, covering news conferences, and doing a reporter's standup.  And usually the rest of the film that you needed for the story, the B roll, was shot with a silent camera.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you're shooting all black and white?
Speaker 2: All black and white film.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We didn't have a lab to develop the film.  So, you shot your story, you drove to a lab in San Francisco [San Francisco], labeled your film, and dropped it off and then went on to your next story.  A courier waited there, and once they processed--I think our lab ran two runs a day, one in the morning and in the afternoon.  He'd bring that film back, and then the film editors would edit it for the night news.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what affiliation did this station have?
Speaker 2: It was totally independent.  It wasn't--it's a Fox affiliate now, but there wasn't any Fox then.  It was just, it was an independent station--probably one, probably at that time in '68 [1968], the only one.  So, its programming was, you know, old movies, re-runs, things like that.  You know, 'I Love Lucy,' 'Star Trek,' a lot of old black and white movies, and wrestling shows, things like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, that makes sense, okay.  Any--now, how long did you work there?
Speaker 2: I worked there for twenty-eight years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 126425
Speaker 1: Alright. So, what are the milestones there and, you know, the highlights of the stories?
Speaker 2: Well, the milestones happened as this particular station, KTVU--even though we were one of the smallest stations here, they were owned by the Cox sisters of Atlanta, Georgia, who also owned the big newspaper there and some other television and radio stations.  We were in the biggest market, so we probably made more money than their other stations, one.  Two, San Francisco [California] in the sixties was just a hot bed.  There was all kind--there were--things were going on, you know.  You had the hippies, you had the anti-war, you had the Black Panther Party; you had the Moonies.  You had all this stuff going on.  So, it was, we never realized it then, but we were covering what was going to become some of the major stories of our time.
Speaker 1: You're right.  Well, well, tell us about--well, some of these we have written down here.  But did you cover the Free Speech Movement over in Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, California]?
Speaker 2: A little bit.  Not much of the Free Speech Movement.  The first things I covered at Berkeley [California] was probably anti-war, the anti-war stuff.  I covered that.  I actually covered that for the Associated Press, where I did some stringer work for when I was still a still photographer.  And that really was the motivation to make me want to go and try to do some news, because it was the first time you really just shot something up and put it in an envelope and sent it away.  It was up to them to figure out what it was, and you gave them a cut line.  And through that casual work with the Associated Press, I got a front page in a local newspaper.  I didn't get a credit because it just said "Associated Press."  That's how their prints went out.  But it really gave you a news feel; you knew what it took to cover news, and that was fun.
Speaker 1: Alright, okay, okay.
Story_ID: 126426
Speaker 1: Let's see.  In the '68 [1968] period here in San Francisco [California], I mean in Oakland [California], the Panther Party was--
Speaker 2: We had the beginning of the Black Panther Party.  And, but the Black Panther Party started to get their publicity while Huey Newton was in jail.  That's why all the early video or film you see of the Black Panthers, everybody's carrying a "Free Huey" sign, because the whole movement was to get him out of jail on this charge of him killing a police officer.  We covered a lot of those rallies, covered all of the trial of Huey Newton.  But I didn't become any kind of fan or anything of Huey Newton, because the Black Panthers that I covered that I had really a lot of respect for was David Hilliard and Bobby Seale.  They're the ones that were really out there on the line, really raising hell--really putting their self on the line.  And that was, I probably covered more of those two guys than anyone else.  And occasionally there would always be some close friend who was a Panther.  (laughter).  And then when you were through shooting, they'd come over and you'd chat and they'd go back to singing "Free Huey."  You'd load up your film, and go back to the station.
Speaker 1: Now, were, did they always send like a black photographer and a black reporter to cover the Black Panthers?
Speaker 2: Not always.  We didn't have the--one of the other black men that was hired when I was hired at Channel 2, eventually came to the news department and was made a part of the news department.  He was originally hired to work in the art department and in the studio as a floor man.  We became very close friends.  We didn't discover until maybe six or seven years after we were at Channel 2, that we were both hired on the same day.  And so, we would make jokes about that.  He literally started working as a clerk in the mailroom, and when he left, he was the main anchor.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, what was his name?
Speaker 2: Dennis Richmond.
Speaker 1: Okay, Dennis Richmond, okay.  But was it the general policy to send you to cover events in the black community, if there was something--?
Speaker 2: I covered some with Dennis.  We did a lot together when he was a reporter.  But we didn't, we didn't, we weren't like permanently assigned.  Just him and I covered everything together--no.  You know, he worked with what white staff we had, and I worked with what white staff we had, too.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you covered natural disasters, too?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Earthquakes, fires.  In the early days was there a big, you know, was there something, you know, in the beginning of your career like that?
Speaker 2: You had the Panthers.  Probably one of the biggest early stories we had, we knew a little bit of the significance of how big it was.  It was the kidnapping of Patty Hearst.  Her grandfather had started the San Francisco Examiner.  She was kidnapped by some revolutionaries who did not want ransom, but they wanted her family to feed the poor.  And then they were stuck with, how do we feed poor people?  They didn't know anything about feeding poor people.  And that became a real big story, just covering that kidnapping.  She was--I don't know how long she was held kidnapped before she was actually captured.  But covering that story was pretty big.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, this is in the early seventies [1970s], right?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Patty Hearst and the Symbionese Liberation Army?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 126427
Speaker 1: I know later on in the seventies, you had the murder of Mayor Moscone [Mayor George Moscone].  Did you cover that one?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was in City Hall [San Francisco, California] a couple of hours before he was killed, with a reporter doing some story where we had to go there and interview someone.  We interviewed that person, and the second part of the story we were doing was a good hour, hour and ten away.  So, we just drove maybe four or five blocks up the street and stopped in the coffee shop, and we were having coffee.  And in the days when Mayor Moscone was assassinated, we didn't have cell phones.  But what we had was a portable two-way radio, which we kind of kept with us at all times.  And so, I had my radio sitting on a counter, and I heard another photographer call our station and say, "There's something going on at City Hall.  I'm hearing a lot of traffic from police and fire.  Someone needs to check that out."  And we were just a block away.  We picked up the two-way and said, "Isabelle and I are a block away.  We'll go down and see," not knowing what happened.  So, we drove down to City Hall, and as soon as we got in, we were informed that the Mayor had been assassinated and Supervisor Harvey Milk had been assassinated.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Did you cover any of the trial of, was that Dan White?
Speaker 2: Yes.  But in the early days, cameras were not allowed in courtrooms.  And witnesses were brought and taken through back doors.  The most you could do is stand around and shoot people in the hallways and get whatever film that you could get then.  Most of the courtroom stuff you would see was done by artists.  What film you did see of Dan White was probably early stuff when he was arrested, that may be one or two shots of him coming and going to trial.  But that was about it.  On most trials then, they didn't even allow cameras in courts.  So, you covered, you covered the trial by sitting in a hallway waiting.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, there was a lot of waiting in this job?
Speaker 2: A lot of waiting, yeah, (laughter), yeah.  But it wasn't really "waiting" waiting, because you didn't know when they was going to come out.  So you had to wait, but always be ready to jump up and grab and put the gear on and go.  In the early days of waiting, when you had very cumbersome gear and there was a lot of things to put on, you really couldn't take it off--because if you're waiting for someone to come rushing out of the room, you basically had to stay ready, with about fifty pounds of equipment.  You had to keep it all on.  So, when they came out that door, you could immediately start rolling some film.  But later on, you know, the attorneys who wanted some press, they would give you time to pick your camera up and let you do, you know, let you get some sound.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 126428
Speaker 1: Did you cover Jim Jones at all?
Speaker 2: Oh, we covered that intensely.  Most of the people that died in Guyana were from the Bay area [California].  The NBC [National Broadcasting Company] photographer that died there was a photographer that I trained, that I--he had been a film editor at our station.  And I had, he wanted to shoot, and he was a very good shooter.  And I trained him to, you know... broke... you know, I broke him in there.  And then he went on to work for the network.  So, he was very closely associated with it.  We--
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Bob Brown.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And if you look at the history of the Jim Jones... and you see the last film...  That's the camera rolling, laying--rolling on his side, rolling from the tarmac--that's Bob Brown's camera, still rolling.  So, yes, we were very, very close.  We found out that we had a housekeeper that was probably put into our house as a spy by James, Jim Jones to--you know, go through our garbage and look through all our mail.  It just, I covered one Jim Jones story.  And we knew we had a couple women that cleaned for us; we knew they went to Jim Jones.  But we had no idea that it was going to end up like.  But I remember covering a story at Jim Jones' church with a reporter--same reporter I covered the Moscone [Mayor George Moscone] assassination with--and it was just a generic story.  But they were starting to get controversy, because family members wanted to know more about this church.  The people hadn't left for Guyana then.  And we covered the story on like a Sunday.  And by Monday afternoon, maybe Tuesday morning, the reporter had thirty-five letters from different members of Jim Jones' church.  And she showed me the letters, and I started looking at the letters.  And I found two letters, one from both of these house women that had worked for us.  And they were written in a language that you know they didn't write.  It was a letter that they probably put on a wall, "Copy this in your handwriting and send it, and we'll mail it for you."  And that's, that was kind of another scary thing about Jim Jones.  You knew the kind of control, the kind of people he--these were older women who were...  Of the two women who worked for us, the one woman who went to Guyana and probably lost her life there was the healthiest one.  The woman who didn't go suffered from arthritis.  She wasn't strong enough, and they knew she would have never survived in that jungle down there.  But Mrs. Glover, that woman we know who lost her life down there, we know she would have survived.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, she, she knew she would?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yeah.  And I think they were very selective in who--especially with the older people--they took with them.  They probably didn't want to take anyone that far away who had any obvious health problems.  And Mrs. Johnson, the other lady who worked for us, was obviously, she wasn't as healthy as Mrs. Glover.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 126429
Speaker 1: Now, in 1988--and stop me if I'm skipping too fast.
Speaker 2: No, that's okay.
Speaker 1: But in '88 [1988], you were assigned to cover the Nicaraguan earthquake, right?  Is that true?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They had like, I don't know, like a 7.1 or 8 point--a pretty big earthquake in Nicaragua.  The local charter airline which was Royal Airlines, which was owned, an airline that just flew charters--the owner decided he would take the press down to cover the earthquake.  The significance of it was that so people had lost their lives.  Because it was a third world country, you know, churches collapsed, houses collapsed.  The earthquake hit at maybe, you know, two o'clock in the morning when everyone was indoors, you know, asleep.  So, they flew a large plane-load of press down, and that was the first real damage of an earthquake.  And naturally being from here in California, any earthquake that size, you'd want to go see, you know, just what happened in an earthquake like that.  So, I did cover that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What were the--were you in danger at any particular point?
Speaker 2: I think when we went, there were still aftershocks.  There weren't very many; it might have been a couple of weeks when we finally went down there.  But there were aftershocks.  By that time most of us knew the simple safety things you must know about earthquakes, you know.  We did--I remember we stayed in town, and you could see buildings that were not earthquake-proof that collapsed, and ones that had been built better that were still standing.  We were in one of the, probably best hotels.  So, you never felt unsafe in the hotel.  When you went out to the neighborhoods--we went maybe twenty, thirty miles outside of the city to find this small town that lost all their lives.  The people were very friendly and open.  You didn't have any fear then--you know, you felt safe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 126430
Speaker 1: I know you did quite a bit of travel, from what I understand in our outline; that you went to Haiti, you shot in Italy, Brazil, Kenya, and in South Africa.
Speaker 2: Well, my wife and I, when we went on vacation we thought it would be nice to do some things on our own.  And so we would, we would go on vacation, and I would just take a film camera along and shoot a little film.  I think our first vacation we ever went to, we went to Jamaica.  And I took a black and white camera and shot a little film.  And we kind of did some experimental things--things we would just try out that we knew that her station would buy.  And when Alex Haley was finishing "Roots," he was living in Jamaica.  And he was always in contact with my wife when he was at sea somewhere.  He'd call her or send her a card, and say if you ever come to Jamaica, look me up.  So, we said we're going to Jamaica and we're going to look up Alex Haley.  And he said come, and we went to Jamaica, and we took film camera.  We met him up at his house in Negril and shot some film at his house.  And that time he had, he had sold Roots to ABC [American Broadcasting Company].  And it was going to be the first mini-series that television ever ran.  So, he was really kind of pumped about that.  We did a great interview with him then and shot some film with then.  And that, that turned out to be a great little film story.  That--on that, we decided to try some others.  The other most successful one we did, we were going on vacation to Brazil, to Carnival.  And my wife said, well why don't we just shoot Carnival?  And I had no idea how large Carnival was.  I don't know if you've ever been to Carnival in Brazil.  But I tell everyone, if you go to Carnival in Brazil, you don't have to go to Carnival anywhere else in the world.  You can skip Trinidad, you can skip New Orleans [Louisiana], you can skip all the rest of those.  When you went to Brazil at the year--and I forget which year it was, maybe '85 [1985] or '86 [1986].  There was no American television there.  So, we knew we could sell some of our filming to the station that my wife worked at.  They said they'd buy some.  I think we sold a lot to Telemundo.  And so, we knew we were going to make some money, and we got a couple of great stories.  You know, we had--overall just covering Carnival was just a story within itself, the massiveness of this.  But there was an engineer whose company went to Brazil to build a bridge.  And he talked his company into leaving him there as a consultant.  And he had been in consulting for this engineering company for about twelve years, still on the payroll.  But he played in a Brazilian band, and he made a great story.  And here was this, you know, guy sitting on a, you know, this great salary, living in Brazil.  And then he hooked us up with a couple of good Samba schools.  So, we got some good inside stuff on Samba schools.  So, it turned out to be a good coverage of Carnival for two people, with not even a producer, just my wife and I.  And we went up to Bya and did a little bit of Carnival up there.  So, that was fun, too.  Italy was another one.  In the main symphony hall here in San Francisco [California], they were building an organ.  And that organ was being built by someone in Italy.  And we said "Let's go find him, wherever he is.  (laughter).  And if he's still working on this organ, we've got a great story."  And he was way up in the northern part of Italy where they don't see tourists.  And we found it, and found him and found him working on parts to it.  And whenever I go to the symphony I always point out a part up there that I shot some film of when it was still in a crate in Italy, getting ready to be shipped back to here.  So, those kinds of things made it fun.  Haiti was a vacation that--by that time I worked with a reporter who liked to do travel stuff, kind of 'touristy' stuff.  And we had a news director that said, "If you can go out and get an airline and a hotel and everybody to trade out, you can go."  And so, they sent me and this reporter to Haiti.  I'd never been to Haiti before we went on vacation there for a week.  And then I came back home and went back to film.  And at the time, Baby Doc [President Jean-Claude Duvalier] was the president.  And it was kind of scary, because everyone referred to him, they didn't refer to him--they would refer to him as "my president for life."  It was a picture of him on the ceiling or on the wall or anything.  And you say, "Who is that?"  And they would say, "That is my president for life."  That is the only way they talked to him, they spoke of him.  We did some travel stuff.  We got in a little bit of trouble, but it wasn't anything to get us thrown out of the country.  We got there and got in and out, and I found Haiti a very interesting country.  I never had a chance to go back, but would like to.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 126431
Speaker 1: Now, what about Kenya?  Was that another vacation type thing?
Speaker 2: No.  When my wife went to Kenya--she was assigned to go to Kenya and Tanzania after the Embassy bombings.  And so, the station sent her.  And having never been to East Africa, I said, yeah, I'll go.  And so, one of the guys there gave me a small camera to use, and it was the first time I'd shot with a little mini-DVD.  "Here," he said, "Go on and shoot some, and have some fun."  And I did.  And I told the photographer who was assigned, I said, "All you have to do is use one of my shots, and I'll be happy."  And I knew eventually I would get something that he forgot to get.  And he did, and he used a couple of them.  And so, I did some filming there.  That was--and again, not knowing the significance that they were practicing on Africa--what they were later on going to do in other countries around the world--it was an interesting trip.  I was more concerned while I was in East Africa what would we have to do if we had got out in a hurry.  Because the station manager said, "Do you have an escape plan?"  And by then I'd figured out that from Kenya or Tanzania, I could get to South Africa quicker than I could get to Europe.  And had we had to leave, I was going to go to South Africa.  And then from South Africa, I was going to come back home to Brazil and manage to get stuck in Brazil for two or three days and it would take care of all of that.  But we got in and out without any emergency, so it was okay.
Speaker 1: Alright.  So, now you did make a trip to South Africa, too, right?
Speaker 2: I made a trip to South Africa.  That--again, I just--I just kind of did some filming on my own.  By that time they were bringing out really good little hand cameras, tourist cameras, that shot small mini-DVDs.  And I remember buying the first one, and I was really kind of PO'ed [pissed off] when I bought it, because I knew I was going to pay too much.  And I think I paid twenty-five hundred dollars for a camera that when I got back home was probably eight hundred.  But it was something I could put in my pocket; your tapes were small.  And I shot some really--we went to--well, the first trip we went, we went to Johannesburg, we went to Durban, and Cape Town.  And the second trip we went to just Johannesburg and Cape Town.  And I only went to Durban once.  By that time, I had been to North Africa, East Africa and West Africa.  And I found South Africa the most impressive of all of the countries I went to, because if you've been to South Africa...  I don't know if you've been to South Africa.  But when you're in South Africa and you're in Johannesburg, you get in a car and you can drive from--I don't know, two hours, and you're still on paved roads--you don't get to the bush.  And, you know, because they had all that free labor for all those years, they could build highways.  And they had highways built, you know.  So, it was, South Africa was interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 126432
Speaker 1: Now, you covered another earthquake in 1999, '89', [1989], the Loma Prieta.
Speaker 2: Loma Prieta earthquake was what we called our big one here in San Francisco [California].  By--we had a saying in the newsroom, "you had to be prepared for the big one."  We know that in California we haven't--until Loma Prieta, we haven't had a major earthquake.  Northridge in Southern California was pretty major, and destroyed a lot of freeways and a lot of property.  But for the most part, we get a lot of light quakes here, nothing that really does a lot of damage.  When the Loma Prieta earthquake hit, we knew that was our big one.  Television stations were knocked off the air.  Fifty percent of the city was without power.  We were, again, in 1989 you weren't as--a few of us had mobile phones.  I didn't have a mobile phone.  You really had to rely on, you know, pay telephones or two-way radios to communicate.  But I couldn't, because our television station lost its power, I couldn't communicate with my station.  I could talk to a couple of co-workers who were coming to San Francisco to go to the game.  And I hooked up with them and we covered the, we covered the quake.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is the quake that cracked the stadium, right, during the World Series?
Speaker 2: This is the quake that broke part of the Bay Bridge.  And normally in the World Series, there's always a Goodyear blimp or a Fuji blimp.  There's a blimp out there shooting aerials of the game.  And as soon as they heard about the quake, that blimp went and flew right over the Bay Bridge, and could show that damage.  And so, that hit the ABC [American Broadcasting Company]--I think it was ABC covering them, I'm not sure who covered the World Series.  That, those pictures went out really fast, and everyone saw those right away.  It was awhile before they saw the collapsed freeway, and the fires and the rest of the stuff.
Story_ID: 126433
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, yeah, so this is the--this is the quake of '89 [1989].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: People, you know, actually saw it on television, because the World Series was going on.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, is there any particular photo from that that you--or footage that you shot that stands out?
Speaker 2: I was waiting on a corner to pick up a couple co-workers who had called me on my two-way radio and said, "Can you give us a ride to the game?"  They were going to go to the game and get a ride back with some other crew.  I said, "Meet me at the Civic Center BART [Bay Area Rapid Transit] station."  That's our rapid transit system.  "I'll pick you there to drop you off at the game."  I had been to one of the games in Oakland [California], because it was Oakland [Oakland A's] playing San Francisco [San Francisco Giants].  And my plan was just to go home, crack a cold beer, and watch the game.  As I stood waiting for them, I felt the ground move.  But knowing that at that particular corner that I was on, the first level down had regular city, Muni-traffic [San Francisco Municipal Transportation light rail], and then BART was below that.  And I thought that's all I was feeling until it started to move some more.  And I looked up to a building over this Burger King restaurant, and saw all the sheetrock come off the wall and cause deaths.  And I knew that was a major earthquake.  So, I quickly grabbed my camera, looking for some damage.  And there was none in sight.  I couldn't see anything.  There wasn't any cracked buildings, nothing had fallen over.  I walked maybe two blocks down to a street--where actually I think it's now the headquarters of Twitter--a street where all the windows were broke, and the street was lined with glass.  And that was about the only visual thing there.  But I had to go back and wait for these two co-workers, because they had gotten out.  By that time the transit system had lost power, and everyone was out walking.  So, I--they had they had a portable radio and I had a portable radio.  And I told them to walk towards me.  They got to me; they were both kind of young.  One hadn't been with us, the station, very long.  And one guy was a little, had a little more experience.  And when they got to me they said, "What do we do?"  I said, "I don't know.  We can't talk to the station."  They said, "Let's chase that ambulance."  I said, "We don't know where it's going.  We can't chase that."  They said, "Let's chase that fire truck."  I said, "We don't know where that fire truck's going.  We can't chase that."  But we could see the fire from the Marina--we're going to the fire.  And so, we went to the Marina, because you could tell by that time--the Marina district is the district in San Francisco that we knew prior was going to take in a major earthquake--was going to have--was going to be the--the neighborhood that was going to have the most damage.  And they knew that because geologists just knew that it was built on sandy soil, and if there was going to be any damage, it was going to be there.  And certainly, that's what it was.  It was major fires.  And we went there, and it was a lot of buildings destroyed.  And that's what we covered for the next five or six hours.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 126434
Speaker 1: Now, you also covered the Oakland Hills [California] fire, too, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about that.
Speaker 2: That was a fire that happened on a Sunday.  And I never was assigned--I did some weekend work, but at that time, at that time I had never--I didn't work weekends.  But where we lived in San Francisco [California], I could walk out of my house and I could see the hills on the East Bay.  And I saw all the smoke.  And so, I called my office.  I said, "You have a fire going.  It's just a little small grass fire."  And I said, "Do you need any help?"  They said, "No, we're okay, we can cover it."  And normally, most news people would call in if you saw something that was of any significance.  And so, I went back to what I was doing.  And about a half an hour later, they said, "We think you better come to work."  (laughter).  And I went to work, and I did cover the Oakland Hills fire for maybe another six hours.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay
Story_ID: 126435
Speaker 1: Now, anything else in the nineties [1990s] before you retire, your retirement?
Speaker 2: What did I miss?  I did cover the O.J. Simpson trial [People of the State of California vs. Orenthal James Simpson, 1995].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did some coverage of it before he was arrested, when we were just kind of staking his house out in southern California.  And then by the time he was arrested and the trial started, we had a morning news show.  And they needed a photographer to fly down to Los Angeles [California], set up somewhere by the courthouse, and do some live shots that they would take into the morning show.  So, the first time I came down, I flew down to Los Angeles.  I got out my gear, I went over to the courthouse, and I called them on the phone.  I say, "I'm at the courthouse.  I need to know where's the remote truck that's going to do my live shot?"  And they said, "It'll be a white truck in the parking lot."  And I turn around, and I looked in the parking lot and I said, "There are thirty white trucks in the parking lot."  At that point in my career, I had never seen any story with that much coverage.  I'd covered major disasters, I'd covered conventions--I'd never seen that much coverage.  I'd never seen so many news outfits from so many places down to cover that trial.  And I found that really just astounding when they told me that the 'New York Times' had three reporters covering the trial.  And one of the tabloid--one of the tabloid newspapers had fifty reporters.  So, we ended up reading the tabloids, because you figure if they had fifty reporters, one or two of them was going to get something right.  So, we went back and forth.  We would go down for a couple of days when they knew that there was some good meat in the trial, we'd cover that.  And throughout the whole trial--and I was there the day for the verdict.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Of course, O.J. is from San Francisco [California], too.
Speaker 2: Well, at that point it had become a major story. What a lot of people didn't understand is that court TV [television] was created from the O.J. trial.  The company decided to put-- court TV went on the air--and said "If you let us come in the court, we'll give this picture to everyone."  Once they started feeding that trial out live, it became the soap opera.  Little old ladies turned off Days of Our Life.  I don't want to look at Days of Our Life; I want to look at the O.J. trial, and it's real, you know.  And it became that popular.  Small cities came and sent their reporters that had never traveled in their life.  And they were so awed by being in Los Angeles, one--being at a big trial--that they ended up interviewing other reporters.  That's how bizarre it was.
Speaker 1: Now, you retired in '96 [1996].  This around the same time as the O.J. trial?
Speaker 2: Um hum.
Speaker 1: I think the verdict was rendered in '95 [1995]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Story_ID: 126436
Speaker 1: Then you retired in '96 [1996] from KTVU, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And during this period of time had you accumulated, I guess, still shots for--you know, that you could exhibit later on?  Or were you thinking about that at point?
Speaker 2: No.  Because you don't, you don't really get an archive when you work for a television station.  Everything you shoot belongs to them.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You keep some things for personal reasons, but most of the stuff goes to the station.  That's where it is.  The first ten years of broadcasting, when they shot film, the news directors or the people in charge had no idea how to create and keep a library.  So, a lot of the early stuff was just thrown out in the trash.  Some stations saved it. Some, maybe one or two stations in the entire Bay Area [California] saved it.  But there wasn't a lot saved.  So, there wasn't a--you couldn't just say here's my arsenal of all the stuff I shot.  No.  I shot a lot.  You knew that the station was only going to really save what portion of it that went on the air.  Later on when we got into videotape, we got into small beta tapes--they started to save up some events that they knew were big, and put them up somewhere.  But you didn't have anything yourself.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 126437
Speaker 1: What would you consider the highlights of your time at KTVU?
Speaker 2: The highlights?  I didn't--I tell people when they ask me about working in television.  There were so many things that went on that turned out to be such huge stories in the twenty-eight years that I worked there.  Had I spent my career in broadcasting in Portland, Oregon, I could only say that I had one story, when a volcano erupted.  But, you know, when you go back and you think about the assassination of a mayor [George Moscone] and a supervisor [Harvey Milk]; you think about the movement and the start of the gay rights movement; the Black Panther Party; the anti-war...  And all of these stories became major, major stories.  They became major things that are just still talked about today--where you were--right in the middle of all that happening.  So, there isn't any one particular thing.  I think one of the moving things was, you know, being there when a mayor was shot and when a mayor was killed.   And when I got to the City Hall [San Francisco, California], we knew the mayor's body was still inside of his office.  So, one reporter went on to gather information, and said, "Stay here and get a shot of them bringing the mayor's body out."  And I stayed and talked to a few other photographers for maybe ten minutes before the coroner's office came out with the mayor's body, and they rolled it in the elevator.  And of course, none of us got in the elevator with them.  We all ran down to the second floor-- mayor's office being on the...  We ran down to the first floor, because the mayor's office was on the second floor.  And all the photographers ran out the front door.  And I ran to the basement.  I don't know why, but I knew that they weren't going to bring the mayor out, right out, on the main street.  They were going to take him out one of the side doors.  And so, when I got to the basement, I was there by myself.  And the door opened up, and just the two coroners come out with the mayor.  And that's when it really kind of hit me.  That's when it was emotional to me.  At that particular time, my daughter went to the same school with his daughter.  George Moscone was the kind of mayor that came over and said--pat you on the back--and say, "Hi, Bill, how are you doing.  How's Dee Dee, how's Belva?"  And so, it wasn't, he wasn't just the mayor that had gotten killed; he was somebody you consider a friend.  It was kind of--really kind of got to you.  But I still kind of worried about--I'm going to get this great inside shot of coming up and going down the hall, but I won't have the outside shot.  But luckily, when I looked down the hallway where they were going to take him out, I could see one of our other photographers was there.  So, I just remained there and did that long go-away shot.  That kind of stuck with me for a long time.  It's still there.
Story_ID: 126438
Speaker 1: So, you retired in '96 [1996]?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: And you started--now what, did you start teaching immediately, or did it take--?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  I had no idea to teach.  We moved out of the city to the country, in a little small town about forty miles north of here, Petluma, California.  And I was just happy, you know, up in the country digging weeds and fighting all that stuff.  The first thing I did of any significance there, I came on the board of an organization that took care of the homeless, an organization called COTS, C-O-T-S, COTS [Committee On The Shelterless].  And that was probably very rewarding.  I wanted to, I knew when I retired I wanted to do something for non-profits.  And I remember the two non-profits in San Francisco [California] that I wanted to volunteer for.  And I remember covering stories and telling them, "I'm going to retire; I'd like to be a volunteer."  And they said, "Please, you know, sign up, we like volunteers."  One was suicide prevention, and one was the Lighthouse for the Blind.  Because I had an eye disease, I wanted to do something there.  And in the early days of television, we covered suicides as news stories.  And those were pretty brutal, too, if you had to cover suicides.  Well, I applied to both of those, and they never responded.  So, they didn't get any more of my money and I didn't do anything there.  But my work with COTS, it was very moving.  It was very nice to know that there was organizations that really knew how to take care of homeless people, and did a good job.  So, I served on their board for about five years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's COTS, C-O-T-S?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And, well, tell us how you started working with Ohlone--
Speaker 2: Ohlone College [Fremont, California]?
Speaker 1: Ohlone College, yeah.
Speaker 2: A correspondent, who just called up and interviewed--you know, interrupted our interview--that I had worked with...  And we had actually covered the--we covered the Oakland [California] fire together, we covered the earthquake here in San Francisco [California] together--called me up one day and said, "I need you to come down and teach a class."  And I said, "I don't know anything about teaching, I've never taught before."  He said, "Neither do I, but we know television, and we got television here, and we're going to teach television."  So, I went down to teach a video class, and I'm still there.  And I've been there over ten years.
Speaker 1: The same video class?
Speaker 2: The same video class.  I teach beginning video class, but we've done a lot of innovative things.  We're probably the only college in the entire Bay area that broadcasts two live shows--one news show on Wednesday night and a sports show on a Friday that go out live.  We don't record it in the studio and then go back and sweeten up the sound and everything.  We're on the air live at 8:30, sometimes 8:35, but we do go on the air and they do put a show out, and that's kind of exciting.
Speaker 1: I would say so.
Story_ID: 126439
Speaker 1: That's--what, how have things changed since you started in television?  Now, you--what do you, what's the--I guess what's the, I guess the essential difference between (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (simultaneous) I started in television with black and white film--where a hundred feet of film got you three minutes of air time, and where you were expected to shoot a news story in two hundred feet, which is about six minutes, which had to be developed.  You had to wait for it to be developed; you didn't know what it looked like until it was developed.  And it came off, and you put it in the projector.  And we went from there to videotape that looked really horrible.  And I tell people today when you see old video and it looks like it was shot thirty years ago, and it looks bad.  It doesn't look bad because it's old; it looked that bad then.  That--it just, the early film was not made for television.  It was an ektachrome film, and it had a lot of contrast.  To see them go from--to see television go from film, all the way up to a memory card about this big, that you load in the camera--and it shoots an hours worth of video--and you pull it out and you put it in a laptop and download it.  To see it go that far, that's, that is exciting.  They now have equipment about this big, and about that wide, that costs fifteen thousand dollars.  And you take it out and you can do a live shot, the same live shot, almost as good as what people are doing with a remote truck that costs over a hundred thousand dollars.  To see it, things go that fast that far, that's pretty exciting.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, I know your co-worker, Dennis Richmond, retired in 2008?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: That's over ten years after you retired.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you retire early, or did you--?
Speaker 2: Well, I was older than him, first of all.  And I knew that--being a cameraman, I knew that when I got old, that I couldn't do the, I couldn't do the job as well as a young man.  That--I was very healthy, I ran six miles about three days a week to keep myself fit.  I knew I was in good shape.  I had no injuries.  But just the normal things that come with aging.  You lose a little eyesight; you lose a little hearing; your reaction time gets a little slower.  There's no way that an older photographer could compete with a photographer who's ten years younger than him.  And there was always the chance that you could become old and grumpy.  And I saw other old photographers, and I used to say "If I ever get like that, would you take my gear away from me, put me in a cab and send me home."  And I never did.  I left working in television when I still liked it, when I had no injuries.  And I thought at sixty-two [years old], that was pretty good, and that's when I left.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 126440
Speaker 1: Now, you've been teaching at Ohlone [Ohlone College, Fremont, California] since two--
Speaker 2: About twelve years.
Speaker 1: About twelve years?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  One course every--
Speaker 2: One course.  We, I only teach a--I teach a beginning video course.  We also have a news class--I maybe lecture there a couple times a semester.  I've helped out with a couple of internet classes that we do.  And I do some one-on-one with really serious photographers that want to go on and really learn how to do things there.  But it's mainly been--we're a community college.  You get some students that are really interested in a career in broadcasting.  Some are just back to school to have fun.  And others who have looked at--had looked at some video that they bought, and said I think I can do better than that.  I had an older student about ten, about eight years ago.  And I asked him why he was in the class.  He said he was really into drag racing.  Him and his son would go to a lot of drag races.  He said, "I went to one and I bought a tape of the race for twenty-nine bucks, and it was horrible.  And then I figured I can learn how to do this, and I probably can do better."  And he's probably somewhere now making a lot of money, because it was truly a bad tape.  So, a lot of people have seen it--"I want to sharpen my skills, I want to take my skills and see what I can do with it."  And a lot of them have.  So, that's what you get in a community college, and that's what makes it fun.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 126441
Speaker 1: Have you accumulated enough photos, you know, to exhibit?  Or have you thought about that?
Speaker 2: My wife [HistoryMaker Belva Davis] thinks I have.  I have some photographs.  We just put a few of them--pulled a few out and sent them over and had then worked on by a friend, and had some decent blown-ups made.  I probably have enough if I--over the years, I've shot a lot of different things.  It's just getting them out and cleaning them up, and photo-shopping, and doing things like that.  I could probably do a small exhibit, nothing big, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, are you considering maybe putting, publishing any of them?
Speaker 2: No.  My wife just done a book, and a lot of the old photographs that I had was helpful for her book.  Some of the earliest stuff I shot, we were able to use my stuff, and didn't have to go buy photos.  So, that really helped out with her stuff there.  Do I want to do a book myself?  Now maybe sometimes I do, sometimes I don't.  You know, I'm eighty years old now.  I just to wake up every morning and be able to make myself a cup of coffee and move about and still...  I saw a story the other day on the Morning, CBS Morning Show, where it was something like a 102-year old guy who lives in New York and eats out every night, you know. (laughter).  And there he is, dressed to the dapper going to the best restaurants.  And I said, "That's a good way to do it."  You know something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, now, meanwhile the San Francisco State University's [San Francisco, California] library has plans to house your collection, right?
Speaker 2: I've got some things--most of what they want is the career that my wife had.  She has really saved a lot more stuff.  Because the end result--when a photographer shoots something, you hand it to a reporter.  That reporter edits it and cuts it, and puts her package on the air, and they have those tapes.  The photographer doesn't have them, not unless you go back in and dig and find out where it is when they're through with it.  When they build your archive, yes, I would certainly give them some of the stuff that--what I've saved or what I have.  And there's a couple things that I think they might be interested in.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 126442
Speaker 1: So, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you'd do differently if you could go back and change it?
Speaker 2: Sometimes... you want to wait?
Speaker 1: Yeah, alright, okay.
Speaker 2: Would I do anything different?  Probably not.  I'm pretty happy about the broadcast career I had here in the Bay Area [California], mainly, because it was in the Bay Area.  I did--just before I went into television--realized the kind of still photographer I wanted to be, because I worked for a photographer that did that kind of stuff.  And working as a--I worked as a still photographer for myself, just before television.  And I remember getting a job at San Francisco Airport with Pan American Airlines.  And I went out, and I shot some stuff for them, and they really liked what I'd done.  And they call me and they say, "We want to hire you.  We want to put you on a retainer.  You will be our official photographer here in San Francisco."  And San Francisco [California] at that time was a big domicile for Pan American Airways.  "There is a state-of-the art darkroom across the hall that our other photographer, who suddenly died, had built.  You are free to use that; you could use it as your own.  You can shoot for any other airline at the airport.  We don't care, as long as you, you know, do our stuff."  And so, they really liked me.  And when I was offered the television job, it was do I stay with this great deal that you wait all of your life for?  You know, and the first couple of years I kind of regretted--I could be sitting out at the airport doing all these important things.  But then as you started to cover news--and I don't know if everyone's career who covered news in the period I did...  When you started to cover it here, you started to see all these things happen.  When Ronald Reagan was the governor of California--and I always thought he was a terrible governor, you know, especially for poor people.  Maybe the rich Democrats liked him, Republicans liked him, but I didn't like him.  We still shot film.  And I used to--I used to go the news conference in Sacramento and cover the governor.  In those days, you still shot your sound on one camera, and then you would take your silent camera and go around the room and shoot some B rolls.  And I never got it on the air, but I would try.  And every time I shot a medium shot of him with my sonic camera, I would shoot about five feet. And then I would I turn the camera upside down and shoot a couple more, and then turn it back the other way.  Hopefully, I'd get a shot of him flip-flopping on the air, but it never made the air. (laughter).  Nobody ever found it.  But as it, as it got more interesting, even with the disastrous things, it said, "Yeah, I'll stay right here.  I'll do this."  No.  I--my wife [HistoryMaker Belva Davis] was offered a job with the network, but we didn't want to go to New York.  I was offered a job in Los Angeles [California] at an NBC [National Broadcasting Company] affiliate.  And I knew at that time I was the only black photographer, video photographer, film photographer, they knew about, and they were just hiring me because I was a sure bet.  "Well, if you want to hire a black guy, there's a black guy out in San Francisco shooting."  So, I went down for the interview.  And I could be pretty cocky.  I could say, "Yeah, I'd love to come and work for you, but my wife's a reporter.  Can you give her a job, too?"  And they weren't very, really open, about trying to do something.  Had they really not missed the ball, they would have got a good package, because my wife was a far better reporter than I was a photographer.  I could have done the job then, I was qualified to do it.  But they didn't, they were only interested in hiring me.  And I said never mind, and I came back up here.  And I never regretted what I said and how I talked to them.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, there are some things that could have been one way or another, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, sure.
Story_ID: 126443
Speaker 1: But once again, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your professional legacy?
Speaker 2: Consider my what?
Speaker 1: Your professional legacy.
Speaker 2: My professional leg... what do you mean by that?
Speaker 1: Legacy.
Speaker 2: I had a reputation when working as being a photographer that, who could work with anyone, who got along, who did whatever assignment there was.  I never squawked or whined or cried about an assignment.  People worked with me because they knew that I just came to work, did the job, and went home.  There was only one type of assignment I didn't do, I didn't like to do.  And I only had to do that once in my career, and that was go to snow.  I didn't like snow, didn't like being cold.  The assignment desk told me I had to cover snow.  And we had a big argument, and I ended up going.  And an hour after I went there, my wife [HistoryMaker Belva Davis] called and asked where I was.  And they said, "I sent him to the snow."  And she said, "Why did you send my husband to the snow?  He doesn't like snow."  But my legacy would be as a good guy, a guy that got along, a guy that got along okay, got along with everyone.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 126444
Speaker 1: And what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African-American community today?
Speaker 2: Oh, there's lots.  There's just--I guess my main concern for the African-American community is the African-American male.  That when I think about that poor kid that was killed in Florida--and I mentor a college student now.  And I started mentoring him in a program I worked with when he was in middle school--that when you look at where black men are statistically, black males are really far behind. Whenever I have a black male student, I'll tell him, "If you don't come to school, I'm calling your mother up."  And I'm serious, I will.  I guess my more concern is for--you know, yes, black men have done a lot; we've got a black man as President of the United States [President Barack Obama].  But the black male has really got it tough.  It's really tough on a black male.  And probably brown males, too, but I'm not brown.  I only know about black people.  And my concern is about that.  I'm concerned about black families, about millions and hundreds of thousands of children that are fathered by men that don't really care if they ever see them, if they ever pick them up.  And so, whenever we're riding and I see a black father with a child--which should be a normal thing--it's just enlightening to me to say, "Look, there's a black man with his children."  So, as you know, worrying about black people, that's the thing that bothers me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 126445
Speaker 1: What advice would you give young African Americans who want to get involved in television today, or in photography?
Speaker 2: I would encourage them to come, to tell our story, because so much of our stories in television are not being told.  I would encourage them to be a part of history, that you will certainly feel fulfilled once you had a career.  Be prepared.  It's an industry that's changing much faster today than it changed in my day.  But if you have the basic skills that most young people have today, you can compete.  So, I have tried to encourage any young filmmakers, any broadcasters anywhere to, you know, let me help you, let me show you what I know.  Let me tell you who I know, and try and stick with it.
Story_ID: 126446
Speaker 1: Now, tell us a little bit about your family.  Now you have, you're married and you have children.
Speaker 2: I have two children.  I have a son [Steven Davis] and a daughter [Darolyn Davis].  My children were stepchildren.  My daughter was two when I was married, and my son was about eight.  But they lived their whole life with me.  I have one teenage granddaughter at fifteen [years old], and a six-year old granddaughter.  We're a small family, but we're pretty close.  We--every year for the last ten plus years, we have went on a cruise for Christmas.  And we've gotten so used to having Christmas at sea or on a port somewhere, that we stayed home one year and everyone complained about having to set the table, or put up trees and things like that.  So, it's a good family.  My daughter works, like her mother.  She runs her own business, a PR [public relations] firm specializing in a lot of government services, and she works pretty hard.  My son is a, he's a 'foodie.'  He's a, he's a chef.  He's worked in running his own business.  He's taught in different schools.  He's more in the educational end now.  He still does some personalized catering, and he does some teaching on healthy food and stuff like that.  So, it's a good family, its okay.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to discuss before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: How much is this going to cost me?  (laughter).
Speaker 1: (laughter).  I don't think it's going to cost anything.
Speaker 2: No.  You did well, you did very good.  I hope you found something in here you can use.  I don't know, I rambled on for hours and hours.  But I, you know, I tried to be as honest and straight with you as I could.  I thank you very much for including me as a HistoryMaker.  I never considered myself a history maker.  I just, you know, I'm just a worker out there doing a job, not as someone that made any history.  So, I want to thank you for taking the time out and doing what you did.  Now you're ready for your last question.
Speaker 1: You're welcome, and just one more question before I get to the last one.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: That was, did your parents get a chance to see you become successful as a photographer?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Not my father [Edward S. Moore], but my mother [Isabelle Logan].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm glad you asked that, because I have a great story.  When I first went to work at Channel 2--and it's the only television station I worked at.  It, we were very small, and after the news every night we ran the credits, every night.  Some stations only run the credits once a week.  But every night, they ran the credits.  And so, one day I asked my mother, I said, "Mama, do you ever look at the ten o'clock news?"  She says--and it was on from ten to eleven--she says, "I turn it on about five minutes to eleven, just to see your name."  (laughter).  You know, and then she turned it off.  So, my mother did get to see my name in television, and knew I worked in television.  And my wife [HistoryMaker Belva Davis], both her parents got to see her--actually came to the studio, on the studio shows she'd done.  So, they did.  I felt happy about that.
Story_ID: 126447
Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a, as a friend; as somebody that would always help somebody; that was always up, never down, never negative, but as positive as I can be; someone you could trust; someone you like being around, and was fun to be around.  That's how I want people to remember me, is that he was always happy, he was a good person.
Speaker 1: Alright, okay, thank you very much.
