Story_ID: 512802
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: I'm Fred C. Matthews, III.  Fred, F-R-E-D, C stands for Cleveland, C-L-E-V-E-L-A-N-D, Matthews, M-A-T-T-H-E-W-S, III.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born March 4th, 1942, in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: And sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am senior vice president for community relations for the YMCA [formerly, Young Men's Christian Association] of Metropolitan Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: And sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is December 3rd, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Presently we are at HistoryMakers' headquarters, 1900 South Michigan [Avenue] in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: All right, thank you.
Story_ID: 512803
Speaker 1: This is a picture of myself, [HM] Fred [C.] Matthews [III], and it was taken at my church for a directory at church about two or three years ago.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  That's great, next.  All right go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me when I was about eight months to a year old in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, about 1942, '43 [1943].
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my grandfather, Fred C. Matthews, Sr., Reverend Fred C. Matthew Sr., taken in about 1943 maybe.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And that's a picture of Annie Minor Matthews, my grandmother.  That was taken probably in the late '50s [1950s].
VIDEOGRAPHER: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my father and mother, my father Fred C. Matthews, Jr. and my mother Vivian Loretta Wills Matthews, which was taken in the, probably in the late '80s [1980s], yeah.  This is a picture of the graduating class in 1940--'44 [1944] or '45 [1945] or '47 [1947] at Valley Park Elementary School [Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  That's a school at a, in a church house and that was the graduating class from third grade.
Speaker 2: Is that in Baton Rouge?
Speaker 1: In Baton Rouge, Louisiana and I think that year was 1947.
Speaker 2: And which one are you?
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Sir, have I got you centered there with the--?
Speaker 2: That's Fred III--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --right there, yes.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  All right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  All right next.
Speaker 2: This picture came out of a 1957 yearbook at McKinley [Senior] High School [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] in 1957.  I was a junior at McKinley High School and I was president of the student body.  And that's a civics class that is in session and I'm at the board demonstrating some topic there in civics at McKinley High School in 1957.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Good job, next.  Start with the top.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my dad and I, about four or five years ago, outside of Magnolia Baptist Church [Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  Magnolia Baptist Church was pastored by my grandfather, Fred C. Matthews, Sr.  And that's a picture in the parking lot there of myself, Fred C. Matthews, III with Fred C. Matthews, Jr., my father.  And that was approximately four or five years ago, probably 1999.
VIDEOGRAPHER: Okay, and then we'll move to the bottom photo.
Speaker 2: The bottom picture is a--I think I--this was in Baton Rouge, downtown Baton Rouge at a photo studio and I think I was about fourteen years of age.  And that had to be around 1955, '56 [1956], '57 [1957], with my father there.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 2: This picture was taken, I think that was in 1957 or '58 [1958].  I was president of the Louisiana State Student Council in 1958.  I think that picture was taken in '57 [1957] or '58 [1958]--
VIDEOGRAPHER:  All right.
Speaker 2: --in Baton Rouge.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Very good.
Speaker 2: I received my commission in, from the Reserve Officers' Training Corp [ROTC] at Southern University [and Agricultural and Mechanical College] in Baton Rouge, Louisiana in 1962.  And I went into career in the 1st Calvary Division as an [U.S.] Army Officer, 1963.  And that's me in my officer's uniform, Seoul, Korea.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Upon leaving Korea in '64 [1964], I went to Fort Dix, New Jersey and I was field--I was a commandant on the field communications crewman's course and that's passing review, Saturday review of our entire division there at Fort Dix.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next photo.
Speaker 2: This is another picture in Korea in Munsa-an-ni, [later, Munsan, South] Korea up around "Last Chance Village" not far from "Freedom Bridge" which led to Panmunjom there in South Korea in 1963, '64 [1964].
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Now if our caption editors were gonna try to spell Munsa-an-ni correctly, how--what would you suggest?  Could you--?
Speaker 2: I would just say South Korea.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Next photo.
Speaker 1: Like (unclear).
Speaker 2: This picture was taken as a part of that church directory two or three years ago at Grant Memorial A.M.E. Church [Chicago, Illinois].  And that's my wife, Rosalind Carol Nix Matthews with me Fred C. Matthews, III, two or three years ago.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, and this one?
Speaker 2: This one is when my oldest daughter Genease [Matthews]--oh, my youngest daughter Rhonda [Matthews], received her M.B.A. [degree] from Clark Atlanta University in Atlanta, Georgia.  And that had to be 1993 or 1994.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: And the top picture there, the next picture is my oldest daughter Genease Dionne Matthews receiving her M.B.A. from Mercer University in Atlanta, Georgia.  I'm not sure if that was '90 [1990] or '91 [1991].  That's the best I can do on that one.
VIDEOGRAPHER: What did you say your younger daughter in the bottom photo--her name is?
Speaker 2: Rhonda Renee Matthews.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, and then the top is--?
Speaker 2: And the top is Genease Dionne Matthews.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Genease is spelled--?
Speaker 2: G-E-N-E-A-S-E.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, good.  All right, we're already up top so let's (unclear).
Speaker 2: In 1967, Vice President Hubert Humphrey came to Chicago [Illinois] to look at some programs that were--that was helping young people get jobs.  And he came to Jobs Now, a government funded program at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] of Metropolitan Chicago to see the orientation program as we were orienting young people to the world of work.  And I was the director of that orientation center and taught a class to the youngsters on how to get around the city and how to engage certain areas of the city to get jobs.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 2: So that was 1967.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  All right, and the bottom photo?
Speaker 2: That's Senator Hillary Clinton.  When I was the executive director of the Duncan YMCA [Chicago, Illinois], Mrs. Clinton conducted a forum there dealing with women's issues in our theatre.  The Duncan Y was one of the first YMCAs in the country to devote the entire YMCA to the performing arts and Mrs. Clinton was there.  I think the year was 19, 1999--
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 2: --or early, 2000.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  All right, next.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This picture was on the cover of the Chicago Journal here in Chicago, Illinois a few years ago.  As I was preparing to leave Duncan to move to my job as senior vice president of community relations with the YMCA of Metropolitan Chicago and these youngsters in our child development program saying a little farewell to me from Duncan.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that is a good picture.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  All right, go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is at the [Luke] O'Toole Elementary School in Chicago, Illinois and I've just completed speaking to young students there, giving them some pointers on what to expect in life and how to deal with having people have expectations for them.  I believe that all youngsters should have some expectations of themselves and that others around them should have expectations of them.  So this is me after making my presentation.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 1: This picture was taken a couple of years ago.  I think this was at my wife's retirement.  She retired from teaching in the public school system [Chicago Public Schools, CPS] after thirty-five years of teaching math.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  That's fine, next.
Speaker 1: Where did she teach?
Speaker 2: South Shore High School [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: South Shore, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In the neighborhood.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  All right, this one?
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me when I was really enjoying myself.  I went to the Southern University-North Carolina A & T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina] football game in Las Vegas [Nevada], this fall 2003.  And I was at the Flamingo Hotel enjoying Gladys Knight.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Ah, good deal.  Okay, next.  It does sound like a good time.
Speaker 1: This is my--on the right is my uncle, J.C. Wills [ph.], my mother's [Vivian Wills Matthews] brother, my closest living relative here in Chicago.  He's eighty-five years of age and we're there along with my wife and myself there, Fred Matthews at an event where I was honored by the Catholic church--
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: --for being a role model.  This is a picture--the Duncan YMCA Training Center for the Arts gave an annual gala and this particular year we honored Buddy Guy, the noted blues musician and that's my wife and myself.  And Buddy Guy is from the Baton Rouge area also.  That was maybe four years ago.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next.  Okay, starting at the bottom.
Speaker 1: At the bottom, this at the groundbreaking this summer at the old Washington Park Y parking lot. There's--this was the groundbreaking for the Fred C. Matthews, III Senior [Housing] Center [Chicago, Illinois].  The YMCA of Metropolitan Chicago thought enough of me to name a sixty unit senior housing development, the Fred C. Matthews, III Senior Facility [sic.].  And that's the president of the YMCA or YMCA and chief executive officer [CEO], [Stephen] Steve Cole on the left and that's myself, as we are symbolically there breaking the ground.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  C-O-L-E?
Speaker 1: C-O-L-E.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 1: Steve Cole.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  All right, and the top one?
Speaker 1: And the top is Steve Cole, president chief executive officer of the YMCA of Metropolitan Chicago along with Fred C. Matthews, III, holding a picture of the rendering of the Fred C. Matthews, III Elderly Center [sic.], sixty units.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
VIDEOGRAPHER:  All right, you got it.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is in the Chicago Defender in 1971, when I became the youngest area district director for the YMCA.  I had several YMCA centers on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois].  In fact, I took Mr. Walt Worrell's [Walter F. Worrell] place when he left to go out east to take on other YMCA work.  I took Mr. Worrell's place as a district director of the Near South District of the YMCA of Metropolitan Chicago.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Kind of self-explanatory this one, isn't it?
Speaker 1: Yes, but--
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Says it all there and--
Speaker 1: But it ties into--
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Speaker 1: --another one that I was the co-founder of the Black and Hispanic Achievers Program [later, Black and Latino Achievers] in 1974, along with Wardell Haywood.  And this program was set up to honor businesses, to honor black and Hispanic achievers in business, and companies would nominate their employees for this outstanding recognition.  And in 1992, the YMCA of Metropolitan Chicago nominated me as their black achiever for 1992, and that's what this picture is about here.
VIDEOGRAPHER:  Okay.
Story_ID: 512804
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions that only require or deserve a short answer that we always ask.  The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is chicken, rice and gravy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my favorite food.
Speaker 1: All right, now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color would be brown.
Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: A favorite time of the year is during the Christmas holidays.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I really enjoy Aruba.
Speaker 1: All right, and finally do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Occasionally I will say, fake it till you make it.  That's one of the phrases.  And I'll also say, when I see someone at an event that I always know I'm in the right place if I see you here.  So those are two that kind of jump off my mouth and they have different connotations at different times.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 512805
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side and your father's [Fred Matthews, Jr.] side, but we'll start with your mother's side of the family.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Vivian Loretta Wills, V-I-V-I-A-N, Loretta, L-O-R-E-T-T-A, Wills Matthews.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born November 1st, 1910, in Torras, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is Torras near Baton Rouge [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: It's up the road a piece from Baton Rouge up in the country we call it, not far, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now what do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: You know, really I can, I go back to her mother, Mamie Wills, my grandmother, and I--I'm very familiar with her siblings.
Speaker 1: Her name is Mamie?
Speaker 2: Mamie Wills, my grandmother.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Mamie?
Speaker 2: M-A-M-I-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I can recall my grandmother, Mamie Wills as a seamstress and sewing and nurturing us because I spent a lot of time visiting my grandmother at 842 Peach Street there in South Baton Rouge.  In fact, I was born in my grandmother's front room.  That's where I was delivered by a midwife at that time and the attending physician was Dr. Leo S. Butler, very prominent physician there in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.  I can recall my aunts and uncles, my mother's sisters and brothers, Fred Wills [ph.] and J.C. Wills [ph.] and Nathaniel [ph.] and Wilhelmina [ph.] and Mildred [ph.], Ninez [ph.], and I don't think I missed anyone in there.  I may have missed someone and then my mother.  And there was R.V. also, R.V. Wills [ph.].  So that's all of the brothers and sisters of my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you hear stories about life, you know I guess back in your grandmother's day, from your grandmother or did she talk about her ancestors or--at all?
Speaker 2: Not that much with my Grandmother Mamie.  We talked a lot about projecting the future and going to school and what have you.  But talking in depth about a lot of things in the past, we didn't do much of that with my Grandmother Wills.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you don't remember any stories or anything that anybody told about, you know how the family got to Torras or why or any of the, any of those kind of stories?
Speaker 2: No, nothing more than they had some opportunities there in Baton Rouge and they came to Baton Rouge and settled.  But I don't recall any real stories from that side of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What did your grandmother do for a living?
Speaker 2: She was a seamstress.
Speaker 1: That's right, you did say that earlier.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She made a lot of clothes for a lot of people and she was churchgoing and taking care of the family in the homestead there.
Speaker 1: Now did she have her own clientele that came to the house to--or what, did she have a shop or--?
Speaker 2: No, it just was a Singer Sewing Machine there and people would bring fabrics.  They would request certain garments to be repaired or sewn.  I didn't spend a lot of time there but I did visit quite frequently, 842 Peach Street, in South Baton Rouge, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Story_ID: 512806
Speaker 1: Well tell us about your father's side of the family.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, Fred Cleveland Matthews, Jr., F-R-E-D, C-L-E-V-E-L-A-N-D, Matthews, M-A-T-T-H-E-W-S, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born in West Feliciana Parish [Louisiana], 1906.  And February 1st is his birthday.  February 1st, 1906.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about his side of the family?  And are there any stories and how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Well I can go back to his dad, Reverend Mathis [Fred C. Matthews, Sr.].  I was a little boy three or four years old when he passed away.  But I was familiar with Reverend Mathis.  Reverend--they called him Reverend Mathis, but it's Reverend Matthews, back then.  He was pastor of Magnolia Baptist Church [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and I can recall going to church every Sunday with our whole family.  But I remember Reverend Matthews he used to sell insurance also.  I guess this is insurance on the debit, going door to door selling insurance.  And I can also remember his laugh and remember his encouraging me to do well.
Story_ID: 512807
Speaker 1: Now on your father's [Fred Matthews, Jr.] side you were talking about your grandfather [Fred Matthews, Sr.] and your father--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --your grandfather was a reverend, right?
Speaker 2: My grandfather was a reverend.
Speaker 1: An insurance salesman too.
Speaker 2: An insurance salesman also.  My grandfather was a sharecropper but he also owned a piece of land of his own also.  They were some very proud individuals.  And my dad worked in the fields and, along with my granddad and my grandmother [Annie Matthews] prepared the food and kept things going.  My dad's two sisters, Nathalee [ph.] and Luella [ph.] had a chance to obtain an education but my dad worked the fields and helped to bring home the necessary resources for the household to continue.
Speaker 1: Now what was the major crop?
Speaker 2: They picked some cotton and there was some sugarcane but it was picking the cotton and other vegetables and what have you.  They left West Feliciana Parish [Louisiana] and came on into Baton Rouge [Louisiana].  I guess that was in the early 1900s and settled on McKinley Street there in South Baton Rouge, not far from the Mississippi River.
Story_ID: 512808
Speaker 1: I can recall my dad [Fred Matthews, Jr.] telling me about the time that he waited tables at hotels downtown [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and how he worked in restaurants to earn money as his two sisters went on, one to finish nursing school and one to finish college.  And Nathalee [ph.] became a school teacher and Nathalee is my godmother who I spent a lot of time with as I was growing up.  But my father was working at this hotel and he lost his job because the hotel closed and he was usually serving a certain gentleman every day and this gentleman happened to work at the ESSO, Standard Oil, which today is Exxon[Mobil].  It was Standard Oil and Humble Oil and today it's Exxon.  And this gentleman gave my dad a slip of paper because he had asked him, he said, "Well Fred, what are you going to do?  The hotel is closing."  And he said, "Well I don't know."  And so he said, "Well take this piece of paper down to the plant on the scenic highway there and give this paper to the gentleman at the gate down there."  And my dad took that piece of paper down and my dad says far as he could see there were people lined up trying to get jobs at the refinery.  And he said he gave this piece of paper to this gentleman and the gentleman looked at the paper and dad went right in and started out digging ditches at the Standard Oil.  And he went on to get promoted through to work in the lab as the maintenance and keeper of all of those different products and what have you that the refinery and the ESSO lab was coming up with during those days.  So my dad had a thirty-seven year career at the ESSO refinery and he was the--he was a union steward.  He chaired the picnic for the black employees of the Standard Oil, the ESSO annual picnic.  He ran the ESSO health association so the black employee at the Standard Oil would get sick they would come to an office out in South Baton Rouge [Louisiana] which was a part time responsibility that my father had.  And they would come out into the office and file their claim so if they had someone in their family sick or they were sick, this is where they would come to file their claim.  So my father was really a big public relations person for the Standard Oil.  He also handled the picnic as I said before.  He was a part of the union there and he also handled the health piece.  He was involved with the home safety association in which the refinery stressed safety.  They would go out into schools and teach safety.  So he was a magnificent person and just a great influence on my life as he worked the refinery.
Story_ID: 512809
Speaker 1: Did he [Matthews' father, Fred Matthews, Jr.] have a chance to get much schooling and--before he--?
Speaker 2: No.  He went as far as, it was fifth or sixth grade and one of his proudest moments was getting his GED [General Educational Development] from McKinley [Senior] High School [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] as he got much older.  I think he was in his, probably his late forties or late fifties even.  I can't remember the exact date.  But when he got his GED, he was so proud.  He also took some courses at, I think it was Marion Business College [ph.], not sure of the name of that college but at a business school.  He was very astute.  He had a great gift for the spoken word and he was a leader.  And a lot of that leadership grew out of his involvement with the church.  He was superintendent of the Sunday school at his father's church [Magnolia Baptist Church, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] for over thirty-seven years.  And he was a strong supporter and leader of the Fourth District Baptist Layman Association [4th District Missionary Baptist Association of Louisiana] which is a part of the Louisiana State Baptist Convention [Louisiana Missionary Baptist State Convention] which was a part of the National Baptist Convention.  So he was very, very involved with the Fourth District Baptist Layman Association conducting workshops, organizing activities for men.  He would always say that, "Fred, you know we have to be fishermen of men and bring them to the church and we need to go out and get people and bring them into the church."  And he was an exponent of utilizing the Fourth District Baptist Layman Association and doing that.
Speaker 1: That's something.  Now your grandfather [Fred Matthews, Sr.] was a minister and your father was a leader too in the community.
Story_ID: 512810
Speaker 1: Is there a significance to the name Fred Cleveland Matthews?  I mean is there--do you know where, what its origin is or is there any story around that name?
Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge other than that Cleveland was, you know sometimes they say it's Cleveland, Ohio then they say it's President [Stephen Grover] Cleveland.  But I think Matthews was a name coming from England.  I haven't traced all of that.  But being the III I found has been, being [HM] Fred Cleveland Matthews, III has been very, very good to me because of the path and the work that my dad [Fred Matthews, Jr.] and the role model that I saw with reference to my dad, I think I have had an opportunity to serve and to help others.  And that's what I saw in my dad.  I tell people that I could tell what my daddy was about in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] in his, all of his civic undertakings by just answering the phone at home.  When I was a young boy I would go and answer the telephone and individuals would start right out with what they want, whether it was a health association application or where a certain meeting would be at the church [Magnolia Baptist Church, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] or what time the polls were gonna open for voting or when was the community chorus meeting gonna be held?  And they would say, "Hello Fred.  We need an obituary done for this funeral."  I'd say, "Just a moment, I'm Fred, III.  You want my dad, Fred, Jr."  But in answering the phone over the years, I got a real good feel for what my dad was doing and he was helping whether it was the biracial committee in Baton Rouge, whether it was serving on the grand jury in Baton Rouge, he was an integral part of that.  Or whether it was helping to organize a group around the black cemeteries there in Baton Rouge where he organized the groups of individuals to get the cemeteries cleaned up and trace where individuals were to let them know the conditions of tombstones and headstones and graves.  He was very, very devoted to that even until his death in 2001, at the age of ninety-five.  So my father lived a real, real wonderful life and he left quite a legacy there in Baton Rouge for civic and community work.
Story_ID: 512811
Speaker 1: Tell us about your mother [Vivian Wills Matthews].  What was she like and what did she do?
Speaker 2: My mother was just a sweet person, a great sense of humor.  She stayed on top of things, keeping us in order and what have you.  She graduated from Leland College, a little Baptist college up in Baker, Louisiana, north of Baton Rouge [Louisiana].  She taught school for over thirty years.  Some school--well some of the schools that she taught that were in what we call up in the country and then she came into the city.  And she taught at Perkins Road Elementary School [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] for many years.  And she was an individual who was very religious, who attended Wesley United Methodist Church [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] which is--which gave us a chance to see the Baptist side of things and the Methodist side of things growing up because on quite a few occasions we would go to church services at both churches and we would take communion at both churches on the first Sunday of every month.  So we had a chance to be a part of the Methodist youth fellowship and the Baptist youth group also.  And through my mother's encouragement we had a chance to go away to Waveland, Mississippi every summer and we would meet youngsters from churches from New Orleans [Louisiana] and it just helped us develop and interact with other youngsters.  She always encouraged us with reference to our dress and how we would look and how we presented ourselves.  She was very charming and gave us a great bit of guidance and she had expectations for us.  She expected that we were gonna get our education and that we were gonna matriculate in the society and help others also just like we saw that my dad did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she have a chance to go to school much when she was younger?
Speaker 2: She finished college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She finished Leland College.
Speaker 1: She finished Leland.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she went through--she was in the first graduating class of McKinley [Senior] High School [Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  I think it was 1928.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's right.
Speaker 2: And I graduated from McKinley High School in 1958, yes.  So she finished McKinley High School and went to Leland College--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: --and got her degree in education, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now Leland College, this is the college I believe it's the same one that [HM] Gardner [C.] Taylor attended [sic.].
Speaker 2: Quite--
Speaker 1: I don't know if that--
Speaker 2: Quite possibly because that was--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --the Baptist college there, yes.
Speaker 1: Right. Right.  That's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, in Baker [Louisiana].
Story_ID: 512812
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, I'm gonna ask you about growing up in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] and you know some of the personalities around there.  I know off camera we were discussing Dr. Valerian [E.] Smith.  The great [HM] Reverend Gardner Taylor was a, you know grew up in Baton Rouge.  And did you run--were you familiar with some of these figures when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Dr. Valerian Smith, a very well read, well versed individual, a musician.  I can remember he was a great swimmer, has a--is a very fine vocalist and for a while he was my dentist there in Baton Rouge.  But he helped organize the community chorus there in Baton Rouge, a group of individuals that had some very fine voices there in the city and my father [Fred Matthews, Jr.] was chairman of the community chorus, on the board you might say of that.  And my dad and Dr. Smith worked hand in hand in developing and nurturing the community chorus.  And that was a part of that whole culture.  You mentioned Dr. Gardner Taylor, we would hear of Dr. Gardner Taylor and his great sermons at Mt. Zion Baptist Church [Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  But Dr. Valerian Smith was one of the fine spokespersons and individuals in Baton Rouge that developed plays and musicals and the community chorus. He would have the Easter sunrise service on the [Louisiana] State Capitol steps, great singing, just an amazing individual.  And all of the individuals that partake of this experience knew that that was something special there. And young individuals like myself through the church and through having a chance to participate and hear these great musical productions and the great choruses just added to our growth and development there.  Also, Dr. Taylor's father [Washington M. Taylor] was a friend of my grandfather [Fred Matthews, Sr.] there in Baton Rouge.  And Dr. Taylor's mother [Selina Taylor] and father are buried in one of those cemeteries that I talked about earlier that my father would keep up and inform Dr. Taylor what's transpiring with that cemetery.  And Dr. Taylor would come back periodically and come by and see my dad and they would talk about how pleased Dr. Taylor was with what my dad had done for the cemetery and for the upkeep and keeping a certain prominence about those cemeteries all year round and not just on All Saints' Day.
Story_ID: 512813
Speaker 1: So you had, you were really immersed in the community there in Baton Rouge [Louisiana].  Can you give us a sense of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think it was like going to school in the first, second and third grade, going to school in Valley Park [Elementary School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  I went to school in a church house with the big potbelly stove in the middle.  My Aunt Nathalee [ph.], Nathalee Williams, my dad's [Fred Matthews, Jr.] sister, would take me to school with her every day to Valley Park Elementary School.  Reverend Davis [ph.] was the pastor of that church.  He also had a grocery store and every day I would go down and get my 7Up and eat my potted meat sandwich and my Vienna sandwich and met a lot of friends there in that school because I rode with my aunt.  And so whether I was in first grade, second grade or third grade, I had to wait because some of those classes were half day.  I had to wait for my aunt to get home.  So I would meet all the children in all of the grades and I would pick up information from all those classes.  And we had an outdoor toilet at that particular school which led for some great interaction and some great sharing of resources of time and of energies there.  I remember my aunt getting me ready for a competition on Southern University's [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] campus.  I don't know if I was in second or third grade but you would go to Southern for this achievement day, this big day, students would come from all over.  And I was a real youngster, about four and a half, five years old.  And she would say, "Now [HM] Fred Cleveland [Matthews, III], remember there are sixty-four parishes in the State of Louisiana."  It's the only state with parishes, and she would say, "I think you know they're probably gonna ask you that.  And the state bird is the pelican."  And she would go down a litany of these and then I went up there and I, I'll never forget it, I won first place and I had a trophy that was almost as tall as I was at that time.  But that was the first competition that I had an opportunity to take part in and actually win that competition.  And I just thought that was so great.  I left Valley Park Elementary School and I went to Perkins Road Elementary School [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] in the city and, over on 15th Street.  And I started fourth grade there and that's when I had a chance to actually meet more kids and move on to McKinley Junior High School [later, McKinley Middle Academic Magnet School of Visual and Performing Arts, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  And at McKinley Junior High School I can remember in eighth grade competing again.  I had to do a monologue, a ten minute monologue.  I can't even remember the title.  But I'll never forget we had to rehearse it and we did it in front of the, all of the seventh and eighth graders in an assembly.  And I got about halfway in that monologue and I just went completely blank.  And I walked off the stage and I was shedding these tears and Ms. Burshelle [ph.] my teacher, said, "Fred Cleveland, you can do this.  Now you gather yourself and you go back out there," and I'll never forget that.  I went back out there in front of my peers and gave that monologue and in the competition I think I came out third in the district competition doing that monologue.  But that was a great moment for me to not quit when Ms. Burshelle said, go back out there, to not quit, and to be able to do that in front of, in front of my peers.
Story_ID: 512814
Speaker 1: During that period of time, the sights and sounds, Baton Rouge [Louisiana], my dad [Fred Matthews, Jr.] did more than just work at the Standard Oil and that involvement.  He also was trying to pay off a mortgage for the house that he built in 1942, the year that I was born at 1319 E. Washington Street in South Baton Rouge.  So we would go with him to wax and clean floors in folks' houses and we would pick pecans and sell them.  And also we would serve parties.  My daddy would serve parties.  He had small parties he would serve and then there were big parties that they would have out in, in Ryan Field [Baton Rouge Metropolitan Airport] in these airplane hangars.  He would have all these white jackets and he would be going through South Baton Rouge giving the jackets to men saying you want to work tonight?  You want to--?  And we would do that.  But he also served some very intimate parties and one of which that I remember quite vividly was when Clark Gable was in town filming 'Band of Angels.'  And--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --I went to serve and daddy had a couple of ladies doing the finger sandwiches and they were wearing their little black uniforms and white aprons.  I had on my little white jacket.  Dad had on his white jacket.  And dad was mixing the drinks and I was kind of walking around as a fourteen or fifteen year old kind of serving the drinks to this party.  They had the president of Fidelity Bank [New Orleans, Louisiana], LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], and all were there at this lovely house on the lake there in Baton Rouge.
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: And I had a chance to serve Clark Gable.  But I conversed with Clark Gable's wife and she gave me some advice.  She said, "Son, whatever you do, you get you an education," and I've never forgotten that from Clark Gable's wife.
Speaker 2: Was this Carole Lombard?
Speaker 1: I can't remember if it was Carole.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Blonde?
Speaker 1: She was blonde.  Yeah and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think it might have been Carole Lombard.
Speaker 1: It may have been.  This was something that I didn't forget.  And I thank my father so for taking me with him to serve that.  He could have taken anybody just to serve that party.  But he took me along because I think he knew what exposure I would get there being a part of that and seeing that.
Story_ID: 512815
Speaker 1: Just a question about 'Band of Angels,' the movie I know takes place in Louisiana and there's a--Clark Gable's plantation on--it was a 19th century movie, I guess pre-Civil War and during the Civil War.  But it's a big role in it for Sidney Poitier, he's in it.  And did he show up at the party?
Speaker 2: I don't recall, you know.  I don't recall.  I know I would have remembered.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He plays the servant of Clark Gable by the name of Raul and he goes--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --to--he's sent on all the errands.  He's basically--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --free almost.  You know almost free.
Speaker 2: But no, I don't recall.
Speaker 1: Because he would represent Clark Gable everywhere you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think I have these--'Band of Angels' I'm almost sure that was the one when--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he--
Speaker 2: --Clark Gable was there but no, I don't--
Speaker 1: Well Poitier comes back at the end as a Union soldier that's got the drop on I think Elizabeth Taylor or somebody that and--but it's a, you know--that's not the subject of this discussion.
Speaker 2: No, but--
Speaker 1: But I wondered in terms of the race relations in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], you know with a significant role for Sidney Poitier in that movie if he was allowed to come to the--probably not, I would guess in those days.
Speaker 2: Probably not and--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I don't recall.
Speaker 1: And no one even mentioned him at all?
Speaker 2: No.  All I remember as a youngster was that I was serving those drinks there for those individuals that were--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that were there.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 512816
Speaker 1: Now I did neglect to ask you how your parents [Vivian Wills Matthews and Fred Matthews, Jr.] met.  Is there a story about how they met?  Did they talk about that?
Speaker 2: Well my mother and father met, I think they met there in South Baton Rouge [Louisiana].  I don't know if my aunt introduced them but I do recall that my dad was courting her there on Peach Street going to see her.  But how it actually consummated, you know through the courtship and through the marriage, I don't have a big story or grasp.  But they courted, they dated and I can recall her saying that he was a fine looking man and I can recall him saying that she was very attractive and had a lot of spirit to her and they were married for about fifty-seven years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A wonderful marriage, and a wonderful couple.
Story_ID: 512817
Speaker 1: How many brothers and sisters do you have and you're the oldest right?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.  I have a sister Evelyn, Evelyn Ann Matthews Baker and have a brother, John Wills Matthews, Sr., who is the youngest.  So there were three of us growing up in our household there in Baton Rouge [Louisiana].  You had asked me earlier about some of the sights and sounds, mentioning my sisters and brothers I can remember our house there on East Washington Street which was a great active enclave there.  My dad [Fred Matthews, Jr.] would put up a basketball goal on a vacant lot, house or two over a lot that he owned and kids would come from all over to play basketball.  We had a vacant lot directly behind our house and they would also come and play football so we got a chance to meet all of the kids in the neighborhood because we were always out active playing ball.  And then my dad was instrumental along with Reverend W. K. Brooks in establishing a black swimming pool there in South Baton Rouge, which was directly on the other side of that field that I just described, Brooks Park and Brooks Recreational Park where we'd go and play horseshoes and swim.  And everything was just great for physical activities because just over the ravine, we called it a ravine, but about a block away was McKinley [Senior] High School [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] where we all went to high school.  So right in that spot we had Alexander's Grocery [later, Alexander's Highland Market] across the street and we had East Washington Street, the main thoroughfare going from east to west in South Baton Rouge. And also we had all of the recreational facilities plus those that my daddy supplemented with basketball goals and the whole bit.
Story_ID: 512818
Speaker 1: Another part of that sights and sounds of it is I can recall quite vividly in 1953, when Dr. T. J. Jemison organized the bus boycott on the city buses [in Baton Rouge, Louisiana] so that blacks could have seats on the buses and wouldn't have to stand up. And I can remember at about 4:00, 4:30 in the morning as I was a young teenager, that was '53 [1953], so I had to be about eleven.  My dad [Fred Matthews, Jr.] would print free ride signs on the dining room table and I would get up in the morning and I'd run out the front and help them tape the free ride signs on the vehicles as they would pull up because that would let the people going to work in the morning early, the domestics and all, that would let them know that this was a safe vehicle to get in, to get them to and from their jobs.  That was a very, very interesting time because my dad was a participant in that.  And a couple of years ago they, at LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], they've done a study with some students on this whole bus boycott.  My sister [Evelyn Matthews Baker] and my brother [John Wills Matthews] were very close there in the household growing up and we were all pushed to get our education and to--whatever we chose to do, to do well.
Speaker 2: Now, I want to go back to this boycott for a moment because I think it's significant to note here that '53 [1953], this is a year before the Montgomery Bus Boycott in Montgomery, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Yes, uh-huh.
Speaker 2: So a lot of people would think that the Montgomery Bus Boycott came first but that's really not true.
Speaker 1: No but--in Baton Rouge [Louisiana].
Speaker 2: And I don't know if this one was first but it was certainly before the Montgomery Bus Boycott.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was in 1953.
Speaker 2: Fifty-three [1953], and--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --T. J. Jemison--
Speaker 1: Reverend, Dr. T. J. Jemison.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Now was he the head of--
Speaker 1: He was Pastor of Mount Zion--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --[Mount Zion] Baptist Church there in Baton Rouge.
Speaker 2: Was there a local NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]?
Speaker 1: Yes, there was a local NAACP.
Speaker 2: Did they participate in that if you know?
Speaker 1: I'm pretty that they did because everybody was participating in this boycott.  This was something that time had, you know had arrived.  This was--this is what had to happen to get the attention of the bus companies there so that black people would be able to be respected as a part of the ridership of that bus system and it worked.
Speaker 2: So it--do you remember when it ended, how long the boycott had to go on?
Speaker 1: I don't, you know, I don't remember how long.  I don't think it was a very long bus boycott but evidently it was long enough to get the message across and to provide better accommodations on utilization of the buses there.
Speaker 2: So were the buses integrated by 1954, by the time the Montgomery Bus Boycott started?
Speaker 1: I think coming out of that, I think blacks had better positioning of seating on the bus than they had.  They could sit--there would be no vacant seats there when you would stand and there was a vacant seat.  And I think they kept the first two rows--I think a part of the agreement.  I'm not sure.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this was--
Speaker 1: This was prior to.
Speaker 2: The issue in this bus boycott was that black folks could not sit in--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --certain seats that were designated--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: --for whites?
Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 2: Okay.  But there was still a black section on the bus afterwards?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, there was still--
Speaker 2: Even after the boycott?
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: To my best recollection.  I'd need to check.
Speaker 2: Well this is a continuation of a struggle I guess that started back in Louisiana with Plessy vs. Ferguson [Plessy v. Ferguson, 1896] back in the 1890s--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I guess.  And that being the birthplace of separate but equal (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But yeah, it's interesting.  So Montgomery went a little further I guess--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, that was--
Speaker 2: --than you all did in terms of their demands?
Speaker 1: Oh definitely.  Definitely.
Speaker 2: But there was a model definitely for a bus boycott already--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --in Baton Rouge?
Speaker 1: I would think so.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I would think so.
Story_ID: 512819
Speaker 1: We're talking about your brothers and sisters and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My sister [Evelyn Matthews Baker] graduated from Southern University [and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and she's a retired school teacher.  My brother [John Wills Matthews] worked for the East Baton Rouge Parish [Louisiana].  He retired after a very successful career with the city and he's retired and I'm proud of both of them, very proud of both of them.
Speaker 1: Okay, now as the oldest, did you have a lot more responsibility I guess than, to--?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know if it's, I don't know if you'd call it a lot more responsibility.  I--when I was sixteen I was headed towards college at sixteen.  Sixteen back, I was an integral part of everything that transpired there at home and helping where I could.
Speaker 1: So you finished high school [McKinley Senior High School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] in 1958 then, right?
Speaker 2: I finished high school in 1958.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 512820
Speaker 1: I went to Southern University [and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], seven miles away and I stayed on campus all four years.
Speaker 2: Okay now, I don't want to get you to Southern yet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But let's go back to grade school for a minute.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What was the name of your grade school?
Speaker 1: Grade school was Valley Park Elementary School [Baton Rouge, Louisiana], which was only three grades at that time and that's, that was a school that's in the--was in the church house.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then I went to Perkins Road Elementary School [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] from fourth grade to sixth grade.  And then seventh and eighth grade I went to McKinley Junior High School [later, McKinley Middle Academic Magnet School of Visual and Performing Arts, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  And then ninth grade through twelfth, I went to McKinley Senior High School [Baton Rouge, Louisiana], four years.
Speaker 2: Now in grade school, who were some of the teachers and personalities that influenced you the most?
Speaker 1: Oh, well first of all my Aunt Nathalee [ph.], because she was my first teacher in grade school.  She was the one that helped me learn to write and to add and subtract and to read, encouraged me to read.  But then there was a teacher in fourth grade, Mrs. Mott [ph.].  Mrs. Mott was a very patient and devoted teacher and I really, really, really appreciated Mrs. Mott because I was coming from a school that was in a church house and this was my first class in a school that was brick and you know, had indoor toilets and it was, you know East Baton Rouge Parish [Louisiana] public school.  And Mrs. Mott--I was young and Mrs. Mott kind of took me under her wing and encouraged and nurtured me.  I remember Ms. Hall [ph.] in fifth grade who always reminded us that we had to keep on doing the best job that we could--we can do no matter what the job was.  And then, I guess sixth grade, Mr. Wickliff Bassett, he was a big guy, an athlete at Grambling College [later, Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] and he was teaching sixth grade.  And these were pretty much self-contained classrooms so you had the teacher all day.  You may go to a music class or something.  But Mr. Bassett was the athlete and I think that in that class I had a chance to grow as far as hanging out with the guys.  We did that in fourth, fifth grade but sixth grade it seems like we were maturing and we'd play basketball a lot at recess and out on the yard.  I didn't play on the elementary school basketball team but I played intramurally with the guys, the John Collins [ph.], Spike [ph.] and others that played, I had a chance to play.  But Wickliff Bassett, a good disciplinarian, kept things straight.  And everybody respected him and I respected him, so Mrs. Mott, Ms. Hall, and Wickliff Bassett.  But there was another person there that--it was a proud person and seemed to keep it all together and that was Ms. Tagno [ph.] who was our--who was the principal there at the school.  And she was a good administrator and well thought of throughout the community.  And we had tremendous respect for Ms. Tagno.
Story_ID: 512821
Speaker 1: Now you went to McKinley [Senior] High School [Baton Rouge, Louisiana], right?
Speaker 2: I went to McKinley High School, yeah.
Speaker 1: And I see the way you're smiling.  You must have had a good time at McKinley?
Speaker 2: McKinley High School was truly, in my formative years here, it truly made an impact.  Ninth grade was a big transition leaving McKinley Junior High School [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and going to McKinley High School, although it was only two blocks away.  But just leaving eighth grade, going to ninth grade as a freshman in high school--
Speaker 1: How old were you as a freshman in high school?
Speaker 2: A freshman in high school, I was about twelve and a half, almost thirteen, yeah.  Because I was born March 4th [1942], and I graduated from high school, I was sixteen so I had to be about twelve.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Twelve and a half.
Speaker 1: Now did they skip you some grades or how did that, how did you end up--?
Speaker 2: Yes, I got skipped from, really from second grade to fourth grade.  I took--as I was going to this one schoolhouse with the first, second and third in it, I was getting lessons from all three grades and so actually I spent about two and half years in that schoolhouse and so that got me ready to be skipped.  And so when they are getting ready to skip between that year, which would have been third grade and fourth grade, I went to the Southern University Lab [Laboratory] School [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] for the summer to take some classes to see if I was ready for the fourth grade.  And I took those classes and it was deemed that I was ready for the fourth grade.  So for all intents and purposes I didn't have a complete third grade, so that's where the skip came in and I went to Perkins Road Elementary School [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] in fourth grade and got to McKinley High School as a freshman.  And there I had a chance to, in my junior year to become president of the student body and seniors had always been president of the student body there at McKinley, my recollection.  But the--my junior year '57 [1957], they brought in the voting machines and I think it was Mr. David Lovely [ph.] helped organized two parties, the federalist and the nationalist parties. So we were going to go through this whole election utilizing the, all of the resources we could garner through the electoral process, as I said bringing in the voting machines in for the student body to vote, having a big convention in the gymnasium.  I had to speak to the whole student body and tell them about my platform.  My campaign theme was Get Ahead with Fred, and my dad [Fred Matthews, Jr.] printed big signs, Get Ahead with Fred.  And my campaign manager was Cincinnatus [Cincy] Powell, 6'7" basketball player on McKinley High's state championship team which was 1957, state championship team, and Cincinnatus was my campaign manager.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that was your junior year.
Speaker 2: My junior year in high school.
Speaker 1: Was that after they won the state championship, where he was--
Speaker 2: This was--
Speaker 1: --that your campaign took place?
Speaker 2: This campaign took place, I think it was before.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they--
Speaker 2: Before they won--I can get it.  Yeah, I think it was before.  But Cincinnatus gave a great introduction for me on the stage at that assembly and then I came behind him.  I could hear the roar of the crowd and you know, what was going on.  And then they voted and I became president of the student body my junior year and that was a great experience, a great experience of leadership and helping to get things done there.  And then my senior year I became president of the Louisiana State Student Council Association [Louisiana Association of Student Councils], and again separate but equal.  I was the black--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I think there was a gentleman from Baton Rouge [Magnet] High School [Baton Rouge, Louisiana], named Dugas [ph.].  I can't remember his full name, it was (unclear), that was president of the white student council.  But I was president of the black student council and I had a chance to go to the National Student Council [National Association of Student Councils] meeting in Roswell, New Mexico.
Speaker 1: Now Roswell, that's the famous flying saucer town?
Speaker 2: Yeah, White Sands [New Mexico] and that whole bit, the Carlsbad Caverns [New Mexico].  And so I, as a youngster there I was with student council presidents from all over the country there and workshops and leadership training--
Story_ID: 512822
Speaker 1: I also, during that same year had a chance to go to Williamsburg, Virginia to be a part of the student burgess which was another leadership development piece and I had a Moroccan roommate and a Russian roommate.  So here's this little black boy from South Baton Rouge [Louisiana] out in old Colonial Williamsburg, Virginia--
Speaker 2: Well that--
Speaker 1: --getting an opportunity to share and to listen and to mature and to grow there.  I was really proud of that.  And so getting back to McKinley [Senior High School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], that senior year I had an opportunity to graduate of course.  But in that junior year when we won the state championship, I was the trainer statistician on that championship basketball team and traveled with the team to Tennessee State [University] in Nashville [Tennessee], and had an opportunity to write articles back to the local papers about our progression in that tournament.  And--
Speaker 2: So the tournament was a state, a Louisiana--
Speaker 1: A national--
Speaker 2: A national?
Speaker 1: A national black high school tournament at Tennessee State.  You had some of the best high school basketball teams and we lost to St. Elizabeth High School, from Chicago [Illinois].  Little did I know that I would end up in Chicago for thirty-seven years as my home, but St. Elizabeth High School beat us in Nashville on Tennessee State's campus in that national tournament.
Speaker 2: That's interesting, I don't think most people would know about the high school tournaments in the black community like that.  I mean they--so black high schools in most of the southern states participated in these?
Speaker 1: Yes, there were quite a few, Tennessee from Mississippi, from Louisiana, yes.
Speaker 2: So you'd have a state champion?
Speaker 1: The state champion--
Speaker 2: And then the state champion would go to Nashville for--?
Speaker 1: --would go to, be invited to Nashville to play in that tournament, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.  So McKinley High School was a great training ground for me.  It was--there were teachers there that impacted my life, Ms. Baham in speech.
Speaker 2: How do you spell her name?
Speaker 1: B-A-H-A-M, Ms. Baham was the one that had me write on the board a hundred times the word, ask.  I would always say axe (laughter).
Speaker 2: Axe.
Speaker 1: Like A-X-E.  And she said, ask, ask, ask and I had to--I'll never forget having to stay over and write that for her in my tenth grade speech class.  And there was Ms. Portia LePaige [ph.] who was just a very fine teacher and Ms. Anderson [ph.], a very fine English teacher that got us involved with Chaucer [Geoffrey Chaucer] and that whole bit.  And we had a very fine chemistry teacher, Ms. V.T. Jones, who really knew her stuff and it was a tough class you know.  She had a--you had to--she knew how to get it.
Story_ID: 512823
Speaker 1: Did you know you were going to Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] when you--or how did that come about?  Did you--?
Speaker 2: Well, I--
Speaker 1: 'Cause your sister [Evelyn Matthews Baker] went to Leland [College, Baker, Louisiana], right and then--?
Speaker 2: My mother [Vivian Wills Matthews] went to Leland.
Speaker 1: Your mother went to Leland, not your--
Speaker 2: My mother went to Leland.
Speaker 1: But your Southern--your sister went to Southern too--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  Well--
Speaker 1: --after you?
Speaker 2: --at that time there was--I sort of started thinking about maybe I would go into the ministry but I hadn't made up my mind on that.  At one point I thought I would consider attending Dillard University in New Orleans [Louisiana] but I didn't.  I went on to Southern in that September because I graduated from Southern in August of 1962.  I was a part of the summer commencement exercise and I--maybe I'm getting ahead of myself because I'm--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't want you to graduate yet.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you don't want me to graduate yet.  You want me--
Speaker 1: But why you chose Southern.
Speaker 2: Why I chose it?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I chose Southern because I think it was close to home and I was familiar with the campus.  And I knew I was going to college.  It was almost like a normal transition and so I chose Southern for its familiarity.  I'd been to football games.  We had had the ESSO Standard Oil picnics on Southern's campus.  I'd been up there as I said before as a little boy competing.  I'd gone to the Lab School [Southern University Laboratory School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] for a summer, so this was the university of choice.
Story_ID: 512824
Speaker 1: What was your experience like at Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Well at Southern, it was a great experience, just a wonderful experience.  When I got to Southern as a freshman they placed me in what they call a special group that's graduating from high school.  I was in the top ten in my class.  And Southern had what they called a special group and they had the class cards all ready for us.  And in this special group we had some classes that were a little advanced but that gave me an opportunity to meet some outstanding individuals from around the country and the southwest.  And during that time when I--we really decided that I was going to stay on, I said we, my dad [Fred Matthews, Jr.] you know, we decided I was going to stay on campus all four years.  So that meant that I stayed in this honors dormitory and that gave me an opportunity to meet a lot of people and it helped nurture me and groom me to become a dormitory proctor also my sophomore year there at Southern.  And so my freshman year was a great period of meeting people, realizing that I could you know, actually talk to my professors and start shaping what I wanted to do.  And in my sophomore year, I decided that I wanted to stay in ROTC, that I wanted to become an [U.S.] Army Officer and take advantage of the Reserve Officers' Training Corps there at Southern University.  I also pledged a fraternity, Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity [] in 1960, and that helped shaped--it helped to shape my leadership skills and interacting and social interacting and intellectual interacting and team building and team work there.  So joining a fraternity, that helped me bond with a lot of individuals and being a part of the advanced ROTC also helped me.  My sophomore year I was vice president of the sophomore class.  And again that helped me with leadership skill development.  And to be voted by your sophomore class to be the vice president was really an honor at that time.
Speaker 1: What fraternity did you join?
Speaker 2: Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity.  And that was one of the best things that ever happened.
Story_ID: 512825
Speaker 1: So you were president of your sophomore class [at Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: I was vice president of the sophomore class.
Speaker 1: Oh vice president, all right.
Speaker 2: Vice president of the sophomore class which meant that I got involved with homecoming and with different activities and with the student council and the student government association there at Southern which gave me an opportunity to meet a lot of other individuals across the campus.  So with that piece, and being in advanced RO--moving into the advanced ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] where I was the S3 of the brigade, the operations officer of the brigade, I was the editor of the Cadence Call which was the ROTC newspaper and it kept me quite busy there on campus.  But also at Southern I had an opportunity because of Joan Marie Williams who was a speech instructor of mine who also grew up in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], she was my speech instructor at Southern, asked me to try out for a role in '[A] Raisin in the Sun.'  And so in 1960, I was in one of the first amateur productions of--'61 [1961]--one of the first amateur productions of 'Raisin in the Sun' in the country.  I played George Murchison, the college student who was dating Beneatha [Younger].  So I became a part of the River Bend Players, so I had my rehearsals for the play because Dr. Hewett Perkins [ph.] had, along with Ms. [Camille Stivers] Shade who was the librarian on campus, they were co-chairing this week of the arts at Southern University and 'Raisin in the Sun' was a part of that week of the arts.  And so I had the ROTC commitment, my regular classes in sociology, I was majoring in sociology and it was--my fraternity [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity, ] and I was just a busy young guy on campus.  And I--and Southern, it just meant so much to me and that's why today I'm active in the Chicago [Illinois] alumni chapter of Southern University.  I'm a lifetime member of the Southern University Alumni and also a lifetime member of Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity also and I'm very proud of both of those entities because they helped shape and nurture me.
Story_ID: 512826
Speaker 1: Now were you on campus when the sit-in demonstrations started at Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Yes I was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, I was.  I--
Speaker 1: There's quite a bit of controversy about those I would--
Speaker 2: Yes.  It was quite a bit, a lot of students made some big--some lifetime sacrifices around that.  I did march from Baton Rouge [Louisiana] with the whole student body down to Baton Rouge during that time.  In fact I was pledging [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity, ].  We were wondering if we were going to come off the line because of the disruption in the academic process there.  But yes, that was in, I think that was in 1960, yeah, that that demonstration took place, very significant, very significant.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I believe the president at the time was--
Speaker 2: Felton G. Clark [Felton Grandison Clark].
Speaker 1: Yes.  Right, he expelled a number of students.
Speaker 2: Yes, there were students that as I mentioned before that made a, you know, a big sacrifice at that time, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How did you feel about that then?  I mean the--you were a junior then right, I guess?
Speaker 2: I was a, yeah I was a junior then, yes.
Speaker 1: Or--okay.
Speaker 2: We had great sympathy and empathy for the students of what we called the cause and we were very supportive to that, very supportive, very supportive--
Story_ID: 512827
Speaker 1: When you graduated from Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], did you graduate with honors and so forth then?
Speaker 2: I--when I graduated from Southern, I--the honors I did pick up, I was a member of Who's Who Among Students in American Universities and Colleges.  And I got my commission as a second lieutenant from Southern University at that time.  It was indeed a proud and great moment for me and for my family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, and I left Southern and--
Speaker 1: Now you were a sociology major--
Speaker 2: A sociology major.
Speaker 1: --at Southern.  Now why did you choose sociology?  Now you're an--I mean cause seemed like that--being a sociology major and an ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] man weren't the most congruent you know things necessarily to do.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: Well you know as I mentioned earlier I was contemplating becoming a minister.  And sociology, people to people, people to group and group to groups, marriage and the family and courses would lend itself to future matriculation into divinity school and what have you.  But I think at that point I was getting a calling from working with people and working with communities and I think that's the whole sociology--because at one point I was saying, well I'll get this, I'll get the sociology degree and I'll go get a Ph.D. in sociology and I'll teach sociology.  And even at that time I was thinking about the--before, I don't know how prominent it was but just in my mind, for a young guy back in 1962, sports sociology or something.  I didn't even know if that was something.  But that was just a fleeting something, just went by--(sound effect).
Story_ID: 512828
Speaker 1: So the real thing was still thinking about the ministry now.  And so I got to this point where I go in the [U.S.] Army.  Do I go to grad [graduate] school and consider that the divinity school piece and then go in the Army as a chaplain?  You know, do I get this Army commitment that I've made out of the way and then go?  And I decided that I would go into the Army and get my commitment out of the way in the service, but I never made it back to divinity school because I got married in May of 1963 and went to [South] Korea in August of 1963.  So I was a young married man in Korea.  I left my new bride here.  I left my new bride in Baton Rouge [Louisiana], Roslyn [Matthews] where she taught school and I was in the service in Korea.
Speaker 2: That's kind of tough to get married and then go right off to the service.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  We were both twenty-one years of age and young and that's something we decided that we would do.  We made this commitment to each other and we said well this is it.  But we thought that we would have had a tour of duty that I could have taken my wife with me.  When I got to Fort Benning, Georgia to the Infantry Officer's Basic Course [Infantry Basic Officer Leader Course] where you go around for eight weeks of advanced training as an officer, that day that they were reading out the destinations for young second lieutenants and they were sending people to Paris [France] and to Europe and these (unclear).  And they had a group of us that were left and they said you guys are gonna go to South Korea.  And I tried to get those orders changed and my daddy [Fred Matthews, Jr.] tried but to no avail and so I had to go to South Korea and I spent thirteen months in the--in South Korea.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now how was that experience cause you at--up to this point you had never been out of the country, right?
Speaker 1: Up to that point I'd never been out of the country, and I was a young man, twenty-one and a half.  So initially it was a little traumatic but I handled it well.  I knew I had made the commitment and I was well taught in the [U.S.] military sciences at Southern University [and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  I was well prepared and so it was my duty to go and serve.  And when I got to Korea, I adjusted quite well.  And as an Army Officer, that helped me adjust because I was an officer and I had a chance to run a platoon and to also become a battalion communication officer for the 2nd Battalion, 7th Cav. [Calvary] there up around Munsa-an-ni [later, Munsan, South Korea], "Last Chance Village" was where our compound was.  Other units up there with us would go out and pull stakeouts up around the DMZ so we were very prominent there up around the demilitarized zone there in South Korea with the 1st Calvary Division.  It so happened I was there in Korea when President [John Fitzgerald] Kennedy was assassinated and we went on full alert there.  We didn't know what was gonna happen.  You know, your commander in chief goes down and you know back home and you're over in Korea so that was a--those were some interesting times and we weathered that.
Story_ID: 512829
Speaker 1: Did you hear much about the March on Washington when you were there or did you--or were you there at that time?
Speaker 2: I was getting ready to go--
Speaker 1: Okay, when that--
Speaker 2: --to [South] Korea when that transpired.  So we were, yeah we were getting ready to go.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this is the Cold War in Korea.  Did you, I mean did it ever get tense over there where somebody you know--
Speaker 2: It got--
Speaker 1: --was it dan--real danger, you know?
Speaker 2: It was--yes.  Up around the DMZ [demilitarized zone] every now and then there would be a little skirmish here, a little harassment there.  But where we were at the time, we didn't have any real combative you know types of incidents.  But there were scattered incidents happening along the DMZ.  And of course when President [John Fitzgerald] Kennedy was assassinated that was a time when we were full on, full battle regalia.  I mean we were ready to go at that time.  All leaves canceled, everything was ready to go and then that subsided and we went back into our training mode there in Korea.
Speaker 1: Now did you have much interaction with the Koreans themselves?
Speaker 2: Yes, we did.  We had quite a bit of interaction with the indigenous individuals, citizenry there in Korea and with the Republic of Korea military forces because we had to do some training and some of those ROK [Republic of Korea] soldiers were attached to our unit [2nd Battalion 7th Cavalry] so there was a type of helping them out and they're helping us out understand the culture and what have you, there in Korea.
Story_ID: 512830
Speaker 1: And after Korea, I came back to Fort Dix, New Jersey to the, to become the commandant of the field communication crewmen's course there at Fort Dix.  And that's when my first child [Genease Dionne Matthews] was born at Walson Army Hospital in Fort Dix, New Jersey.  And what was kind of ironic about that is that I lived on Ash Street in Fort Dix, New Jersey and also on Ash Street was Dr. D'Arcy Bryant [ph.] who was the son-in-law of Dr. [Leo Stanley] Butler who delivered me.  So Dr. Bryant was my wife's [Roslyn Matthews] doctor.  He rotated out just before delivery.  But it was just ironic that here was the son-in-law of the doctor that was the attending physician at my birth, was there.  And we had other friends there on Ash Street that we knew from ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] and from Southern [University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So anything significant that you remember happening at Fort Dix when you were there?
Speaker 1: At Fort Dix, I received the Fort Dix Achievement Award when I was leaving and my--Genease Dionne Matthews was born there at Walson Army Hospital.  Those were two significant events there at Fort Dix.
Story_ID: 512831
Speaker 1: How long were you--did you remain in the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: I stayed in the Army a total of two years, four months.  I left Fort Dix [New Jersey] in September of 1965.
Speaker 1: Did you ever think about becoming, I mean extending your (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well--
Speaker 1: --and becoming a career--?
Speaker 2: Well what happened I was supposed to get out back in May or June, but I extended four months because my wife [Roslyn Matthews] was pregnant.  And at that time we said well we may as well have this baby in the Army and so we extended.  But at the same time we were thinking about maybe making a career of it, of the Army because we were enjoying that tour of duty there in Fort Dix, going to Cherry Hill [New Jersey], to the Latin Casino, watching The Supremes and going into Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] into, I think it was a club called Pep's [Lounge, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], listening to jazz and you go right into New York [New York] and you're at Macy's shopping.  It was the good life.  But we decided that we would get out.  We had served our tour and we would go on and get on with our lives.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now you're, let's see, what you're about twenty-five, I guess?
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: Twenty-four maybe?
Speaker 2: I--Twenty-three.
Speaker 1: You're still--
Speaker 2: Twenty-three, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you're still very young for--
Speaker 2: Very young, twenty-three, twenty-four so yeah because that was '65 [1965].  Yeah, I was coming out and coming to Chicago [Illinois].  We decided we'd come to Chicago which is my wife's home.  My wife went to [James] McCosh Elementary [School, Chicago, Illinois].  Well she was born in Rush Hospital [later, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois] when it was on Michigan Avenue and then she went to McCosh Elementary and Englewood High School [later, Englewood Technical Prep Academy High School, Chicago, Illinois].  And I think she made her mistake by coming down to Southern University [and Agricultural and Mechanical College] in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] 'cause that's where I met her (laughter).  And when she was a freshman at Southern, I was a sophomore and that's when we met and married in '63 [1963], and we've been married forty years this year.  And she got a job teaching in Chicago and I finally started, I started teaching after going without a job for a couple of months when I got here.  And I had taken a social work exam and they labeled me a social worker one and I had a job offer with a Job Corps camp up in Wisconsin but I didn't want to leave Chicago.  And so we stayed in Chicago and I started working with the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association].
Story_ID: 512832
Speaker 1: I started with the Y [YMCA, Young Men's Christian Association] in 1966.  I was a--I was teaching school at Bond Upper Grade Center [Chicago, Illinois] in late February '66 [1966].  And I finished my records.  I had a self-contained eighth grade class that I was teaching and I finished all of my records and I was down in the gym shooting hoops with the physical education instructor.  The principal came and said, "Well [HM Fred C.] Matthews [III] you know, you're a provisional teacher," because I was a liberal arts graduate and I had, I was taking some education courses out at [Chicago] Teachers College [later, Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois], some methods courses but the Board of Ed [Chicago Board of Education] would let you teach and you'd go take these methods courses.  So as I said, I was a provisional teacher so I had to fill hours for the day is the bottom line.  And he said, "Well I need some help over at another school."  I can't remember the name of the school.  But anyway, I went over to this other school and I was doing some filing.  And I don't know I was in the Ks or the Ls and this lady came up and she wanted to get in the file cabinet too.  And she says, "You don't look like you like this teaching."  And I said, "No," I said, "You know it's a job and I'm--I think it's okay but,"--and so we were chitchatting there and she had on this dark colored sweater with a big white T on it.  And I said, "Did you go to Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee]?"  She said, "Yes, I went to Tennessee State."  And I said, "Well I have a friend in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] that went to Tennessee State.  Her name is Joan Marie Williams," the same lady that got me in 'A Raisin in the Sun,' my speech.  She said, "That was my roommate in college," and I said, "is that right?"  She says, "And you're from Baton Rouge and you know Joan Marie?"  And we got to talking and she says, "Well my husband, Marcellus, Marcellus Slater," and her name was Barbara Jones Slater and she was on the Tigerbelles track team at Tennessee State.  And she says, "I'm gonna have my husband call you because they have a--the YMCA has some government programs and maybe you'd like to do that."  So within a day or two he called and I went for an interview and I started with the Y in what is called the Jobs Project, and that was helping young people get jobs, training them and counseling them.  And so on March 1st, 1966, I started at the central unit of the YMCA's Jobs Project Program at 320 N. Dearborn [Street, Chicago, Illinois].  And later that summer that program received notice that they were going to receive funds from the [U.S.] Department of Labor to do a pilot project, a program called Jobs Now.  And I was selected to join Jobs Now and I eventually became director of the--taught a class first and then I became director of that orientation center which oriented over a hundred young people.  Every two weeks we'd pay them a stipend and we'd help them get jobs and get ready for jobs, grooming class, transportation class, how to fill out an application.  I did role play.  So my wife [Roslyn Matthews] was teaching and now I'm working with the Y and the government programs in 1966.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that sounds similar to Jobs for Youth.  The--did it grow out of that or anything?
Speaker 1: No, to my knowledge--
Speaker 2: Was it something--okay.
Speaker 1: --it didn't.
Speaker 2: Very similar in terms of--
Speaker 1: This was a very creative program that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that came about after the riots and looking for jobs for inner city youth in Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 512833
Speaker 1: So this takes us, this is about nineteen--
Speaker 2: Sixty-six [1966].
Speaker 1: --sixty-six [1966] you started with the Y [YMCA, Young Men's Christian Association].
Speaker 2: I started with the YMCA.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And I was with the government programs helping to develop jobs, counseling, going to banks and companies asking them to hire our young people at entry level jobs, that we were training them and getting them ready to get involved with their firms.  We'd go out to companies and do some training there in the companies and teaching reading, writing and arithmetic and that whole bit.  But then in 1971, the president of the Y, John O. Root asked me to consider going into the YMCA centers to do some work.  In fact he asked me to become the district director of the near south district [Chicago, Illinois].  He said that Walt Worrill [HistoryMaker Conrad Walter Worrill] was leaving and he wanted to bring a different style of leadership into the YMCA and I accepted that position.
Speaker 1: Now, what did he mean in terms of different style of leadership, in terms of--?
Speaker 2: Well I did not come from the gym and swim and through George Williams College [Chicago, Illinois] which was the Y college.  I came from the government programs, human relations, sociology, interrelationships.  He saw and I would think that he saw a community type of individual in me.  And he wanted to move me, I guess gambling on my adaptability, into the Y mainstream to help with some of the communities and some of the community development and nurture some of the YMCAs.  This is primarily black YMCAs in the inner city.
Story_ID: 512834
Speaker 1: Now when were you appointed to that regional position [district director of YMCA South District, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I was appointed to that position in November of 1971.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, November of '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's a time period that's past the riots and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the murder of Fred Hampton and all that is over with at this point.  I mean but there's still a lot of tension in--
Speaker 2: There's still a lot of tension.  There's still a lot of tension not only--there's still a lot to be done within the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] with reference to race relations and you know how people are gonna go forth in the future interacting with one another.  And that--those were some challenging times because out of that time came the formulation of a group in the Y, just before '71 [1971], called BAN-WYS, Black and Non-White Staff [sic. Black and Non-White Secretaries] in the Y.  And we would meet in different cities.  The first was in Atlanta [Georgia] but we would meet in different cities.  The one in Atlanta was before I--right at the time I was coming in the Y.  But BAN-WYS was developed to get individuals involved in training, to get individuals to look for upward mobility.  It was much needed to get the black staff together to help influence and shape our organization so that we can move into the future as one organization, and it helped that process tremendously.  And, so as I became district director, we started looking at services for our communities, childcare and healthcare and this type of thing.  You still had the gym and swim, but we needed to focus on other things in the community at that time.
Story_ID: 512835
Speaker 1: That was when I became the district director [YMCA South District, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Now you were the youngest district director they ever had right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: According to--I mean I saw the article.  This is--
Speaker 1: Yes, I was the youngest district director.
Speaker 2: You weren't even thirty.  You're twenty-nine?
Speaker 1: Twenty-nine years old?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was a big responsibility.  And coordinating those centers and coordinating those executives and really developing fundraising acumen and board development and lay development and being able to position your YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] to service the constituency during that time was challenging to say the least.  It was--it wasn't something new but it was new in the growth and development of the Y, changing times and changing resources and so it was, it was challenging.  And then from that piece I became the executive director of the Hyde Park Y and district director.
Speaker 2: Okay now, I just want to ask you like what Ys are in your district when you were district director?
Speaker 1: In my district at the time, you had the Southtown Y, Washington Park Y, the Hyde Park Y, the South Shore Y and then we had Camp Martin Johnson.  That was the initial district that I had--
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: --at the time.
Speaker 2: --the Y in Roseland wasn't a part of it?
Speaker 1: No, the Y in Roseland was a part of another district.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Okay--which is interesting that you asked that, because when Dick Betts left as the district director of that--for the South District I took his place.  Dick left to become president of the Y in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and I took Dick Betts' place with that Far South District which did take in Roseland [Chicago, Illinois], South Chicago [Illinois], Harvey [Illinois], the park district in Markham [Illinois], the university park swimming pool, yhe YMCA at Governors State University [University Park, Illinois], community center in Robbins [Illinois], the day camp, the Drummond Day Camp out around Sauk Trail, and a couple of--oh, the aquatic center in Park Forest [Illinois] with the five outdoor pools.  It was a big district.  And so I left the Near South District and went to take over the Far South District and that took me right up to about '83 [1983] or '84 [1984] because I left the southern suburbs because I was the district director and I was the executive director of the South Suburban Y which was the Harvey Y, at the time and we changed it to South Suburban Y.  And in August of '85 [1985], I believe it was, I came back into the city to the Duncan YMCA.
Story_ID: 512836
Speaker 1: What were some of the programs that you, I guess were the most significant in the Ys [YMCA, Young Men's Christian Association] when you were director?
Speaker 2: Well, in the early goings if I can take them through the early goings, the development of childcare in the Y in the '70s [1970s] there.  That was very significant because today the Y is one of the largest providers of childcare in the city [Chicago, Illinois].  And then--
Speaker 1: This is in terms of after school programs?
Speaker 2: After school and preschool childcare, yes.
Speaker 1: Preschool childcare too?
Speaker 2: Preschool childcare, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The YMCA is the leading preschool childcare in the city.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm surprised to hear that really.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes we are.  And the other significant program was the West Side Future, which was an infant mortality reduction initiative on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] that started in 1985.  You had over thirty some babies dying in an area called the Near West Side which was McKinzie [sic. Kinzie Street] on the north to 16th Street on the south and from the Chicago River on the east to probably, oh I don't know Lawndale [Avenue] on the west.  But you had a lot of babies dying and West Side Future was an infant mortality reduction initiative that was done in conjunction with the Chicago [Department of] Public Health and Illinois State Health [Illinois Department of Public Health].
Speaker 1: What was the problem there then?  I mean why were babies dying?
Speaker 2: They were--well they were dying for lack of the proper nutrition, proper prenatal, postnatal care.  And so we had all these medical concerns but the holistic approach was what West Side Future moved to where we had workers in the Avalon Homes [ph.], Rockwell [Gardens] and [Henry] Horner [Homes].  We had staff that were from these complexes and they knocked on doors and they dealt with the whole family.  If there was a newborn baby, what about postnatal care?  If there was a young lady that was pregnant, let's get prenatal care.  If there was a guy there and didn't have a job, let's find him a job.  If there was somebody there that dropped out of school, let's get them an education.  If there was some other social services needed, let's do a massive case management and that's what it was.  It was case management in a big, big way.  And today with those that they've touched, that has subsided tremendously.  It's made a big difference.  The other--another program was the Black Achievers Program which has grown into the Black and Hispanic Achievers Program [later, Black and Latino Achievers] that Wardell Haywood and I in 1974 cofounded.  We had a chance Wardell and I, to go to the Harlem Y in New York [New York].  We went to the Waldorf Astoria [New York] to one of their big dinners, Black Achievers in Industry where they had major corporations honoring their black achievers in their companies.  And we saw that and we came back and we said we want to do that in Chicago [Illinois].  And so Wardell and I got with Mr. Stanton Cook of the [Chicago] Tribune.  And we also--he brought in the publisher of Tuesday Publications and we had our first black achievers in industry here in 1974.
Speaker 1: Now--okay, this is '74 [1974]?  But Tuesday Magazine once again was a supplement to the--
Speaker 2: Supplement to the Chicago Tribune.
Speaker 1: It was a black--
Speaker 2: Black, a black--
Speaker 1: --supplement.
Speaker 2: Black publication, yes it was.
Speaker 1: Right, highlighted the black community and what's going on.
Speaker 2: Highlighted the black community and events in the black community and it was national in scope.  It was a very fine, very fine publication.
Speaker 1: Is it out of publication now, completely?
Speaker 2: I think so.  I don't know if--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think it is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm almost sure it is.
Story_ID: 512837
Speaker 1: The childcare and the infant mortality reduction and the role modeling of black achievers, now black and Hispanic achievers, these were programs that were very significant within the scope of those things that I was involved in.  We also--when I got to the Duncan Y [YMCA, Young Men's Christian Association], I spent seventeen years at Duncan [in Chicago, Illinois].  But back in 1992, '93 [1993], we were in an executive committee meeting of the Duncan board and we were talking about all of the different programs and activities that we were gonna do at the Duncan Y.  And Barry Irvin [ph.], our administrative director, mentioned, well what are we gonna do for the girls?  You know, seems like some programs were kind of tilted more towards the boys.  And that's when we got involved with dance and we got involved with the dance center of Columbia College [Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and got some instructors out to start teaching dance.  And in 1993, we got involved with the Writer's Voice, which was--which is a program designed to help demystify the literary arts out in communities.  And we became the only Y in the city [Chicago, Illinois] to get the Writer's Voice program going.  We were the ninth Y in the country to deal with poetry and reading and writing and bringing attention to that.  And so we had those two disciplines, The Writer's Voice and the dance with Columbia College.  And we met with Dr. Woodie White one day, he was the executive director of Columbia College and he said, "Well Fred, why don't ya'll look at the other disciplines?  You know you have the dance and you have--why not look at the theatre, the drama and visual arts and do the whole arts thing, and music?"  And so we took Dr. Woodie White up on that and we developed the Duncan YMCA Chernin Center for the Arts.  And Chernin's because Don Lord of Chernin's shoes was chair of our board and the Harry Chernin's Foundation gave substantial dollars, lead gifts to help us towards raising three million dollars to add a 220 seat theatre, recording studio, a shoe box theatre to the Duncan YMCA.  The Duncan YMCA at 1001 W. Roosevelt Road was a 14,000 square foot facility with childcare and reading rooms.  We turned it into the Duncan YMCA Chernin Center for the Arts by adding on another 11,000 square feet, which included that 220 seat theatre and recording studio.  And--
Speaker 2: Chernin Shoes [Chernin's Shoe Outlet] just, I guess as a note is a huge shoe store on Roosevelt Road.
Speaker 1: Roosevelt Road, yes.
Speaker 2: In that area that specialized in discounted shoes and--
Speaker 1: Exactly.  Exactly and the leadership--
Speaker 2: --you know, huge volume service and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Yes, a fine distributor of shoes.  And the leadership there, Don Lord took a great interest in the community and because of that commitment of Don Lord and Myrna Lord and the Harry Chernin Foundation, we had the first YMCA to devote its entire programmatic thrust to the arts.  And with the Writer's Voice and with the theatre and the computer lab and the recording studio, we were able to engage youth in the community and adults in the arts.  Because I believe that the arts is probably one of the most important pieces of our culture and I think that everyone should be exposed to the arts.  And in developing that, we opened a lot of doors for artists to come in, to hire artists.  One of the key hires for us was a young lady name Ifa Bayeza who came in as our artistic director.  I like to say our arts and education director, but she was our artistic director and she gave some very fine leadership to some organic theatre to some creative pieces there which the center and the Y benefited from tremendously.  And so the leadership team there at Duncan, Barry Irvin and Ifa Bayeza and later on Pam Dickler who came in to give us leadership in our theatre productions and theatre classes have made an indelible print on not only arts in this community but arts throughout the YMCA.  And we were a part of the beginning of that whole arts movement in the Y prior to our getting involved with the Writer's Voice.
Story_ID: 512838
Speaker 1: A young man named Jason Shinder out of the West Side Y [YMCA, Young Men's Christian Association] in New York [New York] started the Writer's Voice and he was the individual that came here [Chicago, Illinois] and encouraged us to take the program on.  And now Jason Shinder is the director of the arts and humanities program for the YMCA of the USA.  So today there is a whole department of the arts in the YMCA and its peeking its head up all over this country in Ys everywhere, down in Montgomery, Alabama where [W.R.] Willie Jones is doing a wonderful job throughout the country.  In St. Louis [Missouri] they've had a theatre for a long time and arts is a big part of the YMCA programmatic thrust as you look at trends going into the future.  So we're pleased to be a part of that history and a part of that journey in the Duncan YMCA Chernin Center for the Arts [Chicago, Illinois].  It's made its mark and hopefully it will continue to serve youngsters and families throughout the Chicagoland [Illinois] area with arts and culture.
Story_ID: 512839
Speaker 1: Now one of the, I think one of the features of Chicago [Illinois] YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] life that's fairly popular on a recreational side is the YBA, Youth Basketball Association.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yes.  Yes indeed, the Youth Basketball Association where everybody gets a chance to play, youngsters have been involved in that to those shorties on through when they learn the skills and get a chance to play.  One of the big, one of the larger programs like the South Side YMCA, where they do a fantastic job out there with the YBA program with volunteers and parents.  They have their big banquet, they have hundreds and hundreds of youngsters--
Speaker 1: I think it's, Mau Mau Cason was also over there.
Speaker 2: Mau Mau Cason gives tremendous leadership to that along with the other staff there at the South Side YMCA.  Lefty, I'm trying to think of Lefty's name but he does one outstanding job there in keeping it organized and keeping the parents a part of.  And Gil Walker also does a lot of volunteering out there and, because Gil was in the Y at a point in time in his life and he always had a great affinity for that program.  And the Y is very grateful too, to all those individuals for helping to continue the Youth Basketball Association and to the flag football group that we have.  And of course, you have the swimming and the counseling and the Black and Hispanic Achievers Program [later, Black and Latino Achievers] which is a, sort of a mentoring and sharing program also.
Story_ID: 512840
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community in general?
Speaker 2: Well one of the big concerns right now is that we can get a handle on this whole education piece so that we will have our youngsters get into school and finish school and understand how important it is to complete their education.  The other bit is to get back to the family and see if we can bolster and lift up the family in our communities again.  And then there's the whole economic development piece of jobs and training and having expectations that individuals can get jobs and that people can learn and that our youngsters have expectations that they--they're expected to succeed.  And I think it's time to really take a look at our communities almost block by block.  Block by block, to more than just make assessments but to help bring resources from housing, from healthcare, education.  The social interactions that have to take place, but education is the key to helping not only the black community but all of the communities to move.  An educated community is a community that can work and share resources and I think that we have to, as blacks, help each other and reach back and help each other achieve and get a solid hold and help to solidify foundations and build new foundations so that we can grow and nurture our people.  It's hard sometimes to integrate if you don't have all of your part together.  You'll get usurped and swallowed up economically because I think we need to learn again how to spend our dollars with each other, how to share our resources with each other.  And I think one of the other pieces--and my father [Fred Matthews, Jr.] was a Baptist minister and--I mean my grandfather [Fred Matthews, Sr.] was a Baptist minister.  My father was a big Baptist lay person and I think it's important that the church continue its leadership but step it up a notch or two.  And I know that the churches are doing a good job with their parishioners and flocks and all but we need to utilize the church like we did in the old days.  The church was a central part.  You'd find out the news at church and you would help take care of the sick at church.  It wasn't just the pastor.  You would have the vacation Bible school that we were taught--just like we were taught in the public school, we--that was just like school in the summer really.  We learned things about the Bible and all but we also had some other rudimentary types of instructions that went on just because of the nature of the people.  The Tony Jacksons [ph.] and the Laura Burns [ph.] and the Naomi Whites [ph.], these were teachers and Mrs. Wicks [ph.] and all these were teachers, Ms. Annie Bell Davis [ph.], these were teachers that taught year round.  And you didn't have to sit in the classroom to learn from Ms. Potters [ph.], from Ms. Kent [ph.] or from Reverend Mayes [ph.] or Reverend Davis [ph.], Reverend Albert [ph.].  I mean, these were people that were teaching 24 hours a day, 365 days a year, and that's how we've grown.  That's how we've grown on the backs of that type of nurturing.  So today we have to continue doing that.  We owe it to our ancestors to continue to grow and to take individuals and grab them by the hand and say this is the way to go and this is what you need to do to prepare yourself.  And that's so important.  That's so important to me.  And I've spent my thirty-seven years with the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] helping and nurturing individuals.  I just--I don't know if I know how to do anything else but to help individuals achieve their dreams and their goals, and even help them set them and that's really important to me.  And I try to pass that on to others because the Southern Universities [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and the McKinley [Senior] High Schools [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and the Perkins Road Elementary [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and Valley Park [Elementary School, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and Magnolia [Baptist Church, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and Wesley [United Methodist Church, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], they're the sum total of my experiential bit.  And that's what I am right now as I go in retrospect, the sum total of that experiential bit.  And thank God for the people that I had an opportunity to come in contact with, Ms. Joan Marie Williams, Dr. Hewett Perkins [ph.], Dr. Valerian Smiths and Dr. Leo S. Butler, my father and my mother [Vivian Wills Matthews] and Nathalee Williams [ph.], my godmother.
Story_ID: 512841
Speaker 1: In terms of the YWCAs--
Speaker 2: The YMCAs.
Speaker 1: Oh I'm sorry, YMCAs.
Speaker 2: That's okay.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  Yeah I'm--
Speaker 2: People do that quite a bit.
Speaker 1: I--yeah but there is a difference in them.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: I shouldn't have said--known that.  But in terms of the YMCAs started off as the Young Men's Christian Association.  Some time, I mean especially today I know people wonder you know, if the Ys are still as involved in character development as they used to be.  I don't know if they you know, how you feel about that but I know, I was at a YBA [Youth Basketball Association] function once and someone said basketball reveals more character than it builds nowadays, you know.  But is there still an emphasis in the Y?  Do you all talk about values that--
Speaker 2: Yes we, yes we do.  We build strong kids, we build strong families and we build strong communities.  And we, we're concerned with honesty, integrity and character.  That is instilled in whether it's in the swimming class or whether it's the YBA or the Youth and Government Program, whether it's Black and Hispanic Achievers [later, Black and Latino Achievers] or whether it's a mentoring program, it's in preschool or it's in afterschool, this is a part of our whole modus operandi.  And it's crucial to the core of our programming and our core programming emphasizes whether it's the mentoring program or whatever, the whole building of character.  And sometimes you would think that you, you know, you want to get back to the high wire, try high wire this whole group work piece and I think we are--I think we're kind of moving towards that with Youth and Government as a group, Black and Hispanic Achievers, the programs that the young people are involved in and are mentored by these achievers are--that's a--it's a sense of group work, of grouping individuals around a common bond.  And I think that the YMCA is moving more and more towards that whole group work piece which is about building character and dealing with peers and peer pressure and exuding the fact that we want all of our children and families to succeed, yes.
Story_ID: 512842
Speaker 1: When you look back on your career, what would you consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, one is after spending thirty-seven years is that you can stick to one organization and meet some of your lifetime goals.  The other, as a black person in the Y [YMCA, Young Men's Christian Association], can show other young blacks coming along that there can be a future in the YMCA, a career, and that you can use the YMCA to get a lot of things done in your community.  And I think that coming down the stretch, getting people to understand that the arts is an integral part of life itself in that just about everything is about arts, writing, communicating.  The arts give more than just balance to life itself, it pulls people together whether it's a song in the morning or listening to the very articulate minister or art of speaking, listening to hip hop, that's the arts.  And the arts have a way of really affecting your life.  You don't have to be a great performer on stage but the arts has been proven that with young people that get involved with the arts that they're learning is enhanced tremendously in the early grades as they are utilizing the integration of arts into their curriculum.  So I think the arts piece and the role model piece and the opportunity to be a part of an institution like the YMCA for thirty-seven years, where else can you really meet Vice President [Hubert] Humphrey, Hillary Clinton and others?  It's a great institution.  I wouldn't trade it for anything.
