Story_ID: 222310
Speaker 1: My name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton, and I am the interviewer.  Matthew Hickey is the videographer, and Caesar [ph.]--Caesar, what's your last name?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Jackson [ph.].
Speaker 1: And Caesar Jackson is observing.  And this interview is taking place on Monday, December 13, 2004, in Washington, D.C.  Now, if you would please, for the record, please tell us your full name, including your middle name, and spell it.
Speaker 2: Evangeline Juliet Montgomery.  Evangeline is E-V-A-N-G-E-L-I-N-E, Juliet, J-U-L-I-E-T, Montgomery, M-O-N-T-G-O-M-E-R-Y.  And I'm known as E.J. Montgomery, capital E, capital J.
Speaker 1: Thank you.  And you would you please tell us the date and location of your birth?
Speaker 2: May 2, 1933, New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, and your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an arts administrator.
Story_ID: 222311
Speaker 1: Now the next couple of questions are some People magazine-ish type questions that just will help us get familiar with the process, so I ask you to give me short answers to this one, these questions.  Would you please share with us your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I guess it's salmon.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: April.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yellow.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: California.
Speaker 1: And your favorite--
Speaker 2: Northern California.
Speaker 1: Northern California.  Your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't think I really have one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 222312
Speaker 1: Let's begin talking about your mother, starting with your mother's name, and where she was born, and where she grew up as a girl.
Speaker 2: Her name was Carmelite Anna Teresa Thompson, was her married name.  And she was born in Washington, D.C., and remained here until her late teens.
Speaker 1: And did she ever share with you any stories about what life was like for her as a girl growing up in Washington?
Speaker 2: Well, it was segregated and even to the church that she attended, which was a Catholic church.  And she stayed away from here.  She never brought me to Washington.  We traveled to other places but not to Washington, D.C.  It seemed like when she left, she left that whole life behind her.  And it wasn't until sen--President [John Fitzgerald] Kennedy's funeral march, we were watching it, and she mentioned a few little things about Washington.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what she mentioned?
Speaker 2: Well, she said she lived ten blocks from the White House [Washington, D.C.] and just a little about her school.  She was raised in a Catholic school I think and went as far as the eighth grade.
Speaker 1: And how was it that she ended up in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: She had a daughter by a previous marriage I think, who was much, much older than I, and we went to live with her, and she divorced her husband.
Speaker 1: So, did she leave Washington, D.C., as a teenager?
Speaker 2: Yes, in her late teens.
Speaker 1: And where did she go when she left Washington, D.C., in her late teens?
Speaker 2: My understanding is, is that she went to Newark [New Jersey], in and around the Newark area, in Jersey.
Speaker 1: Did she have family there?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what did she do in Newark?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: And how would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: Well, she was very kind person, warm, friendly, and very religious.
Speaker 1: And did she go to Mass every day back at the--
Speaker 2: Well, as an adult, she took on another religion.  But I think even at one time she thought in terms of being a nun.
Speaker 1: And how did she meet your father [Oliver Paul Thompson]?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I think that they met in New Jersey.  And he was a minister, a Baptist minister.
Story_ID: 222313
Speaker 1: And let's talk a little bit about your father now, starting with his name.
Speaker 2: Oliver Paul Thompson.
Speaker 1: And he was a Baptist minister?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Where did he grow up as a boy?
Speaker 2: Well, he was born in Canada, and I think some of the time we spent in Canada.  And I know that he was in Virginia and South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Did he ever talk about his childhood in Canada?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember any of that.
Speaker 1: And what--
Speaker 2: He actually passed away in Canada.  He divorced my mother [Carmelite Thompson] and went back to Canada.
Speaker 1: What did your mother do for a living?
Speaker 2: She was a housewife and then she was, became a housekeeper.  In, and in Boston [Massachusetts] in the, from 1950 until she passed, she was in charge of a organizational home that rented rooms and had events.  It was called the War Mothers' Home [ph.].
Speaker 1: And how would you describe your father?
Speaker 2: Well, he was very progressive I think as a minister.  And he had small churches.  He created lots of activity for young people in his churches.
Speaker 1: Is that why you said he was progressive?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.  And I remember the church had a pool table, and kids or young people could come there in the summer and after school-- play on the pool table.  He also had a habit of--turning the whole church membership into a choir.  And because we lived in predominantly white communities, often he took the church as a choir to participate in programs in other churches.
Speaker 1: And so did he, did he move from church, from various churches or--did he spend most of his time at one particular church?
Speaker 2: No, he moved to several churches.
Speaker 1: All in the Newark [New Jersey], New York area?
Speaker 2: New York, Boston, and Ohio.
Speaker 1: And did you live in all of those places?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 222314
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit now about your grandparents.  Did you spend--
Speaker 2: I don't know anything about any grandparents.  I was an adopted child, in that the state contacted the church, the authorities did contact the black church in Massachusetts, in Newton--West Newton, Massachusetts, and asked them to take or find a home for this child, which was me--
Speaker 1: Do you know how old--
Speaker 2: --and it ended up, they ended up taking me themselves.
Speaker 1: Do you know how old you were at the time?
Speaker 2: I was about a year.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. And did, did you ever know like what happened to your biological parents?
Speaker 2: No, I, and I also made up my mind when I was quite young that I was not going to engage--myself in finding and being a part of another family.
Speaker 1: Why did you make that decision?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I just decided that that was my family and that was the way I was gonna do it.  I was part of that family, and I didn't care to know too much about the other.  I found out some few little things, which I don't care to discuss now.  But I accepted them and they me.
Story_ID: 222315
Speaker 1: Tell me what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember being in West Newton, Massachusetts.  I remember a house that was a fairly large house that we lived in that had a porch that went around three sides and my riding a tricycle around that, things like that.
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about what holidays were like in your house growing up?  Were they very special occasions?
Speaker 2: Well, I imagine so.  When you're involved with a church and a Baptist church, you're always going to church.  And so, much of your activity may be at church or in other people's homes.  But because we lived in small towns, we had some very interesting visitors to our home.
Speaker 1: Do you remember some of them?
Speaker 2: Well, people like Mrs. Bethune, Mary McLeod Bethune, people of that caliber, because oftentimes there was no hotel or place that would really accept them--
Speaker 1: And do you--
Speaker 2: --and so they became our houseguests.
Speaker 1: Do you remember her when she came to your house?  What, what was she like?
Speaker 2: No, I don't really remember her too much, except that when my mother [Carmelite Thompson] became single, and we were in her company one time.  She said that she'd like to take me back to her school and get me educated in that, that setting.
Speaker 1: What did your mother think of that?
Speaker 2: Well, I think she sort of played with the idea, but I don't think that she wanted to let me go. She needed my company as much as I needed her--
Story_ID: 222316
Speaker 1: So what were like Christmas and Thanksgiving like in your house growing up?
Speaker 2: I remember that I had almost everything I ever wanted; whatever I asked for I got.
Speaker 1: And did your mother [Carmelite Thompson] cook like a really big meal on Thanksgiving?
Speaker 2: My mother was an excellent cook, and she did, you know, have dinners and groups of people--but I don't necessarily remember a specific holiday or something like that--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --but her, she had lots of serving utensils and things like that too, too.
Speaker 1: And did you grow up an only child?  Were you an only child?
Speaker 2: Yes, I lived in a home as an only child, although my mother had a daughter who was much older than me and almost too--could have been my grandmother, you know, 'cause these were older parents that I had.  And my father [Oliver Thompson] had two young men who were related to him in some way that he was rearing, was responsible for their growth and development.  And so that's, that's three adults that were much older than me that I came in contact with. Well the two men that had children after they married.  And their children were all older than me.  So they each had a boy and a girl.  And I have some relationship with one member of that family now.
Story_ID: 222317
Speaker 1: I know you said that you all moved several times growing up, but is there like a particular community that you would call home?  What community would you call home?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think of any of my early years as a particular community that I'm attached to for any reason, more on my adult life in my favorite city, San Francisco [California].
Speaker 1: Can you describe one of the communities that you grew up in for us though?
Speaker 2: Well, Westerly, Rhode Island, was a small town not too far from military base.  And there were very few blacks there.  But in the summer, a number of blacks come into the area to work in the large hotels--a beach resort area and homes.  And I remember that place very well--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --and going to the beach.
Speaker 1: And what was the community like?  Was it mainly a residential community or--
Speaker 2: Yes, a residential community.  And much of their--well, it may have been two or three industrial plants outside of Westerly.  But there were very few blacks.  And another place was Wooster, Ohio.
Speaker 1: Woister [sic.], Ohio?
Speaker 2: Wooster.
Speaker 1: Wooster.
Speaker 2: Wooster, Ohio.
Speaker 1: What's that near?
Speaker 2: It's a college town near, not too far from Akron [Ohio].  And there again, there were not that many blacks, and so you become, everything is kind of centered around the black church--
Speaker 1: And you--
Speaker 2: --for the black people--
Speaker 1: And you all were there--
Speaker 2: --or African American, however you want to--
Speaker 1: --because your father [Oliver Thompson] had gotten a job--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --as pastor of the local church?
Speaker 2: Right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 222318
Speaker 1: Can you tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the ocean, beach was something that, place that I always enjoyed going to, near water and popcorn.
Speaker 1: Why does popcorn remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that going to resort areas and amusement parks.
Speaker 1: Do you have any other memories of growing up that you'd like to share?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that I, I acquired interesting friends, young friends my age.  But most of them in those communities were white, and I sometimes had my feelings hurt, like the class party, someone having a birthday party and my not being invited.  The whole class was invited.  So I had to learn to deal with situations like that quite young.  Or going into a hamburger joint to get a hamburger, and they packaged mine in a bag, and my girlfriend's was on a plate, you know.  So, those are I guess the bad situations in life like that, personalities I remember more as a youth.  But as a teenager I moved to New York City [New York, New York], and life was quite different there.
Story_ID: 222319
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about elementary school.  What was the name of the first--
Speaker 2: I don't remember the name.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, do you remember any of your elementary school teachers?
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: --just junior high.
Speaker 1: So, let me ask you this, though, but during those years, like the elementary school years, do you remember what type of child you were during those type, during the, that time frame?
Speaker 2: I think I was interested in just a lot of things.  I take that back.  I did live in Cleveland, Ohio, before going to New York [New York], and I was still in elementary school.  And I remember one teacher (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What was his or her name?
Speaker 2: His name was Mr. Love [ph.], and he was a science teacher.  I just remember I liked scientific things.
Speaker 1: So, now, during elementary school were you starting to develop your artistic talent?
Speaker 2: Yes, probably in a sense I, I was, I did, in that I played with dolls and paper dollars and things like that a lot.  And I made clothing.  I drew clothing for the paper dolls, things like that.
Speaker 1: And during elementary school, those years, did you have dreams and aspirations?  What did you think you'd be when you grew up?
Speaker 2: Well, I was sickly, and I thought of being a doctor.  I don't know that I thought about or can remember too many other--
Speaker 1: What kind of ailment did you have?  You said you were sickly.
Speaker 2: Well, tonsils and things like that that happen to kids, but it--that was it, problems with my throat.
Speaker 1: Sure, sure--
Story_ID: 222320
Speaker 1: Can you kind of talk a little bit about your family's experiences in church?
Speaker 2: Well, as I said--in a Baptist church, in a small church, you tend to take part in a lot of activities.  And in a town [West Newton, Massachusetts] where there's little amusement facilities and what not, you're, you're involved in church activities more, so and everyone in the town is.
Speaker 1: So were you, did you all, did you go to Sunday school and then--
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I went to, I was in church all day Sunday.  And even as a very little tot, I was forced to stay in church.  And I know one thing, I did not want people to kiss me.  The little old ladies used to hug me and what not.
Speaker 1: What was it like growing up having your father [Oliver Thompson] as a minister?  Was that tough?  Were you still able to do a lot of the things that your other friends did?  Or what was that like?
Speaker 2: Well, I think people are always watching you when you're in the, in--when you're family or have some prominent situation within the community.  I remember us visiting some friends, and I went out in the yard to sort to play by myself.  And I saw a hammer, and I picked up the hammer and started breaking all these, what do you call it, the, they're connected with the house, the wood, instead of wood, it's, they're little boards that are attached together.  Well, I can't think of the name right now.
Speaker 1: I can't either.
Speaker 2: But they're kind of, kind of like a slate or something.  And I just took the hammer and went all the way around the, the house and broke those things.
Speaker 1: Did you get caught?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I really got in trouble.  But the minister's daughter did this or the priest's daughter, you know.  And so people came to tell the owners of that house that I had done it.
Story_ID: 222321
Speaker 1: Were you ever lonely as a child, growing up as an only child?
Speaker 2: No, I seemed to know how to amuse myself.  I had soldiers, so I constantly would set up a, a battle with the soldiers.  They were like lead soldiers.  I had lots of dolls, and I played with those for hours by myself.  I read a little too.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite doll?
Speaker 2: Yes, I had a Sonja Henie doll, and I had some black dolls that were very beautiful and played with them a lot.  I was interested in athletic things and--
Speaker 1: What kinds of athletics?
Speaker 2: --I, well, I ended up doing a lot of roller, roller skating in roller skating rinks and whatnot by the time I was ten.
Speaker 1: And what other things did you like to do in your spare time?
Speaker 2: That, playing with other kids.  I played a lot.
Speaker 1: Did you always, was it easy for you to make friends, because--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you'd move so often, so you'd just make new friends and--
Speaker 2: Yes, I never felt that I couldn't attract friends.
Story_ID: 222322
Speaker 1: During the junior high school years, what were some of your dreams and aspirations at this time in your life?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I think I became very interested in skating, and I wanted to do more of that; I think seeing movies with swimmers like Esther Williams, people like that; I also wanted to swim and did do a lot of swimming by the time I was in high school [Seward Park High School, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: And do you remember the name of the junior high school you attended?
Speaker 2: P.S. 43 in New York [New York].
Speaker 1: So, how old--
Speaker 2: --and before that, in Cleveland, Ohio, was Old Central [Central Junior High School, Cleveland, Ohio].
Speaker 1: How old were you before you moved to New York, when you moved to New York?
Speaker 2: I moved to New York I was about thirteen.
Speaker 1: And is this when your parents [Carmelite Thompson and Oliver Thompson] divorced?
Speaker 2: Yes, they had.
Speaker 1: And why did you all move, you and your mother move to New York?  Oh, you moved with your sister.
Speaker 2: Yes, their daughter.
Speaker 1: And what was it like living in New York?
Speaker 2: Well, it was quite different because I lived in an apartment building, you know, with people stacked high.  And I lived in, in Harlem [New York, New York].  I was very close to a park, and that was nice.  But life was just quite different in New York.
Speaker 1: And was your mother's daughter very receptive to you all coming to live with her?
Speaker 2: Yes, she wanted us to.  And she was a recent divorcee also.
Speaker 1: Did she have children?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And what kind of work did she do?
Speaker 2: Well, she was rather artistic herself.  And she was, she knitted clothing, women's clothing, and much of the work was done in the home.
Story_ID: 222323
Speaker 1: And when you were in junior high school [P.S. 43, New York, New York], what was happening with your artistic talent?  Were you, was it really starting to blossom at this point, or--
Speaker 2: Well, I was being encouraged by teachers.  And by the time I was fourteen, my mother [Carmelite Thompson] did give me an oil painting set, which I'm sure I asked for.
Speaker 1: Well, how did you like oil, oil paint?
Speaker 2: I liked it.  I did all kinds of things, mostly painting landscapes.
Speaker 1: And did, did you think, wow, I'm pretty good at this?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes.
Speaker 1: And when did you--during the junior high school years, did you begin thinking perhaps I can do this as a career, or did that come later?
Speaker 2: No, it came later.  I don't think I--by the time I was in high school [Seward Park High School, New York, New York] I knew that I could rely on the art to boost my grades or, or get ahead with other people by doing posters or things like that.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your friends in junior high school?
Speaker 2: I had one, one friend.  Her name is Loretta Kelly [ph.], and we were in the eighth grade together.  She lives in the Los Angeles [California] area.
Speaker 1: And what kinds of things did you all do together?
Speaker 2: Mostly just classroom activities.  We all ate lunch in the same drug store every day.
Speaker 1: Were you influenced by any particular teachers in junior high school?
Speaker 2: Not especially, but I did have an art teacher.  I can't think of her name right now and so, something like Feinstein [ph.] or something--who began to save my work, some of my art pieces, so that she was trying to encourage me to go to the High School of Music & Art [Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York] in New York.
Story_ID: 222324
Speaker 1: What was the name of the high school you attended?
Speaker 2: Seward Park High School in New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Could you spell it please?
Speaker 2: S-E-W-A-R-D.
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like in high school?
Speaker 2: Well, I was very active, and people were attracted to me.  And I was involved in politics in the school, and cheerleader, swimming, teaching swimming, assisting the swimming teacher, played basketball--basketball team.
Speaker 1: And student government, you said?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now was this a--high school for students with an art talent?
Speaker 2: No, but they had more art classes there than, than the normal schools.  But I didn't--
Speaker 1: What kind--
Speaker 2: --go to the Music & Art high school [High School of Music & Art; Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: How come you didn't go to the Music & Art high school?
Speaker 2: My mother [Carmelite Thompson] I think sort of didn't feel that I would get a complete education to, to allow me to say go to college or something like that if I went to--I think maybe she saw it as, like a trade school or something, which they did have those in New York, too.  But it offered some of the activities that I wanted, and it also had a very diverse student body, which was interesting 'cause it was down in the Bowery in New York near Chinatown [New York, New York], the Jewish community, and the Italian community, people from Harlem [New York, New York].  It was an unzoned school.  At that time they had zone schools in New York.
Speaker 1: So is this the arts and music school or Seward Park?
Speaker 2: Seward Park.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm. What were some of the art classes that you took at Seward Park?
Speaker 2: Just drawing, and painting, and textile printing.
Speaker 1: And at this particular time in high school, were you beginning to work with other art mediums?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What mediums were you working with?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't, don't recall too much other than the textile printing.
Speaker 1: And do you remember some of your teachers from high school?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I don't remember many of their names or--
Speaker 1: Who was influencing you at this particular time in your life?
Speaker 2: My mother.
Speaker 1: And what were you thinking that you wanted to do with your life?  What were you thinking you wanted to be when you grew up?
Speaker 2: I don't think that I really had a definite desire to carry through in any particular field.  I was interested in the art, but it, I didn't think I wanted to be a teacher or something like that.
Speaker 1: And what were some--
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: --what were some of your thoughts about college?
Speaker 2: I'd hoped that I could go to college, but I didn't know whether I could because--it would depend on me having a scholarship.  My mother was single and would have to--was getting elderly at that time, and I wasn't sure that she could afford to help me get through college.
Story_ID: 222325
Speaker 1: When your parents [Carmelite Thompson and Oliver Thompson] divorced, did you still have a lot of contact with your father?
Speaker 2: No, none.
Speaker 1: None.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What was that like (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He moved to Canada.
Speaker 1: Did you ever go to visit him there?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: What was that like for you, not having contact with him?
Speaker 2: Well, I think after moving to a big city [New York, New York], many young people didn't have two parents.  So, I didn't give it a lot of thought, just went on.
Speaker 1: And what was your social life like in high school [Seward Park High School, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: It was very good.  I attended everything, parties and things like that.
Speaker 1: Did you date?
Speaker 2: Yeah, sort of, but I think I was more carried away with being cheerleader then--you know, it was group activity.
Speaker 1: So, you're about to graduate from high school.  What's happening on the college front at this particular time?
Speaker 2: I didn't go to college at that time.
Speaker 1: So what year did you graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: In 1951.
Story_ID: 222326
Speaker 1: And what did you do after you graduated from [Seward Park] High School [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: I went to, shortly after that, I went to Massachusetts.  My mother [Carmelite Thompson] and I moved there.
Speaker 1: Why did you all move to Massachusetts?
Speaker 2: Well, we, it was suggested by these two brothers that she had also helped rear, that we get out of the city, and we did.
Speaker 1: And what part of Massachusetts did you move to?
Speaker 2: Well, we lived in Boston [Massachusetts] in the winter and in the summer we were down in Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: And how did you enjoy Massachusetts?
Speaker 2: It was fine.
Speaker 1: And what, what did you do there for work?
Speaker 2: I worked in the statuary business--painting religious statuary.
Speaker 1: So were you, what, was that a job that you sought out so that you could use your art talent?
Speaker 2: Well, it was something that came, became available, and I tried out for it and got it.
Speaker 1: Did you enjoy that?
Speaker 2: Yes and no.  It was not the cleanest atmosphere to be in and the, not the healthiest atmosphere.
Story_ID: 222327
Speaker 1: And what was happening with your art talent at this particular time?  Were you starting to think that perhaps you could make a career out of being an artist at this time?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Even before I left New York [New York] I worked in the--in the industry, so to speak, painting dolls' masks, faces.  And between the two different jobs, I got experience with working with all kinds of material and was using very fine delicate brushes and things, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Had you ever been exposed to those types of brushes--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --before?
Speaker 2: I'd not thought of ever buying one, a brush with two or three hairs on it.  And I never even, all the while I was playing with dolls and whatnot, I don't think I looked at their eyes, or the mouth, or (laughter) anything or vision--envisioned myself painting the lips.
Speaker 1: And how long did you stay at the company where you painted religious statues?
Speaker 2: Well, I worked for two different companies and, in the Boston [Massachusetts] area, and I did that for a couple of years.
Speaker 1: So, like from 1951 to 1953?
Speaker 2: Yes, well, by 1954 I moved to California.
Speaker 1: And what prompted--
Speaker 2: And I, I even did some freelance painting of religious statuary when I went to California.
Speaker 1: And what prompted the move to California?
Speaker 2: My husband.
Speaker 1: So you got married in Boston?
Speaker 2: I got married in Boston.
Speaker 1: How did you meet your husband?
Speaker 2: Well, he was in college and you know, just running around with the crowd.
Speaker 1: What college did he attend?
Speaker 2: MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: And was he from the Boston area?
Speaker 2: No, he was from New York.
Speaker 1: And so you all, so what year did you get married?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-two [1952].
Story_ID: 222328
Speaker 1: So you moved to California in 1954.  What part of California?
Speaker 2: Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: And what were you doing in Los Angeles in 1954?
Speaker 2: Well, I, when I first got there I painted some religious statuary, and then by 1955 I had started college.
Speaker 1: And where did you start college?
Speaker 2: Los Angeles City College [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: What was that like for you?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a great experience.  I registered as an art major and didn't have any art--
Speaker 1: Why did you decide--
Speaker 2: --the first year.
Speaker 1: Why did you decide to register as an art major?
Speaker 2: Well, I had been involved with art.  In fact--before attending City College, I went to an arts and crafts center, which was run like a school.
Speaker 1: And did you think at this particular time that--had you began working with other mediums?  Like what did you think you were going to do with your art degree?
Speaker 2: Yes, I worked with other mediums when I went to the craft center.  I began enameling, making jewelry, and actually worked in the jewelry field for a while in a big factory-like setup, but working with enamels on jewelry, on silver.
Speaker 1: Were there other, were there many African Americans in that particular industry?
Speaker 2: Well, it just so happens there were two that were designers that worked for two different companies, and I went to work with one of them, in one of the companies and, until I went to college.
Story_ID: 222329
Speaker 1: And were you able to design some of your own jewelry?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did--what kinds of things did you design?
Speaker 2: Well, I stuck to the enamels.  And when I talk about enamels, I'm talking about fire powder glass onto a metal surface that's done at a very high temperature.
Speaker 1: Let's take a break for a second.
Speaker 2: (BRIEF INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: What kinds of jewelry did you design?
Speaker 2: Well, the pendants, earrings, cufflinks, and usually using round or rectangular shapes less than an inch in size, about the size of a quarter.  But the designs made in the enamel were bright colors and very intricate design.
Speaker 1: Can you kind of describe for us how you work with enamel and how you create a design out of enamel?
Speaker 2: Well, as I mentioned, it, the enamel itself is in a powder form.  And when you mix it with a, a gum-like mixture, you can adhere it to a surface and as long as there's no air conditioning blowing it around and whatnot.  It, it'll dry, and it'll harden and just stay where you put it.  And then it's sent or placed in a kiln at a very high temperature--a very short time, one minute.
Speaker 1: And then what happens after that?
Speaker 2: And you take it out and clean it, and you can either put more enamel on it or clean it, and it's a finished piece.
Speaker 1: And you had mentioned there were two--
Speaker 2: You can mix colors too.  And when they fire, it's like a grains of sugar, if you can think of that, and wetting it and patting it down.
Speaker 1: You had mentioned that there were two African American designers [in the jewelry field].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Do you remember their names?
Speaker 2: Yes, one was Curtis Tan [ph.].  He worked for Sascha Brastoff in Los Angeles [California].  He's deceased now.  And the one that I was working under was Thomas Usher, and he worked for J.A. Meyer and Company, which in both cases these were very large factories with a number of people working, but working at other types of materials and things.  And the, both of them came out of Cleveland, Ohio, which is quite a center for enamels.
Story_ID: 222330
Speaker 1: And when you began attending L.A. City College [Los Angeles City College, Los Angeles, California], what was college life like for you?  But you were--were you different from most of the other students because you were married?
Speaker 2: Yes, but Los Angeles City College was like a community college, and you had a lot of older students there, people who had served in wars, whatnot, were coming back.  And the art building at that time had all kinds of visual arts, plastic arts, but it also had the music department.  And so you had this combination of people in the arts hanging out around that building together.
Speaker 1: And what other mediums did you begin working with when you were in college?
Speaker 2: Well, I took all of the general art classes that one can take, from basic design classes, graphic design, weaving, textiles, printing, painting, ceramics.
Speaker 1: Did you start to develop a favorite?
Speaker 2: Yes, because I had had the experience with the metal, enameling, I want--I knew that I wanted to do more in the way of--designing metal objects, enjoy, and I worked towards that, also in ceramics and weaving.  The three areas were equally as important to me, although I took many other kinds of courses in the arts.  And I maintained an interest in the studio art area.  I left City College and went to Los Angeles State--Cal State University [California State University, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] in Los Angeles.  And I purposely selected that school because there was a very import metal smith person there that I wanted to study with.  His name--
Speaker 1: Who was--
Speaker 2: --was Hudson Roysher, and he taught metalsmithing, which is raising and forging bow shapes, silverware, teapots, whatnot.  So my classmates were making all kinds of things in bowls this big around.
Speaker 1: What were some of the first things you made?
Speaker 2: Well, I made jewelry first, and I did a number of enamel plaques.  The equipment was there.  In fact, I showed other people how to use it.
Speaker 1: And wa- was it the same equipment that you had described to us earlier?  Was it the same process?
Speaker 2: Yes, the same process.  But, but I quickly got into the raising and forging, of making bow shapes, which I enjoyed.  It took, it's quite involved and quite long process to work--
Speaker 1: How is it--
Speaker 2: --to get a complete object.
Speaker 1: How is it different from the enameling, like the jewelry?
Speaker 2: Well, that, the enameling is quick, and, and chance getting a successful design or image.  But with the metal, you're moving the metal, heating it and moving it with, by using a hammer mostly.  And for every inch you move, you move it back and forth and both, so to speak, and it's quite involved.
Speaker 1: It sounds very physical too.
Speaker 2: Yes, but I continued to work in metal, not doing the raising and forging but casting and making wax molds and developing it in that way now.
Speaker 1: And so you earned your degree.
Speaker 2: Yes, I, but not at that time.  It was, I dropped out for a while, traveled some with my husband, and finally went back to California College of Arts and Crafts [California College of the Arts] in Oakland [California].
Speaker 1: And that's where you earned your bachelor of fine arts degree?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what year was that?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-nine [1969].
Story_ID: 222331
Speaker 1: And then you went to the University of California at Berkeley [Berkeley, California]?
Speaker 2: Yes, and at the same time taking some courses in African literature.
Speaker 1: So, during this time, what were you thinking that you were going to do career-wise?
Speaker 2: The one thing I would like to say that--when I was at Los Angeles State [California State University, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], I thought that I might go into teaching art.  And I was discouraged by doing that because I was told that they were cutting out all of the arts in the school system, and I was wasting my time.  So I did take a few education courses, art education, but I just continued to take all the studio classes that I could there.  And they had excellent equipment, very good, well-known faculty.  And by the time I went to California College of Arts and Crafts [California College of the Arts, Oakland, California] I was way ahead of other students in most everything, area that I had to still take courses in for credits to get the degree, so--
Story_ID: 222332
Speaker 1: When you traveled with your husband, some of those travels took you to Nigeria--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --correct?  What did you think about the art there, and just what were some of your impressions?
Speaker 2: Well, I was very impressed with the art.  The first trip, I didn't really get to know artists, but I went back and stayed a much longer time, and I got to know most of the leading artists of Nigeria at the time, which was 1965.
Speaker 1: How was their craft different from what was going on in the U.S.?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was very different.  I think we were into abstracting things, experimental mixtures, and they kind of stuck to one material.
Speaker 1: So was it a little bit more crude there in terms of--
Speaker 2: No, I wouldn't say crude, because their history in the arts is quite long, much longer than ours in America.  So, I was seeing all of the traditional art forms.  And some of the artists were trained in that and also trained in Europe.  But there were a number of artists that went to Russia, and they, they were more cubistic in their shapes, and subject matter was more like the Herron [School of Art and Design, Indiana University Purdue University Indianapolis, Indianapolis, Indiana]--[Joseph Van] Sickle theme.
Speaker 1: And was it, what kind of job did your husband have?  Did his job take him to Nigeria?
Speaker 2: Well, he was there on business for himself, and he did finally teach at the university.
Speaker 1: What university?
Speaker 2: Yaba Technical College [sic. Yaba College of Technology, Lagos, Nigeria] really.
Speaker 1: In Nigeria?
Speaker 2: In Nigeria--Lagos. Teaching engineering.
Story_ID: 222333
Speaker 1: When you came back to the [United] States [from Nigeria], what were you thinking about how were you going to incorporate your art into your career after you had earned your degree?
Speaker 2: Well, I, after I earned the degree, I immediately got involved with organizing exhibitions and--
Speaker 1: Can you tell us what an ex--
Speaker 2: --as soon as that happened, I knew that I was going to try to work in museums.
Speaker 1: What's an--exhibition?  How would you define that?
Speaker 2: A fine arts exhibition, painting, sculpture.
Speaker 1: But what is an exhibition, for those who don't know.
Speaker 2: A collection of--art forms generally taking on a specific theme and being shown and exhibited together in an institution, gallery, museum.
Speaker 1: And so you decided that you wanted to be involved in museums and--exhibitions.  Were there many African Americans in this particular aspect of art at this time?
Speaker 2: Not too many in, in the museum work.  Museums are very interesting in that any kind of position that you can think of in the corporate world or whatnot, you find them in museums, the same slot, and except the exhibition person, curator, who organizes the exhibitions.  And at the time that I got involved with that work was just in the place that I was living in the [San Francisco] Bay Area [California] was the beginning of the black studies movement.  And my career parallels that, because in most cases, the students that were demanding black studies were demanding a festival week or a festival month, and with that, they wanted art.  They didn't know what kind of arts they wanted, but they wanted art shown.  And also you, you have a development of history exhibitions--historical exhibitions--and I've been involved with both art and historical exhibits.
Story_ID: 222334
Speaker 1: Is coordinating an exhibition, is it difficult getting all the pieces and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --can you just kind of explain how you coordinate it?
Speaker 2: Well, I'll take one exhibit--for instance, it was the life work of one artist, Sargent Johnson, Sargent Claude Johnson, who is a very important African American sculptor, developing in the '30s [1930s] and coming forward and dying in '67 [1967].  He works in sculpture.  He works in wood, stone, metal, and he also did enameling, which attracted me to him.  He--his work is found all throughout the [San Francisco] Bay Area [California], in public art as well as private collections.  And he's supported by sale of his art to, by wealthy people.  He also took part in--exhibitions in the area where you don't find that stage in '30s [1930s] and '40s [1940s].  You don't find African Americans involved in exhibitions, presenting their work in group shows, but he did.  And he's active in the WBA [ph.] and other situations like that.  So he's a very interesting life to record and look at.  And the work, some of his works are in museum collections and mostly in the Bay Area.  So it was easy to kind of pull his life history together and his art.
Story_ID: 222335
Speaker 1: And at the time when the black studies explosion was taking place, what impact do you think that had on African American artists?
Speaker 2: Well, it was great for them because it began to open new doors for them.  For instance, I did exhibitions.  I organized exhibitions for all the colleges in and around the [San Francisco] Bay Area [California] and some in Southern California even.  I was able to bring artists from Southern California into exhibitions in Northern California.  I also decided that if I was asked to do a show in a university setting or something like that, that I would try to get an artist from outside of the area as a guest artist as part of the show.  For instance, I did an exhibition at Stanford University [Stanford, California] on printmaking.  And I invited an artist from Boston [Massachusetts], Calvin Burnett, who is a famous printmaker, and had a dozen of his pieces as part of the show, so that I as introducing a new name, new style, someone who had reached heights in, in that particular medium.
Speaker 1: And were you finding that only African Americans were interested in African American artists?
Speaker 2: No, in California it was truly accepted by everybody in that they came to see.  And if, if coordinated in the right way, the, lot of publicity and whatnot, everybody came to see.  Now, whether in museums and whatnot, you're not necessarily selling works of art. So--
Speaker 1: You're just showing them.
Speaker 2: Just showing and giving people a history, and a background, and also offering an opportunity to look at abstract work, to look at images of themselves, to look at quality art, new technology, things like that.
Story_ID: 222336
Speaker 1: So, let's talk a little bit about from nineteen--in 1968 you became a curator for the Rainbow Sign Gallery in Berkeley [California].  Can you tell us a little bit about what your responsibilities were as a curator?
Speaker 2: Well, the year was wrong.  That was--'70 [1970], '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sixty-eight [1968] I was working with the Oakland Museum [of California, Oakland, California].
Speaker 1: Okay, as a consultant?
Speaker 2: As a consultant--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --again.
Speaker 1: On ethnic--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --art?
Speaker 2: Yes, on ethnic--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --art, primarily African American and selecting and curating one, at least one exhibition a year for them on African American art, but also advising the other curators who, if they selected a specific subject, say landscape painting, if I knew of an African American that was a landscape painter who was worthy of looking at to, to possibly include in a particular show.  So I would make recommendations like that.
Speaker 1: And did you feel like, do you--really wanted to make sure every opportunity you got, you were able to showcase an African American artist?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Well, that, that was my aim.  And my direction in life I felt was to try to help African Americans progress in the field of art, opening as many doors as possible for them, and encourage them, create a market for their art.
Speaker 1: And so you left the Rainbow Sign Gallery.
Speaker 2: Well, the Rainbow Sign Gallery was--it was a private membership club in Berkeley where several ladies had gotten together and bought a funeral parlor which was two or three buildings.  And it was set up for black cultural entertainment, and I did exhibitions there.  So it was a black center for the arts, and they had constant lectures and performance, political meetings, things of that sort at the Rainbow Sign.  But you could always find art there.  And for seven years I created exhibitions for them and programs in the visual arts.
Story_ID: 222337
Speaker 1: And from there [Rainbow Sign Gallery, Berkeley, California] you went to Nashville [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: In Nashville, I went to work for the American Association for State and Local History.  And it's an organization that kind of services historical museums, historic sites, and--historians are members of that.  It's a national organization.  And what I was involved in was creating a workshop.  I did eight workshop programs around the country, regional work--
Speaker 1: What kind of workshops?
Speaker 2: --on interpreting the humanities through museum exhibits.  And the people that attended the workshop were--went through a selection process to get into the workshop.  And they were small, twenty-five people, and they were either curators or directors of museums around the country.  And these workshops were regional.  So, that was quite an experience and very rewarding, because whenever the workshop was held in a specific city, we went to every museum or exhibition site in that city.  For instance, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] had something like seventy museums, and we went to all of them, you know, with bus tours, lectures, things like that.
Speaker 1: And were you meeting African American artists all along the way?
Speaker 2: Very few.  This was historical material, so I was, but I was looking for them.  In fact, the first workshop was held in the African American Museum in Philadelphia [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  They were the hosts, but that didn't mean that they attended.
Speaker 1: Um-hm. Right, I see.
Speaker 2: They were not registered in to the workshop.  They kind of sat in on some sessions, some of their staff.  But it was unfortunate, because if you, to be registered in the workshop you also had to do an exhibit in your home museum as part of taking part in the workshop, and that was evaluated.  So, it was an interesting experience, and I met an awful lot of people in the museum field.
Story_ID: 222338
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about your work with the Association of African American Museums.
Speaker 2: Well, I worked with them creating a similar program [as the American Association for State and Local History].
Speaker 1: But for African American artists.
Speaker 2: For African American artists and museum people.  And only one national program was held that I coordinated, but it was quite valuable experience for, for those that attended.  And I shared everything that I had gotten from the other experience, which is part of what I'm about, in that I've had opportunities to mingle and mix and be in specific situations in the museum field.  And I try to share as much of this information as I can with African Americans and other diverse cultural groups.
Story_ID: 222339
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about the ancestral boxes that you create out of metal.
Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Carmelite Thompson] had an incense burner, and it's a Chinese little vessel.  And she used to write notes, and when she prayed over them and thought about them, if the experience that she wanted to happen came to pass in a favorable manner, then she would burn the note.  I knew that she was using this incense burner for something.  But, and I had seen her place things in it, but I had never looked in it, ever.  And when my mother died, the, the first thing I did was to open that incense burner, lift the cover off, and there were two notes placing me in God's hands.  Now, I was an adult, but I was divorcing and you know, had problems of my own and whatnot.  So she, she was still thinking about me even in her sickest moments.  And when I was thinking about an object to, to make, I first made incense burners.  And there are three of those incense burners from the first set that I made in the collection of the Oakland Museum in California [Oakland Museum of California, Oakland, California].  Then they turned into box shapes, and I began to think about ancestral worship and whatnot and I had seen containers in Africa knew that they make, use them for various things.
Speaker 1: How, how did you make your first ancestral box?
Speaker 2: They're all made out of wax originally, and then they are cast using a method that Africans use a lot.
Speaker 1: What's the method?
Speaker 2: Well, forming them in, in some sort of container situation in a mold, and then burning out the wax, and then pouring in hot molting metal into your mold shape and casting.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And I, I feel these boxes are for something precious.  They could be used as incense burners whether they're a box or whatnot.  But they also could hold like your wedding ring, your tooth, all your baby teeth and, or anything, something.
Speaker 1: How, how big are they usually?
Speaker 2: They're fairly small, two by two, three by three.
Speaker 1: When did you make your first one?
Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969].
Speaker 1: What do you keep in yours?
Speaker 2: I don't keep anything in mine (laughter).  I just have them.  And I recently sold some of the earlier ones.  They have been included in exhibitions over the years, and are recorded in several publications.
Story_ID: 222340
Speaker 1: You moved to Washington, D.C. in 1980.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What prompted the move to Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: I came here to work for Howard University [Washington, D.C.] television station.  They were just getting off the ground.  And with my experiences in the museum field and with these exhibitions, there's always the publicity that went on.  And so I had a lot of contact with television over the years.  And they asked me to come and be community affairs director.
Speaker 1: Did you have some trepidations about coming to Washington, D.C., because of your mother's [Carmelite Thompson] disdain for it?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't, I didn't.  By that time I had visited Washington on one or two occasions, and I was satisfied.  And I was just happy to--that was the first black television station, black-owned and operated.  And although it was PBS, we were all quite proud to come, you know, work for it no matter what they were paying us (laughter).
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: But it was short-lived for me, in that it lasted the first year and then I dropped out of it.
Speaker 1: And, and from there you, is that when you went to--
Speaker 2: The government.
Speaker 1: Right, you were a program development officer.
Speaker 2: Yes, I went to work for the United States Information Agency [USIA].
Speaker 1: As a program development officer?
Speaker 2: As a program development officer for exhibitions.
Speaker 1: So you were back to exhibitions?  Were, were you glad to be back?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was coordinating exhibitions that toured the world--
Speaker 1: And were they--
Speaker 2: --American exhibitions.
Speaker 1: Were they--did they have some kind of cultural or ethnic flare to them?
Speaker 2: Not really, no.  They were either a craft show, or painting show, or print show, or one or two were black women, photographers, something like that.  But I've worked now with over fifty exhibitions that have been shown around the world, coordinating the full activity, from getting the grant to an organization or a curator to fulfill the exhibition needs, and then I plan the tour and maintain the, the whole experience throughout the duration of the tour, which maybe I could work with an exhibit as long as six years.  And it could be on tour for, say up to four years--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: --a year, year and a half in the planning and then returning.  And the exhibitions have gone to as many as, as little as three or four venues or thirty venues.
Story_ID: 222341
Speaker 1: During some of your exhibitions, did you have an opportunity to showcase the works of African American artists?
Speaker 2: Yes, there were some.  I personally wanted to encourage curators to be more diverse in their selection of artists.  But yes, [HistoryMaker] Sam Gilliam did four major installations, one in Korea; Helsinki [Finland]; Magdeburg, Germany; and Chile--Santiago, Chile.  Betye Saar did five installation projects.  And when I say installation projects, they're, they've taken a theme, and they've had a multimedia situation, and it may ink off a whole building, the, the, the works and the materials used.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Betye even had performance as part of hers.  Sam draped full rooms.  He draped the whole interior of a monastery in Germany.
Speaker 1: What did he drape it with?
Speaker 2: Art.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: His art form takes on a drape-like form, format.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: But he used something like a thousand yards.
Speaker 1: Of fabric.
Speaker 2: Fabric that was painted and some metal objects that included other types of hard and soft things with it.  Roy DeCarava, a noted photographer from Brooklyn [New York, New York], full exhibition of his work, over a hundred pieces.  By the same token, we had say a craft show with all kinds of crafts from the craftspeople in the United States, and there were only three black artists out of 250 artists in the show.  But that 250 objects being sent overseas is no small thing.
Speaker 1: Oh, of course, of course--
Story_ID: 222342
Speaker 1: When did you start becoming involved in lithographs?
Speaker 2: Well, it was something I had a course in lithography and etching in school at Los Angeles State University [sic. California State University, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California].  And so I had been involved in the printing of textile and the printing of works on paper from almost the beginning of my artistic career.
Speaker 1: Is that your favorite medium?
Speaker 2: Yes, next to metal.  But there again, you might be using metal or something to create some of the--lithography works--
Speaker 1: Can you--
Speaker 2: --lithographic works.
Speaker 1: --take us through that process of how, how you do it?  Like, do you--visualize at first in your mind, or how does it work for you?  Or does it start to come to life on paper?
Speaker 2: Well, I take a lot of photographs, so I'm constantly thinking how, how to use what I've photographed.  And much of it is centered around textural things, tree bark, stones, things like that.  And I try to work that into some kind of imagery eventually, mostly abstract in nature.  And so the lithography is one method, but then I may mix it with silkscreen.  I have a tendency to mix two or three mediums together.
Speaker 1: And how long does the process take you?  I mean does, does it take you years sometimes, or how long does it take you?
Speaker 2: Well, no, it's something that you can create within a day or two.
Speaker 1: But does the whole process--just even visualize--
Speaker 2: Well, thinking through what the image will be, how to use the image that you've captured some other way, even if it's just sitting, say at the seashore, or looking at the waves, or flying in a plane and looking down at the, the Grand Canyon [National Park, Arizona].  You're thinking about, if you're an artist, oftentimes how to use this in your art form.  And I'm constantly looking at nature, things in the urban community.  Like a burned out building, that fascinates me, a building that's being torn down.  I take pictures of all of that, and I like that mixture of mangled wires and concrete crushed and whatnot.  I see shapes in there.  I'm looking at something now that looks like a landscape, but there are fish throughout the piece.
Story_ID: 222343
Speaker 1: Do you still work with metals a lot?
Speaker 2: Yes, and the silkscreen process as well as lithographic process.  And I'm--sometimes do etchings too.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: I go to workshops where there are facilities, heavy duty facilities and where you're assisted by printers to print the process.  You no longer have to really do all the hard work yourself.
Speaker 1: Thanks to technology.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, what role do you think technology has played in the whole world of art?  Do you think that some people who may not necessarily have the talent are using technology now and--
Speaker 2: Yes, some are.
Speaker 1: And as an artist, what are your thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: Well, more power to them (laughter).  It, it doesn't bother me.  I don't think about the competition in that light.  I just--I'm interested in tech, in the technique and technology, progressing for myself.  And I work, I don't compete with other people.  If it's, if it happens that they're doing the same thing, fine.  If they want information as to how I did it, I don't mind telling them.
Speaker 1: Are most artists like that?
Speaker 2: No, most are, want to keep it to themselves and make you think that there's some great mystery in creating what they've done.  Well, if you've got the talent, you can move on.  If your eyes are open, you'll find out new vistas and cross those paths when you get to them, and you'll still come out with quality art.
Story_ID: 222344
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you a little bit about--what do you think--what were some of the challenges in your opinion facing African Americans artists when you first started out in your career?
Speaker 2: I think finding places to exhibit and share my art with the general public.  It's still--there are not that many doors open, still.
Speaker 1: Even today, in 2004?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Why do you think that still exists?
Speaker 2: Well, it takes a lot of money to get into the art game and to stay in it, that is, to open a gallery, to get a job in a museum.  They, they, the museums generally have one, two curators, and they're there for forty years, twenty-five at least.  And it's, it's just not that many openings.  There, it's true that since, say 1976, museums have, the number of museums in the United States have more than doubled.  But for African Americans, we probably have about two hundred museums.  Most of them are historic, historical museums, and they're collecting past history and not dealing with recent contemporary work and not creating too much space for the visual artist.
Story_ID: 222345
Speaker 1: And do you consider yourself a visual artist?
Speaker 2: Yes, I work as a studio artist and continue to exhibit my work, even though I'm in arts administration, coordinating exhibitions for the government.
Speaker 1: And with some of your abstracts, are you ever--are, are they all based upon individual interpretation or--
Speaker 2: Yes, mine are memory, memory objects, whether it's memory of my mother [Carmelite Thompson], memory of fish in a pond, memory of the water hitting against the rocks at the beach, trees in the brush, thick brush area, pinecones laying on the ground, you know, whatever experience I had when I first saw it, the shape, the color, whatnot.
Speaker 1: And when people look at your work, sometimes do they have the same interpretation that you did?
Speaker 2: I hope that they do.  I hope that my titles of the work help them along, if they pay attention to them.  It will probably give some hint of what it is, like 'Highland Butterflies' [sic. 'Highland Flowers'].  Well, if you read a little more about me and found out that I was in California, you might figure out where Highland [California] is or what's happening in the Highlands.  You know, there in California much of, six months of the year everything is brown.  But there's a couple of months where, if you're around the Carmel [California], Northern California area, the whole mountainside is in bloom, beautiful wildflowers.  And that will give you some hint to Highland, the colors I've used, the shapes.
Speaker 1: What's been your favorite piece?
Speaker 2: Well, for works on paper, I think maybe the 'Highland Butterflies.'
Speaker 1: Which is a fairly recent one--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --for you.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And I've become involved with even digital technology now, so I'm hand painting and doing digital work as well as creating all by hand like a lithograph.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite metal piece?
Speaker 2: I have an ancestral box that's called 'Mojo,' and it's silver, kind of silver.  It has a shape of landscape.  It has some African symbolism for utility, and it has a French pearl on it.  And it's just, it's a great feeling when you place it in your hands, to feel the whole thing, to look at the shapes and the expression that's coming from it.
Speaker 1: Where did your inspiration for that piece come from?
Speaker 2: I was working with Betye Saar for an exhibition, and Betye had made boxes she called "mojo boxes."  Well, they had hands and faces and things that might even be kind of scary in them.  But that's where I got the title 'Mojo' from, and the rest of it comes from my experiences from the atmosphere and landscape.
Story_ID: 222346
Speaker 1: --[HistoryMaker] Mrs. [Evangeline] Montgomery, in 1997 you were diagnosed with Parkinson's disease.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What impact has that had on your art?
Speaker 2: Well, it's taken its toll because, I may have mentioned earlier, I'm, I'm not really doing any raising and forging and metalsmithing anymore.  It's affected my right hand, and I'm right-handed.  But I can kind of control it for a few seconds, but I don't think that I can control it enough to manage hot metal and hammers, heavy hammers.  And I'm not going to jeopardize anybody else's skills to assist me to do something like that.  So that's why I work in wax now.  My boxes are more in wax.  And unfortunately, I have several unfinished larger pieces that I'll have to figure out how I'm going to finish them off.  But also, it's another reason why I began to work in the digital, because even painting--I do hand painting on things and whatnot--I'm not able to steady my hand all the time in the way I would like to.  I go to print workshops where you have a master printer who will assist and do the printing for you and handle the large machinery.  And, but it's my color, my image, my drawings and so forth that we're working form.
Speaker 1: And so through technology, you're still able to--
Speaker 2: Yes.  And you know, in today's world, many artists, well-known master in the fields, have assistants and whatnot who do certain technical things for them.
Story_ID: 222347
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about tthe scholarship [Evangeline J. Montgomery Scholarship Fund] that's in your name for BIG [Blacks in Government]--
Speaker 2: Well, I belong to Blacks in Government, which is a national organization.  And I work for the state department [U.S. Department of State] now, and it has several chapters and--
Speaker 1: Because USIA [United States Information Agency] is no longer--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in existence.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And in the, in our particular building we have a chapter, and they have all kinds of programs, the chapters do, you know, helping in the community and whatnot.  And so we decided to create the scholarship for one or two visual artists and other adults that are going into the field, various fields in government and want to continue their education.  So we'll give two to three scholarships a year, and they decided to name the scholarship fund in my name.
Story_ID: 222348
Speaker 1: And you know, did you ever think that when you were fourteen years old when you got that oil painting set that someday you would become this, you know, phenomenal artist?
Speaker 2: I didn't, no, I didn't think anything about that, nor did I have the desire to say that that's what I wanted to be, an artist.  But I, but everything I've done is leading up to being an artist and to sharing my art and my knowledge of the field of art with others, the museum work and whatnot.
Speaker 1: And do you think that there are enough African Americans who are exploring the art and going into the field of art?
Speaker 2: No, I think, think they really need to rethink and consider that there are jobs in the museum field.  Every job you find in a corporation, you can find similar jobs in the museum world--
Speaker 1: So you don't necessar--
Speaker 2: --if you have to work as a secretary and then move up to something else, if you're studying art history, you don't just have to teach.  You can go into museum work, be an--art historian for a particular museum, become a curator.
Speaker 1: Why is it important for there to be more African Americans in the museum industry?
Speaker 2: Well, our culture needs to be recorded as everybody else's.  And only you can speak for yourself.  Others can speak for you, but they can't always get to the bottom of things.  For instance, you go to Africa and go into one of the tribal settings back in the bush.  They're more apt to talk to you as a black person and tell you some of their secrets than they would others, if you're open to receive them.
Story_ID: 222349
Speaker 1: And do you think that a lot of African Americans think that it's too difficult to make a good living as an artist?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think most of our parents feel that--
Speaker 1: The term, starving artist.
Speaker 2: Yes, that you can't make it.  But if you're committed and stick with it, it's no reason why you shouldn't be able to.  People like myself are trying to help create an audience all the time for the art, for the history--
Speaker 1: Do you--
Speaker 2: --for the object.
Speaker 1: Do you sell a lot of your work now?
Speaker 2: Yes, not as much as I'd like to I guess, because it's not something that I do full-time.  But yes, if I take the time to place it in a proper setting, I usually get sales.
Speaker 1: And generally, what does your work sell for?
Speaker 2: It, now it sells for probably under $2500.
Speaker 1: And is that average or a little on the high side, the low side?
Speaker 2: No, that's about average to--depends on what it is, what medium, size, how involved.  I mean you could take a work on paper and you could have a hundred different colors operating on it, or marks and whatnot, or it could have just two.
Story_ID: 222350
Speaker 1: --One thing that we didn't say was that the scholarships for Blacks in Government, or BIG, proceeds from various artists are selling their works--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you talk a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: Yes, I've asked three friends of mine to join me in having our art sold through the Blacks in Government chapter.  And 20 percent of the sales is going to the [Evangeline J. Montgomery] Scholarship Fund.  What it has done, it has opened new doors for the artist, because a lot of people who are actually members of Blacks in Government had not purchased original works of arts that, before seeing it and working with this exhibit that we have.  And it's sort of an ongoing exhibit in someone's home to, to mount the work and have people come in in intervals to see it, by appointment.  And I'm helping to locate collectors and getting them in.  But we found a number of people.  In fact, the national president for BIG has bought a piece, had it framed.  She's very excited about it.
Story_ID: 222351
Speaker 1: What advice do you have for someone who may be interested in a career in art?
Speaker 2: I say jump in, and get your feet wet, and try to stick it out.  Get as much knowledge as you can in the medium that you have selected to work in, travel, and experience, go to exhibitions, try to get to know people that are working in similar styles or, or materials, and just keep at it.
Speaker 1: As an artist and--are you at all concerned about the lack of exposure to art for many African American students who, for financial reasons, their schools no longer have art programs and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How essential do you think that is?
Speaker 2: I think it's very essential.  Art surrounds us daily.  Everything about us is art.  This table is art.  This lamp is art.  And, and it's an experience that one needs to have to know how things are made and how they are created and to try to work with it, from your earliest experience of carving a shape on a potato and stamping it on a piece of cloth or something.  The more you know, the more you'll begin to appreciate all these things around you, the making of them, the design of them.  Also, I think that we have to help our young people to find ways and means of occupying their time and energy, and it doesn't all have to be sports.  It can be in the arts.  It can help you--preservation of our culture, help you to get involved in that and understanding it through the arts.  You can learn math by doing paintings.  When I, when we started talking, I talked about Sargent [Claude] Johnson exhibition.  Well, in the City of Oakland [California], the fifth grade classes all go to the museum for about six months.  And at the time of that show, they came and we had what we called create in days.  And I invited artists from the community to be there to perform and whatnot, and the kids wrote about it.  They wrote about Sargent Johnson's art.  They went back to school and tried to make similar things that he made.  And they learned--I talked to them, told them the history of--his life as far as I knew.  So, you need these supplemented experiences, and art is really badly needed in our lives and schools.
Story_ID: 222352
Speaker 1: And when you look back at your life, what stands out the most to you and why?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I've been very fortunate to have had the experience of travel, not just to Nigeria but a number of countries, and to experience how other people live, and to look at their art.  Most of the travel I've done through the state department [U.S. Department of State] and United States Information Agency [USIA] has been working directly with museums abroad and their staffs and their ministry of culture, people like that.  I've had the opportunity of meeting and talking to them.  The most important artists in these various countries are usually paraded out for me to meet or have lunch with them, architect, people like that.  So, I've been fortunate to be in this position, to, to be able to experience all of this.
Speaker 1: And do you think that the United States has the same appreciation for art as other cultures in other countries?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think we do, but, but we're, we're putting other things ahead of the art, not realizing you can progress equally and you know, parallel other things.  I--think we do because we're building museums every day.  We're preserving our art and our history.
Speaker 1: But are people going to the museums and--gaining an appreciation for art, you think?
Speaker 2: I think they are.  I think more and more people are seeking their entertainment and their history.  And everybody has a computer now.  Well, there are virtual exhibitions on the computer, so you don't even have to go out of your house to experience an exhibition, but I suggest that you do.  I think there's nothing better than the real thing.
Story_ID: 222353
Speaker 1: And what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: Well, I just hope that we keep our eyes and ears open and become involved--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --especially in the political arena, to take our rightful place in the community.
Story_ID: 222354
Speaker 1: And who are or who were you inspired by?  Who are some of your favorite artists?
Speaker 2: Well, I've mentioned [HistoryMaker] Sam Gilliam's name several times, and he does live here in Washington [D.C.].  And he works in the abstract mode, and I do too.  So, he's one person.  Another is Richard Mayhew, who is a landscape painter in the abstract mode, so abstract expressionist.  Sargent [Claude] Johnson was, and as a sculptor, Richmond Barthe was another sculptor, who, both of them are deceased now.  Isamu Noguchi also a sculpture, sculptor, and Henry [Spencer] Moore [OM CH FBA].  Their work inspires me.  In the printmaking field, Bob Blackburn [Robert Hamilton Blackburn] started the studio setup workshop [sic. Printmaking Workshop] in New York [New York], but his own work I find very interesting, and Calvin Burnett, who is a lithographer, whatnot, from Boston [Massachusetts].  There are others, but they certainly inspire me, and particularly those living today that are still working.
Story_ID: 222355
Speaker 1: Do you think you ever would have chosen a different career path?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.  Now that I look back, I think I was always gifted and showed some promising leaning toward art.  And I also have been involved in leadership kind of things, even in the church, and so I was always ready to organize people to do something.  And because I am in visual arts, another major activity for me has been to organize conferences or help others that are organizing conferences and to assist a lot of people who are writing about art.  I'm a rat pack; I, I keep everything and collect up everything, every little newspaper article and whatnot.  And so a lot of people come to me who are involved in research and whatnot in the visual arts and particularly African American and the [African] Diaspora.
Speaker 1: How do you think your art has benefited the African American community?
Speaker 2: Well, I hope that it has.  I would say three-fourths of the people who have purchased my art have been African Americans, and they seem to see something in it, even though it's abstract.
Speaker 1: And is there a medium that you haven't tried yet that you'd still like to try?
Speaker 2: I didn't blow glass.  It was just sort of taking hold as an art form, contemporary art form when I was in college.  And that was one thing that I thought I'd like to try but never got a chance to.
Story_ID: 222356
Speaker 1: And is there anything that you haven't done yet that you'd still like to do, personally?
Speaker 2: Still probably looking to curate a major, major exhibition of African American artists in some theme.
Speaker 1: And if someone wrote the check today, who would you try to have in that exhibition, and what theme--
Speaker 2: I'd rather not call names, but--
Speaker 1: But do you have a theme in mind?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  It relates to books and installation, book art and installation, but a new form of book art, not just a book as we know it, with a cover, two covers and something and a spine.  But it--
Speaker 1: What form?
Speaker 2: --it could take up, the book could be this whole room.  And the four walls can make a block form and could be filled with something.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'd like to see that.
Story_ID: 222357
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you've done already that you wish you would have done differently, any regrets?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.  I enjoy what I'm doing.  I enjoy much of the way I've directed my life and my interests in the arts and the contributions that I feel I've made in the arts.
Speaker 1: And what values do you consider most important and why?
Speaker 2: Well, being honest with yourself and follow through, give some time to others, helping others.
Speaker 1: And how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, I--as an artist.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: I hope that some of what I've created will last, and I, the metal pieces certainly will last forever.
Speaker 1: Do you believe that that's your legacy, your art?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what are some of your thoughts about, you know how they say that sometimes, you know, an artist never really becomes famous or their work, you know, very valuable until they're no longer here.  Do you agree with that?
Speaker 2: Well, I've seen it happen.  But no, I hope that, that I create enough friends and interests while I'm alive and that people will join me in my experience and live with it, want to live with it as I do.
Story_ID: 222358
Speaker 1: Is there anything that we haven't talked about, that we haven't touched on that you'd like to talk about?
Speaker 2: I don't, I think just that I've tried to create as many spaces as I could, and I think as an artist--to show art--I think as an artist, one might have to get involved in getting a space, providing something for that space, and telling the message of what it is you're trying to convey.  And if need be, you need to corral a few others to help you do this because you're not necessarily required to have all of the talents.  But you need to form associations as you go.  You need to travel and have experiences and get somebody who writes about art, and who will write about you, who will talk about you in the media; and find a place that you can be sure to, to show; and keep in touch with other artists; don't isolate yourself.
Speaker 1: And in your opinion, what makes an artist good?
Speaker 2: Well, the production and technology, being up to date on what's going on, understanding the medium that you're working to its fullest.
Speaker 1: Is that the key, to really understand the medium that you're working in?
Speaker 2: It's one of them.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know, to keep--just because I see you working something doesn't mean that I can do it, you know.  You need to study it, experiment with it and whatnot.
Story_ID: 222359
Speaker 1: So, you had mentioned you were an art commissioner in San Francisco [California].  What were your responsibilities as art commissioner?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was appointed by the mayor, Mayor George Moscone.
Speaker 1: And what year was that?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-six [1976].  As an art commissioner, there were twelve commissioners, and my duty as a commissioner was to head the arts committee within the [San Francisco Arts] Commission, and we gave public art contracts.  We looked at signs and streetlamps and things like that and decided on, on whether they were a good design for the city.  We talked to artists themselves about their needs, tried to help them--
Speaker 1: And did it create--
Speaker 2: --give grants.
Speaker 1: Did it create opportunities for African American artists?
Speaker 2: Yes, some.  For instance, like the airport in San Francisco [San Francisco International Airport, San Francisco, California], new wings were being built.  And they have what they call percentage for the arts.  Two percent of public buildings and areas would go towards the arts, visual arts--and attended a lot of various meetings and conferences on the arts, representing the city.  I've received a number of different honors and awards, and that's, that's quite an honor to be selected by the mayor to serve.  And in our case, when you're on a committee, you're busy all the time, and you don't get paid for that.
