Story_ID: 611601
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am could you state your full name and spell it for us please.
Speaker 2: Sure.  My name is Barbara Anne McKinzie [HistoryMaker Barbara McKinzie], B-A-R-B-A-R-A, A-N-N-E, M-C-K-I-N-Z-I-E.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is January 2nd, 1954.  My place of birth was Ada, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a, the CEO of my own consulting CPA [certified public accountant] firm.  I'm a CPA here in Illinois, BMC Associates [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you're also the--
Speaker 2: International president of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority Incorporated [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], and the president of Alpha Kappa Alpha Educational Advancement Foundation.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is February 20th, 2008.
Speaker 1: And where are we are the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in the board room of the corporate headquarters of Alpha Kappa Alpha [in Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 611602
Speaker 1: Okay, now before we even get to the AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] questions, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that we use as a warm up sort of.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they just require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: It would be gumbo.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, black.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes, a favorite time of year for me is fall.
Speaker 1: All right now, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, Aruba.
Speaker 1: And the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Make excellence a habit.
Story_ID: 611603
Speaker 1: All right, now I'm going to ask you a series of questions that were developed for this special project with Alpha Kappa Alpha, special leadership project questions I suppose.  First one is about the election process.  What influenced your decision to seek the position of supreme basileus?
Speaker 2: The influence came from a presentation I made when I was the international treasurer.  There had been an issue, financial issue, that had developed at the beginning of my term as treasurer, and I had to speak to the membership about it, but there was a two year time period between the event and the opportunity that I had to speak to them.  As I prepared for it, I wanted to be sure that I dealt with the facts of the issue, but I was more interested in having the story told about what we'd done to provide a solution, and more importantly, what we were doing to ensure that it didn't occur again.  And I would say the reaction that I received when I did make that presentation is what make me think something special happened at that moment between myself and the membership at the convention.  I didn't think at that moment about running for national president.  Actually, as I was leaving that auditorium, one of the former international presidents came up to me and indicated that she wanted to speak with me.  We did have a conversation and out of that we began to look at that possibility.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How would you describe your ascension to supreme basileus?
Speaker 2: I would say that my ascension to supreme basileus was one that without planning was well prepared.  My initial entry in this organization, as well as my ascension, was always done simply on doing the jobs that needed to be done that I felt I had the skills to do, or the talents to offer.  And, as I look back, I realize that I have probably done just about everything there is to do.  Meaning that I am the first international president who also served as executive director.
Speaker 1: Okay, the third question in this series is what propelled your candidacy for supreme basileus?
Speaker 2: That presentation that I just referred to.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  This next series is under the heading of, on your leadership, and the first question is what was your vision for Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority Incorporated [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: I joined the organization some thirty-five years ago at a time when excellence was something that everyone aspired to.  You wanted to be the best student, you wanted to be the best member, you wanted to always give in a way 'cause you receive so much in giving.  And I watched through those thirty-five years that the organization as it grew, it seemed to lose some of that luster I'll call it, and a part of what caused me to go ahead and make this run was the fact that I believed that I could speak to why we needed to obtain the luster again, and I had the conviction and commitment to raise the battle to make it happen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What or who influenced your vision for Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority Incorporated?
Speaker 2: I was appointed to the financial advisory role to the twentieth supreme basileus, Barbara K. Phillips [Barbara Kinard Phillips], and I was given that responsibility at a very young age right after college actually.  It was a position she created on her board for me and she, of course, was my first mentor in Alpha Kappa Alpha at the national level.  I then was the, served in the same role for her successor [HistoryMaker Faye Beverly Bryant] and I also served as executive director for her successor.  And you could say that then through the years I met other supremes as well as other members and there are a lot of mentors that I've had along my journey in this organization.
Story_ID: 611604
Speaker 1: In what ways was your vision designed to ensure Alpha Kappa Alpha's [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] survival?
Speaker 2: Our--Alpha Kappa Alpha is a microcosm of our society at large.  And that reality is something that has been there from the moment we were created.  One of the things I felt would ensure our ascension into our second century of service was the fact that as a large institution we had to awaken in each individual member, the luster that I referred to earlier in a way that that member not only understood, but that the member understood how to execute it.  And so we crafted a vision for this administration that has a national/international look and a national/international structure, but at the core of it, it is very dependent on the level of excellence and sophistication that is put forth by each member.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how was your vision communicated and carried out through the sorority's program during your administration?
Speaker 2: At the boule where I was installed [as supreme basileus] in Detroit [Michigan], we presented to the convention the vision.  We presented the concepts of the vision and then we set about the business of developing models and tools that could be used by chapters and members to execute that vision.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What kinds of things did you specifically do to successfully communicate your vision and to effectively institutionalize it as a guiding principal?
Speaker 2: The theme of this administration, three simple letters, but yet they mean so much.  And those letter are ESP [Extraordinary Service Program].  That's an acronym and it's an acronym for anything that a member can create using those letters.  Example, in the external world as a service organization, we use that, those letters to mean economics, service and partnerships.  Internally to the organization we use those letters to mean excellence and sisterhood and purpose or performance.  A member may decide that they want to use it on a given day because we refer to our members as every soror is a pearl.  So the point is those three letters, when used in the context of sisterhood and service, gives each member the opportunity to create what they want to do, how they want to be in the organization under the context of making economics the common thread that permeates everything we do, because it does.  Everything we do can be measured in economic terms and when we awaken within our community that reality, it is something that through education can serve our community very well.
Story_ID: 611605
Speaker 1: Example, we have five platforms in the ESP program [Extraordinary Service Program of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.].  Platform one is what we refer to as our nontraditional entrepreneur.  That is, we, as an organization of women who found it to encourage, foster relationships with women, we focus on developing women entrepreneurs, which is nontraditional, and in particular, in the African American community.  The second platform is called the economic keys to success.  The focus of that platform is meant to say everyone needs a high school diploma in the topic of economics.  You cannot give away what you do not own.  And education as a core competency of this institution for a hundred years, we think that every member needs to have at least, let's say a high school diploma in economics.  Our third platform is a focus on our black family which we always do.  And we've decided that we would focus on the black male in our black family unit structure and support that concept through certain economic ventures.  We have a partnership with JP Chase Morgan [JPMorgan Chase and Co.] where we've agreed to put first time homeowners four thousand of them, in homes over the four year period of time of this administration.  And we have a platform four which is a platform for our undergraduates.  Those are our members who are on college campuses, and their focus is to use economics and education with technology by studying a problem in their community on their campus, collaborating with the university, partnering with the other organization and chapters on those campuses and actually bring to fruition some technology program that had some value to someone in the way of service.  An example of some of those would be in Evanston [Illinois] at Northwestern [Northwestern University].  The students studied what was a problem in that community.  What they figured out was this, there were a lot of immigrants who had relocated to the Evanston area, and so if they were to strengthen communication as a community, then helping those immigrants learn a second language, English, and helping some of the older people in the community learn a second language, whatever the prevalent second language, they're Hispanic, was, that that would be a way they could use technology to train and tutor people and that's one of the things that they do.  The fifth platform is called economics in health management and in that topic of health, preventive health, we wanted to focus on mental health, because we used that as our foundation in stating that it is the mental state that truly drives the connection between mind, body and spirit, and there is an economic cost if that mental state is not at its tip performance.
Story_ID: 611606
Speaker 1: Now these next questions are about leadership style.  Which leadership style did you use to bring your vision to fruition?
Speaker 2: Collaboration, because to get to this place you have to win an election.
Speaker 1: Okay.  As the individual with the ultimate responsibility for making decisions which would shape AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], what was the fundamental test you applied?
Speaker 2: Can you repeat that again?
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay (laughter), I think so.  As the individual with the ultimate responsibility for making decisions which would shape AKA, what was the fundamental test you applied?
Speaker 2: To always put God first and to always make decisions in a selfless manner as best as I could within the human condition.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Which former supreme's leadership style, if any, did yours parallel the most?
Speaker 2: I would like to think that my leadership style probably parallels our eighteenth supreme basileus.  She served in Alpha Kappa Alpha during the period of 1970 to '74 [1974].  She was our youngest supreme basileus ever elected.  There have been twenty-seven of us in a hundred years.  I believe she was in her thirties when she was elected, and she was our youngest ever, but she is very forthright in her approach, she is very passionate in what she believes.  She also is very committed to the perpetuity of this institution, and in that passion and commitment, she's willing to do what she needs to do to ensure that the institution remains viable.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And her name?
Speaker 2: Her name is Dr. Mattelia Bennett Grays [HistoryMaker Mattelia B. Grays] from Houston, Texas.
Story_ID: 611607
Speaker 1: Now this next section is under the heading supreme encounters.  What did you learn about leadership while serving as supreme basileus [of Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: I learned you very rarely get what you want, but it doesn't hurt to always ask.  I've learned that people need attention more than they need substance.  I've learned that the institution is a wonderful organization and the organization and the selfless sacrifices of women that have gone before us is really the energy that has propelled this institution to where it is today.  And it is my hope that our generation does its best to fulfill our legacy for this generation so that we can keep the institution around for other generations.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What lesson or lessons learned was most instructive for you?
Speaker 2: While I may see something that is clearly needed and makes sense to do, and I may think that I understand the challenge to communicate that to others, how effective you are in the actual communication is something that I've learned takes time because you never know what is really beneath the external or the superficial that you're engaged in with another human.
Speaker 1: What was the great challenge or controversy you faced and how did you respond?
Speaker 2: The greatest challenge or controversy that I faced in my leadership here has been through the efforts of some other leaders to take a very sterling (unclear) reputation I think for them because of fear factor they held, and go about the business of trying to harm that reputation, so I had to face that.  I had to walk through it, and I had to do it in a way that I would never regret my response and that was probably my greatest challenge.
Speaker 1: Okay.  On whom did you rely for counsel and guidance when responding to challenges or controversy?
Speaker 2: Prayer.  And, of course, I'd call some former supremes who I felt would have some insight into that issue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you describe an irritation that spurred you to action?
Speaker 2: Mediocrity.  Time is too valuable to waste.
Story_ID: 611608
Speaker 1: This next series of questions is under the heading achievements.  By what standards would you measure the success of your administration?
Speaker 2: I would say transparent communication, not necessary saying what everyone wants to hear, but knowing that you're always going to have a conversation and the truth and the facts will always be the--forthright and presented, so that everyone can at least understand that, whether they agree with it or not.  That would pretty much sum up the way I think I would like to define my success because leadership is difficult in today's world.  A lot of people want to be all things to all people, and you cannot and lead and if you can have a clear focus of what your convictions are, and your goals and you've clearly communicated that, and you've been factual in truth about it, then the execution is something as a standard, you can always lean to.  Now I would say the blessings that have come my way in my administration as a result of that have been primarily the fact that this institution [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] has grown at this juncture and is the most financially successful it's ever been in its hundred years.  And so we are reaping some wonderful benefits in that regard.
Speaker 1: What one thing would you liked to have done that you were, that you were unable to accomplish?
Speaker 2: Well, I still have two years left, and a few months, so I'm hopeful that I will be able to accomplish the couple of things that are before us.  One of them is we want to increase our selection grade point average.  Right now it's a C plus cum [cumulative].  We want to increase that to a B.  When I came into the organization, it was a B, but it was lowered, maybe about thirty years ago.  As a result of that, I think today we have some characteristics that we need to adjust and I think if we demonstrate a higher standard in education, it's going to put us more in alignment with our purpose as well as with where I think the country needs to be for our citizens to continue to be successful.
Speaker 1: It's said that we do not remember days, we remember moments.  As supreme basileus, what was your greatest moment?
Speaker 2: The response that I gave to the greatest challenge I described to you earlier because there is no moment of regret of my response and obviously my response was successful.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was your proudest moment?
Speaker 2: My proudest moment would have been the convention embracing a long term financial strategy that I offered as international treasurer, that lives today, that has begun to make measured benefit and financially to that.  So that probably is my proudest moment 'cause it offers the capacity to do more service.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was your happiest moment?
Speaker 2: My happiest moment would have been the night I was installed because it was, it was a reality at that moment.
Story_ID: 611609
Speaker 1: The next series of questions is under the title your legacy.  Compare the Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] you inherited from your predecessor [HistoryMaker Linda M. White] to the one you're going to leave, I guess, for your successor.
Speaker 2: Well, the Alpha Kappa Alpha I inherited was a large organization, an organization that had significant members and certainly had world renowned-- and an organization poised to embrace its centennial's birthday.  That's the, I'd say the sound bite I'd give, but it was also an organization that was fraught with some internal issues primarily related to operations and issues where we simply had not tended to the knitting, as I'll say, that we should have tended to over the years.  It wasn't that anyone per se, couldn't have done it.  I don't know that anybody thought about it.  I think there was a model in place that everybody when they took office they followed and then they went out of office.  So the mantra we offered when we came in office is a simple phrase, it's a new day.  And in that new day, we have embraced such things as every chapter, and we have about nine hundred and seventy-five of 'em around the world, every chapter is going through an, an external evaluation of its operations and performance in terms of what we say we do as a means to document and track and substantiate and congratulate and improve if need be, those chapters that need improvement and to illustrate those chapters who are doing well to other places in just their community.  We have also implemented the continuation of our financial strategic plan and we have clearly increased our asset base in the terms of millions of dollars and that is a legacy that we will be leaving that is unlike what we inherited.  It will substantially grow.  We will have a larger membership at the end of this term than we had when we began.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Bless you.
Speaker 1: I've been pretty good so far.
Speaker 2: You want some water?
Speaker 1: No, I'll be all right.  Just trying to get over a cold and I'm almost there (laughter).  Next question is, right let me do this before I ask it--has had the most impact?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure I can answer that because I think the best response to that would be in responding to the perception of others, but to try to answer your question, I think the awakening in each member, and I'm back to that foundation I started with.  At the base of ESP [Extraordinary Service Program], for me it means every soror participates.  So at the base of it, the awakening in each member that the involvement of that member is directly correlated to the success and strength of the institution.  Having a member make that connection in their lifetime would be the legacy that any national president would love to leave, because it means you have truly fulfilled your purpose in making sure the institution continues in perpetuity.
Story_ID: 611610
Speaker 1: What accomplishments of your administration do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: Well, the blessing is that we are in the centennial of this organization [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] and 100 years by any feat is a long time.  This country is only four hundred plus years old, so to have an African American organization of women, college educated women, be around for a hundred years is quite remarkable and to have that experience and that it's based and grounded in giving is even more remarkable.  And to be at the, as a leader, in this institution at this time, is a very special moment.  So that obviously the pinnacle of the administration and how well each member remembers their experience because it is a once in a lifetime experience, would probably be the legacy that we will leave that people will remember, as you said, a moment in time, not a date, but I'm also proud that we would, we will be leaving a stronger financial organization, a larger membership and a more educated and informed membership.
Story_ID: 611611
Speaker 1: The next series of questions is under on the past and the future.  What key elements of the sorority's heritage and legacy have been powerful enough to keep AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] vibrant through the test of time?
Speaker 2: The very simple fact and concept of service.  In giving, you receive.  And we were born out of that context of nine women embarking on a college education at the turn of the century knowing that what the world, the world that awaited them, was a world that they had no road map for.  It had not been done before.  It had not been tried, it had not been tested.  They were one generation away from slavery.  And so they joined in friendship and in the common of giving and in the giving of service, and in recognizing that if they could do it as a group, they could bring in others and they could serve the larger community who had that need.  So that concept nurtured, along with the concept of sisterhood, are the two main characteristics that have kept this institution alive and thriving.
Story_ID: 611612
Speaker 1: What one thing is essential to assure that we quote walk rather than back into unquote the next 100 years?
Speaker 2: An awareness of the individual, yourself, and more importantly, where that self fits in a global community, not just in the American society.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Has the sisterhood dimension taken a backseat to our pledge to be of service to all mankind?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't describe it as a backseat.  I would think that as an organization we've not done all we could do to make sure that the sisterhood element keeps right up front with the service element because, in fact, when you don't have the sisterhood element, you can't do service, because it's a unity of force in a sisterhood that allows the service to be the result.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What do, do you perceive as the greatest threat to the survival of the sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: The individual members not understanding the power of an institution and not seeing their individuality as a critical element in that power.  A lot of people think, oh, I'm one person, I don't matter, I can't have an impact.  And that's not true.  It's, the sum of the whole is always greater than its part, but it takes a part to make a whole.
Story_ID: 611613
Speaker 1: What elements of the sorority must be maintained or changed to ensure a perfect sisterhood?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know that we'll ever get to perfect because I think there's always something you strive for, but as I said earlier, the selection process as it relates to our undergraduates in having that academic average improve so that it's more in alignment with academic excellence in our society will help us to grow and nurture leaders and prepare them I think, even better for more challenging careers and, and future.  That's one area.  I think we need to be a better job as graduates in making sure we stay connected and nurture and mentor our undergraduates.  We don't do that as much as we did, say twenty, thirty years ago.  And that is still a need and it may even be a greater need today, I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What, this is the last question.  What is your vision of the perfect sisterhood?
Speaker 2: My vision is that it's a sisterhood for women come together by choice.  They are eager to express their love for humanity, beginning with themselves first and then extending to everyone they meet and in that exchange what they do is as a unified force, then share that in improving their communities at large.  That is what sisterhood is and that's what, that's what a sisterhood in service looks like.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you, that's the AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] questionnaire.
Story_ID: 611614
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now I'd like to ask you some questions about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I wanna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side [Leonard McKinzie, Sr.].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please.
Speaker 2: Sure.  Her name is Johnnie, J-O-H-N-N-I-E, Mae, M-A-E, maiden name is Moses, M-O-S-E-S [Johnnie Moses Watson].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth is November the 1st.  Now the year, I'm not quite sure, 'cause she doesn't tell anybody (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So you suspect in the 1920s [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Let's see here.  Her year would, yeah, probably.
Speaker 1: Nineteen, just put 1920 something.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Arizona.  I'm not exactly sure where in Arizona.  I think Tucson [Arizona], but I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother is an only child.  Her parents, my grandparents, were Naomi and Jasper Moses.  My grand- my maternal grandmother, Naomi Moses [Naomi Armstrong Moses], was one of two children and she had a brother and his name was Jessie [James L. Armstrong, Jr.].  Armstrong was my grandmother's maiden name.  And her mother was African American, but her father was Cherokee, Native American Cherokee Indian.  And her father actually made the trek from North Carolina to Oklahoma as a child during the Trail of Tears.
Speaker 1: Now this would be Jessie Armstrong or--?
Speaker 2: This would be Jessie Armstrong, Sr. [James L. Armstrong, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is--
Speaker 2: My grandmother's father.  She also, her brother was a junior.
Speaker 1: So he actually was in the, was a Cherokee--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --moving across the country from North Carolina in the Trail of Tears?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is 1840s I guess--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --he would have come across.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories passed down about what that experience was like?
Speaker 2: Yes, he lost both his parents on the trip and he grew up as an orphan in Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was little, he was a little person--
Speaker 2: Un-huh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --prior to the Civil War.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Now on my grandfather's side, he was one of fourteen children and his name was Jasper Moses.  His mother Elsie Moses, and I don't, did not know her husband.  I knew my great-grandmother because she lived to be like a hundred and four.  I was in college [East Central Oklahoma State University; East Central University, Ada, Oklahoma] when she passed.  She had fourteen kids.  She outlived ten of them.  She was a Seminole Indian that never talked about her childhood or growth and we always suspected there must have been something related because she was around the same age as my great-grandfather on my mom's side.  But I couldn't tell you anything 'cause we didn't know it.  And, but my great-grandmother on my mother's side, meaning my grandmother's mother, she also lived to be about ninety-eight.  So I was an adult when she passed as well.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories from the Seminole side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, there are some.  You know as I said, my great-grandmother was, she had fourteen kids.  She outlived ten of them, so that meant my mother [Johnnie Moses Watson] and her cousins were the second generation and my grandmother [Naomi Armstrong Moses], as a Seminole Indian [Native American], she was a part of the tribe so there is land that was in the family or that is in the family.  I'll tell you a story about one of my mother's cousins.  He's an only child and he married at a very young age.  Well, he married someone that my great-grandmother did not approve of.  And he went immediately from being her favorite grandson to being disavowed.  So she was very serious as she held certain beliefs about things and she did not detract from 'em, which I thought was really strange.  I guess it was the first time I ever heard of, you know, a family like disowning someone was when this whole act happened simply by him marrying someone, but it's kind of strange, but it occurred.  That would probably be the strangest thing that I remember growing up about her, but she was a wonderful lady and she was very embracive always of children.
Story_ID: 611615
Speaker 1: Now did your, your mother [Johnnie Moses Watson], you say she, she probably grew up in Arizona, you say?
Speaker 2: She was born in Arizona.
Speaker 1: Born in Arizona.  Did she grow up in Oklahoma?
Speaker 2: Yes, she grew up in Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: In Ada [Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: Eventually she got to Ada.  Now my dad [Leonard McKinzie, Sr.], well we're not on him yet, but eventually she did get to Ada, yes.
Speaker 1: But, do you know where she grew up exactly?
Speaker 2: I, she went, she went, pretty much grew up in Ada.  She came to Ada like at the junior high school level from Arizona and so she went through high school and some college.  She was a nurse in Oklahoma.  So she pretty much grew up in Oklahoma, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Did she have any stories of growing up and what it was like in those days out in the Southwest I guess?
Speaker 2: Well, my mom is an only child.  She led a pretty sheltered life in the context that my grandmother [Naomi Armstrong Moses] and my grandfather [Jasper Moses], she was their only child so she pretty much was, if you were to use some words that we sometimes refer to, she was spoiled.  So I think that they did a lot to make up for maybe what they experienced, you know, so she, no, I mean she never talked about any bad times.  See we lived in Ada and because of my great-grandmother [Elsie Moses] on my grandfather's side, we lived on land we owned, we had a family homestead and we sort of had, what I guess you could call a little small farm but we never, so, and our neighbors were Indians [Native American], they were Caucasians, they were black.  It wasn't an issue related to, I guess everyone was, you know, middle class, lower middle class, whatever, however you would characterize the economics of it.  But we were all just neighbors, 'cause I went, I went elementary [Napier Grade School, Ada, Oklahoma] to sixth grade, I went pretty much to an all Native American/African American school, but beginning in the seventh grade I went to an integrated school.  And I went, that was junior high [Ada Junior High School, Ada, Oklahoma] and high school [Byng High School, Ada, Oklahoma].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your mother go to integrated schools when she--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She did.
Speaker 1: All right.  And she was able to finish high school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 611616
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it please?
Speaker 2: Sure.  His name is Leonard, L-E-O-N-A-R-D, Terry McKinzie [Leonard McKinzie, Sr.], March 15, and he would, he is seventy, oh no, wait a minute.  Yeah, he's seventy-five so, seventy-six coming up, but whatever that is from 2008.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he's--
Speaker 2: Thirty-two [1932]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, '32 [1932] or '33 [1933], '33 [1933] (unclear).
Speaker 2: So my mother [Johnnie Moses Watson] couldn't have been born in the '20s [1920s].
Speaker 1: Is he older than your mother?
Speaker 2: They're about the same age.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she was born in the '30s [1930s] too I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was your father born in Ada [Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: No, his mother lived in a place called Texarkana, Arkansas, and, but he was reared by his aunt.  My dad's background is kind of interesting.  He didn't know his real mother until she passed.  He grew, the lady that I grew up calling grandmother on my father's side was really my great aunt.  And so he was born in Texarkana, Arkansas, but he moved to Ada probably as a young boy to be reared by his aunt who he grew up with as his mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you say he was in Texarkana in his early years and then--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but then, then, but then he moved to Ada and that's where he and my mom met.  They got married.  I was born.  They got divorced when I was like three going on four.  And then he left Oklahoma and moved to California.
Story_ID: 611617
Speaker 1: Now is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: They went to school together as I said.  They went to the same, the school that I described to you earlier, that was my elementary kindergarten school, or grade school.  When they were in school it was a high school [Napier Grade School, Ada, Oklahoma].  The, the Native American school was a high school, and so they met in high school and fell in love, got married, ran away got married, you know, had a baby and struggled for two or three years and my mom [Johnnie Moses Watson], I guess being, you know, the way she was, it wasn't working so she came home.  My grandparents [Naomi Armstrong Moses and Jasper Moses] then adopted me.  My mother remarried and had another family and my dad [Leonard McKinzie, Sr.] moved to California and he remarried also.  So I really grew up with my grandmother, my maternal grandmother, my maternal grandparents.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so your household consisted basically of just you and your grandmother or was there other--
Speaker 2: Just me and my grandmother and my grandfather, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: That's how I grew up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Like my mom, but I guess for my grandmother it was her second shot at raising a daughter.  So I think my childhood was a little different than my mother's.
Story_ID: 611618
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in the sense that I have a scar here and on one of my eyebrows that I got, I think, when I must have been about two or so.  And I always liked talking on the telephone and every time--and I'd actually get on the telephone and I could dial numbers but I'd always end up dialing like long distance numbers, so I'd always get in trouble.  And this day in particular I was in trouble and I was running.  Generally, my [maternal] grandmother [Naomi Armstrong Moses] had her door, the front door generally was locked so I couldn't get out, but that particular day it was unlocked and so I ran out the door and off the porch and fell, knocked myself out, you know, with a gash, whatever, so, it was pretty traumatic, but yeah, I do remember that.
Story_ID: 611619
Speaker 1: Did your neighborhood have a name?
Speaker 2: No, it was just Ada [Oklahoma], you know.  Ada is a small town.  There is a small four year liberal, liberal arts college there that I went to, East Central [East Central Oklahoma State University; East Central University, Ada, Oklahoma], so it's not a big city.  Maybe it has ten thousand people in it, 'cause I know the university probably has about three or four thousand students.  So there might be maybe ten thousand.  It may be more like seven or eight thousand people there.  So it's pretty small, you know, and it's--you live in a given area of the city, you know, on the south side, north side, but it's no named community.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was the neighborhood integrated or was it a black side of town or--
Speaker 2: There was a black side of town yes.  That was called Hammond Heights [Ada, Oklahoma], um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did you live there or did you live in another--
Speaker 2: We lived there for a period of time, but not throughout my whole childhood.  Probably lived there through the time I was in grade school [Napier Grade School, Ada, Oklahoma], but then in junior high [Ada Junior High School, Ada, Oklahoma] and high school we moved 'cause I went to a different high school [Byng High School, Ada, Oklahoma].
Story_ID: 611620
Speaker 1: What were one of the, what was some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Dirt, milking cows, you know, dealing with cows, pigs, farm life, chickens, learning how to till a garden, so it was pretty, I guess I, and for me I thought it was normal because everyone around was doing the same thing so you didn't really think of it as not being what everybody else did.  We did, we had television, but we weren't allowed to watch TV a lot so there wasn't something like that, but it was, I, it was pretty normal.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what did you like to do growing up?
Speaker 2: I read a lot, had a bike that I loved so I rode my bike a lot and riding my bike I rode it all over the city [Ada, Oklahoma].  So I'd get in trouble about going away, going too far riding my bike.  But I also enjoyed meeting people and I was very active and involved in my church.  I'm Catholic.  So I just enjoyed learning different things and doing different things.  But reading probably was the thing that I enjoyed the most.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how would you describe your personality as a little kid?
Speaker 2: Probably someone who could keep herself entertained pretty well by myself.  I'm not someone that needs a lot of people around me.  So in that case I guess some people might say that I'm somewhat of an isolationist, but I enjoyed being around a crowd but it's not something that I require.
Story_ID: 611621
Speaker 1: Did you have, what was the name of your first school?
Speaker 2: My elementary school was Napier [Napier Grade School, Ada, Oklahoma], N-A-P-I-E-R, which is the same name as my mom's [Johnnie Moses Watson] high school.  You remember I told you it was a high school but then they converted it to an elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Named after the same Napier?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Had the same name.  It was just that when they went to it, it was a high school and when I went there, it only went to the sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was Napier black?
Speaker 2: It was Native American, black and white, you know, but they weren't, it was predominately Native American and black, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now were there any special teachers there, or mentors at Napier?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I can remember a couple.  One, a man by the name of Mr. L.Z. Black, who was my math teacher, and then my English, social studies type teacher that I developed a really nice relationship, her name was Miss T.L. Reid.
Speaker 1: Now is Ada [Oklahoma], I know that they were, during the, I guess the period after the Civil War, lots of black people went to Oklahoma, I think over thirty black towns were founded.  Was Ada one of the black towns?
Speaker 2: No, the only all-black town in Oklahoma is a town called Boley, B-O-L-E-Y, which is in the north central part of the state.  Ada is actually the county seat of the county Pontotoc County [Oklahoma].  Now Pontotoc is the name of a Chickasaw chief [sic.], so that part of the state was given to the Chickasaw Indians [Native American].
Speaker 1: All right.  Did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: No, I did well at anything I did, everything I did.  But I guess math maybe I liked, but I liked school.  I liked learning.
Speaker 1: Now when you were in grade school did you know, had you ever heard of an AKA?
Speaker 2: Not in grade school, but when I got to high school [Byng High School, Ada, Oklahoma] I ran into women that were in Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], but no, I had not heard of it in grade school at all, no, or junior high school [Ada Junior High School, Ada, Oklahoma].
Story_ID: 611622
Speaker 1: Okay was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Church was.  Catholic church was.  It was a great way to be able to do something on a Sunday afternoon.  My [maternal] grandmother [Naomi Armstrong Moses] on my, my grandmother that raised me was Baptist.  But my father's [Leonard McKinzie, Sr.] Catholic and so that's that part of him that I kept and retained.  But as a Baptist, you know, I grew up, they didn't do anything on Sunday but go to church.  So as a Catholic though we played basketball on Sundays, so it was a wonderful way to socialize and to be able to get out and get away from what I did, or would have been doing, if I'd not been Catholic.
Story_ID: 611623
Speaker 1: Now you grew up during the '50s [1950s], did you, did your family keep up with the television and the Civil Rights Movement and the other things on--
Speaker 2: We had a TV, and yes, I was aware of what was going on, but it was like it was in a distant world.  It wasn't anything that was a part of what we, in the town we lived in, that we experienced.  And no one really talked a lot about it, you know as you saw it on TV.  Of course, when you saw scenes in the '60s [1960s] where people were being hurt and you heard about people being murdered, you couldn't believe it, you know, but again, it was something that was like in a place you didn't even necessarily knew where it was, yeah, would be the best way I'd describe that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so as far as you know, growing up in Ada [Oklahoma] wasn't the scene of any civil rights struggles or anything?
Speaker 2: No, not in Ada at all.  Now history teaches me that in Tulsa, Oklahoma, but this would have been back in the '20s [1920s] I think, there probably was the largest race riot in this country, even to this day.  But, in, by the time of the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], no, they were not.  In fact, even when Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] died in 1968, I do not believe there were any disorders or issues in Oklahoma.  I don't believe that people had anything that happened, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so things were--racial relationships in Ada were fairly smooth you think?
Speaker 2: I don't know that I, yeah, I think they would be.  I mean because I went to a, as I said, in junior high [Ada Junior High School, Ada, Oklahoma] and high school [Byng High School, Ada, Oklahoma] I went to a, to a predominately white school.  I think in my high school graduation class, let's say we had, I don't know, seventy-five people in the high school graduating class or ninety or whatever it was, it wasn't a hundred, maybe there were five blacks, and everyone else was white and maybe a couple of Indians [Native American].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But did you have any black teachers in high school?
Speaker 2: No, no, all my teachers were white, and junior high.
Speaker 1: Okay, but there were some (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I had black elementary school teachers [at Napier Grade School, Ada, Oklahoma].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was elementary school mostly black?
Speaker 2: It was black and Indian.  But there was some whites that went to it, but not, it was predominately black and Indian.
Story_ID: 611624
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of your junior high school?
Speaker 2: I went to Ada Junior High School [Ada, Oklahoma] for seventh/eighth grade, and then for high school, ninth through twelfth, I went to a school called Byng, B-Y-N-G.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is the high school, Byng High?
Speaker 2: There's Ada High [Ada High School, Ada, Oklahoma], but I went to, there were two high schools, Byng and Ada High.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went to Ada Junior High, but then I went to Byng High School [Ada, Oklahoma].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who is Byng named after?  I was just curious.
Speaker 2: It's in Byng, Oklahoma--
Speaker 1: It's in Byng, oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --but it's, it's, maybe it's about ten miles away from Ada [Oklahoma].  I'm not sure who it's named after.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Now were you active in high school activities that were typical (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Played basketball.
Speaker 1: Okay, played basketball.
Speaker 2: Byng had the state champions for the State of Oklahoma in girls basketball.  That was the reason I went there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  In those days did they play regular basketball they play now?  I know they had like one version where you can't cross the center--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we play that version.
Speaker 1: What do they call it, captain's basketball, I think it's called.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yeah.  Yeah, we didn't play full court, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  That's funny because I think I've heard from older people that years ago the girls did play full court, and then they--
Speaker 2: Sometimes you could, yeah.
Speaker 1: --changed it that other, that gym version and then they changed it, now it's back to regular basketball.
Speaker 2: Sometimes you could, but back then the regular play was you really had a position that dictated, the guards guarded and then they did certain things, but it wasn't a run up and down the entire court, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 611625
Speaker 1: Now did you have, did your, did you maintain a favorite subject in high school [Byng High School, Ada, Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: I started gravitating toward business type classes in terms of shorthand, typing, but I still enjoyed English literature, and history was another subject that I gravitated to.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Very few history fans for some reason.  I mean I am, obviously (laughter), but what drew you to history, what did you like particularly about history?
Speaker 2: Probably my Oklahoma history 'cause in the State of Oklahoma you have to take Oklahoma art, then you did, you had to take Oklahoma history as a part of your history subjects in addition to world history and U.S. history, and so in the Oklahoma history, I probably got bitten by the bug in the ninth grade because I'd already heard stories growing up from my [maternal] great-grandmother [Elsie Moses] and my grandmother [Naomi Armstrong Moses] and my grandfather [Jasper Moses] about his trek from North Carolina and so forth, and when I started to read about that in the Oklahoma history story then I got an interest because it kind of came to life for me and I wanted to, you know, understand more about it and to go back and compare notes, so that's probably how I'd really gotten into the history inkling and it was in having the personal relations of my family to a history in a situation that I got my first exposure to the fact that what's written in a book is not necessarily what happened.
Speaker 1: Okay, now were you familiar, I, there's probably a long shot, but Melvin Tolson, Sr. [Melvin B. Tolson] who was featured in the, was portrayed by Denzel Washington in the film 'The Great Debaters' son, Arthur Tolson [Arthur L. Tolson], wrote a book called 'The Black Oklahomans' ['The Black Oklahomans: A History, 1541-1972'], black Oklahoma history.  Did you ever run across that when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: Nah, unh-uh, did not.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think he teaches at Tulane [sic. Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] or someplace now, in Louisiana, but he's, yeah, there's a book out.  We had it (unclear) state in the '70s [1970s], I, you know, in fact, I thought it was the same Tolson, but it's not, the son Arthur Tolson.
Speaker 2: Oh, it's his son?
Speaker 1: Yeah, who wrote 'The Black Oklahomans.'
Speaker 2: Well the father, Melvin, I think was at one time, the president [sic.] of Langston [Langston University], which is the black university there in Langston, Oklahoma, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right, that's right.
Story_ID: 611626
Speaker 1: The land runs of 1889 were only for that middle part because they discovered oil on it.  It was never given to the Indians [Native American].  And today it's what makes up Oklahoma City [Oklahoma].
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: The capital.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, now in high school [Byng High School, Ada, Oklahoma] now were you involved in clubs and things in high school and--
Speaker 1: Yes, most of my extracurricular activities other than basketball in high school was in what we call scholastic meets.  Those were competition on a given subject.  So, for example, as I told you history became something I became interested in based on the Oklahoma history that I learned, so I started reading a lot of history books and I was approached by my Oklahoma history teacher because, as I indicated to you a minute ago too, that reading that's where I learned what you read in a book is not necessarily what happened because I had real stories of what happened in my family and I could see in the books that they were giving us that that was not the way it was.  And, of course, I took that on with my teacher in class.  This particular Oklahoma history teacher was someone who asked me if I'd be willing to continue to read and compete for my high school in the inner scholastic meets around the state and essentially what it means is you take a subject, in this case history, or Oklahoma history or whatever, and you get to read or devour all the books that there are about it and then you go to a university and you compete against other students in the state that have done the same thing with the test, and as a result of, you know, who scores the highest or writes the best paper, you win these medals called Interscholastic Meet, you know, as a test of your knowledge base.  So I did a lot, I did that all through high school and did it in the areas of history, literature.  I also did it in business subjects like shorthand and typing.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Now were you an honor student in school?  Did you--
Speaker 1: Yes, I was.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Well that's significant 'cause you were a minority in the school as well (unclear).  Okay.
Story_ID: 611627
Speaker 1: When you were then a senior in high school [Byng High School, Ada, Oklahoma] what was, what were your prospects?  What did you think you'd do when you got out?
Speaker 2: Go to college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I actually went to Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] for my freshman year.  Well actually it was for my first semester of my freshman year.
Speaker 1: Well how is that decision made?
Speaker 2: Well my father [Leonard McKinzie, Sr.] lived in California and he lived in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area], and I, growing up, even though I grew up with my maternal grandparents [Naomi Armstrong Moses and Jasper Moses], I spent my summers, one summer with my mother's [Johnnie Moses Watson] family, the other summer with my father's family.  And after high school I had spent a lot more time with my mom's side of the family because that's where I grew up.  We decided that I would go and going to college it would still be like visiting my dad, but I could visit more often.  So I went to Stanford and I took the test and I went to Stanford for a semester.
Speaker 1: Now did your father live in East Palo Alto [California]?
Speaker 2: He lived in, at the time, he lived in San Francisco [California].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  But after a semester I really missed my grandmother.  I, I realized that I was gonna be getting out of college pretty quick and that that probably meant that I wouldn't be living like I'd lived all of my life, essentially with my grandmother, so second semester of my freshman year I decided that I wanted to go back to Ada [Oklahoma] and I would just finish college there.  I could always go to graduate school somewhere else.
Speaker 1: So this is 1974?
Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972].
Speaker 1: Two [1972].  Okay, '72 [1972], okay.
Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I went back to Ada in '73 [1973].
Story_ID: 611628
Speaker 1: You enrolled in East Central?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes.
Speaker 1: Now is that the full title of the college?
Speaker 2: East Central, East Central University is the name of it, or East Central Oklahoma University [sic. East Central Oklahoma State University; East Central University, Ada, Oklahoma] or something.
Speaker 1: Okay.  East Central Oklahoma University.  Some would say, how, going from Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] to East Central Oklahoma University.  It seemed like a step down or something, but how did you feel about that at the time?
Speaker 2: I didn't think it was a step down because the major I chose, which was business administration or accounting, East Central had a wonderful business program and my sights at the moment wasn't on burning up the world, it was in Oklahoma so there was not a company that wouldn't die for an accounting graduate out of East Central.  And I graduated with honors so it wasn't like I was not at the top of that heap, so, you know, it just wasn't anything that was that important to me at the time.  What was more important was spending that time with my [maternal] grandmother [Naomi Armstrong Moses].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you take part in campus activities and various things?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  That's where I joined the sorority.  I got back second semester my freshman year and they were getting ready to create a chapter of Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] on that campus and they were, basically consisted of upperclassmen, but they needed twelve students to charter the chapter and they only had eleven upperclassman so they had to come into the freshman class.  I was a second semester freshman and you had to have one semester of grades and I was at the top of that freshman class with grades, with that first semester of grades, so they invited me to join them and I did, so on March 10, 1973, right after I got back I became a charter member of the undergraduate chapter there at East Central and the name of the chapter was Eta Pi [ph.].  I was in the honors program--
Speaker 1: Eta Pi.  That sounds like--
Speaker 2: Ate a pie, yeah.
Speaker 1: I ate a pie (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, Eta P-I, but I ate a pie.  I was in the honors program at East Central, was treasurer of the chapter there and started off as a corresponding secretary I think, went up to treasurer then to basileus my senior year.  And I was involved in student government and other things on campus.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I received the outstanding graduate award of the business school my senior year.
Speaker 1: Now was, now was there a black student organization on campus and did you--
Speaker 2: Other than the fraternities, no, no, pretty much.  We had Alpha Phi Alpha [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity] and Alpha Kappa Alpha.  We were the only two, the only sorority and fraternity on the campus.  We didn't have like a black student union or anything like that, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, out of the, if we had three thousand students, there probably were not more than 100 African Americans on that college campus.
Story_ID: 611629
Speaker 1: When you were a senior had you planned to go to graduate school immediately after college [East Central Oklahoma State University; East Central University, Ada, Oklahoma]?
Speaker 2: I knew I was going to go to grad school, but I'll tell you a little story, when I was in high school [Byng High School, Ada, Oklahoma], my teachers tried to get my parents [Johnnie Moses Watson and Leonard McKinzie, Sr.] to allow me to test out a grade so that I would come out of high school like at fifteen or sixteen and my dad was just dead set against it because, you know, he felt that was just too young to go to college, so I was a bit miffed about the fact that he didn't let me do that.  So when I went to college I was committed not to go to college for more than four years even though I knew I was going to go to grad school.  So I graduated from college in like three years and was going to go to grad school, however, I discovered this profession called public accounting and being a CPA [certified public accountant], and decided that, you know, if I did that and was successful enough I might not ever come back to grad school so that was like my declaration to my family.  Basically still being angry after three years or four years that I had not been allowed to go to college at an earlier age.  So I did not go to grad school immediately.  I think I started a master's [degree] program at the University of Oklahoma [Norman, Oklahoma] a couple of years out of college, but I just didn't have an interest, I was having too much fun working and having a social life and being on my own and doing all these other things so I just continued to work.  And I was involved in the sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] and I just kept doing those things.  But I eventually did go to grad school, but it was way many years later.  In fact, it was here in Illinois.  I have an M.B.A. from Northwestern [Kellogg School of Management, Evanston, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that was achieved in the--
Speaker 2: In the last eleven years, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, since the '90s [1990s].
Speaker 2: Yeah, I graduated in '97 [1997].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: From '95 [1995] to '97 [1997].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But by then I'd gone, I enjoyed school, going back and it was great because then I had had enough work experience that I had a real great appreciation for school and then going to Northwestern and being in that environment for the discipline and the approach that they take, it was a wonderful experience.
Story_ID: 611630
Speaker 1: Now from the--some of the notes that I have, you had, you held positions with AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] early on, right out of college [East Central Oklahoma State University; East Central University, Ada, Oklahoma], right?
Speaker 2: No, not right out of college.  Right out of college I went to work in public accounting for Deloitte and Touche [Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited], which at the time was Touche Ross [Touche Ross and Co.], and that was in Tulsa, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: Touche, T-O-U-C-H-E, like touche.
Speaker 1: T-O-U--okay.
Speaker 2: Touche Ross, CPA [certified public accountant] firm.
Speaker 1: That's in Tulsa, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, that was in Tulsa, and today, so that was in Tulsa.
Speaker 1: That's 1970?
Speaker 2: That's 1970, at the end of '75 [1975], beginning of '76 [1976] and they moved me to Oklahoma City [Oklahoma] in like 1978 to open up an office.  They didn't have an office in Oklahoma City.  And I'm still involved in the sorority at that time as I said to you, the twentieth supreme basileus [Barbara Kinard Phillips] had appointed me her financial advisor and she did that in 1978.  So I did that for her and in 1980, I think it was '80 [1980]--I was in Oklahoma City from '75 [1975], '78 [1978] to like '83 [1983] I guess it was, or something like that, '82 [1982], '83 [1983], and Deloitte Haskins and Sells, which is another CPA firm, recruited me to come to Chicago [Illinois] and I'm saying it was '82 [1982], '83 [1983], I can tell you when it was, it was right, well, let me put it this way to you, the year Harold Washington won the primary for mayor of this city--
Speaker 1: That's '83 [1983].
Speaker 2: That was the year I moved here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Deloitte Haskins and Sells in Oklahoma City, which was where I was with Touche Ross. There in Oklahoma--I knew people in the Oklahoma City office and they were asking me to come over, switch firms, and so they started talking to me about would I be interested in moving to a large city and they presented a proposition of my coming to Chicago, and that's how I came here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I was with Deloitte from '83 [1983] to '85 [1985].
Story_ID: 611631
Speaker 1: And then in '85 [1985] we were building this building that we're in now.  I was a financial advisor at that time to the twenty-first national president [HistoryMaker Faye Beverly Bryant], the twentieth's successor and the executive director who at that, who was the executive director of Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.].  She got married and she moved away from Chicago [Illinois] so we were in the middle of the construction of this building.  We were raising money to pay for this building debt free and needless to say, the building wasn't finished and we didn't have all the cash we needed.  So the president asked me from the financial advisor, would I come here, be executive director and see the project through, and that's what I did.  So I left public accounting.  I left Deloitte [Deloitte Haskins and Sells; Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited], did that.  When we finished the building, we dedicated it in 1985, my work was essentially done so I stayed around another year or so making sure things were settled and I went back to public accounting at Coopers and Lybrand [PricewaterhouseCoopers] in 1987.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well overseeing the development of this building, that's, that's really a big deal.  I mean that's been a source of wonder and mystery to many of us who lived in Chicago for years.  I knew it was headquarters for AKA.  First I didn't know what it was.  But we found it was the headquarters for AKA.  People were really, you know, impressed.
Speaker 1: Well, we used an African American architect firm, Moutoussamy and Moutoussamy [ph.].  John Moutoussamy [John Warren Moutoussamy, Sr.] was the architect that designed this building 'cause he also designed the Urban League [Chicago Urban League] headquarters that's here in Chicago.  If you look at both our buildings, they're kind of similar, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, now he's the father of [HistoryMaker] Jeanne Moutoussamy-Ashe, who married the tennis legend Arthur Ashe.  She's a photographer in New York [New York] right now (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, absolutely.
Speaker 2: Jeanne Moutoussamy who grew up here in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Right, well her dad was the architect for this building and we used, we used a black construction company, Bush Construction Company [Bush Construction Co., Chicago, Illinois].  The original owner of that construction company is now deceased, but he was, that was the construction company that built it and so we did that.  We opened it, we dedicated it and we did it all by raising money internally within the organization.
Speaker 2: Well that's, that's--sounds like the right way to do it and, but it's always surprising to me when black organizations do not use black contractors and that sort of thing, you know, but was there ever any question of not doing that?
Speaker 1: No, no, we wanted this to be, the point of that statement of power was we wanted to raise money, we wanted to find an African American architect, an African American construction company, all legal work, and to do it that way and we did that and opened this building in 1985.  We bought the land from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  Our second national president who was a University of Chicago graduate in 1919, with a master's degree, was very instrumental in helping us to get the then president of the University of Chicago who was a lady by the name of Hanna Gray [Hanna Holborn Gray] to agree to sell us this land here on the corner for us to be their neighbor and for us to have our headquarters here, so.
Speaker 2: Now what was the name of the former national president?
Speaker 1: Loraine Richardson Green.  She's the wife of, I believe, the first African American judge here in the City of Chicago, Wendell Green.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's good, that's good information (laughter).  I like having this kind of detail about this.  This is, yeah, this building kind of sits at the head of, you know, you're across the street from the great Museum of Science and Industry [Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --and 57th Street leads to, it's a wonderful street filled with bookstores and restaurants leading to the University of Chicago.  I think it's three, four bookstores, so it's really, it's one of my favorite streets.  I mean just because (laughter) of the bookstores and restaurants, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it is.  It's a wonderful area, it really is, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 611632
Speaker 1: Wow that, that's, that sounds like--are there any stories associated with the development of this building (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) With the building of this building?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I guess one could be how I got to be financial advisor to the twentieth national president [Barbara Kinard Phillips].  Well, Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] has always had its headquarters here in Chicago [Illinois].  Our first executive director who was a lady by the name of Carey B. Preston [Carey B. Maddox Preston] who was a legend in this community too, opened up our first office over on Green- I believe it was on Woodlawn [Avenue] and I think it was 63rd Street or 61st Street in 1949.  And we bought a building at 5211 South Greenwood Avenue, which was our second headquarters office in like maybe it was 1949, 1950, so we owned that building and we moved from there here in '85 [1985].  So the president before the one who appointed me financial advisor, she studied the situation and decided we'd outgrown 5211 and so they wanted to build a new headquarters building.  Well at the '78 [1978] boule, she got the boule to agree to sell 5211, rent some space while they build this building.  The incoming president, the twentieth, gave me that information and she said, "Tell me what you think about this.  Is this a good deal?"  Well, I didn't know what the president going out because I'm just this lowly recent college graduate, had said that I was looking at her work.  You understand what I'm saying, so I said to her, "No, this is stupid."  I said, "Why would you leave something you owned, deplete your cash reserves by renting while you build something?  That makes no economic sense."  So she listened to me and I said no, you stay where you are, you save your cash, you use it to pay it and that's how we grew to this concept of owning, raising all of our money and buying it outright and constructing it that way and not, you know, borrowing money.  And so that was how I became her financial advisor.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's sound advice.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and as I said earlier to you when I said I'd done just about every job, I simply did it because she asked me to do it.  It was the right thing to do and it was a talent I had that I could share and there would be some mutual and common good that come from it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then the twenty-first [HistoryMaker Faye Beverly Bryant] kept me on 'cause even though we broke the ground under the twentieth, the construction was going to have to be under her.  So when the executive director left and got married, then I became the person that they turned to say well now, let's kind of finish this, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So you could kind of see someone's guidance and footprints all along the way I guess for me in this role today.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You had a long history with them.
Speaker 2: Yes, at the national level.
Speaker 1: At the national level.
Speaker 2: Which is very unusual.  Most people don't experience that.
Story_ID: 611633
Speaker 1: Now you worked with Coopers and Lybrand?
Speaker 2: Coopers and Lybrand, yes.
Speaker 1: Is it Lybrand or Lee, is it Lybrand?
Speaker 2: Lybrand was what it was called when I worked for them.  Now it's PricewaterhouseCoopers.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Coopers and Lybrand.
Speaker 2: Uh-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  That's a big accounting firm, national reputation and such.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was that like when you, were there many black people working for Coopers Lybrand when you were there?
Speaker 2: No, I was the only one that, I was the first that Touche Ross [Touche Ross and Co.] hired in 1976, African American male or female.  I was the first and only African American manager that Deloitte Haskins and Sells [Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited] brought here to Chicago [Illinois] in 1983 and when I went to Coopers and Lybrand in 1987, after I left this position, I was one of two African American managers in an office of twelve hundred people.
Speaker 1: Now is it, is it tough being the only one?
Speaker 2: I guess it could be if you focused on that but you know as I share with you when you asked me about my background, the upbringing and what I experienced, it wasn't anything I focused on.  And I guess you could, if I think about it a little bit about some of the situations that I experienced, I guess you could probably say people who were used to having situations or issues that I probably was a little different to them in the context that I never had an issue with speaking my mind, that I guess came from my ability in knowing my level of intelligence, but that might be offensive to other people, but because I never took on that persona of that I guess, I just, I never, I never paid attention to it.  I don't perceive it as ever having impaired any promotions or raises so it never got my attention.
Story_ID: 611634
Speaker 1: Are there any stories of misunderstandings on the part of others in terms of how they related to you?
Speaker 2: The only thing I can remember ever happening that I would say would be related to just unbelievable was in Oklahoma.  When I was moved from Tulsa [Oklahoma] to Oklahoma City [Oklahoma] to open up the Oklahoma City office, there was only like initially six of us.  Then we grew the office.  By the time I left I think we had about twenty-something people on the staff, but I was the only African American there too.  In Oklahoma City I was assigned to go out and go to work on an audit.  There was an audit of an oil company and I was the supervisor.  Well, I went to the place and the CEO when he saw me, you know we talked on the phone for weeks or whatever.  When he saw me, his reaction was, "Oh no," and you know I'm like, "Okay, is there a problem here?"  And his statement was, "I need to call your office."  Well, what I learned was he had called the office indicating that he could not work with me.  Well, of course, the partner in charge of the office who knew me was like, "What's going on, is there something, did something happen, what did she do?"  So he actually made up something that I never found out what the situation was and when I talked to the partner in charge and gave him my side of the story, he said, "Oh, well," he said, "I think that it's best that you don't go back out there, but the reality of this is, you know, he's the client, we got to pay a fee, you know, we want his business," and all this.  And so I still don't know why he did this, but I don't know, but I guess that's the closest encounter I've had to what I could, would characterize or somebody might say had some race tone to it, but I couldn't tell ya.  He wasn't disrespectful to me.  It was a little ah ha kind of thing of, you know, oh no, you know, like that, but I'm not, you know, it didn't, I didn't worry about it or think about it because, you know, I knew there was nothing I had done.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what he basically did was made up a whopper to--
Speaker 2: Un-huh, to cover whatever his own insecurities were, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So how long did you work for Coopers [sic. Touche Ross and Co.; Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited]?
Speaker 2: From the time I got out of college [East Central Oklahoma State University; East Central University, Ada, Oklahoma] in 1975, early '76 [1976] to when I came to Chicago [Illinois] which would have been 1983.
Story_ID: 611635
Speaker 1: Well, what happened after the building was constructed and were you working, when you were executive director of the, of AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], was that considered full time?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's a full-time job.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had to leave Deloitte Haskins and Sells [Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited] in 1985 after two years and I came here to take the executive director position.
Speaker 1: I've got notes here, but the dates I think are off, so I'm just trying, I have to depend on you to get us to whatever's next.
Speaker 2: Okay, well after I left Deloitte, I mean Touche Ross [Touche Ross and Co.; Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited] and came to Deloitte in '83 [1983].  I left Deloitte in '85 [1985] and took the position of executive director of AKA.  So I left Coopers, I mean I left Deloitte in 1985 and became executive director, built the building, got it opened and then left and went to Coopers and Lybrand [PricewaterhouseCoopers] in 1987.  So I was in Alpha Kappa Alpha from '85 [1985] to '87 [1987].  I was Deloitte Haskins and Sells from '83 [1983] to '85 [1985].  And I was with Touche Ross from '76 [1976] to '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Touche Ross from college graduation [from East Central Oklahoma State University; East Central University, Ada, Oklahoma], '76 [1976] to 1983.  Deloitte Haskins and Sells Chicago [Illinois] from 1983 to '85 [1985].  Alpha Kappa Alpha executive director from '85 [1985] to '87 [1987].  Coopers and Lybrand from 1987 to 1994.
Speaker 1: Now, is 1994 when you decided to go back to grad school [at the Kellogg School of Management, Evanston, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did, but I had decided to go back to grad school, and in doing so I wanted to pursue possibly a corporate career, so I took a position initially in '94 [1994] with a Fortune 100 company as head of their internal audit function.  A company by the name of Whitman Corporation.  It was publicly traded on the New York Stock Exchange [New York, New York] and I was their global, their worldwide internal audit director out in Rolling Meadows [Illinois], so I was there from '94 [1994] until I began grad school in the fall of '95 [1995].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what does Whitman do?
Speaker 2: Whitman was a holding corporation, but I'll tell you what they owned and you'll know that.  They were a holding corporation that had evolved from what was called the old IC Industries, so what they owned at the time I was global internal audit director was primarily three companies, Midas Muffler [Midas, Inc.].  They owned, they were the largest bottler of Pepsi [PepsiCo] products and they also owned a manufacturing operation based in St. Louis, Missouri, called Hussmann Corporation that manufactured refrigerator cases.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  We're gonna pause (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was a $3 billion a year operation.
Story_ID: 611636
Speaker 1: Okay.  So we had you working with Whitman [Whitman Corporation].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And they do make a sampler, they did make it at one time.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You said the Whitman Sampler candy [Whitman's Sampler] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But at the time I took over they had the, the three entities that named, Midas Muffler [Midas, Inc.], Hussmann [Hussmann Corporation] and Pepsi [PepsiCo].  What that meant for me was I traveled all over the world to every possible nice city that there was because Hussmann had manufacturing facilities all throughout Mexico and over in Europe.  Pepsi was all over the place and they were expanding into developing countries, competing with Coke [The Coca-Cola Company] like, places like Poland and Russia, and Midas Muffler was everywhere, Belgium, Ireland, Scotland, Europe, UK [United Kingdom], they were just all over the place.  So I did a lot of traveling for about a year and then decided okay, I better get this master's degree.  So I left Whitman and started full time at Northwestern [Kellogg School of Management, Evanston, Illinois].
Speaker 1: What year is this at Northwestern?
Speaker 2: I was at Whitman from '94 [1994] when I left Coopers [Coopers and Lybrand; PricewaterhouseCoopers] until '95 [1995] when I entered graduate school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I graduated in June of 1997.
Story_ID: 611637
Speaker 1: Okay now you were at the Northwestern Kellogg School of Management [Evanston, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now this is supposed to be a special place.
Speaker 2: Yes it is.
Speaker 1: All right (laughter).  Can you tell us a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: Best place in the world.  I lived in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] which meant logically that you would go to University of Chicago [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois] because it was so close, but looking at the curriculum for the M.B.A. program, and both of them are wonderful schools, Kellogg's philosophy I felt was more in kind with what I wanted to do and for where I was in my life at that moment, which is one that was more entrepreneurial in spirit, not so quantitatively based.  University of Chicago's program is a very wonderful program and it's very grounded in economics because, you know, they've turned out more Nobel Peace Prize winners in economics [sic. Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel] than any other school on the planet.  So that business school is aligned with that, and I wasn't going to per se teach or pursue, you know, the next theory of, economic theory that was gone save the world, but I wanted to use cutting edge issues in current business so it was like a practical application to theory.  And that was the perception as well as the image that Northwestern has, and it has been labeled by some to be the best business school there is around the country, so that didn't hurt, but yes, it is a very special place.  It was a wonderful experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What's, if you had to think of some, one major thing that you learned there that, that really has been of use and benefit, you know, I mean invaluable sense, what would it be?
Speaker 2: Well the group of people that I met, 'cause my class was probably somewhere around seventy-five or eighty students, I'm not sure, are friends I'll have for life so that's a wonderful experience, but the one thing I probably learned, I would say the one thing that was confirming for me because I'd been working for quite a number of years, almost twenty years when I went back to school, was the, I learned enough theory to marry with the practical experience I had that it probably gave me the confidence I needed to start to do some of the entrepreneurial things that are a part of who I am also.  So I would say that's probably what I learned the best.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you got your degree in '97 [1997], was it '97 [1997] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ninety-seven [1997].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 611638
Speaker 1: And what did you do next?
Speaker 2: Well, before I graduated from Northwestern [Kellogg School of Management, Evanston, Illinois], I took a job with a government agency, the State of Illinois, the Toll Highway Authority [Illinois State Toll Highway Authority].  I was approached, I don't know if you remember that, if you lived in Chicago [Illinois] long enough, but there was a time back in let's say the early, early mid-'90s [1990s], when there was a lot of scandal in the press about the Illinois Toll Highway Authority.  They built a new building out there in, where is that building, Downers Grove [Illinois], and the executive director who'd been appointed by the governor had used a helicopter inappropriately and there was some scandal around some money and some real estate transactions and so forth.  Well I was approached by a person to go out and help them clean that up from an internal audit perspective.  So that was how I initially got introduced to the toll way.  As I stayed out there I went ahead and took the position as internal audit director and I went to them probably in like '96 [1996], it was after I'd started school, and I did that until I decided to go with Salomon Smith Barney [Morgan Stanley Wealth Management] after graduation, and I think I went to Smith Barney in like '99 [1999] or something, so I was out of the toll way for two or three years as internal audit director.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went to Smith Barney.  Now in college I formulated this idea that I felt that my experience and my education was ideal for a chief financial officer position in a major organization, so that became my goal after college.  I interviewed with a lot of people and nothing was coming up but I didn't want to stay in internal audit either for much longer, so I went with Smith Barney to get cash management and securities transaction skills which were skills I did not have.  So I was with Smith Barney doing, being a broker, doing transactions and that type of thing.
Story_ID: 611639
Speaker 1: And I got that first opportunity to be a CFO in a start up company called Hollywood Casino [Hollywood Casino Corporation].  And I moved from Chicago [Illinois] in 19--in 2000, yes, to Shreveport, Louisiana to get a casino operation up and running and casino hotel in Shreveport, the Hollywood Casino [Hollywood Casino Shreveport; Eldorado Resort Casino Shreveport] as the chief financial officer.  That was a, that's a publicly, was a publicly held, traded company also.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So this is in 1990--
Speaker 1: No, in 2000--
Speaker 2: Two thousand [2000]
Speaker 1: --I think it was 2000.
Speaker 2: Okay, 2000.  What's it like working with a casino, I mean in the--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well first, if you think about my career it has always been in accounting, public accounting or AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] but they were all businesses that were established.  This was an entity that didn't exist.  The only thing that was there was a physical structure for the hotel operation, a physical structure for the casino, a boat that they would gamble on, and then they had retail operations.  Well my job as CFO was to get thirty-five hundred people hired between June and we were opening the casino I believe it was on December the 4th.  So I had less than six months to get people hired and trained and in place through a human resources department that I managed, as well as get all the finance and accounting up and running and the regulatory reporting to the government, and to finally recruit and convince people to move to Shreveport, Louisiana.  And a casino operation, first a start up, is very difficult to do.  It takes a lot out of you 'cause you're working twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week.  But a start up that's a casino means that when the casino opens, you're definitely working twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week 'cause it's open twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week.  So it's a very interesting phenomena.  What I learned from experience was one, I had the creativity, the skill and the stamina to take a business from just bricks and mortar to a real live operation with systems that generated money and economics, and so you saw economics come to life.  I also learned that it mattered what industry you found yourself in because the topic of gambling, as I witnessed it, while it should be just entertainment, too often a lot of people who go and do that are people who are looking for something other than entertainment.  And oftentimes, the people that really keep that business running every day, are not the high rollers, you know, the wealthy people, it is the people that we refer to as the daily grind, those people that come every day and by volume you keep the doors open and those sometimes are the people who shouldn't even be in a casino.  And in that whole, living that experience and watching some of the things that happen to people and their lives, I really, after a couple of years, just knew that I could not, that was not a career that I could continue in, because I didn't want my talent to be used in a way that so many people ended up being in so much grief.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I think a lot of people in cities like Detroit [Michigan] and elsewhere, (unclear) kind of regret that they got involved with the casino movement.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: So it really just blossomed in around 2000 or so all over the country, on the gulf down where you were, Shreveport and Detroit and some of the other cities, reservations as you will report, Upper Peninsula, Michigan, different places.
Speaker 1: So then I started looking to, okay, you know, do I stay in Shreveport or move to Texas or do something different--
Story_ID: 611640
Speaker 1: So I opted to come back to the place I had been and knew which was Chicago [Illinois], and I came back as a chief financial officer for the late John Stroger, Jr. [HistoryMaker John H. Stroger, Jr.].  Again, I came back in this role of turn around person.  If you recall, the Cook County forest preserve [Forest Preserve District of Cook County], when they were going through a series of scandals back in 2002, 2001, 2002, they'd fired their CFO, rife with all kinds of financial issues and so I came back in January of '02 [2002] as the CFO of the forest preserve to turn around a fourteen year deficit driven agency, and we were successful in doing that within two years.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is like, this is 2000 and--
Speaker 1: Twenty o-two [2002]
Speaker 2: Twenty o-two [2002], okay.
Speaker 1: To 2004.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, what was some of the, I guess I have to ask, what were some of the challenges in trying to right that situation?
Speaker 1: Well first you had, I think it's eighteen or nineteen Cook County [Illinois] commissioners.  You see 'em on TV, you know the personalities.  And when I came back President Stroger was, I think 2002 was an election year so he was getting ready to run for president of the Cook County board for the third time I think it was.  And there had been some issues surrounding it, but the biggest issue he had was the forest preserve.  Well, I knew from my experience and the work habits that I had that I could turn it around, but the only way I could do it was that I had his support and I meant his solid support, not his political support.  And he indicated to me that he wanted it fixed and he was committed to having it fixed and that if I was able to do it, then he would support that.  And so I shared with him the vision and plan I had for how I knew it could work and I also wanted to understand, given the fallout from it, what would that mean politically and that that was something he was prepared to deal with and he indicated that he was.  So my job became very simple, which was to devise a plan and implement it.  And I did it in a way that first, dealing with the commissioners.  All of them say that they are here to serve, well, if that were true, then they would have no problem buying into the plan that he and I had devised because the plan was about returning the county back to the taxpayer by minimizing their taxes.  That was basically the strategy but the way we would have to get there was to reduce costs, which meant laying off people, which meant with a reduced staff, the people who remained must be people who can do the work or you can't get the work done.  And so we took an agency down from, the forest preserve district I think, upwards of fifteen hundred, twelve, fifteen hundred people, we restructured it down to a staffing of somewhere less than half that.  And immediately began to, after two years of severance packages, et cetera, return the agency to financial solvency, and therefore stem the tide for property tax increases to taxpayers because the organization was operating in the black, under the current tax structure.  And so like I say, the most challenge I had was sitting in a, sitting in board meetings watching the antics and the stage performances of people for the camera when it wasn't doing anything to governing.  So that was a valuable lesson.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, so you were able to turn this situation around and--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --make it solvent again.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 611641
Speaker 1: And as I turned it around and made it solvent I got tapped to see if I could come over to the Chicago Housing Authority, CHA, and help with their transformation program and there I was told that they too were committed to doing to the same thing that President Stroger was.  The difference is he as a statesman, and that's the only word I could use for John Stroger [HistoryMaker John H. Stroger, Jr.], 'cause he truly was not just a politician, he was a statesman.  He understood what hard decisions meant and he was a man of his word.  I cannot say that the experience that I had over at the Chicago Housing Authority was the same.  They indicated they wanted change, they wanted to fix these problems, but there was not the resolve within the structure and within the leadership to make the hard decisions.  So knowing that, I also knew that not effecting change meant that the problems were going to persist and that was not an environment I wanted to stay in.  So at about that same time, which this was, I left the forest preserve [Forest Preserve District of Cook County] in 2004 after a couple of years, and went to CHA.  I then started, I had been elected in 2002 to first supreme anti-basileus of Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], which meant I would be president in 2006.  So I knew I needed to plan for the administration and to get a vision and I think okay, well if the CHA is not working, what better way than to just take the time before you come in office and plan it out and just really consult, but take, have the time to really make this work.  So I left the CHA in 2005 and took the rest of 2005 and the first half of 2006 planning out the vision of ESP [Extraordinary Service Program], having meetings, getting with people, working through that, and then we went in office in July of 2006 and I've spent the last, since that time, getting the strategy in place as a reality so that it can kind of go on its own.  And that's what we're doing right now.
Story_ID: 611642
Speaker 1: Well, I think, well we asked some of the questions at top, I guess around, you know, specific things around--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, what--well, we can still ask more specifically I guess.  That was--how many AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] are there in the country at this point?
Speaker 2: We have initiated since we were created in 1908, over 200,000 women, and our database is over that.  We have an active, an involved membership of over 55,000 women, but our database is over 200,000.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So how many, what kind, I guess what is the national administration entail, I guess.
Speaker 2: This corporate office building houses what we call our corporate operations.  I indicated you have 200,000 members, over 200,000.  We have over 975 chapters all over the world, in the United States, Canada, Great Britain [United Kingdom], Germany, Japan, Korea, U.S. Virgin Islands and I think that is, and Africa.  Those chapters are a network that the members use to deliver a community service and 360 plus of those chapters are on college campuses.  They're undergrad chapters.  So this corporate office [in Chicago, Illinois] services that membership base and it also helps to plan the annual conferences that we have where our members participate in leadership development training.  We hold eleven conferences per year, ten of them are at the regional level and one national conference.  In the even numbered years we have what we call our national convention, which is what's coming up in July in Washington [D.C.] for our centennial.  For our odd numbered years we hold what we call a leadership seminar.  So this office here, the staff with about twenty-five people and what they do is execute communication, technology, conference planning, membership services to the members as well as public relations to the community in the global society.  We also have on this third floor, in addition to this being the executive level and the board room and my office, our Educational Advancement Foundation is on this floor on the other end of the hallway and they have about five or six employees.  And what they do is award scholarships and mini-grants based on the investment portfolio and asset base that we have, which is primarily contributed by members and chapters.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how long will you be the, you have two more years, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, my term goes from July 2006 to July 2010.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And there's no, you won't campaign for four more years or anything like that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, no, it's a one time thing, yeah, a one time thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 611643
Speaker 1: Is decision making in the AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] a collective process?  I mean I see, this is a big conference room we're sitting in now, huge table (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We have an eight- we have an eighteen member board.  I'm the chairman of that board, and structurally our constitution gives me the authority to act as the chief executive officer.  Now I am subject to that board approval of what I do, but the board approves a budget, the national convention that we hold every two years also approves a budget.  The board gets to revise that budget as it goes forward, so the eighteen member board, we meet three times a year and I chair those meetings.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, I take it you have to travel too, to meetings in other countries?
Speaker 2: I travel for speaking engagements.  I sit on several corporate boards, both as a result of being the president as well as in my own private career, and so that does keep me on the road every week, yes.  But the speaking engagements for the sorority is what keeps me traveling pretty much like every week, like I don't have a weekend that I'm at home from the beginning of this year until May.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Has the fundamental nature of the AKA changed?  I know at one time, I know people would think of it as a college, you know, experience, primarily, but I, I've met lots of women who have joined after graduating from college now.  Is it, what's the, has the character of it changed at all?
Speaker 2: No, I wouldn't say that.  In our society in America most fraternities and sororities are college based because that's the way the majority of our society thinks of them, but the African American experience of fraternal organizations has always been very different.  We have never been just a college institution.  Our organization, for example, founded in 1908 was incorporated in 1913 and we chartered our first graduate chapter, meaning out of the community in the '20s [1920s] so we have never been just a college based group.  It was always designed to be a lifelong experience.
Story_ID: 611644
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything that you've done to this point yourself in life, in your own profession and with AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], I mean, is there any major thing that you, that you would do differently now if you could do it again?
Speaker 2: I probably would have started my business [BMC Associates, Chicago, Illinois] earlier, you know, simply because that might have given me longer to be in it than I've got right now, but I don't know that I would do anything different in terms of the way that I've served in this institution, or in the way I've served in my career, because I've approached each experience as something that I should try to learn as much as I can and to give as much as I can--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because I know that in giving you receive.
Story_ID: 611645
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, it depends on the generation you're talking to, but I'd say for our younger generation, my concern is that it is a generation that is growing up and existing not in a world where they have on the one hand all of the knowledge available from the human kind, but yet it is something that they don't bother to devour.  They're absorbed with things like videos, TV games, things that may or may not enhance their humanity or their human nature.  And that's a concern because we, being their caretakers, really are the ones who provided them that stimulus.  And so whatever they turn out to be, it's our, part of our responsibility.  I'm then concerned that our generation doesn't take that responsibility on in the manner that it should as I would say other generations have done, and then overall we have, we certainly are now through the Internet connected to a global society and that means we now have a global children population to worry about.  And there are so many issues and challenges to our coming together as human spirits to deal with those issues in a, in a very humane way that it, it somewhat, it can be very intimidating, mind boggling and overwhelming when you think about it.
Story_ID: 611646
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point again, what would you consider today to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: You know, when you say there're 6 billion people on the planet called Earth, you're just one of 'em, what is the difference you can make?  It might just simply be to be the best human you can be in the time and space you occupy.
Speaker 1: Who constitutes your family today?  Can you talk a little bit about your immediate family?
Speaker 2: Well, I explained to you that my mom [Johnnie Moses Watson] and my dad [Leonard McKinzie, Sr.] both had other families.  Well I'm the oldest of three on my mother's side, so I have a half-sister [Cheryl Jackson] and a half-brother [Brad Watson], each who have families of their own.  And on my father's side, I'm the oldest of five, but only three of them are living today.  And only one of them has a family.  So I am divorced.  I was married [to James Harper (ph.)], but I have no children of my own biologically, but I do have six godsons and two of them are married now.  No grandkids yet, but I'm, hopefully that's in process.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Is there anything I have not asked you before I ask my last question that you think we ought to talk about?
Speaker 2: No, not that I can because I didn't have frame of a context of what we were trying to achieve today so, no I don't think there's anything we probably haven't touched on.
Story_ID: 611647
Speaker 1: Well the last question is similar to legacy.  But a little different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered?  I would like to be remembered as that spirit that always had a helping hand, but given by requiring that in exchange the person is the best that they can be.  So I'd like to be thought of as that person that, you know how when you grow up and you have a teacher or you have a parent and maybe at the moment it happened you don't really appreciate it, but as you go through your life as time passes, as things happen, you look back and you say wow, that person really did make a contribution to my life.  That I think would be a wonderful legacy.
Speaker 1: All right.  Thank you very much for spending the time with us.
Speaker 2: Thank you.  Thanks.
Story_ID: 611648
Speaker 1: Okay this is my high school, Byng High School [Ada, Oklahoma].  It's graduation week from high school, so it would approximately be May 1972, and in the photo is myself in the red dress and my best friend in high school, Alexis Lewis.
Speaker 2: Okay that photo is a photo of the banquet of the first boule or international convention I attended which meant I was a sophomore in college, [East Central Oklahoma State University; East Central University, Ada, Oklahoma] so it would have been July 1974, Miami, Florida, Fontainebleau hotel [Fontainebleau Miami Beach, Miami Beach, Florida].  In the photo in the forefront are myself and the basileus of our chapter at the time, Alethia Young [ph.], and let's see if I can remember who is in the background.  In the background in the blue dress is another chapter member, Denise Echols [ph.] and Skip Johnson [ph.] is next to her and I can't remember the names of the other two.
Speaker 1: This is a photo of my high school honor society I believe it is.  These are students that I went to Byng High School with, and the only person's name that comes to my mind as I look through this, the guy standing behind me is Billy Webb.  He was in my high school class, as well as all the rest of those students.  Rory is the guy standing to the forefront and to the fore right and I see.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Can you go ahead and point them out.
Speaker 1: This is me.  This is Billy Webb.  These are the Tate twins.  There were two of 'em.  Now there's one of 'em and I'm trying to find, where is the other one?  They look just alike, so you can't miss 'em.  Oh here he is, Larry [Larry Tate] and Gary Tate.  Those are the Tate twins.  This is Rory Ward.  This is the other African American of the honor society.  His name was U.J. MacArthur [ph.].  And this is Becky [ph.] and I can't remember Becky's last name.  This is Lorrie [ph.], but I tell you I'm drawing a (unclear) and of the rest of the names but they're all students that were in my class.  So that would have been May of 1972.  So I guess after thirty-six years you can forget some people's names.  'Cause I haven't seen some of those people since that day.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This picture was taken by one of my Touche Ross [Touche Ross and Co.; Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited] colleagues at my first audit engagement in Tulsa, Oklahoma.  I don't know where we were doing the work, probably at some, looks like maybe might have been some school or some construction company.  And so he came through the door and asked me to look up and as I looked up he snapped that Polaroid photo.
Speaker 1: This is a AKA function with my godmother, late godmother, Dorothy Johnson [ph.], who lived in Shreveport, Louisiana, and it's a picture that we took at a dinner gala event that would have been a sorority function, probably at a regional conference.
Speaker 2: That is the week before my wedding.  This is part of the festivities.  I believe it was the bridal shower.  Someone gave me an autographed rolling pin as if I were going to do some cooking or something (laughter).  I was looking at some of the notes that had been written by some of my friends.
Speaker 1: This is a picture as the president-elect, our first international vice president of Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.], at a meeting I believe at the Washington Hilton hotel, maybe, no it was, it's the Grand Hyatt [Grand Hyatt Washington] in Washington, D.C.  And to my left, the lady in the black and white is Dr. Gloria Dickinson [Gloria Harper Dickinson], who is our international regional director, or board member now, and to my right is another member of the sorority who was a university professor.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's the Alpha Kappa Alpha executive director picture.  The city would be Detroit, Michigan.  It would be the 1986 boule which we held there and we are, that's the then current international president, Dr. or Ms. Faye Beverly Bryant [HistoryMaker Faye Beverly Bryant].  That is to my right, and in between she and I are, I believe this gentlemen was an executive at General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] 'cause they sponsored one of our major events in Detroit, but I don't remember his name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is a president-elect photo also taken in Houston, Texas, during our south central regional conference.  I was elected president-elect in South Central [South Central Region], which is that region and this is at one of our conference.  To my left is my conference planning chair, Ms. JoAnn Brown, and to my right is a soror from the Dallas, Texas chapter.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is a college graduation photo to that I attended with members of my sorority who graduated from Langston University in Langston, Oklahoma.  The one who is without a cap on her head is my goddaughter and member of the sorority, Troya Clark [ph.] and the other three sorors are friends in her chapter.  They all, this was their graduation day and we were at the auditorium there in Langston.
Speaker 1: This is Detroit, Michigan again, Alpha Rho Omega Chapter and they held their international Founders Day and I along with Eric Michael Dyson [sic. Michael Eric Dyson], who is sitting to my left, were the speakers that day, and the current regional director, Mrs. Schylbea Hopkins is sitting in between Eric and myself, and two, on the other side of me is Miss Denise Wright and then the, at the time the other member of the chapter I believe is Ella Stather [ph.].
Speaker 2: OK, this is North Carolina A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University].  Their homecoming weekend in Greensboro, North Carolina and they do a big, what do you call it, tailgate--
Speaker 1: Party.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right on the grounds of the university and the stadium and so this is a picture of us right before we were going into the game.  To my right in the jean set is Dr. Lucille Piggott retired administrator at North Carolina A and T, and to my left is a retired Reynolds [Richard J. Reynolds High School, Winston-Salem, North Carolina] executive, Mrs. Janet Wheeler.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of Alpha Kappa Alpha women who are also members of The Links, Incorporated.  We were in the same chapter, which is the windy city chapter [The Windy City Chapter of The Links, Incorporated] in Chicago [Illinois], and to my left or in the middle, I'm in the white, next to me is a lady by the name of Harriet Johns, who is now deceased, and in fact, the other lady is also deceased, but she was a well known Chicago person, Miss Jacqueline Vaughn who was president of Chicago Teachers Union.  Yeah, but they are both AKAs but we were also, that was a Links picture that we took.
Speaker 2: This is a photo for my election as vice president or president-elect, which was at the end of my international treasurer's term here in Chicago, Illinois at the Palmer House [Palmer House Hotel; Palmer House Hilton, Chicago, Illinois], and that was the celebration party.  And Margo Baines is the lady standing next to me, one of my avid friends and supporter and soror with the winning signal.
Speaker 1: This was my first outing for an international position in 1982 as the international treasurer.  I did not win that election, but I had a good time running, and so this was the banquet photo that night.
Speaker 2: This is the Houston, Texas, seventy-fifth anniversary celebration as president-elect, and my date is attorney Alan Green [ph.].
Story_ID: 611649
Speaker 1: This is taken from my wedding photo which was September 3, 1988, in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma and it is a picture of me and my ex-husband, Mr. James Harper [ph.], cutting our wedding cake.
Speaker 2: And this is the bride photo from that same wedding day.
Speaker 1: This is the wedding sorority picture.  The women in these photo are all women who at the time in 1988 held national or international positions in Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Inc.] and I'm going to try to do this starting to my left and at the bottom.  The first picture is a picture of my dear friend who is our current executive director of our Educational Advancement Foundation, Miss Deborah Dangerfield.  Next to her is Miss Doris Asbury [Doris Robinson Asbury], a former regional director of the Mid-Atlantic Region.  Next to her is Miss Eleanor Phipps [Eleanor Phillips Phipps] who is the daughter of the twentieth supreme basileus and my mentor, Miss Barbara K. Phillips [Barbara Kinard Phillips], who gave me my first appointment.  This is Miss Judith Armstead, who is a member of the Chicago [Illinois] chapter of Theta Omega [Theta Omega Chapter] Alpha Kappa Alpha.  This is Miss Rhonda Fountano Johnson [Rhonda Johnson], who is a dear friend of mine, but more importantly, she is a classmate of my ex-husband.  They attended Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] together and she was in attendance at the wedding, and a soror.  This is a mentor of mine, the eighteenth supreme basileus, Dr. Mattelia Bennett Grays [HistoryMaker Mattelia B. Grays].  And, of course, the lady in the middle in the pink is the second national president of Alpha Kappa Alpha, Miss Loraine Richardson Green from Chicago, Illinois.  This is the twenty-first national president of Alpha Kappa Alpha, Miss Faye B. Bryant [HistoryMaker Faye Beverly Bryant].  This is attorney Debra Hill Burris [ph.] from Oklahoma City, who was in attendance at the wedding.  This is a dear friend and soror, Miss Linda Walton, who is from Tucson, Arizona, and this is Mrs. Elizabeth Dargan, who is from Charlotte, North Carolina.  This is attorney Beverly Ledbetter [Beverly E. Ledbetter] who is general counsel for Brown University in Providence, Rhode Island.  And this is Miss Polly Sparks Turner who is the former south central regional director from Houston, Texas.
Speaker 2: This was around, I think, like 1980, '81 [1981].  I'm not exactly sure.  Part of my days of being as natural as I could be, but I think it was somewhere around the early '80s [1980s].  It's just a photo that was taken.
Speaker 1: Rehearsal dinner of the wedding.  My godmother is in forefront there, Miss Dorothy Johnson [ph.] of Shreveport, Louisiana.  I'm next to her.  One of our groomsman is a dear friend of mine who is from Tulsa, Oklahoma, Mr. Gilbert [ph.], and the best man in our wedding who's the husband of Rhonda Johnson.  His name is Harry, I'm sorry, Henry Johnson [ph.], and he and my ex-husband were college roommates at Fisk and that's all I can see in that picture.
Speaker 2: This two disk is a song and division of the ESP [Extraordinary Service Program] leadership and it gives, was given away at the Detroit [Michigan] boule to each member in order to help them understand the presentation they'd just seen and to get some insight into how to implement ESP and the journey, so to speak.  There's a snippet in there that's a pull out from that.  It gives you a kind of brief bio of me too.  This is a little pamphlet thing.
Speaker 1: Now this is 1984 East Central [East Central Oklahoma State University; East Central University, Ada, Oklahoma] homecoming queen titles.  All of us were queens for some organization or another on the campus of East Central and I'm here.  This is my sorority sister at the time, Mildred Cudjo who was the queen for somebody.  Rose Butler Brown [ph.] is my sorority sister and she was the queen also.  I don't know who that person is, I can't tell her, and the others I'm not sure that I know.  So it would have been different groups on the campus, nominating queens, so these were the group pictures before the great parade.
Speaker 2: After high school, my first summer job was an appointment that I received from the mayor of Ada, Oklahoma, Mr. Joe Parson [William Joseph Parsons], and I replaced a Joy Crouch as coordinator.  I was a Byng [Byng High School, Ada, Oklahoma] graduate, as I said, and the daughter of Johnnie Steward [Johnnie Moses Watson].
Speaker 1: This would have been when I returned back from Oklahoma after my semester away [at Stanford University, Stanford, California], and to finish school at East Central and a photo that I took with my [maternal] grandmother, Miss Naomi Moses [Naomi Armstrong Moses].
Speaker 2: Okay.  That is the picture that was taken, I was international treasurer at the time, running for first vice president, but as treasurer I had to give a finance report and so that is where we unveiled to the organization that we had, in fact, started the capital endowment and was leaving the organization with a four and a half million dollar investment portfolio that didn't exist before we started office, and so that was the unveiling of that as part of the treasurer's report.
Speaker 1: Well, that is where in that same report you can see I have asked all of the members of the finance committee to come forth.  The lady right behind me here in the red, it was our president at the time, Mrs. Norma S. White [HistoryMaker Norma White].  Next to her it was president-elect Linda White [HistoryMaker Linda M. White].  Next to her is the international program chairman, Carolyn House Stewart, Angela Fryal [ph.] is a member of the committee.  Miss Adelicka McMillan [ph.] was a member of the committee.  Miss Wilma Holmes Tootle, who was the international regional director.  Miss Angela Okunsanya who is our second international vice president.  And our executive director, Dr. James [Betty Nowlin James] and myself.  So that's a committee that I chaired as treasurer.
Speaker 2: Now this is the actual night after I'd won the election as first vice president and so at the end of that convention you're installed and so the lady who installed me as the first vice president or president-elect was the twenty-first supreme basileus that I worked for as the executive director, Miss Faye B. Bryant and she's up there in the, next to the one in glasses.  And so next to her are the women who were installed that night.  Mid-Atlantic regional director Caroline Lattimore, the supreme parliamentarian Rachel [ph.] (unclear).  Next the treasurer who succeeded me, Miss Berna Greer.  The national secretary, Miss Carolyn House Stewart, and our second vice president at the time, Miss Jatisha Marsh.  And this is the twenty-fourth national president, [HistoryMaker] Eva Evans.
