Story_ID: 326959
Speaker 1: I'm gonna start by slating that I am Evelyn Pounds the interviewer.  Scott Stearns is the videographer and Denise Gines is observing today.  Would you please state your complete name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My name is Harold David Melton [HistoryMaker Harold D. Melton], H-A-R-O-L-D, D-A-V-I-D, M-E-L-T-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your date of birth and location of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born September 25, 1966 in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Oh it's getting hard now.  Oh February 17th, 2006.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: We're in my office in the supreme court [Supreme Court of Georgia], state Judicial Building in downtown Atlanta [Georgia].
Story_ID: 326960
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask you just a few People magazine-ish type questions.  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I love chips and salsa, nachos.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.  Thaw out from the winter and the NCAA [National Collegiate Athletic Association] tournament and my wedding anniversary all in the spring.
Speaker 1: And your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Probably green.  Don't know why, but I've always liked green.  I thought green is underrated.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Our honeymoon was in Bermuda, fell in love with it and if I ever have a chance to go back in life I will go there.
Speaker 1: And what is the favorite phrase or saying that you might have, if you have one.  Do you have one?
Speaker 2: I can't think of one, at least off the top of my head.  Favorite phrase?
Speaker 1: Um-hm or saying?
Speaker 2: My wife [Kimberly Melton] tells me that if I really like somebody I'll say he's a good guy and that's the highest compliment I can give somebody and I'll say it often if I really think somebody is a good guy.
Story_ID: 326961
Speaker 1: Tell us something about your mother.  What is her name and if you remember when was she born and where she was born.
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Carole Melton [Carole Hawkins Melton].  She was born in 1942 in Washington, D.C.  She grew up the third of four children and in a [U.S.] military family.  My grandfather [William Hawkins] was a retired lieutenant colonel in the [U.S.] Army, fought in the Korean War and World War II [WWII].  And she lives here in Austell, Georgia, now just outside of Atlanta [Georgia], but my mother and my father [Augustus Melton, Jr.] were married and had two kids.  My older brother [Augustus Melton III] who's three years older than me and then they divorced when I was five.  And so she was largely a single, single parent and above all else was a committed mother to her kids.  She, she was an active, active mother in terms of what, what she put into raising her two boys.
Speaker 1: Did she have any stories or do you remember any stories that she might have told you about her growing up days in Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: Very meager existence.  You know the stories that are very common within the African American community in terms of splitting hotdogs, and divide them up among the kids and how many kids slept in one room and taking other kids in to the house even though you didn't have much room or didn't have much food to go around.  You still took in the cousin or the friend of the family and it's a very meager, meager existence even in the big city like D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay and you said she was in a military family so they moved around a lot, right?
Speaker 2: They really didn't.  The house that, that my grandmother [Carolyn Hawkins] still owns in D.C. was a house that they grew up in for the better part of her existence.  It's the home base for the family on Division Avenue in Washington, D.C.  But I don't know how that happened that he didn't have to move around too much, but the large part of their existence was based right there on Division Avenue.
Speaker 1: And they didn't have to stay on military base or did they?
Speaker 2: I'm sure there was a portion of time, I don't know that history, but I'm sure it's a portion of time where they're on the base.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I know there's a portion of time where they were in Michigan briefly but bulk of their existence was in D.C.
Speaker 1: So she was still a military brat?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 326962
Speaker 1: And your father, tell us about him, what was his name or what is his name and where was he born.
Speaker 2: My father is Augustus Melton, Jr.
Speaker 1: Now that's an interesting name.  Did he share anything about how he got his name?
Speaker 2: He's named after his father [Augustus Melton, Sr.] and my brother [Augustus Melton III] is the third and my nephew's the fourth so there are four Augustus Allen Meltons running around.  All four are still alive.  My father was born in New Bern, North Carolina.  His mother [Anne Bonds Melton] died at an early age and he was raised by his grandmother, Grandmother Tucker [ph.], and she was a school teacher.  And when he was sixteen he got a little too big for, for grandma.  His father had previously moved up to New York in Brooklyn [New York] and so he went to, went to join his father in Brooklyn where he went to high school and ultimately made it to college.  My uncle who I'm named after, Uncle Harold [Harold Melton (ph.)], insisted that he go to college and he said you come down here to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and go to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] you can stay with me.  So he went to D.C. and went to Howard University and that's where my mother [Carole Hawkins Melton] was.  She was attending Howard University and that's how they met.
Speaker 1: Did they share any stories about how they happened to find each other on Howard's campus?
Speaker 2: They found each other in the library.  They were supposed to been studying and other things came to mind and one thing lead to another and they ended up being married.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  Now what did he major in, do you remember or did he say or?
Speaker 2: He was--he wanted to be a dentist and I can't remember whether he was majoring botany or biology.  It's one of those sciences.
Speaker 1: So he's a scientist?
Speaker 2: And he was in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], [U.S.] Air Force ROTC and he ended up going into the Air Force when he finished college and that started his career with airports and planes.  Every job he ever had after that until the time he retired had to do with airports and planes.  He retired as the airport manager at National Airport, Reagan--
Speaker 1: Reagan National Airport now.
Speaker 2: --Ronald Reagan National Airport [Washington National Airport; Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport, Washington, D.C.].  So his dreams of dentistry went by the wayside.
Speaker 1: So did he actually fly or did he work on?
Speaker 2: He started out as a, as a fighter pilot training, in training, and didn't complete that process and went to the behind the scenes side and that's how he got into the administration.  He did airport inspection with the FAA, Federal Aviation Administration, once he got out of the Air Force.  Worked with the FAA for several years and at the time the FAA ran the the airport in D.C. and he was in charge of abatement and noise and things along those lines and then ultimately was promoted up to management spot there and then when the airport privatized to under authority ownership or administration management process, then he stayed with the authority and ultimately retired.
Speaker 1: So this was what during the '70s [1970s], '60s [1960s], '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: He retired--no this was in the '80s [1980s] and '90s [1990s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He retired probably in, I'm trying to remember in '96 [1996] around.
Speaker 1: Now this was quite an accomplishment for him to end up being the manager of the airport,   because there aren't many African Americans who've held that spot.
Speaker 2: There probably aren't.  No Atlanta [Atlanta Municipal Airport; Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia] has an African American airport manager, Ben DeCosta [Benjamin DeCosta] and Geddis [ph.] before her--before him, but they're, there are not a lot.
Story_ID: 326963
Speaker 1: Did he [Melton's father, Augustus Melton, Jr.] share any stories with you about his experiences, well first when he was in the [U.S.] Air Force, did he share any experiences there and then later you know as he went on to the career with the airport [Washington National Airport; Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Well my father and I have probably very similar styles, we're both somewhat understated in our approach and his, his method of going about business is to work quietly and go in and do the job and if he needs to leave, it's time to leave and go home, he was gonna go home.  And that's the kind of person he was.  He got the job done.  He worked effectively and efficiently.  He was somewhat underrated a lot of times because of that and maybe he didn't do a lot of things that you would think people ought to do to draw attention to yourself--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and in some ways he was under, underestimated because of that, but ultimately he earned the trust of enough people who, who, who really mattered in terms of gaining confidence in his ability and skills and ultimately really had one of the longest tenures of an airport manager at National Airport in their history.
Speaker 1: About how many years did he actually?
Speaker 2: I think about sixteen years, but maybe even longer.  I think the average tenure is about eight years so he greatly exceeded that.  He oversaw the remodeling of the airport which is a success by all accounts.  It's a beautiful, beautiful new facility.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was there when they were in that remodeling process and I was just completely floored--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --because I mean you couldn't even see the airport--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --because everything was all torn up and and National is the main airport for the D.C. [Washington, D.C.] area because Dulles [Washington Dulles International Airport, Dulles, Virginia] is so, so far out there.
Speaker 2: Right.  Dulles has more passengers but National has the, the politicians.  That's the one that they use because of its convenience to the [U.S.] Capitol [Washington, D.C.] and everything else.  So the congressmen and the administration officials love to fly out of National.
Speaker 1: Okay so in retirement does he have any dealings with the airport at all?
Speaker 2: No.  He (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or with planes or?
Speaker 2: --he came down, he came back to Atlanta [Georgia].  He remarried and he now lives out in the country.  When he grew up in New Bern, North Carolina, he lived by a railroad track and a house with a tin roof and now he lives out in the country by the railroad track in a house with a tin roof.
Speaker 1: Now if I remember correctly, New Bern is like a fishing area?
Speaker 2: It's on the east coast.  It's right on the Atlantic [Atlantic Ocean] and its fishing and it's growing from what I hear.  I haven't been to New Bern back to New Bern in years but from what I hear it's a growing little city.
Speaker 1: And just kind of moving a little bit ahead here without sidetracking you went to school in Alabama?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Was this because of your father's roots in Alabama or?
Speaker 2: That's North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Oh you were you--
Speaker 2: He was in North Carolina.  New Bern's in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) North Carolina, okay that's right North Carolina.  All right.  But coming back to the South then this is put in that respect--
Speaker 2: Well we moved down when I was little, when I was five years old my father had a job transfer to Atlanta with the FAA [Federal Aviation Administration]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and so that's how we ended up in the Atlanta area and that's where we stayed, grew up in East Point [Georgia] and Marietta [Georgia].
Story_ID: 326964
Speaker 1: Tell us about your mother's [Carole Hawkins Melton] father and mother.  Now we mentioned her--your grandfather--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --which was her father and him being in the [U.S.] military.  Did you have a chance to meet your grandparents or where you still--were they still alive?
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Tell us something about them?  Tell us their names and a little bit about them.
Speaker 2: My grandfather's name is William Robert Hawkins [William Hawkins] and my grandmother's name is Carolyn Hawkins.  She's still alive.  My grandfather passed when I was in law school [University of Georgia School of Law, Athens, Georgia], but he's buried in Arlington National Cemetery [Arlington, Virginia], beautiful service, the military funeral.
Speaker 1: Horse drawn carriage?
Speaker 2: No not quite that large, but it's still a beautiful ceremony with snow on the ground and taps off in the background and twenty-one gun, you know the guns--
Speaker 1: Salute, yes.
Speaker 2: --just a beautiful service, but very strict man you know, a person who never sat still.  He wasn't the handiest of fellas but he figured he could fix just about anything by cleaning it.  So he was always cleaning.  If he, if he had some free time, he always found something to clean or tinker with or he was involved in the church.  My mother's side of the family is very musical.  My grandfather was a choir director.  My grandmother played piano for the church.  My oldest, my oldest uncle on that side was a singer, sang and was very talented was drawn, caught the attention of Motown [Motown Records, Detroit, Michigan] and turned that down and my mother's oldest sister, well only sister, is a piano player in the opera and music major at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and her baby brother is a music major at Howard.  My mother wasn't much in the music.  My brother [Augustus Melton III] is very much into music.  He was a music major and teaches music now.
Speaker 1: You said he was a band director right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's a band director and so I had my mother's genes when I came to music.  She and I don't do too much with it.
Speaker 1: Okay so your, your grandfather served in two wars?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So he was born what in the '20s [1920s] or around that time.  Your mother was born what in the '40s [1940s] I mean '42 [1942] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes '42 [1942].
Speaker 1: Yes '42 [1942].
Speaker 2: Yes, so that be about right.
Speaker 1: So about around in the '20s [1920s].  Did he share any of these stories with you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No we didn't talk about war.
Speaker 1: Do you remember--he didn't talk about war at all?
Speaker 2: We didn't talk about the war.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 326965
Speaker 1: Tell us about, a little bit more about your grandmother [Carolyn Hawkins] on your mother's [Carole Hawkins Melton] side.
Speaker 2: My grandmother--
Speaker 1: Grandmother Hawkins.
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: --was a faithful mother, endured a lot.  Her mother, Gammy [Caroline Mappe (ph.)], was born to a slave.  Her father, Gammy's father was a slave owner and of course her mother was the slave.  Oddly enough Gammy lived in East Point, Georgia, and even though we all grew up and were born in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and my mother's family's based in D.C., when we moved from D.C. we moved to East Point, Georgia, and that was the one thing we had in common with my great-grandmother.  And I remember when Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] was first elected president, or when he was elected president, how nervous and anxious Gammy was because she felt that another white president from the South would be the return to slavery.  She was at that point in life where she had stopped keeping up with the times so much.  She died at the age of 103.  That's our best estimate, because when she was born they didn't keep records so we don't have any official records of when she was born but our best estimate is she is 103.
Speaker 2: Now that is amazing.  Now you said that she was a slave, Gammy (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) She was born to a slave.
Speaker 2: She was born to a slave. Spell Gammy.  How do you--
Speaker 1: G-A-M-M-Y.
Speaker 2: How did that name come about?  Did they tell you how she came to be--
Speaker 1: That's what we called her.  I think that's a derivation of grandma and--
Speaker 2: And all that.  So this is what the great-grandchildren called her?
Speaker 1: That's right.  We called her Gammy, Gammy.
Speaker 2: That's right because she was around when you were born right?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: She was still alive?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Now, do you know anything about, like did she have any slave stories that passed down?
Speaker 1: The story that we heard most often were post slavery stories about dealings with the Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK], house burned down and she would still have dreams and nightmares about the Klan coming and the house burning down and she would, she would have these intervals of not being so lucid.  She would act as if it just happened.  So you would have those stories.
Speaker 2: Now did you know how the house burned down?  Did the Klan burn the house down?
Speaker 1: Yes, the Klan, yes.
Speaker 2: They just came in and--
Speaker 1: Yes and I don't know the background of what happened, but she lived through, through all those kinds of changes in society.  She's on the tail end of the slavery period and, but on the front end of the buildup of the Klan here in the South.
Speaker 2: That, okay.  All right now do you remember anything about your grandfather's [William Hawkins] father?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay, no stories like where he was born, was it still Georgia, not the Georgia--
Speaker 1: No.  I don't--
Speaker 2: --connection at all?
Speaker 1: My grandfather's father?  No.  No.
Speaker 2: On your mother's side?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay all right because that was your grandmother's mother, Gammy was?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 326966
Speaker 1: Now on your father's [Augustus Melton, Jr.] side, did you meet any of his parents [Anne Bonds Melton and Augustus Melton, Sr.] or his grandparents or great--you know just tell us (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: --something about either his parents or his grandparents.
Speaker 2: The, Grandmother Tucker [Melton's great-grandmother] is who we visited when we went to New Bern [North Carolina] and she passed when I was in high school.  Didn't get to know her too well because we had--were separated by distance, but I just remember her being just the classic school teacher, church going grandmother in, in a small town, small country town where family knew every--you know family knew everybody in the town and everywhere you would go you had the potential of running into family.
Speaker 1: So the roots were deep in New Bern?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  And then my grandfather we saw even less of up in Brooklyn [New York].  Like I say he's still in life and we saw him just recently this past Father's Day.  But he, he's retired, blue collar worker all his life and lived in the same house that I ever--I remember going to see him.  Since the time I was small enough to walk or big enough to walk and he hasn't moved, nothing's changed in his life--
Speaker 1: His life is still--
Speaker 2: --he's still there in the same house in Brooklyn.
Speaker 1: Still kind of doing the same thing?
Speaker 2: Still doing the same thing.
Speaker 1: Okay now what, what grades do you remember that your grandmother [sic. great-grandmother] taught?
Speaker 2: Elementary as far I know I don't know the grades.
Speaker 1: It was elementary, elementary school.
Speaker 2: I don't know to what degrees he was separated by grades now but--
Story_ID: 326967
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Probably, oh gosh, I remember growing up in D.C., Washington, D.C.  I remember pre-school, four years old or so maybe a little younger.  I remember riding big wheels through the house up and down stairs.  I remember going to grandmother's [Carolyn Hawkins] house and her watching us and going to grandmother's house and after pre-school and her picking us up.  Remember various houses that we moved into and the apartments that we were living in too, living in.
Speaker 1: This is when your mom [Carole Hawkins Melton] and dad [Augustus Melton, Jr.] were still together?
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In D.C.
Story_ID: 326968
Speaker 1: Tell us something about the community that you lived in.  Like what street you lived on, do you remember the name of the street?
Speaker 2: In Washington [D.C.]?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: We lived in some apartments.  Probably the earliest apartments I remember living in were Continental apartments, which were just over the D.C. line into Maryland and I believe those apartments still go by that name.  And at the time, there's a field out in front of the apartments, I call it a field right now it's just a piece of grass but when you're little it seemed like a huge expanse--
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: --and that's where we played baseball and did what we called playing baseball.  And then we moved to a house in Suitland, Maryland.
Speaker 1: Would you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: S-U-I-T-L-A-N-D. And I remember that.  That was our first house that we bought.
Speaker 1: Do you remember, just tell us kind of draw a picture of that house for us and--
Speaker 2: Again it was a house that we thought had a humungous backyard, but when we go back and visit it was just a regular sized backyard, but it was big to us.  We lived in a cul de sac.  We had a lot of kids in the neighborhood and that's my first recollection of just being out, and playing kickball and having to come in when it's still light outside and you can hear the kids playing and wanting to be out, out there.
Speaker 1: Was this a predominantly black neighborhood all black or was it mixed.
Speaker 2: It was predominantly white but it was, it was mixed.  And it was probably in the process of beginning to tip.
Speaker 1: Okay now what year was this? Was this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Probably 1970 or so because we moved to Atlanta [Georgia] in '72 [1972] so right--it would've been 1970, 1971.
Story_ID: 326969
Speaker 1: And what are the sights or some of the sights and sounds and smells that you remember or that you can associate with growing up?
Speaker 2: My fondest sight and smell or sound would have been Saturday mornings waking up with cartoons on and mom [Carole Hawkins Melton] and dad [Augustus Melton, Jr.] or dad cooking in the kitchen, breakfast, waffles and bacon and watching 'Looney Tunes' cartoons.  Those are probably the fondest memories.
Story_ID: 326970
Speaker 1: Now what did the small Harold [HistoryMaker Harold D. Melton] like to do?  What were your--what were some of the things that you liked to do as a small child?
Speaker 2: That big wheel was me.  (Laughter) I could, I could ride down anything in a big wheel.
Speaker 1: You can cover a lot of territory with that big wheel?
Speaker 2: Oh I could cover it.  Ride it in the house, down the stairs.
Speaker 1: Down the stairs?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You maneuvered that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I got around in the big wheel.
Speaker 1: And then outside too?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: All around the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: All around.  All around.  But we were, my brother [Augustus Melton III] and I both were active in terms of just going outside and we always were active getting outside and going around and playing sports and throwing balls around.  And I look back that was fond times just being able to go outside and be boys.
Speaker 1: So the, the backyard that you had when you moved into the house [in Suitland, Maryland]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --did you all play in the backyard a lot or did you play on the front a lot?
Speaker 2: We played in the backyard an awful lot and in the front.  When other kids came out we'd play in the front in the cul de sac.  We learned to ride bikes in the cul de sac.  I remember dad [Augustus Melton, Jr.] taking me out there and learning to ride back there but yeah we played front and back in next door neighbors' yards.  It didn't matter we were out there playing.
Speaker 1: So was learning to ride a bike a difficult experience for you or was it an easy experience?
Speaker 2: My dad will probably tell you it was difficult.  My recollection was it was pretty straightforward.
Speaker 1: Did you have training wheels or?
Speaker 2: I did.  I had training wheels and he took the training wheels off and I remember him holding me up as I tried to, tried to get my balance as we went around the cul de sac.
Speaker 1: Well you had been going around it forever in the big wheel so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so it seemed to be very second nature I guess.
Speaker 1: --but you went at a slower pace and did it on the bicycle at first.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah right.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Right.  Sometimes riding a bicycle is a difficult maneuver to learn--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --for some and then for other it is not as difficult--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but he did accomplish his goals.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we got there, we got there.
Speaker 1: And what sports, what games did you actually play when you were playing with the young kids?
Speaker 2: Baseball, I remember and kickball.  And then you know how kids are you make up all kinds of stuff that don't make any sense whatsoever.  I don't remember any of them.  I do remember acting like we were really playing some baseball.
Speaker 1: Okay and you don't remember any of the makeup games that you did (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.  No.
Speaker 1: Okay. All Right.
Story_ID: 326563
Speaker 1: Now the house that you moved into when you were learning how to ride the bicycle and all of that, any other memories of D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and the house that--oh you was in Maryland [Suitland, Maryland] actually--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --where you moved into the--
Speaker 2: Right.  But just over the line.
Speaker 1: Just over the line.  Any other memories of that home and that neighborhood?  Do you remember the name of the street or did we talk about that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Astill Court.
Speaker 1: Astill Court?
Speaker 2: It just came to me is the name of the street yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And then where did you move to?
Speaker 2: We moved from there to East Point [Georgia] in '72 [1972] and remember that well.  That's 3206 Dogwood Drive and--
Speaker 1: What prompted the move from Maryland to Georgia?
Speaker 2: My father [Augustus Melton, Jr.] had a job transfer.  He was working with the FAA [Federal Aviation Administration] and they moved him down to work out of the office here in Atlanta [Georgia].  So East Point was close to the airport [Atlanta Municipal Airport; Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia] and so it's very convenient to the job and that's where we settled in.
Speaker 1: And what was the neighborhood like?
Speaker 2: Neighborhood at the time East Point was almost exclusively white.  And the school that we went to Mt. Olive Elementary School [East Point, Georgia] was almost exclusively white.  I believe my brother and I were the first black boys to attend that school.
Speaker 1: This was around what 1972?
Speaker 2: Seventy-two [1972].  So I start first grade there and my brother was three years older and he started in fourth grade.  I think overall it was a very positive experience for us in terms of the community that was around.  It was a very simple community.  Not a lot of crime, not a lot of controversy and such.  We were very active in little league.  We walked to school.  We walked home from school.  Because of our involvement in Little League, often we would walk to school and some of the parents who were on their way driving their kid to school would pull over and give us a ride the rest of the way.  Not uncommon at all.  And I remember even after school, there was a group of us that lived along the same route and we would kind of gather around one corner of the school and we'd all walk together and drop off as we reach various homes and that was our ritual and this was our way of fellowshipping on our way home.
Speaker 1: On the way home?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How about how many other black families were in the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: One in particular that lived down the street that we became fairly close to but in the neighborhood, that was, that was it.  Later there was another family that moved in a little bit closer down the street, but there weren't, there weren't many.  The other family that we became close to I believe was the first, had the first black girls to attend that school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now name, what is your brother's name again?
Speaker 2: Gus [Augustus Melton III].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And he was the fourth right?
Speaker 2: He's the third.
Speaker 1: He's the third, okay.  And his son is the fourth?
Speaker 2: Is the fourth.
Speaker 1: And, so it was just the two of you-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --as you stated.
Story_ID: 326564
Speaker 1: Now you moved to East Point, Georgia because your father [Augustus Melton, Jr.] is transferred.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But this is also where your ancestry has settled in, we'll say late 1800s--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --your [maternal] great-grandmother?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And tell us a little bit more about her and at this time you're not making that connection because you're so young right?
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't learn that until later but my great-grandmother had lived in East Point.  She was born to a slave and her father was a slave owner.  And I don't know what, what it was that ultimately precipitated her move from East Point to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] how that actually happened, but just by chance we ended up moving to the same town where she had lived.
Speaker 1: And you stated that there was the names, her name was, we know we talked about Gammy, but what was her name?
Speaker 2: I believe her first name was Caroline [Caroline Mappe (ph.)] and my grandmother's name is Carolyn [Carolyn Hawkins], and my mother's name is Carole [Carole Hawkins Melton].
Speaker 1: All right and your great-grandmother's last name was?
Speaker 2: My great-grandmother's Mappe, M-A-P-P-E.
Speaker 1: All right and this is more than likely the slave master's--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --name.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Okay.  It would be interesting to do some family genealogy to see where the and what the Mappes--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --did in Georgia.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 326565
Speaker 1: Now you started elementary school [Mt. Olive Elementary School] in East Point [Georgia].  You and your brother [Augustus Melton III] were what like the one of two black children--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in the whole--
Speaker 2: Black boys.  We were probably less than five in the school.
Speaker 1: Now how did that make you feel?  I know you had lived in a mixed neighborhood in Maryland but--
Speaker 2: It was mixed, but it was predominantly white.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --I was too young to know any different.  And the kids that I was surrounded by were too young to know any different.  I was somewhat of a novelty of course.  I remember the first day, first few days where they were fascinated by my hair and you know that kind of thing but I really felt that they took me in pretty quickly.  They didn't know not to for for the most part.  So I think for me it was a relatively easy transition.
Speaker 1: And for your brother?
Speaker 2: It's a little bit more difficult.  His starting in fourth grade, there were probably, there were some, some kids who had been a little bit more indoctrinated in the issues of race and so he faced a little bit more controversy but overall I think he, he adapted and had a good time there.  He did have some rough spots but I think he overall enjoyed his time there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you have any teachers who actually influenced you in elementary school?
Speaker 2: Yes, I had great teachers all the way through.  I think my one teacher who my mom [Carole Hawkins Melton] was--who grew especially fond of was Mrs. Battle [ph.] who is an African American woman who was my fourth grade teacher and she was very stern and insistent that you do well in the basics.  Write legibly, put your name in the right space on the paper and put your date on it and really held firm on the basics.  But we really did have good teachers.
Speaker 1: Now you were at a predominantly white school--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and you had black teachers or a black teacher.
Speaker 2: A black teacher.
Speaker 1: Now do you remember how many black teachers might have been on staff at that time or was Ms. Battle the only one (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember, I remember another black teacher who taught third grade, Mrs. Williams [ph.].  I didn't have her--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --so probably were just two.  One of the things that was kind of comforting was that as one of the few blacks in the school, the staff, especially the cleaning staff and the lunchroom staff, probably took a great--took greater care and attention to me and so they were always very nurturing towards me.  I was allergic to chocolate for example--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and so whenever we had chocolate in the cafeteria for lunch, they always had a special dessert for me.
Speaker 1: That was sweet.
Speaker 2: And sometimes it was just an apple.  But they always were careful to know that when I came they need to give me something different.  And the other kids always were envious of whatever it was because I had something different from what they had.  So they could have been eating chocolate cake and I could be eating an apple, but they thought that apple was the best thing because it was different from what they had.
Speaker 1: The grass is always greener.
Speaker 2: The grass is always greener.  So, so it was in that way it was a very nurturing environment.
Speaker 1: So kind of paint a picture for us how elementary school actually was or did you participate in any sports or did you?
Speaker 2: That's all we did.  We were three sport kids.  We went straight from basketball to baseball to football.  We didn't do football as much, but we did play football but, and then when we weren't doing that we would go outside and throw the ball around.  We'd ride bikes.  We'd go up the hill and play with the kids in the adjoining neighborhood.  We would go up to the high school, and where there is a big creek and we would play in the creek and take our dog out on, on runs and ride bikes all throughout the neighborhood and we were just out out and about doing stuff.
Speaker 1: Now at school, did you do any sports activities during recess?  Did you have recess?
Speaker 2: Sure, yeah we had recess.  We did kickball and you know the presidential physical fitness programs (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Program that they had.
Speaker 2: --we remember doing all that.  Softball, high jump and various games and we did all that.
Story_ID: 326566
Speaker 1: Now where did you attend junior high or did you go to junior high?
Speaker 2: Went to middle school.  We moved to Marietta [Georgia] in '78 [1978] I believe, 1978.  I started middle school at East Cobb Middle School [Marietta, Georgia] in seventh grade.
Speaker 1: Okay and what was that like?
Speaker 2: It was a change of sorts in that, went to a much bigger school.  We moved, we were living in apartments and one of the changes was East Point [Georgia] was sort of the symbol of innocence where the most trouble any kid got into was playing hooky and that was the talk of the town.  We moved into some apartments in Marietta where I'm waiting at the bus stop and kids are smoking cigarettes.  I never seen that before.
Speaker 1: And you're going from walking to school to riding the bus to school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Riding the bus to school yeah, yeah.  And that was fine too because we did ride the bus from time to time in East Point--
Speaker 1: In East Point, okay all right.
Speaker 2: --but there's a little bit more of a faster culture when we moved out to Marietta.  We had a little bit of everything, a little bit more of everything and so that was an adjustment and the size of the school was a lot larger than the school that I'd come from.
Speaker 1: And what was the racial mix?
Speaker 2: The racial mix was probably less than 5 percent black.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were there any teachers that you remember that stand out at Marietta--I mean at the, you know the junior high school?
Speaker 2: That stood out?  Gosh.
Speaker 1: Any that influenced you?
Speaker 2: Gosh.
Speaker 1: Either coaches or?
Speaker 2: Certainly some coaches.  I enjoyed my teachers but I was--continued my involvement in sports and played basketball and there the basket- you know playing basketball was the first time I played for the school and that that took, that took the level of intensity up a couple of notches and so everyday practices, getting in shape, practicing when you're not at practice, you know those kinds of things had to step it up on, but I remember Coach Collins [ph.] who was my coach in ninth grade who really lit the fire under you.
Speaker 1: Now was this an African American coach or was this a white coach?
Speaker 2: A white coach.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh okay, so he challenged you?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes and he was a good man too and, and what I really respected were the coaches who used sports, used their access to kids to make them better not just build a program to win and the basketball coaches I had as a whole were, were those types of people.  They wanted, they wanted their kids to do well in general they wanted them to represent the school well, represent the team well and so they insisted on hard work.  They insisted that you go to class and handle your business.
Speaker 1: So were there any trials or tryouts that you had to do in order to get on the basketball team?
Speaker 2: Yeah and that was the first time I had to go through tryouts.  We, I remember going out for the team and it must have been oh we may start out with a hundred kids trying to make that team, which was amazing to me and they, in seventh grade when they picked the team, I think we ended up with fifteen which is a lot for a team and it's hard to get playing time but it was, it was a good experience especially each--
Speaker 1: What position did you play?
Speaker 2: Wing forward, small forward and you know with the system we had the middle school was a small version of the system that was used at the high school so it was an opportunity to grow into, into the overall system.
Speaker 1: Now do you feel like basketball was your discipline at that particular time or in middle school or what was your discipline?
Speaker 2: In terms of what kept me on the line?
Speaker 1: That kept you center-focused (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mama [Carole Hawkins Melton] was always my discipline and she was pretty stern, but she taught us well so I don't think she had the battle that, that maybe it was the nature of the kids maybe it was the nature of her teaching, maybe it was a combination of both but she didn't really have to wrestle the way a lot of parents had to wrestle to keep kids in line.  My brother [Augustus Melton III] she worked with a lot more and he was--for him it was music was the discipline. That was--she held him out of something involving music that was the end of the world for him and so that's, that's what--
Speaker 1: That put him in brought him back to shape right quick?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But there were a lot of positive influences for me and certainly basketball and sports were a big part of that.
Speaker 1: Now is this--are your mother and father [Augustus Melton, Jr.] still together now?
Speaker 2: No, no, they were divorced.  They divorced shortly after we moved to Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right so when you moved to Marietta, it was without your father?
Speaker 2: Right, it was just mom. Right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 326567
Speaker 1: In junior high school [East Cobb Middle School, Marietta, Georgia], I mean in--I keep calling it junior high because it's junior high for me, but in middle school 'cause it actually changes and varies throughout the country but basketball was this where you got your male images from or what did your mother [Carole Hawkins Melton] use to keep the male figure before you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I don't know if she intentionally kept male figures before me.  We [Melton and his brother, Augustus Melton III] were naturally drawn to sports.  We remained close to my father [Augustus Melton, Jr.] so the combination of all that always kept male figures in front of us and fortunately we had several positive male figures in front of us of, and are people who didn't necessarily look like me but took enough interest in me and pushed me just like they pushed everybody else.  So we had some good images always before me without really realizing it.
Speaker 1: Now what were some of your other interests in middle school?  You had basketball?
Speaker 2: That was largely--
Speaker 1: That was largely it?
Speaker 2: Sports.  That was largely--well we--there's a friend of mine who I got to know when I was about in eighth grade and this guy was a stellar basketball player.  This guy could play and we developed a friendship and we played especially during the summer every single day.  We would get up and we would play.  It was not a question about what we're gonna do.  We were gonna play, somewhere at some point in the day we were gonna play and that's what we did.  And he was a big influence just in terms of the work that it took to get better and--because before then I was more of a recreational athlete.  I played because it was a season and I don't know how much of a natural player I was.  In fact I wasn't much of a natural player.  If I got good at all it was because of the work.  In fact if I start playing right now you'd probably would think I never picked up a ball.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Do you get a chance to play any now?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Not at all?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.
Story_ID: 326568
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask about in Marietta [Georgia], what churches did you go to or what did you do?  Did you all attend service?  What did you do for holidays, special events?
Speaker 2: Yeah, growing up we attended churches here and there.
Speaker 1: What faith were you, are you at that particular time what churches did you attend?
Speaker 2: My mother [Carole Hawkins Melton] was real involved in what's now Hillside Church [Hillside International Chapel and Truth Center, Atlanta, Georgia] with Barbara King [HistoryMaker Reverend Dr. Barbara L. King] and we watched church on TV from time to time.  We always had a spiritual undertone to the house.  I don't know how seriously I took it personally until I went to high school [Joseph Wheeler High School, Marietta, Georgia] and in high school after my freshman year, made a commitment, a Christian commitment and started growing and just being challenged to take that seriously and at the time I went to Roswell Street Baptist Church in Marietta and that's where I was really nurtured into my Christian faith and challenged to grow.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what were holidays like when your father [Augustus Melton, Jr.] was there and then after--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --your father left?
Speaker 2: Well you know holidays varied, we always did something different.  There are times we would go up to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and spend Christmas with my dad or we'd go up to D.C. and spent Thanksgiving with grandmother [Carolyn Hawkins].  They're, they're always different--but I think the one common thread was that we tend to always spend Thanksgiving with mother in some form or fashion but they all varied and even now when we start thinking about Thanksgiving, we always try to do something different.  My mother always wants to think about what to do besides turkey, whether it's salmon or shrimp or lobster (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So every Thanksgiving there's not necessarily a turkey on the table?
Speaker 2: We go through the ritual conversation about what to do besides turkey, and sometimes we end up with turkey, a lot of times we do.  Sometimes it might be a Cornish hen or something but that's our, that's our routine.
Story_ID: 326569
Speaker 1: Okay so now we move on into high school.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What high school did you attend?
Speaker 2: Wheeler High School [Joseph Wheeler High School, Marietta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: And would you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: W-H-E-E-L-E-R which is right across the street from the middle school [East Cobb Middle School, Marietta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay in Marietta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And how was that experience?
Speaker 2: Loved it.  Loved it.  And there I did just about everything I could find time to do.  By that time I was playing basketball of course and I ran cross country.  The only reason why I ran cross country is because I wanted to run track and a friend of mine told me that a good way to get your body ready and get prepared is to run cross country.  And I was horrible.  I think I--my claim to fame was I never finished in last place.  I finished next to last but never finished in last place.  But there's a fun group of guys and girls and we had a great time, and so I ended up running cross country for three of the four years I was in high school even though I was never any good.  I just enjoyed the fellowship so much and--
Speaker 1: Well this, this was like rigorous training?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah it hurt.  It definitely hurt in the heat.  You know we'd start in August, hundred degree weather running three, four, five miles and I guess that's what you can do when you're young.  But we enjoyed it.  And then in high school we I was still--I was increasingly involved in the church [Roswell Street Baptist Church, Marietta, Georgia] so I was going back and forth to whatever youth activities were going on there, was involved in Key Club [Key Club International] and Fellowship of Christian Athletes [FCA] and Spanish Honor Society [Spanish National Honor Society; Sociedad Honoraria Hispanica], National Honor Society [NHS] and anything else that might have been going on with the school whether it's homecoming or whatever functions were going on.
Speaker 1: Now you said Spanish Honor Society, so when did you start taking Spanish?
Speaker 2: I start taking Spanish my freshman year in high school.  I took four years of Spanish in high school.
Speaker 1: And how did you do in Spanish?
Speaker 2: I did well, did well.  Enjoyed it.  In fact one of the reasons when I went to college, when I went to Auburn University [Auburn, Alabama] one of the reasons I went there is because of the foreign language program.  I was an international business major.  And I continued with the foreign language there.
Speaker 1: And National Honor Society, so what were your grades like?
Speaker 2: Grades were very good.  Don't remember the ranking in the class but it was probably, probably top 10 percent of the class.  Took several honors programs, honors program courses.  Wheeler High School at the time, and still is, is an extremely good school.  It always felt like I had a private school education in a public school.
Speaker 1: And why would that be?
Speaker 2: Because of the access to the honors program courses, calculus, physics.  I didn't take physics but you had access to it.  Access to four years of foreign language, a great English program and in fact I was able to take the Advanced Placement test in Spanish, math and English and based on the scores in those classes, exempted a number of courses in my first year of college.  So that when I finished my first semester at Auburn, I was a sophomore already.  So that set me up nicely for a lot of the activities I was able to participate, while I was in Auburn because I had time course load wise to get really active on campus.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that (unclear)--
Speaker 2: So it prepared me very well, the school did, it prepared me very well.
Speaker 1: Do any teachers stand out in your mind before high school?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh yeah, I'm sure they did.  I was just there a couple of weeks ago for the Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] event they had.  The first time I visited there in a long time and we had so many good teachers, I'd hate to I really would hate to single any of them out.  We had so many good teachers and one or two of them came to that event just because they knew I was gonna be there and, and it's good to see them again.
Speaker 1: Right now, any coaches stand out at the high school?
Speaker 2: My basketball coach was a fellow by the name of Dave Westerfield [David Westerfield] who was a tremendous coach, a very stern disciplinarian.  One of the things for example he made sure we understood was that when he fussed at us the answer was yes sir.  And I think he even told us as an example, "If I'm fussing at you, fussing at you about what happened in the game, I don't care if you weren't even on the court, the answer is yes sir."  And that lesson has prepared me well.
Speaker 1: So he didn't allow you to give any back talk as they say (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no.
Speaker 1: You just had to shape up and do it--
Speaker 2: He wasn't looking for an explanation.
Story_ID: 326570
Speaker 1: Now what was the difference between playing basketball in high school [Joseph Wheeler High School, Marietta, Georgia] versus middle school [East Cobb Middle School, Marietta, Georgia]?  How, how did it change?
Speaker 2: The work, the work that you had to put into it.  You know you start--I believe you would start in October, maybe even before and under the county rules you couldn't even pick up a ball and whenever it was that you started so all you did was show up to the gym--at the gym and run and every now and then you could break that up and go on the street and run but you would run for the first month.  And only then once that period is over you're allowed to pick up a ball and but the work that that it took was a lot (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So your distance running came in handy for hanging out with the--
Speaker 2: It did, it definitely did.
Speaker 1: --short term runner.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What were some of the other extracurricular activities?  I know Spanish.  Did you serve on the student council in high school--
Speaker 2: I did a little--
Speaker 1: --or did you do any?
Speaker 2: --I did a little student council, home room rep kind of stuff.  But really was just involved in just about anything that, that came across.  I, I just enjoyed the people and I enjoyed the environment and just really got into high school.
Speaker 1: Now what was the racial mix in the high school?
Speaker 2: Oh by then we probably made it up to about 5 percent (laughter).
Speaker 1: From little under to actually 5 percent.  What about the, the teachers?  How were there many black teachers on staff there at all or were they all white (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No. No. They were all white, all white.  I don't think I had any African American teachers in high school.
Story_ID: 326971
Speaker 1: Now we talked a little bit about, while we were off tape, about some of the first, the first that you accomplished while you were in, I would say co- high school [Joseph Wheeler High School, Marietta, Georgia]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --so tell us some of those first accomplishments being an African American in a predominantly white environment that you received.
Speaker 2: The--I was voted by my peers as Mr. Freshman high school.  I wasn't voted Mr. Sophomore.  The following year I guess I did better and they voted me Mr. Junior and then as a senior they voted me Mr. Wheeler High School and as far as I understand those were all, all firsts.
Speaker 1: Now what did you have to do to qualify in order to be Mr. Freshman, Mr. Junior?
Speaker 2: There were no written criteria.  They hand out a ballot to the students and they say vote for who you think ought to be and there's no written criteria at all.  If you ask me what I think attributed to that, I would say that, one I was real active in the school and all aspects of the school, but two, I had relationships with all types of students.  My brother [Augustus Melton III] was in the band.  I had played in the band at middle school [East Cobb Middle School, Marietta, Georgia] so I knew all the band people.  I was involved in sports so I knew all the sports people.  We had in the apartments that we lived in, we had drugs and all other kinds of stuff, so I knew the folks that are into drugs and, and I had good relationships with them.  I was in the advanced classes, so I knew the people who were in the, you know the smart people or however you want to describe them, so I was close to all kinds of people and took pride on enjoying relationships with everybody.
Speaker 1: So you were a little politician so to speak (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I don't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You might not want to comment on that but in other words you were--
Speaker 2: Maybe so.
Speaker 1: --known in the neighborhood and in the school.
Speaker 2: I was known in the neighborhood, but I really enjoyed everybody.  It was what I enjoyed doing.  I really enjoyed everybody.
Speaker 1: So what were some of the responsibilities after you became Mr. Freshman (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, there were no responsibilities.
Speaker 1: Did you escort someone on the court you know for the school queen or--
Speaker 2: There were, there were several times where I was--not several, but there were a couple of times I was voted homecoming court where actually we'd escort somebody, but when you're voted Mr. Wheeler, you walk down, you receive a plaque, you pose with your mother (laughter), and that's it, that's it.
Story_ID: 326972
Speaker 1: All right now we also talked a little bit off camera about the times when you were in East Point [Georgia] that was the time of the Atlanta Child Murders [Atlanta Missing and Murdered Children cases]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and just tell us how it affected you know you and your brother [Augustus Melton III] and your family during those times?
Speaker 2: Well, we kept a look out a little more.  We didn't do things off the beaten path too much anyway.  So we didn't have to change our behavior.  We kept our eye open.  Most of what, most of what happened with those missing murdered children incidents occurred a little bit further from our neighborhood, but there was one segment of some of those incidents that, that kind of got a little bit closer to the College Park [Georgia], East Point area where we were living so it kind of drew our attention, but for the most part we were able to carry on as usual.
Speaker 1: And how did your mother [Carole Hawkins Melton] feel, how was she taking it?
Speaker 2: She was concerned and my family in Washington [D.C.] was concerned and they would call and make sure that we were watching ourselves and she would have to assure them that we were and that we were okay, but overall it didn't, it didn't impact our behavior too much.  Although it certainly, it certainly had our attention.
Story_ID: 326973
Speaker 1: Now, we all talked, we talked a little bit about your age group and the state of America during the time that you were born as it related to the rights of African Americans and some of the leaders who had paved the way--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know for your generation--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so and just, just comment on that for us.
Speaker 2: Well I'd like to be able to say that the success I had at the elementary and middle and high school levels were the result of breaking down barriers, but for me personally, it didn't feel like that.  It felt like I was able to walk into a pretty receptive environ- environment.  Largely because of folks who had come before.  I think in our generation we're gonna start seeing people who, who have achieved without necessarily having to kick in the door because the door has already been kicked in or opened by those who have gone before.  And that's a good thing, that's a good thing.
Speaker 1: And I always like to ask the younger successful African Americans, what is your view or what is your opinion, how do you feel about those who did open those doors, knock down those doors, sacrifice their lives and to make a way, to make a better way for your generation, the generations today and the generations to come?
Speaker 2: There's nothing that you can say or have except for the highest level of regard, respect, appreciation, admiration.  It's hard to imagine what a lot of these folks went through.  The ability to go through what they went through, but also to do it in the way that keeps--maintain their sanity.  And in many instances not just maintain sanity but also maintain ability to interact positively and in instances of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] for example, ability to love those who were--who had evil in mind for you, just remarkable, remarkable people.  I was at an event not too long ago involving African American lawyers and they're introducing various people in the audience and they announced this judge as the first African American judge of this, and this person is the first African American who did this.  And these were all older people and it's amazing the people in that room who are the first and then they introduced me and they said well there's Harold Melton [HistoryMaker Harold D. Melton].  I thought I wasn't the first of anything worth noting.  Then I thought you know that, that's where we are now.  We're getting passed the first where we can start talking about the seconds and the thirds and the fourths.  At the end it becomes not remarkable at all that somebody is African American in various positions and that's a good thing.  But you have to have those firsts to be able to get there.
Story_ID: 326974
Speaker 1: You were very young when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated I mean extremely young and may have been too young to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Too young.
Speaker 1: --to remember--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --okay and being from, being born in the nation's capital [Washington, D.C.] you were probably not even thought of or your mom [Carole Hawkins Melton] and dad [Augustus Melton, Jr.] were probably just meeting during the time that the March on Washington--
Speaker 2: Um-hm
Speaker 1: --and Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] died in Ghana you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and all of the was taking place but you were born in a historic spot where a lot had taken place--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --just before you know you got here, but if you reflect back, did your parents ever mention any of these events to you and if so, what was your impression or your feelings about them?
Speaker 2: You know my mother was good about drawing us to the TV when the footage was being shown about the Civil Rights Movement or 'Roots' for example.
Speaker 1: And 'Eyes on the Prize' and 'Roots.'
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The problem that I had or that she had was that I had a soft stomach for that kind of stuff, and it was pretty unsettling to me so I couldn't watch much of it.  It wasn't until I was older that I was able to watch 'Roots.'  I couldn't watch 'Roots' when it first came on.  It was too troubling for me, and I've since read the book ['Roots: The Saga of an American Family,' Alex Haley], but that was her biggest difficulty was my soft stomach.
Speaker 1: Okay all right.  And your brother [Augustus Melton III], did he have any?
Speaker 2: No he watched it.
Speaker 1: He watched it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what was his impression or how did he feel or what was his expression if you remember?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, shock.  You know it's still hard to imagine as you look back on some, some of the things that took place in our history as a country it's still hard to imagine that these things actually happened.  Especially when you look at what we have today and what we assume to be the norms and the, and the, the moral understanding that we have as a country.  It's hard to imagine that we once were where we were.
Speaker 1: One thing that and I forget who actually said it.  It's a statement that he made.  Maybe it was one of our African American forefathers, but I can't really remember the name and states that history and I'll say dot, dot, dot can repeat itself you know if it goes unchallenged, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So how would you feel about that or how do feel about that particular statement.  You know growing up in the era that you in the time that you grew up and accomplishing what you have accomplished in the event that history did repeat itself, how would you feel about that?
Speaker 2: One, I would hope I would have the courage to respond and be involved in the way that some of these great heroes were.  You know when you read about the '60s [1960s] you always have to stop and ask where would I be in the midst of this?  And there is a whole range of possibilities.  There are many people who watched it on the news and maybe commented when they're at the barbershop about what was happening and then on the other end, there were folks who were really front line.  There were people who put their kids in the marches and that was accepted.  And their kids suffered.  They were physically injured, you had--the children who were killed in the 16th Street bombing [16th Street Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama].  Where would I be in the midst of that especially after, after the children were killed and you continue to put your children, include (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) On the front lines.
Speaker 2: --include your children in the front line marches, which happened.  Now would I have the courage to do that?  You know, I would hope that I would.
Story_ID: 326975
Speaker 1: So we graduated high school [Joseph Wheeler High School, Marietta, Georgia] and did you have any idea what school you would attend, or did you even think that you would go to college?
Speaker 2: Oh always, always felt like I would go to college.  I don't think there was ever any question.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: The--I went to Auburn University [Auburn, Alabama].
Speaker 1: And why did you select Auburn?
Speaker 2: I was attracted to Auburn largely for I guess for three reasons.  One, first I looked at them for their international business program and their foreign language program.  Second, was everybody I talked to that had gone to Auburn absolutely loved it.  And the third was the more I learned about Auburn, the more I learned it had a very nurturing Christian component to it and then at one point I thought about going to a Christian school.  It, it really did have a strong segment that was committed to continuing the spiritual growth.  And so there was a combination of all three of those.
Speaker 1: Now you said most of the people that you had talked to now Auburn is a predominantly white university--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --now all of the people you had talked to were all white right?
Speaker 2: Most of them were yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Most of them, were there any African Americans who you had chance to talk with about it?
Speaker 2: Not first hand.  But reports I had from African Americans maybe second hand through my mother [Carole Hawkins Melton] she had talked to a few people were all positive.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I'm thinking that you left something out because when you were in high school did you not travel with the basketball team?
Speaker 2: No, that was in college.
Speaker 1: This is in college.  Okay so you when you got to Auburn, let's just talk about what happened then.
Speaker 2: Yeah well, gosh, that was, my first semester, first quarter, we were on quarters then, was little bit of an adjustment period.  It's a big campus, eighteen thousand students.  I wasn't involved in a fraternity, didn't wanna be involved in a fraternity and so it takes a, takes a little bit longer to find your niche, get your feet under you.  It took me a while and so I guess my first quarter was somewhat unsettling.  Eventually got involved in two organizations that I remained involved in for my entire time there.
Speaker 1: And what organizations were they?
Speaker 2: The first was Campus Crusade for Christ [Cru]--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --which was--which is an evangelistic organization.  The second was student government.  And the way I decided to get involved in student government was I felt detached from what was going on around me and I realized looking back on my high school days that I loved knowing what's going on.  I love being in the mix and that's what makes me happy where I am is being connected with where I am and so I just talked to some friends about how to get involved and I ended up just signing up to be an administrative aide which meant that you would go in on regular office hours and do whatever need to be done, address envelopes, you know that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: So student council actually had an office?
Speaker 2: Yes, student government had an office.  Yeah it's very--Auburn University is in a small town.  And there's not much to do.  And so what happens there is everybody on campus pours their energies into the campus.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So everything that is a little bit larger than it would otherwise be and student government is no exception.  Student government is a lot larger there than you would expect and the campaigns are a lot larger than you'd expect and all the activities there are just magnified because of the energy that the students poured into 'em.
Story_ID: 326976
Speaker 1: So you leave Georgia--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and you go to Alabama.  Now this is a change.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: This is quite a change.  What was it about and what part of Alabama was that?
Speaker 2: Auburn, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Auburn, Alabama.
Speaker 2: Right just over the state line going down 85 [Interstate 85 (I-85)].
Speaker 1: So it's a different culture?
Speaker 2: It is.  I mean with eighteen thousand students you're gonna have a little bit of everything.  We were at 3.6 percent black when I was there, which was just over five hundred students.  You--we had students that were more along the lines of what I was used to, being exposed to.  We had more rural students who had come from farming communities within the State of Alabama.  I probably ran into more, for the first time, students who were just flat racist.  I don't think I'd really addressed that face to face that were students who were that vehemently racist.  Now I do remember having some encounters when I was in middle school [East Cobb Middle School, Marietta, Georgia].  But I met more at Auburn [Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama] and they were an exception.  But I did meet them.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was an interesting experience because I was able to draw on my comfort level.  Obviously given my background I was very comfortable around whites, white people and so I knew it wasn't anything wrong with me.  And I just kept doing what I was doing.  I had a good friend from high school [Joseph Wheeler High School, Marietta, Georgia] for example who went to Auburn and I was hanging out with him and his friends and a couple of his friends had a problem with me.  And but I just kept doing what I was doing and I said to my friend you know, "Is there something wrong here?"  He said, "Yeah, but he's working through it."  I said, "Well that's all I need to know.  As long as he's working through it I can be okay with it."  And that's the beauty of integration is that it makes people work through their stuff, stuff that they don't realize is there until they're confronted with it.  And so I was the one, I was the face of confrontation in that way and so just doing what I was used to doing made certain people have to wrestle with notions that they've been taught but hadn't had to face.
Speaker 1: Now did any of your other classmates from Marietta [Georgia] go to Auburn or just?
Speaker 2: There were five of us that I went to high school with. And of course once you get to to a school that size, you kind of huddle together than you disperse in various directions and that's pretty much what happened.
Speaker 1: Because you had different career--I mean different majors.
Speaker 2: Different majors, different interests.  You live in different parts of the campus, but it's good to know that they're there when you first get there because it gives you that instant comfort level and po- point of contact.  But we then kind of disperse and go our separate ways and pass all along the way.
Story_ID: 326977
Speaker 1: Now how did you find the professors at Auburn [Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Great.  Great.  I didn't have any problems with any of the professors.  Like I said before after my first semester, after my first quarter, I was at sophomore status, had taken a couple of advance classes even there, but no problems.  I was a kind of student too that when I, especially at Auburn in a bigger environment, the introvert side of me kind of kicked in and I basically would go to class and sit off to the side and do my work and take the test and go on about my business.  That's pretty much how I operated.  I didn't generally get to know the teachers, some of the classes where the big two hundred student classes.  Teachers generally didn't get to know me unless there was a reason to and most of the time it wasn't a reason to and so I just, I just did the work and took the test and, and--
Speaker 1: So were most of the classes like lecture classes or did you have some smaller classes also where it was more--
Speaker 2: Both.  Especially in freshman year, you have a couple of the large lecture formats, but many of the classes were you know the twenty to thirty student class size that you would expect.  In the foreign language classes we tend to see the same students we migrated--
Speaker 1: Right.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: --through together and see the same teachers again you have the same teachers again.  But most of you know, I always tell people at Auburn you got two tracks for your education, you got the formal classroom scenario, but because of the nature of the school and the energy people put into the school the extracurriculars provide another area for personal growth and activity.  And if you go to Auburn and don't get involved in those activities, you're gonna miss out on a lot of the opportunity to grow.
Story_ID: 326978
Speaker 1: So you picked up basketball again?
Speaker 2: Well, in high school [Joseph Wheeler High School, Marietta, Georgia], I--one of my dreams was to play college basketball.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I never got good enough and maybe I was too busy doing other stuff to put the time and energy to get good enough, I never got good enough.  And through my involvement with campus crusade [Campus Crusade for Christ; Cru], I learned about the sports ministry of campus crusade which was Athletes in Action.  And Athletes in Action sponsored trips to various countries.  And the more I learned about Athletes in Action the more intrigued I became.  And so one day I called up the office and said, "I'm interested in these trips.  How does this work?  How do you select your players?"  They said, "Well normally we select college players unless you have something else to offer; if you're not a college player we're not particularly interested."  Now of course I wasn't playing college ball so I said, "What do you have in mind?"  He said, "Well it's like if you have a musical skill," or any number of things they list.  I said, "What about foreign language?"  And he said, "Yeah if you got foreign language, we're interested."  So I applied based on my high school basketball experience and experience I had with foreign language and that combination was enough for them to take me on and I ended up playing with Athletes in Action down in South America when we went through Peru, Bolivia, Brazil and I was a player translator.  And--
Speaker 1: How long was that tour?
Speaker 2: Three weeks.  It was a three week tour and we had a training camp in Colorado.
Speaker 1: What part of Colorado? You remember?
Speaker 2: Colorado Springs [Colorado].
Speaker 1: Lovely.
Speaker 2: Yeah, beautiful. And it was my first exposure to two a day practices and really college level basketball practices.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And which I loved every minute of it and that hurt too (laughter), but I loved every minute of it.  And then the exposure of being able to travel through Lima, Peru and various parts of Bolivia and Brazil and see the cultures and play against teams down there and, and play with college level players.  It was just a dream.
Speaker 1: How much time did you get to spend with the people or in the, you know in the towns and cities?  I know you were there for basketball but did you have tours, or?
Speaker 2: We had tours and we traveled a good bit, but we generally spent maybe two or three days in a town and that might be one or two games while we were there.  When we weren't playing we would have lots of time to walk around, go to various shops and bazaars and see whatever it was to see in the town.  Bolivia for example, I remember going out to Arequipa [Peru] and Lake Titicaca which is the highest lake in the world and seeing the Quechua Indians [sic.] there, taking pictures of the landscape and really seeing all aspects of society, meeting with some of the local leadership in city.  I at the time was semi-fluent.  I would go--they would take me out to various radio stations.  I'd do a radio station interview in Spanish.  We would do basketball camps in the community.
Speaker 1: With the locals?
Speaker 2: With the locals, with the kids.
Speaker 1: All age groups or just?
Speaker 2: All age groups.  And when we got to Brazil we spent a week in Brazil.  The last week we did a basketball camp with the high school age kids and, which was a lot of fun just teaching them and then we'd play, we played a couple of games while we were there and the kids at the camp got to see us play an actual game.
Speaker 1: I'm trying to see if the Brazilian festival was going on then.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It was not?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: All right.  Because there is an Afro, what Creole--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --community there.  Did you all get a chance to visit that community?
Speaker 2: We, we spent a little time in Rio de Janeiro [Brazil] and we walked around and Rio is probably as diverse as any place on the planet.  All kinds of races and all kinds of races have mixed.  So you see a lot of, a lot of everything in terms of racial diversity.
Story_ID: 326979
Speaker 1: I wanna go back and pick up your being not musically inclined following in your mother's [Carole Hawkins Melton] footsteps as you put it, but playing in the band when you were in elementary [Mt. Olive Elementary School, East Point, Georgia].  What instrument did you play?
Speaker 2: I played the clarinet.
Speaker 1: Now, what attracted you to the clarinet?
Speaker 2: Well, because my family was a musical family when we hit fourth grade, which is when they started teaching music in the school that I was at, it wasn't a question of if I was gonna take music, it was what was I gonna play.  And my uncle had several instruments--played several instruments, had an extra clarinet in the closet.
Speaker 1: Now this is when you was in?
Speaker 2: I was in fourth grade.
Speaker 1: In D.C. [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: No in East Point [Georgia].
Speaker 1: East Point and he was here.
Speaker 2: He was in D.C.
Speaker 1: Oh he was in D.C.?
Speaker 2: Right.  My uncle--
Speaker 1: So when you would go up and visit for--
Speaker 2: No we were just talking.
Speaker 1: --for the holidays.
Speaker 2: We were just talking.
Speaker 1: Okay you were just talking all right.
Speaker 2: And he mentioned that he had an extra clarinet in the closet that he could send down if I was interested in playing that, then he would send it down to me.  I don't even think I knew what a clarinet looked like.  So I said sure that makes--that sounds like it makes a lot of sense and that's how I ended up playing the clarinet.
Speaker 1: So what were the challenges of the clarinet?  I see young people try to master--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --an instrument and it's difficult--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but how did that clarinet challenge you and how did you master it to learn how to make a tune?
Speaker 2: I don't know if I ever mastered it.  I--and I don't know if I really fell in love with it.  The first reaction I had when I got it open when I opened it was, "Oh, so that's a clarinet."   And then I took it in the first day of music classes and I noticed that all the guys were playing either saxophone or trumpet and that I was surrounded by a bunch of girls, so the only guy with a clarinet.  And that made me a little uncomfortable.  And I think when he mentioned clarinet, I think in the back of my mind, I think I always had the picture of a trumpet.  So, I was somewhat disappointed even when I opened the box.  But I played it all the way through eighth grade and I never really developed a liking for it, and I was okay at it.  Ended up being second and third chair, but largely because I could cram very quickly and whenever the music director heard something that was a little off, he would always start at the end and work the way you play it, now you play it.  And by the time it got to me I had already figured out what it's supposed to look like.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 326980
Speaker 1: Now, move forward a bit.  The apartments in Marietta [Georgia] that you lived in, this was a predominantly white apartment complex?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you mentioned slightly and lightly about the drug culture that was in this apartment complex, so your dad [Augustus Melton, Jr.] and mom [Carole Hawkins Melton] are separated, you and your brother [Augustus Melton III] are there with your mother--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and you're going to Marietta, to the high school [Joseph Wheeler High School, Marietta, Georgia] there, how did you, how did you come out unscathed?
Speaker 2: I was never really drawn to it.  I knew my mom would beat my, I shouldn't say that nowadays, but reality was she would have our hide if she had any inkling that we were involved in drugs, but wasn't drawn to it.  I didn't have a sense that, that would take me anywhere where I needed to go.  I was more drawn like I said before to basketball and my friend and I were always at the court and so we got to know the guys that were involved in drugs, and they were involved in everything from marijuana to LSD to anything else that they could afford.  And they would offer it to us, but they weren't offended if we turned it down, and they knew what we were about so they would kind of pass through and every now and then they would stop and play a game of basketball or so with us; so we got to know each other and we had a mutual respect for each other's position and--
Speaker 1: 'Cause see there are different types of peer pressure.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: It can be the name calling--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --it can be the you know out--verbal outburst, it can be the physical--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --outburst and here, the way that you handled it you just didn't, didn't give into it but and the fear of your mother's discipline--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --so she must have been a strict disciplinarian.
Speaker 2: There were certain things we knew were not accepted and that was definitely one of them.
Speaker 1: And it seems as if you didn't like getting yourself into a spot with her where you would have to be disciplined.
Speaker 2: No I didn't but too there is, there is always what you need to run from, but then there's what you trying to run to and there was always enough that I was trying to run to that, that kind of drew me and moving to those things drew me away from the drugs and all that.  I wasn't, wasn't interested in it because of what I was drawn to.  And I didn't know exactly what it was that I was drawn to, but I was drawn to achieving something.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  You were focused but--
Speaker 2: Focused yes, but really desiring to have a good life whatever that meant and it was very clear that drugs weren't consistent with, with that and I was you know time wise and energy wise caught up and committed to lots of other activities and just never had an interest in it.
Speaker 1: You know there was an old statement, or there's an old adage an idle mind is the devil's workshop (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It is and that's true, that's true.
Speaker 1: But your mind was active and so was your physical body--
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) active.  So there was no time for unnecessary play.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 326981
Speaker 1: How did you choose the major at Auburn [Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama], international business, why did you choose business as a major?
Speaker 2: I guess I always envisioned myself as a, as a business person.  I really wanted, at one point I really wanted get involved in advertising.  I like the creative side of advertising.
Speaker 1: Is this from the artsy standpoint or from the marketing standpoint?
Speaker 2: I think initially from an artsy standpoint and then ultimately my interest kind of migrated to international marketing.  I didn't see international marketing majors offered in too many places that I was interested in going and I think that's what ultimately drew me to international business and that's what Auburn called the major and I guess and I think I also saw myself as a businessman.  I didn't know what it was I wanted to do but when I looked at my mind's eye twenty years down the road and envisioned what my day would look like, it looked like going into an office at nine o'clock or eight o'clock and walking out at five or six with a briefcase, wearing a suit.  And to me that meant business.  So that--so became international business major.
Speaker 1: And about what year were you in when you decided definitely that this was?
Speaker 2: That was my senior year in high school [Joseph Wheeler High School, Marietta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  So tell us more about life at Auburn?
Speaker 2: Again carried, carried on with the path that I had in high school just being involved.
Speaker 1: And you had just come back from the tour (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --of Peru, Brazil--
Speaker 2: Yeah right.
Speaker 1: --with the basketball team [Athletes In Action]--
Speaker 2: Right.  And at this point I guess that was the summer after my sophomore year in high school, I mean excuse me sophomore year in college and leading up to that was the year before my sophomore year involved raising money.  Because you had to raise money to go.
Speaker 1: The basketball team was on a fundraising kick?
Speaker 2: Well you had to pay your own way.
Speaker 1: Oh so you had to raise your own money?
Speaker 2: I had to raise money, right.
Speaker 1: It wasn't a group effort it was an individual effort.
Speaker 2: Each individual in the group had to raise money.  I had to raise I think thirty-five hundred dollars.
Speaker 1: So how did you do this?
Speaker 2: Lot of letters.  Wrote letters to friends, family, people in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], people who I never met gave money and that's very common for those types of trips to raise money.  So that year I was involved in raising money.  I was involved in trying to get in shape physically and hone up on my skills so playing as much as I could and then doing the class work and, and the other activities with student government because I'm still involved with student government.
Story_ID: 326982
Speaker 1: And then when I got back, it freed up a lot of time and at this point I was--I had moved up within the ranks so to speak of student government and then as I was approaching my senior year, I was thinking about what I was gonna do within student government is, I was thinking what my overall year would look like and I was at the point where I was either gonna move up or out.  And based on where I was at the time, the only place up to move to was the president of student government.  But there never been an African American president of student government at Auburn [Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama].  There'd only been one independent president and there was already a guy who had indicated when he first stepped foot on campus that he wanted to be student government president.
Speaker 2: So what do you mean an independent one?
Speaker 1: It's not a fraternity.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: So there's only, there's only been one president who was not in a fraternity.
Speaker 2: Who went on his own and just kind of did it without support of his brothers and his organization.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And he wasn't African American?
Speaker 1: No. He was not.
Speaker 2: All right.  Okay.  There had not been one before.
Speaker 1: And so obviously it was a prospect that required some degree of consideration and when I got back to campus I started talking to some of the campus leaders who I knew fairly well.  I said, "What do you think about this idea?"  And it was favorably received.  They generally told me uniformly that I think they thought it was a good idea and so I went about the process of putting my name in the hat to run for president.
Speaker 2: I like the way you sent out some feelers.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It's one thing to think that it's a good idea, but you know it's another thing to know that other people think it's a good idea.
Speaker 2: It's like not just jumping into the pool but testing the water first before (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: --you jump into--good strategy.
Speaker 1: And I guess you know what I know now about politics it's not unusual to have exploratory committees is what they call it.  I know this--I didn't know that's what I was doing.
Speaker 2: Well you been doing this a long time you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You hadn't been started then you--it goes back. Okay.
Speaker 1: Right.  And the good thing it's all about relationships and these people were friends, they were genuine friends that I'd known for the few years that I was there and they thought it was a good idea and fortunately they were right and I ran against two other young men and--
Speaker 2: But you were independent?
Speaker 1: I was independent.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They were both out of fraternities and I just ended up, ended up being one of those perfect storms where things just seem to align and momentum started building and one thing led to another and next thing I know I was successful in the election.
Story_ID: 326983
Speaker 1: How did you run your campaign [for student government president at Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Really by organizing among campus leaders.  Identifying the campus leaders and various organizations and saying, you know, can you support me?  Can you get behind me?  Identifying somebody in each of the fraternities and each of the sororities.
Speaker 1: Oh so you infringed upon his territory your opponents territory?
Speaker 2: You have to, you have to.  Large segment of the population is within the Greek organization and so you have to get Greek support and just because the two other candidates are in a fraternity doesn't mean that all the fraternities are gonna get behind--
Speaker 1: Good strategy. Okay.
Speaker 2: So I did that and the, the Christian organizations which are several, were very active and supportive because of my involvement with the campus crusade [Campus Crusade for Christ; Cru].  The black students got behind me and just a lot of things lined up, and I ended up winning without a runoff with 65 percent of the vote which was the best of all dreams, because I was tired by the end of that campaign.  I was hoping not to have to go through that--
Speaker 1: About how long did it run?  Was it a month?
Speaker 2: No, no, it's about a week and a half process where you basically skip all your classes and go to anything on campus that you can find, it's a real spread.  Then again because Auburn is such a small town, small campus so much energy, it's table tents, it's T-shirts, it's bill boards, it's posters all kinds of things along those lines.
Speaker 1: So where'd you get the money to--
Speaker 2: You had to raise money.  I had to raise money.  I had a couple of people give money and I worked at Honey Baked Ham [Honey Baked Ham Company] over Christmas holidays, sawing hams in half.
Speaker 1: Saw--okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: And made about four hundred, five hundred dollars in a week which was a lot of money to me back then and I was able to put to the effort and but you, you rely on the graces of your friends to raise money.
Speaker 1: Now was this your first job, part time job after you know since, was this your first?
Speaker 2: No, no I had worked my senior year in high school briefly at Sears' [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] parts department.  But this was a job that you could, it was the first job I ever--I had many jobs at that point, but it was the only job that you would go to on an interview and they say, "Well can you start right now?"  "Well, can you at least let me come back tomorrow?  I wasn't really planning on working right now."  But it's sawing hams in half for hours on end.
Speaker 1: So it was an eight hour job or did you just work part time for four hours or so on weekends?
Speaker 2: Honey Baked Ham does all the most business throughout the year during that Christmas season, meeting all those orders and they hire, they hire just for that season and it start out as eight hour day, but as you get closer to the Christmas day, the hours increased you know in order to meet the orders.  And so we worked forty hours, we're up to forty hours by Wednesday and so by Wednesday I was working time and a half.
Speaker 1: I was gonna ask you did you get time and a half there?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.  And you worked Sunday and got double time.  So I think we worked ninety-two hours that week so no it wasn't an eight hour job.  We'd go in early in the morning, start sawing hams, leave late night.
Speaker 1: And you knew that you didn't wanna be a ham sawyer for the rest of your life?
Speaker 2: It confirmed that I needed to stay in college.  If I ever needed any confirmation it did that for me--
Story_ID: 326984
Speaker 1: Well let me ask were there any national mentors?  Were there any men, black men, white men, Asian men, Hispanic men, were there men or women in the media or in your life anyway or anywhere, or women who inspired you that you had in your mind's eye that you wanted to be like?
Speaker 2: Well there was always my father [Augustus Melton, Jr.].  Always watching his success and watching how he went about his business and that always was in the back of my mind and always created a picture of what the expectation was for me.  Always admired various basketball players as well that I followed.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your basketball role models?
Speaker 2: I remember liking Mo Cheeks [Maurice Cheeks] for the Sixers [Philadelphia 76ers].  I remember liking Mo Cheeks.  His style and his leadership on the court.
Speaker 1: Now who did he play with?
Speaker 2: He played with the Sixers, 76ers.
Speaker 1: Sixers, um-hm.
Speaker 2: And I even saw him last night, he was coaching and I said that's Mo Cheeks on the rim.  He was a big, big model for me I think.  And in college [Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama] too I started reading more about Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and began to appreciate the depth of what he represented and what he taught and the difficulty in holding people together that many people together under those types of circumstances for that long period of time.  And the depth of philosophy it took to be able to do that and be able to articulate that.  So I began to really appreciate him as well.
Story_ID: 326985
Speaker 1: Okay so you worked at Honey Baked Ham [Honey Baked Ham Company], you ran a successful campaign for student government president [at Auburn University, Auburn, Alabama]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so what was the celebration like?
Speaker 2: Mixed.  It was a--to some degree there's a sense of euphoria having accomplished something that, wasn't sure it was even possible on the front end.  But when you--I found that when you get in positions like that, there's always in the back of my mind okay now what do I do?  And while everybody celebrating, my mind starts making the shift to what am I gonna do next?  How am I gonna do it?  Just make sure I do a good job.  You know focusing on the task at hand, the business aspect of it.  So it's a, it's a mixed sensation of euphoria plus responsibility.
Speaker 1: Now what were some of the responsibilities of that office, what did that office entail for the New Bern University [sic. Auburn University] for the campus there?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh we budget, we allocated I think about it was about sixty-five, I forget what our budget was but probably sixty-five thousand dollar budget which for students is a lot of money.
Speaker 1: That's quite a bit.
Speaker 2: That we allocate.  We would manage a lot of the programs, manage elections.  We'd manage, gosh trying to remember what we did, stayed busy.  I was--I served on a number of committees by virtue of the position.
Speaker 1: Was the student paper--was the school's paper [The Plainsman; The Auburn Plainsman] out of that office?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: It was different altogether?
Speaker 2: It was different altogether.  I was liaison with the university faculty, various proposals that would come up whether it's switching from a quarter system to semester system, which is one of the issues that we dealt with.
Speaker 1: Any issues dealing with the students and what went on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 1: --relating to them?
Speaker 2: Exactly.  We had a major project that we had been underway, had been underway for years which was to get a new Olympic sized pool.  We had Olympic, Olympic caliber swim team and dive team but we didn't have a Olympic size pool.  And we thought that we ought to have an Olympic size pool and the students were willing to make that happen, and so that was a long term project to, to deal with that.  We would budget, like I said it was a big part of what we dealt with because we allocated the money to the newspapers and to the programming council that brought in all the concerts and speakers and things along those lines and all the activities whether it's homecoming, we were responsible for campus security, we had little networks of students that would escort people at night and all those types of things to improve the life you know.
Speaker 1: So how long would you stay in that position?  Was that a year?
Speaker 2: It was a year.
Speaker 1: It was a year?
Speaker 2: It was a year.
Story_ID: 326986
Speaker 1: At this time were you thinking anything about being a judge?
Speaker 2: No.  No.  In fact my father [Augustus Melton, Jr.] had suggested to me as I was approaching graduation the idea of going to law school.  I said no I don't think I'm really interested in that.  So I wasn't thinking about being a judge.  As I approached graduation, I wanted to finish the drill in terms of getting fluent in Spanish because you can only get so fluent in a classroom.  And I start thinking about traveling abroad and studying for a year or so, but I realized if I were gonna do that, I would need another piece of paper.  So I was thinking about a year program or two year program in international studies, or foreign affairs or something along those lines and did a lot of research into that.  The more I thought about it, the more homesick I realized I'd probably be at the end of that.  Had a desire to come back home and started looking at international studies at home.  And then start looking at international law.  And the University of Georgia [Athens, Georgia] had a good international law program and I had already made the psychological leap of going to school for another couple of years so three years at home for international law was doable.  That's how I got--became interested in going to law school.
Speaker 1: All right now how was undergrad financed?  Did you get a scholarship?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Was it a full scholarship?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It paid for, the scholarship paid for tuition and books.
Speaker 1: And who was the scholarship through?
Speaker 2: It was through the university.
Speaker 1: Through Auburn University [Auburn, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And how did you qualify for that?  What did?
Speaker 2: It was based on.  It was called the Presidential Opportunity Scholarship and it was based on activities and grades and things along those lines.
Speaker 1: Okay and your high school grades and activities--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and advanced status--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --helped you to get that one.  Did you find that on your own or did they find you?
Speaker 2: Both.  I don't even remember how that happened.  I remember I applied.  I remember sending in my SAT scores and they accepted me right away.  And I don't think it was long after that that, that scholarship became available.  I don't remember what the process was, but it wasn't a complicated process of finding, finding that scholarship.
Speaker 1: Well in the school system now it's test, test, testing, how were your SAT scores (background noise)?
Speaker 2: They were pretty good.  They've changed the scale so I don't know what my test would equate to under the new scale but it was over a thousand.  Don't remember the number exactly, but it was pretty good.  Not as good as I'd hoped but--
Speaker 1: So how did you prepare for your SAT scores, was it a combination of everything that you've done?
Speaker 2: It was a combination of everything.  We had--
Speaker 1: Did you take any prep courses?
Speaker 2: --I didn't take any prep courses.  We had, we had at the high school [Joseph Wheeler High School, Marietta, Georgia], there were so many advance courses and in each of those courses, they took pride in preparing you for what would lie ahead whether it's college courses or the Advanced Placement exam or the SAT exam that we felt prepared going straight from those courses into the SAT.
Speaker 1: I wanna ask, how did you go in to take a test?  Now my daughter took it lightly, like oh it's just the SAT, but she took the ACT seriously.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So how do you go in, how do you go in to take a test of that nature the standardized test?
Speaker 2: I took all of them very seriously.  The problem I had is that I tend to read slow.  That's always been my problem.  I read slowly.  And so I have to be very strategic as I go into these exams and especially on the reading comprehensive portions where you've got all that text that you have to pour through.  And generally what I would do if it--I would focus on the short questions first and then if I had time I'd go back and address the longer ones but there are all kinds of testing techniques that would help as you take the test and that was one of the ones that I had to use.  And then also you have the process of elimination and you know the various tools that would equip you to improve your chances of succeeding on those tests and employed all of them.
Speaker 1: A lot of students need to know that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's certainly an art to it unfortunately.
Speaker 1: And these tests are required?
Speaker 2: They're required.
Speaker 1: I mean you can't do anything unless you pass a standardized test.
Speaker 2: And, and the reality is that I don't see that we're gonna migrate away from standardized test.  The more, the greater our population becomes, the larger our population becomes, the more reliance we will have on standardized test most likely, not less so so we have to meet that reality.
Speaker 1: So you may as well like them because you're not gonna get around them (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They're gonna be there. Yeah.
Speaker 1: If you don't like them you may as well prepare to take them.
Speaker 2: Right. Absolutely have to prepare to take them.
