Story_ID: 54586
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with the HistoryMakers, our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: All right.  It's Derek Gordon McGinty; D-E-R-E-K, G-O-R-D-O-N, M-C, capital G-I-N-T-Y.
Speaker 1: And, Sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August 17th, 1959, Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I am a TV anchor person, a TV journalist.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is March 19, 2014.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are at WHUT Television on the campus of Howard University [Washington, D.C.].
Story_ID: 54587
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we asked as sort of a warm up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Because we always do it, we always ask them.  They only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: The first question is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, do I have a favorite food, probably hamburgers.  I'm a burger and potatoes kind of a guy.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Perhaps red, maybe blue, somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: All right, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: That would almost certainly be the summertime.
Speaker 1: All right a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a tough one, because I love to ski, but I also like nice weather.  So, it just depends, you know, where I want to--what time of year it is.  So let's say I like nice ski resorts, Vail [Colorado], for example, Ski Resort's probably my favorite.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  It's probably--I'll think about that, but it's probably, "such is life".
Story_ID: 54588
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask about your family history, I'll ask about your mother's [Doris McGinty] side of the family and your father's [Milton McGinty] side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Doris Evans McGinty; D-O-R-I-S, E-V-A-N-S, M-C, capital G-I-N-T-Y.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay, August the 2nd, 1925, Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: What can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what are the stories?
Speaker 2: I don't know much beyond my [maternal] grandmother and her husband, who I knew.  They were my--I know my grandmother was from South Carolina, I'm not quite sure where my [maternal] granddad was from.  He died when I was eight or nine years old, but I knew my grandmother very well because she lived until I was about 30.  She was--they were--she was--from South Carolina, moved up here at some point and married my granddad and had two daughters, my mother and my Aunt Jean.  My grandmother worked for the government for a long [time].  But my earliest memories are of her are that she was retired.  She, you know, was a--you know what I mean, I don't know--she was a really nice woman, a great grandmother, we called here "Memo", you know, and she was a kind of a stereotypical grand mom in a lot of ways, you know, she made the cookies, she cooked, she took care of us when we were kids and she was the one who--we used to go spend the night at her house when we were little kids.  She let us stay up late watching horror movies, I mean, just stuff, you know, it seems like it's kind of corny from a movie or something, but that was really how things were, and she and my mother were very, very close.  And that's what I remember about my grandmother.  I don't know anything or hardly at all about her family except she was one of like eleven brothers and sisters.  I knew her sister whose name was Alfonse, or something like that.  They called her--we called her Aunt Al, and I kind of met a couple of her brothers, you know, vaguely, but never--didn't know them.  It was like 10 or 11 of them, but--
Speaker 1: Do you know where in South Carolina that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I do not know.  My sister would know that, but I don't know.
Speaker 1: And did--were there any stories passed down from that side of the family about what life was like down there or--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --Or how she moved to D.C., or--?
Speaker 2: You know there really weren't a lot of stories.  The stories mostly came from--were more from my father's side of the family, but no, I didn't hear much, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 54589
Speaker 1: So your mother [Doris McGinty] grew up here in D.C.?
Speaker 2: She did, she and her sisters.  She went to Dunbar [Paul Lawrence Dunbar High School, Washington, D.C.] and Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  My mother was a Fulbright Scholar.  She was--so she went to--she started-she started--she went to college.  She was really, really smart.  She went to college when she was 16.  She finished that in a couple of years.  She went to Radcliffe [College, Cambridge, Massachusetts] at the age of 19 to get her Master's degree and then later on, it was off to Oxford [University of Oxford, Oxford, England] for her PhD as a Fulbright Scholar.  She came back here, became a professor at Howard [professor of musicology, 1947-1991], married my father [Milton McGinty], late, by today's standards.  She was like 30--by those days' standards, rather.  She was like 30 years old when she married my dad, but you know she said, I think my sister told me she didn't think she was going to get married at that point, because she was so elderly by, you know, 1940's standards, but you know, she married my dad and had three kids.
Speaker 1: What was your mother a professor of?
Speaker 2: A professor of musicology, history of music.  And apparently, pretty accomplished in the field, from what I'm told.  I get--I still till this day-- my mother died in April of 2005 and I still get people coming up to me on the street and going, your mother taught me, your mother taught me, you know, I knew your mother.  It's amazing to me, you know, they loved her, you know, they really did, so.  I feel very proud to have known her.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any stories about some of her students or--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I'll tell you, I remember a lot about growing up with her and her students.  I mean she was--it's so funny--the funniest thing to me is that she was so beloved, but was so harsh.  I mean she would grade 'em tough, you know.  She was compassionate, but she just wouldn't cut you any slack.  If you didn't know the stuff, you were going to get an "F", you know, and I would be--we'd be at home and she'd be grading the papers and she'd be talking, "Oh this one's trying the best he can, but he doesn't know the stuff, F" you know, she would fail you right out, you know, but the kids loved her.  You know, it's weird to me.  I don't even know exactly what it was about, it's like because she had such high expectations for them they really appreciated it.  And so here at Howard when my mother retired from Howard, there were--they had it at the chapel over here, the Rankin chapel [Andrew Rankin Memorial Chapel] and it was like--it was years, like ten years after she retired and the place was packed, packed.  I was blown away.  I gave the speech.  They had me give the key--and I came down from New York to give the speech.  I was working in New York at the time.  I came down, and you know, I cannot find that speech now.  That's of my regrets, I cannot find that speech.  I don't know what happened to it.  It should have been on a computer or something, but it just--it got lost.  But I gave the speech and I talked about all that and stuff and that was--it was a great time. I--But I mean the students--she was beloved.  That's what I mostly remember and even though she was tough on 'em.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 54590
Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's [Milton McGinty] side.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Milton Oliver McGinty; M-I-L-T-O-N, Oliver;    O-L-I-V-E-R, McGinty; M-C, capital G-I-N-T-Y.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He is July 24, 1927.  He was born in Hannibal, Missouri.
Speaker 1: Okay, the home of Mark Twain--
Speaker 2: As he used to often say.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, how far back can you trace that side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, again, you know, I can't trace it back but so far, because he talked a lot about his father and stuff, but I don't know that he really knew his grandparents that much or else I didn't pay close enough attention to the old stories, but I know his father was from the south and ran away from there after having some altercation with a guy.  I seemed to remember something about maybe stabbing a guy or something and having to leave town, because they might have lynched him.
Speaker 1: Now this would be a white person?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  It was some kind of altercation with a white person--
Speaker 1: Was it over--
Speaker 2: --I have no idea what it was over.
Speaker 1: --Okay.
Speaker 2: But there was some kind of altercation.  My [paternal] granddad had to leave town.  My granddad was a minister, turned into--or became a minister.  And in the Midwest in the Depression--being a minister, the kind of minister he was, was very difficult.  He sort of traveled around and even went to church to church kind of a thing, had no money.  My father was deeply affected by the poverty of that, you know, and he--I know he really just did not like it, who would, but he--it deeply affected him, you know, how he perceived money and how he perceived religion, I think, was deeply affected by how difficult it was for my grandfather.  My [paternal] grandmother, "Nanah"(ph), as we knew.  I never knew my granddad, he died of a heart attacked before I was--before they were even married.  My grandmother, Nanah, as we called her, I remember her.  She was alive till I was eight or ten years old, and she was a feisty old lady.  I remember one time--we were--I was about seven years old.  I was hanging on the back yard with my--one of my buddies and grandma, Nanah came out there and she said, "who wants to wrestle me?"  So I'm thinking--I'm seven years old, I'm thinking, I'm going to have to hurt this old lady, you know, but I'll wrestle you, you know.  So I kind of tried to put the grab on her, as my father would say, and she threw me on the ground.  I said well, how could this happen, you know, so I got back up and I tried to get her again, and she threw me on the ground.  I realized I can't do nothing with this old lady, I can't do any--cause I didn't realize I was just a little kid, and of course, you know, unless she was totally decrepit, she could beat me, you know, but I didn't have a conception of that, but I thought that was funny.  But she was very nice, but she got sick while I--so I just don't remember a whole lot about her personality 'cause I was too little.  But I do remember that, and she lived two doors down from us, so we lived on Jefferson Street and northeast, we lived at 32 Jefferson Street, she lived at like 18 Jefferson Street, so they lived a couple, what was it--her and my dad's brother, Uncle J.C., lived there as well, and so.  I grew up and my cousins, Kevin and Brian.  So I kind of grew up--in a little teeny street neighborhood with, you know, family right near by, so that was kind of cool.
Speaker 1: Now, did your father grow up here in D.C.?
Speaker 2: He grew up, no, he grew up in the Midwest.  You know, Iowa, Kansas.
Speaker 1: In Kansas?
Speaker 2: Iowa and Kansas, yeah.
Speaker 1: Born in Hannibal--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but they didn't stay there for long.  He was in Iowa and Kansas most of the time.
Speaker 1: Now, is Hannibal the town that your grandfather got in trouble?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  That was in the south.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: That was in the south, like Georgia or somewhere like that.  Again, I just don't remember the details of that.
Speaker 1: So were they following your father's--grandfather's career as a minister--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he took his family around with him, I mean, yeah, once he--you know, once he had the family, he had my father and his brother and two sisters, they moved around.
Speaker 1: What denomination was he?
Speaker 2: I want to say Methodist, but I'm not certain.
Speaker 1: It sounds about right, because they would--the bishops would place you in churches if you were Methodist.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  It sounds like--I want to say Methodist, you know, but that's--that's my memory.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that sounds about right.  So your father grew up in more than one place?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he moved around.  Yeah, they moved around.  He didn't like it.  In fact, by the time he was 16 or 17, they were leaving and he wanted to play football for another year at the high school and so he stayed with the family there.  He did not move with them, he stayed there.
Speaker 1: Where was that?
Speaker 2: Oh, God, don't get me to lying.  I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  It was some small place, you know.  We went back there.  We drove across the country when I was just about 15 years old and when went back there to this small town, to--you know, and even with that I can't remember the names of any of them, you know, but we drove through them, and I'm thinking "whew" glad I didn't grow up here, but you know, that's where my dad was from, so.
Story_ID: 54591
Speaker 1: So what did he [father, Milton McGinty] do after high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he joined the Army, he--right at the tail of end of World War II.  He lied about his age, if I remember correctly, 'cause he was only 17, and got in there.  I guess they weren't checking too hard back at that time, and he got sent overseas and he liked it over there in France because there was so little racism, there was a lot little--less racism than here.  He liked it, like a lot of the soldiers over there.  And--but the war was almost over.  The war in Europe was almost over.  And so the war ended and they were sending all the guys back.  He didn't want to come back, but they made you come back.  So he came back to the States and he just really had a hard time tolerating the racism and he decided he would go to college on a GI Bill, so he went to--okay, now I've never really been clear on the order, cause he was at Kansas for--University of Kansas [Lawrence, Kansas] for a minute but then he ended up finishing up at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  How long he was at either place, I'm fuzzy on that.  But he went to--he went there, then he came to Howard, stayed here for a few years, came to Washington [D.C.], you now, went to Howard, stayed here, went to American University [Washington, D.C.] for a minute to study law, didn't like law, dropped out after a semester, went back and got a Masters in Psychology, which he never used, at least not in terms of practicing.  Probably used it on us, but--
Speaker 1: So what did he end up doing for a living?
Speaker 2: Well, he went to work for the government.  And--the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency].  He was what they called an editor or something like that.  His job was to look over papers or whatever and correct them with a pencil.  And he hated it and what he found was they would not promote him because he was black so he grew very, very frustrated, very, very frustrated, and he talked about how he would, you know, at the--some days he would put the pencil down and he would just swear that he was not going to pick it up, but then he would think about his family, whatever, and then he would pick it up and he would continue to work.  And then he couldn't get promoted, they wouldn't promote him, even though he did well on the tests and everything, they wouldn't promote him.  So finally he quit and decided to go in business for himself.  And he always told the story about how he came home that night and he quit, and he told my mother [Doris McGinty] that he had quit and mom said to him, well, I don't know how you can sleep at night, you got these kids here and fam--how you going quit your job, you know, and he said I will sleep better tonight than I have slept in a long time.  And he did.  And he went out and he started his own business.  He got into construction and he said it was really hard and he did not make hardly any money at first.  He said the first three years, he made $1500 a year, and the only reason he was able to make it by is because my mother was a college professor [professor of musicology, Howard University, 1947-1991].  And he said his lowest point came was when he had to wait for my mother's check so he could complete a business transaction of some sort.  He said that was his lowest point.  He said but after his third year, the fourth year he made $20,000, which at that time was actually some money.  And he didn't never look back.  He was very--went on and became very successful.  He ended up buying  several--four apartment buildings in Washington, D.C., a total of about 100 units, you know, and he was--after a while, he quit the construction business, just ran his real estate business, you know, and he was very good at it.  He didn't like it particularly, but he was very good at it and he was very successful, he was able to provide for us and send hid kids to college and you know move us to a better neighborhood and all that.
Story_ID: 54592
Speaker 1: Did he ever--it sounds as if there was something else that he [father, Milton McGinty] would have rather done?
Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting you ask that, because there was something else.  He wanted to be a writer.  And so--I mean and he had collected like all these writings, all these things.  He's written all these short stories and these various essays and stuff and he got some published in the newspapers and stuff and he--at the end he wanted to be a playwright, that was his thing.  He wrote these plays and he hacked on 'em and took 'em to seminars and had other people hack on 'em, and so he ended up with five or six plays that he had written that he thought he had about as good as he could get them.  And then no one would produce them.  So he ended up buying the Takoma Theater here in Washington, D.C. so that he could put his plays on.  So he bought the Takoma which had been an old movie theater.  It wasn't open anymore and he kind of fixed it up into a live stage theater.  And he would rent it out to people and stuff, but mostly he just wanted to put his own plays on and he did, he put them all on, he produced them all, he got 'em on stage, and you know, they didn't--they didn't do well, you know, they didn't--he didn't make any hits, he didn't make any money at, I'm sure he lost significant money at it, but it was his thing and he did the best he could and he--he made it happen just through, quite frankly sheer force of will, you know, and so you know he got a chance to do his thing, he got a chance to do his thing.  So I was very happy for him, you know, even though they didn't--people didn't flock to them like he hoped.  I think--frankly I--and I told him this, I said, "Dad, do you know they need"--I thought they were very, very good in some ways, his dialogue was brilliant and he could do some things, but some things missing and I thought he could have fixed them had he'd been willing to do something different than what he wanted to do, but that was not my father.  He was a man who did it his way, you know, and that was the only way he could do it.
Story_ID: 54593
Speaker 1: What were they about? I mean what were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Almost all were about race.  They were all related to race, except perhaps one referred--even this one--was called "The Reverend" and that was really about his [Milton McGinty's] father, you know, it was about this reverend who was trying to do his thing in the Depression and how hard it was and his wife was going to leave him, and they didn't have any children in the play, but all is (unclear) and the second act, was a two act thing, the second act was very, very funny because he had the reverend trying to be seduced.  But my father had a great sense of humor, I know I probably haven't made that clear, but he was a very funny guy.  He--the second act was very, very funny, but--so they--so it was about this black reverend and I thought that was about his father.  But the other plays were all about race.  He had "The Ambassador" which was a story of the first black man to be appointed to--to be ambassador to the Soviet Union, a country he referred to in the play as the "Big Country".  His play--he had another play "Where Forgotten Things Belong".  Which was about a couple that was matched up by a computer dating service, but they make a mistake and it was an interracial couple.  He had "The Retreat" which is about these black folks and white folks to get together to try to solve racial problems by going on a retreat together and you kind of find out all their flaws and weird things and stuff that goes on.  There was a "Masters Retreat" (unclear) to reverend.  Oh, the first one he did was called "The Organization" and it's about this--these two black men, and one is--it's really about these two, although there were other characters.  One is--runs this organization, he's sort of a radical type guy like from the '60s (1960s) and an older gentleman who wants to see change but he's a more conservative, more, sort of you know, like an older guy might be, not as radical.  And they meet together and how they try to join this organization and make it work and stuff, and he--and I always felt like that guy, the older guy was my father.  Like every play, he's in the play, you know, and that character, you could always spot that character as him in the play and so, they were all--all his plays were about race except "The Reverend".  That's why I always felt that my father, who at the end of his days, said he refuse to refer to anybody as black or white or even that cause he just thought it was an irrelevant thing.  And I was like, Dad, but you're the one who's most affected by race and racism and as for a change, you know, it has messed with his whole world, so to speak.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did he form a theater company at the Takoma [Takoma Theatre, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Not as such, I mean, you know, people would come around and they would, you know, form companies and a little bit and work with him and try to do things and stuff, but it never was permanent, it was always sort of a--it was all sort of a ad hoc, you know, it wasn't--it wasn't a permanent--it was never set up like the arena stage or something where you know you have a really strong company and that sort of thing.  No, it was always kind of a fly by night, almost kind of a thing.
Speaker 1: About what time period did he have these?
Speaker 2: That was the '80s (1980s) and '90s (1990s), you know mid-'80s (1980s), early '90s (1990s), I would say; yeah, mostly in the '80s (1980s), 'cause I was here, so it was before I went to New York, so.  Eighties to early '90s (1990s), yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 54594
Speaker 1: So is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: Yes.  There is a story.  Now let's see if I can get this right.  I think they were introduced at a party by somebody who wanted them to meet.  And my father [Milton McGinty] always talked about how my mother [Doris McGinty] had on this red dress so he wasn't quite sure.  See my father was very conservative in some ways.  It's ways that I thought were kind of silly, like, Dad, really, the red dress was a problem.  But that was him, you know, he just had certain ideas about how things ought to be and if they weren't like that, well, then that was going to be an issue, so.  But he liked my mother, my mother was pretty and was very, very smart, as I've described and so he really appreciated that about her, and he met her and he says the next day he called her in the morning, because the next day was a Sunday, and he wanted to see if she was at church because if she was at church, then he wasn't going to be interested, okay.  And she wasn't, she answered the phone.  And she wasn't at church.  So he said, "oh, okay".  So it was like I say, my father, he had a--he had a poor relationship with God because he, I think he really felt angry about how his father, who was so devoted had such a bad life and he just said, "I'm not playing that" you know and so he was kind of an atheist, I guess, sort of.  I don't know, but he--I don't know that he was completely an atheist, I thought it was more that he was angry at God than thought God didn't exist, you know.  But if you asked, he probably would have said he was an atheist, you know, and he would argue with anybody who said different, you know.  But I always thought it was more that he was angry, disappointed, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay. So that's how they--so they struck up a relationship (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: That's how they met.  Six months later they got married.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this when? Mid-'50s (1950s), late '50s (1950s)?
Speaker 2: This was mid-'50s (1950s).  So they got married about '56 (1956), I believe, cause three years later, I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So.  My mother would have been 29 at that point, I guess, and my dad was 27.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your mother was a little older than (unclear)--
Speaker 2: She was two years older.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I guess she would have been 31.  No, that wrong.  She was born in '25 (1925).  So in '56 (1956) she was 31, he was 29, yeah.
Story_ID: 54595
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about their personalities, their talents, their dispositions, how they walked, talked, their sense of humor, what they looked like, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think I have significant parts of both of them.  I look like my father [Milton McGinty].  He was a tall dark skinned man with long legs just like me and he had--the only difference--the only big difference, he had all his hair when he died, which I don't know how that happened.  But, you know, I'm athletic a little bit like he was, although he was a better athlete, I think, and--I think personality--and I get sort of my sense of humor and outgoingness from him.  He was outgoing, he liked to tell jokes and that kind of--I get that from him.  And so saying--quite often, I can hear myself saying stuff, I was like, God dang, I'm sounding more like him every day.  But a lot of my personality sort of--I'm not as hard-line as my dad, you know, I much, I'm more--and so any warmth or--I won't say any warmth, but just the--my sense of people and relating to people and enjoying regular stuff.  My dad was not a fun guy.  Man I mean, Dad, he didn't have any friends, you know, nobody came around to hang with Pops, I mean the only thing--if he hadn't played sports, he'd been a complete odd ball and couldn't do anything, wouldn't have had any friends at all.  He had friends because he liked to play ball so he was around guys who liked to play ball and do stuff, but he didn't have like buddies.  Like I got buddies, like most guys, I've known since I was, you know, elementary school or high school, we're still friends now.  You know, Pops didn't have that, you know, 'cause he was too prickly, too odd, you know, and so, I'm glad, frankly, that I'm not like that.  I'm more like my mom [Doris McGinty], you know, and I like people, I like being around people, I like to have fun, I like to interact with them and appreciate them, sort of where they are.  My father would be too critical.  "Oh, he's an idiot" you know, and so, I'd be like, yeah, Dad, but he's a fun guy or he's a nice person.  And he--but he might agree with that but wouldn't want to be around the person, you know, and I'm more like my mom and I'm like, I can hang out.
Speaker 1: It sounds like it sort of a mass of contradictions on some levels--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well.
Speaker 1: --You said he had a sense of humor, he was outgoing, yet he didn't attract people to him.
Speaker 2: He did attract to him, he just didn't like them.  They liked him, but he didn't like them.  Pops did not--he did not hang.  I mean, he just, like I say, he wasn't fun.  He didn't drink, he didn't smoke, you know, he didn't, you know, he wasn't--he kind of laughed at me because he said, he told me, he said once, he said, "You are a very intelligent man", he said "but your pursuits are the pursuits of just a regular guy."  I said, "That's right, Dad, that's why I'm fun."  See, I like to watch regular movies and hang out with the fellas and play video games and the stuff that regular dudes do, even though I might also want to read the Wall Street Journal and do New York Times and understand politics and do the things I do, but to you that a--to him that's a contradiction, to me, life wouldn't be fun without those things, you know, and so that was where we were different.  He was not a fun dude, you know.
Speaker 1: So it seems like he was really hard on himself?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was hard on everybody.  He was hard on everybody, you know, he was very judgmental.  My father was a very judgmental man, and you had to perform.  He used to always say, you gotta perform, you gotta perform.
Speaker 1: Do you think he was more like his father than he thought in terms of his father being a reverend?
Speaker 2: That's interesting.  Man, yeah, that's interesting.  Maybe.  Although I don't think he didn't think he was like his dad.  I mean, I think he didn't have the faith that his father had, but he certainly was sort of a, as he even said, I'm a preacher, I gotta speak what I think, and he would, you know.  If he felt strongly about something, he would get up on the pulpit to some extent and talk about it and explain it and he would call me up, you know.  "I've been thinking about this, I just want to tell you" you know, and he would go into detail about it, yeah, good lord, you know, but that was my dad, you know, so I would listen to him.  So, you know, I think that, yeah, he was a preacher in some ways, but he knew it, when they didn't know it.
Speaker 1: Sounds like an interesting person.
Speaker 2: Oh, he was.
Story_ID: 54596
Speaker 1: And your mother [Doris McGinty], this woman was a genius (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was, she was, she was.  My parents were both to me amazing people, they both were, you know.  And I think, if I'm honest about it, I did not appreciate--my father was so larger than life, you know, that my mother--and my mother was a reserved person.  I didn't know until I was like an adult like, that she was big time in her profession [Howard University musicology professor, 1947-1991], 'cause she never said it.  You know, she would never tell you, oh, yeah, I wrote these articles or I did this or they're asking me to come talk here or whatever.  I remember one time I was at the Smithsonian [Institute, Washington, D.C.] and she was speaking at Smithsonian and people were--and she's giving this lecture and people were asking her all these questions and she was answering them.  I was like, Mom, you are bad, you know, but I had no idea.
Story_ID: 54597
Speaker 1: I was going to ask you about Roberta Flack, if she (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My mom [Doris McGinty, professor of musicology at Howard University from 1947-1991] taught Roberta Flack, my mom taught Donny Hathaway you know, she knew any number of--she knew Donald Byrd  pretty well.  She knew any number of the musical people out of Howard here, she really did.  She taught the Blackbyrds.  I got a sense there weren't that good a students, but I don't know, you know.
Speaker 1: Rock Creek Park.
Speaker 2: There you go.
Speaker 1: There we go.  So, yeah, and you said she taught one of the major opera stars?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm trying to think.  Did she teach or work with her.  I don't remember cause I think the woman is kind of closer to being a contemporary of hers, but I can't think--Leontyne Price, no, what's the woman's--I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Denyce Graves?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no, that's way after her.  Denyce wasn't here at Howard, was she?
Speaker 1: I don't know.
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I've met Denyce Graves, I actually interviewed her at least once or twice for my radio show back in the day, but--
Speaker 1: I was just throwing out--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Yeah, no, I just don't remember.
Speaker 1: --Kathleen Battle [internationally-recognized soprano opera singer], I don't know.
Speaker 2: No.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: All right.  None of them sticks out.  I'm going to stop asking.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a good idea.
Story_ID: 54598
Speaker 1: All right, so, do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I have one brother [Dana McGinty], one sister [Lisa Toppin], both younger than I.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Kind of tell us about them then?
Speaker 2: My sister, who is the youngest of three of us, she--six years younger and so, she was the only girl, the first girl and, you know, it wasn't easy for her, you know, because my brother, who is only two years removed from me, we were already sort of a team, you know.  By the time she came in, he and I had already sort of established a working sort of situation.  We played together, we did stuff together.  Here she comes, you know, much younger than us, much younger than we and a girl, you know, so it was hard for her, you know, we gave her a tough time, you know, we teased her and you know messed with her and so forth.  I'm amazed that she grew up into the amazing stable person that she is considering how tough a time we gave her.  Because she, you know, of course she looked up to us and wanted to hang with us and stuff.  I mean, man, there's a lot of times we didn't really want--my mother [Doris McGinty] did a great job of sort of refereeing it, making it okay, you know, and she was really close to my mom.  My sister is, you know, is just an amazing person.  She is--she went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and she went to GW [George Washington University, Washington, D.C.] and she's got a Master's, what was that thing, she's got a Ph.D in Human Resources and she--what else is her stuff--Speech Pathology was her original choice, so she sort of went through some changes before she figured out she wanted to be in Human Resources.  She's really smart and just a very wise wonderful person, you know.  And in the last few years, my parents both got sick and died, you know, she was the one who sort of took the leadership role in making sure everything was taken care of and, you know, she wasn't even here.  When my mother was sick, she lived on the west coast in San Francisco [California], she was flying back and forth and doing all this stuff.  I was like, Lisa, how are you doing it?  But she was really close to my mom and so, you know, she just wanted to be here and she was great, you know.  I don't know, we would always tell, Lisa, if we didn't have you, we'd have to invent you, you know, because she was just amazing.  And when my father [Milton McGinty] got sick, by that time, she had moved to the east coast, so she was more able to--in Atlanta [Georgia].  She said, he didn't really know how to handle a girl, you know.  He knew how to handle boys.  He wasn't quite sure what to do with her, but they became very, very close in his last few years, so that was good.  So, I don't know, what else do you want to know about her?
Speaker 1: That's it.
Story_ID: 54599
Speaker 1: And your brother, you got a brother [Dana McGinty]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I got a brother.  His name is Dana.  Dana and I, you know, we became good friends right from the beginning.  You know, I don't remember ever feeling resentful of him or whatever, because I was the first born, you know, sometimes you do some, whatever, and being the first born envy or some such thing, I don't know.  There was never any of that.  He and I always got along as kids.  He was my first playmate, you know, so we hung out together, we played all these games together, we did all this crazy stuff together.  He was my roommate until I moved out of the house, you know.  So, he and I were always close, although we are very different in a lot of ways.  I mean, he's a more reserved person than I am.  He's more quiet like my mom [Doris McGinty].  Super intelligent guy, Phi Beta Kappa, he's a physician, he's, you know, he's always done--but he's--my brother's sort of--my father [Milton McGinty] pointed this out to me, he's kind of the rebel, right.  He--I'm more the sort of want to fit in and want to be part of the group.  My brother was the rebel, he wanted to be the, I don't know, the outlier, the one who's doing something different, the one who is, you know, who was, who's coming up with the sort of different way of looking at things.  I think he hated--and he didn't like people who wanted to fit in.  He didn't like being part of any kind of in-crowd, you know, that's just not his thing.  And so that's where he and I are different.  But, you know, we've always, you know, watched out for each other and had each other's back over the years, even though at times, we haven't hung out all the time, because we are kind of different, you know, but we've never had really any conflict or anything like that, you know.  So, that's the thing I really appreciate about my siblings.  And you know I knock on wood as I say this is that we've gotten along, you know, we've always gotten along and even through my parents' illness and death, you know, we always were there for each other and manage to work together on stuff.  I've been very grateful for that, you know, 'cause I hear these stories about people who are not speaking to brothers and sisters and all these types of things.  I'm very grateful that it's not like that for us.
Story_ID: 54600
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness, and that--'cause this will kind of fly in the face of what I just told you.  I remember pushing my brother [Dana McGinty] down the stairs.  Now, that's one of my--that might be the earliest thing I can remember, cause I was, maybe three or four years old, and I remember the two of us sitting at the top of the stairs in our old house.  And I remember kind of thinking, I wonder what would happen if I just gave him a shove, and I did, gave him a shove, and he rolled down.  My father [Milton McGinty] was furious.  And now, I didn't know--understand at the time, 'cause my brother could have been killed, you know.  And he did something he rarely did, which he spanked me for that, because I always felt like he had to make sure that I knew that that couldn't happen again, 'cause we were always playing and running around.  If I do that again, like he could have gotten hurt, and so.  But I never pushed him down the stairs again.  But I do remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 54601
Speaker 1: Now, did you grow up in the same neighborhood in [Washington] D.C., or did you move around?
Speaker 2: We grew up for the first 12 years on Jefferson Street in Northeast, right off of North Capital.  So it was the unit block of Jefferson Street, 32 Jefferson Street was our address, right a block away from King Elementary, which is where we went to elementary school, so we were really close.  And we were there for the first twelve years.  I think we lived over somewhere else like on, what was that, I don't remember exactly where it was, which--Irving Street or somewhere.  Was it Irving?  They had another place like on C Street or somewhere far away from there when I was first born.  But very quickly we moved up to Jefferson Street.  Jefferson Street's the only address I remember, as a kid growing up, and it was a great little street, you know, little kind of street.  It's still there.  You know, I don't know if the character is still the same, but you know we ran up and down there, ran, ran, ran, rode our bikes in the allies, did the stuff you do in a neighborhood where everybody looks out for everybody's kids.  It was old school, you know.
Speaker 1: Individual homes or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, individual homes, you know, modest homes, you know, working class folks, you know and--but, everybody, like I say, was a different day, man, it was a different day, God, it was a different day, you know.  I remember all little things like Mr. Watson was our next door neighbor to the right and he had this lawn, and he really spent a lot of time working on that lawn so he didn't like us running on it, you know, so we would--of course we were kids, we would go run on it and fall on it and wrestle on it and stuff, and he would get mad, you know.  But, it's like I say, that was so innocent.  It's such a different time, you know.  Like I say, we were there for the first 12 years.
Speaker 1: So all African American neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Yep, yep.  There was a couple--this was back when D.C. was like 80 percent black, right.  So I didn't even know what a white person really was when I was growing up.  I remember one really light-skinned kid moved into our elementary school, we were asking him if he was white, 'cause we didn't see white people, we didn't see them.  Living in that neighborhood, going to the neighborhood stores, doing the things we did, we--only white people we saw were on television.  It was a very--like I said, it was a different day.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: A different day.
Story_ID: 54602
Speaker 1: Well, we always ask this question.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, man, the sights and sounds and smells of growing up.  Well, of course, there's always the food, you know.  You know we--my mother [Doris McGinty] was not a great cook, man, but she would, you know, we always could--I can always remember smelling the meatloaf or the roast beef or the something that she was doing in the kitchen.  I remember, oh, man, I remember the smell of the cafeteria at Keene High School.  You know cafeterias always have this kind of funny smell, you know.  I don't know what it is, all a bunch of different lunch boxes all being opened at one time, you know.  I remember that, you know.  I remember the sound of the playground, the loud sort of raucous yelling of a bunch of kids running all around just having fun, you know.  I can still see you know, just all of us out there on the playground, playing kickball or doing whatever it was we would do, you know.  I remember that.  What else.  I remember the little no-speed bike I had growing up.  You know we had these bikes, you know, where sat--you peddled backward to break, you know, we had those bikes, riding all around the neighborhood doing stuff.  My father [Milton McGinty] and mom had told us not to ride in the street of course we did it anyway.  You know, it was like I say it was very innocent fun time.  We would wander you know what seemed like miles away from home.  We would go and then they wouldn't know where we were.  And no one, you know.  As long as we came back at lunchtime or dinnertime, whatever, there was no questions asked, you know, where did you guys go, well, we went over here to the creek and we did this or we did that, whatever, nobody worried that we would get snatched up or something.  It just didn't come up.  So, you know, we had adventures, man.  Nobody was, you know, it was a better time in a lot of ways.
Speaker 1: You were a little kid during the Kennedy Administration?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Well, during the Johnson Administration, really.  I was really little kid during Kennedy, cause he died in '63 (1963), so I was only four years old when he died, and then Johnson came and then I remember--the first political situation I really remember is Nixon, you know, cause I didn't know anything about Johnson and so forth.
Story_ID: 54603
Speaker 1: And I remember the death of Martin Luther King [Jr.].  I remember there being riots not that far from our house.  I remember troops walking up and down the streets, and us, as little kids, going out and talking to these guys, who were probably barely more than kids themselves, you know.  And we're out there talking to them and asking them to show us their M-16, you know.  For us it was just a big, big party.  We didn't have any clue what was happening, you know.  I was eight or nine years old.
Speaker 2: You were only nine years old?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: When Doctor King was assassinated.
Speaker 1: I remember him.  And there were people writing soul brother on their building hoping it wouldn't get burnt down, you know.  And that was--that was quite a time, and I was too young to really know.
Story_ID: 54604
Speaker 1: So I take it you went to school at Keene [Elementary School, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Keene Elementary.  I went there for the entire time I was in elementary school.  And then we moved the summer I was turning twelve [years old] and going to junior high school.  We moved up to North Portal Drive and up in northwest [Washington] D.C.  And--so we moved, although I went to the same school, I would have, I think, which was Ribol(ph) Junior High, which was horrible.
Speaker 1: Ribol(ph)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I've come to learn now, that middle school was horrible for everyone, or most people.
Speaker 1: Now, in grade school, for instance, I suppose you liked school?
Speaker 2: I liked school.  I was good at school.  It didn't--it was easy, it wasn't that hard for me.  So, you know, I mean elementary school, anyhow.  You know, you got your grades and you had fun and you went to recess and it wasn't that bad.  And I mean I did, you know--had my--I think because I was pretty smart kid and did my work and stuff, I had my share of tormentors you know, what would today would be called bullying, you know.  But I guess it was just part of the landscape at the time.  I didn't like it, but I survived it, you know.
Story_ID: 54605
Speaker 1: What were you interested in as a kid?
Speaker 2: Dinosaurs, astronomy, stuff like that.  I liked comic books and, just I liked sort of fantasies and adventures and things like that.  I was always--wanted to watch shows about that kind of stuff, ever since I was a little kid.  I still like it now, you know.  I still like, you know, movies about superheroes and things like that.  I just have always been fascinated by that stuff and--from when I was in my 20s, I was like you're too old for this, but too bad, I mean.  But they say the heart wants what it wants.  So that's just the kind of stuff I like.  So I've always enjoyed--that was just sort--that was my entertainment.  That's what I was interested in.  I had no idea what I was gonna to do as a career.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you hadn't thought about it at all?
Speaker 2: Of course I thought about it, but I--people would ask, what you gonna do when you grow up?  I had no idea.
Speaker 1: Now did you have any hobbies like photography or--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, I didn't have anything like that.  My mother [Doris McGinty] was in music, so we had music lessons.  I played piano for several years then we played--I played the trumpet from about age of 10 to about the age of 13.  I played the trumpet, but I wasn't good at it, but I liked it, but I didn't practice enough to be ever be good.  And then--and I really enjoyed music a lot, but I didn't--I wasn't gifted or at least not at piano or trumpet.  So I didn't have any big hobbies.  I liked to play sports, you know, so I played football and baseball and stuff that guys would play.
Speaker 1: --Were they just pick-up games around?
Speaker 2: A lot of pick-up games a lot of stuff.  I didn't play any organized--my brother [Dana McGinty] did, he played organized baseball, but baseball was sort of my least favorite, so I didn't--I didn't care to play, played little league.
Speaker 1: Now you were a member of--were you a member of the Boy Scouts or anything like that or--?
Speaker 2: I was.  I was a Boy Scout, I was a Cub Scout and then I was a Webelos.  I was sort of the transitional thing, and then I was a Boy Scout for a few years.  My thing about being a Boy Scout and to the extent of being a Cub Scout, although I did better at Cub Scouts. I didn't care about badges and stuff, really, you know.  To advance as a Cub Scout, you had to do some of that, you know, so I did it, you know.  But Boy Scout, you know, I was a Tenderfoot for like three years, you know, because I just wanted to go on the camping trips.  I didn't care about getting badges, 'cause it was all about--it looked like to me, it was all about learning how to tie knots.  I couldn't see any useful advantage to knowing how to tie knots.  So I just never advanced, you know, which I guess was not good, but I was having fun going on the camping trips and that's all I really wanted.  I didn't care what rank I had, which I'm sure they were probably like, what's wrong with this kid?
Speaker 1: What was the camp around this area where they would take you to?
Speaker 2: Oh, man, they would drive.  I don't even remember exactly where they took us.  They would take us to, you know, Virginia, West Virginia, wherever they would drive us to and we would camp out for weekends.  It was really nice, I mean it was fun it was away from school and all the stuff that you wanted to get away from.  I had a good time, out in the woods, the fellas were fun, you felt like you were a part of something, it was good.
Story_ID: 54606
Speaker 1: Now you were a kid during the, I guess, the Black Arts Movement [c. 1960-1970] days or culture movement days when everybody had a big afro--
Speaker 2: Oh, right, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --You know, so, do you have any memories about those days?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember in school, we started to--people started wearing afros and doing stuff.  And then there's--of course there's always push back from the parents who didn't think that looked good at all.  You know, I had an afro, it wasn't the best looking one in the world, but I had an afro and then wanted to wear the cool, crazy-looking clothes, you know, and all the big bell bottoms and the stuff, you know.  When I was in high school, that became a big deal, so.  Because I was always the one in my family of the kids who really wanted to sort of belong, you know, so.  If I thought this is what the cool people were doing, I wanted to do that, you know, I wanted to be a part of that.  My brother [Dana McGinty] was less so.  So I remember that, and you know so yeah, I was trying to fit in.
Story_ID: 54607
Speaker 1: Were there any special teachers or mentors in grade school?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  I had a couple of really good teachers.  The one in particular who stands out--two in particular who stand out for me.  One was my first grade teacher, a lady name Mrs. Jenkins, really nice lady, and I always remember her because she taught me to read, you know, first grade is when you learn to read and so.  Mrs. Jenkins taught me to read and she was a nice woman, nice lady and she liked me, and she gave me a book.  At the end of the year, she gave me a book for being--having the best attendance.  I think I was never absent, like the whole year.  She gave me a little book about a dinosaur, or something.  And I always remembered that and she actually called me for her retirement party.  Many, many years later I came and spoke at her retirement party, which, I guess because she knew about me because I was on television or something, and she decided to give me a call, and so I gladly went, you know.  And that was very interesting.  But the lady that I really remember the most, white woman, by the name of Mrs. Minear(ph).  Mrs. Minear was my fourth grade teacher.  She was really cool.  She was a really smart lady and she liked me, you know, she took a liking to me.  And I remember--the thing I remember most was one day I was playing in the playground and I jumped off the monkey bar and I landed on somebody's lunch box and twisted my ankle.  And it hurt but I kept on playing, you know, as kids will do, and I went back in from recess and I sat for three hours.  Well, you know, when I got up, I couldn't put any weight on it, you know, it was all swollen up.  And Mrs. Minear put me in her car and drove me home and that was like two blocks, right, but I never forgot that.  I never forgot that she did that.  And she didn't have to do that, you know.  I guess that's the thing a teacher would do, right, but, you know, like I said I never forgot the kindness and she was a great teacher, you know.  I don't remember so much what we learned, but just her warmth and her personality in teaching it, you know, and so I remember Mrs. Minear.
Story_ID: 54608
Speaker 1: Middle school, did your family move--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we moved uptown [Washington, D.C.], but we still went to--I went to Ribol(ph) Junior High.  Ribol Junior High was a different world man.  That was a different world.
Speaker 1: --Was the neighborhood different?
Speaker 2: Well, the neighborhood was a little different.  It was over off "O" and Kansas and "O" Streets up here.  It no longer exists now, right near North Capital, over there.  Relatively modest school.  I think it had been built in the '60s [1960s], so it was like '71 [1971], so it was relatively new.  But you know, of course it's a much bigger place, kids from all over the place and I did not know how to really get along, I mean it was very difficult and you know there was--and I got beat up, you know, my grades suffered, it was really an unhappy time.  I mean, seventh and eighth grade for me were just terrible, terrible time.  I mean, of course when you're twelve years old, you don't know how to handle it.  Obviously, if I was there now, I would, but at the time it was just miserable.  And so my parents took note of this and after two years, they transferred me out of there.  I went to Archbishop Carroll [High School] for two years.
Speaker 1: Was this a middle school, high school situation or was it--?
Speaker 2: No, it was junior high school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: High school?
Speaker 2: High school.  But it was a ninth grade through 12th grade thing.
Speaker 1: Okay. So I got transferred to Archbishop Carroll [High School] and I stayed there for two years.  That was a lot better, 'cause you know, it was a Catholic school, it was a lot more discipline, there was--it was much better.  And I sort of began to come into my own a little bit.  I played a little bit of football, quickly figured out that that wasn't really my sport.  But I played a lot of sports (unclear) and all this, had a great time there.  I liked it there and made some good friends.  And after two years, my father [Milton McGinty] thought that socially, we were not getting--my brother [Dana McGinty] went there too after a year.  He had skipped seventh grade and so he was only one year behind me, and he came there for a year.  But my father thought that we were socially inept, because there were no girls there.  So that next year he transferred me to [Woodrow] Wilson High School.  My brother and I both went to Wilson.  So I went to Wilson for, which was public, for eleventh and twelfth, my brother was there for all three years.
Speaker 2: Where is Wilson?
Speaker 1: On Nebraska Avenue, near Wisconsin, Tinley Town area.  And at the time there were--it was one of the few still sort of integrated schools in D.C.
Story_ID: 54609
Speaker 1: But you know I went to Wilson [Woodrow Wilson High School, Washington, D.C.] and, you know, that was a great time.  I had a great time at Wilson.  That's where I sort of found my calling in terms of my career.
Speaker 2: How did that come about?
Speaker 1: Jim Vance came to my high school, and he's the anchor over at WRC [-TV] still.  It's amazing, that was what, thirty-five years ago.  Jim Vance came to my high school in like 1976 and he spoke.  And he talked about communications and how great a career it was and how all the things there were to do in it and so forth and something about it struck me, and I realized this is what I want to do.  I want to be a reporter.  I never wanted to do anything else after that.  And so I started taking a journalism class at school.  I started working for the school newspaper, I started, you know, thinking about a career as a reporter.  Now I thought I would be in print, but I--it ended up that I ended up in broadcast through a bunch of things, but that was where I first realized I wanted to be in journalism.
Speaker 2: Now, this is 1976?  This is near the time where Max Robinson--
Speaker 1: Yep, Max Robinson was at Channel 9, I think, at the time.
Speaker 2: --Yeah, yeah.  Anybody else?
Speaker 1: That I remember?
Speaker 2: They were black personalities on locally here in D.C.?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Jim Vance was on, Max Robinson was on, I don't know if whats his name had gotten on yet, Paul Berry.  I don't know, he might have been on, he might well have been on at that point, so.  You know, I'm pretty sure, J.C. Hayward if she wasn't on, she was almost on, you know, Maureen, all the sort of the--the first D.C. black anchor stars were starting to come on the scene.
Speaker 2: The national news, Max Robinson was the first--
Speaker 1: Well, Max, yeah, but that was after I was in college when he went to the network.
Speaker 2: --Really, I thought it was before then?
Speaker 1: Maybe late, late '70s (1970s).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That was I would think was when it was.  I went to college in '77 (1977), so, I think that's when he--
Speaker 2: He was coming on about, he's either on or coming on around then.
Speaker 1: --Yeah, that's my memory.  So, maybe it was a little before that, but he was on there for a few year, but, yeah.
Speaker 2: ABC World News.
Speaker 1: ABC, when they had that three anchor thing.  Him, Frank Renolds and Peter Jennings.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Peter was in New York, Frank was here in D.C., Max was in Chicago.  It was crazy.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So but you thought you'd be in print?
Speaker 1: I did.  I thought I'd be a writer because I liked writing.  I was working on it, my father [Milton McGinty] was a writer and I thought that--I think really, I probably always thought broadcasting would be more fun, but I thought it would be too hard to get into.  You know, I thought, I can't--how can I do this.  And my old man was like, look, you know, if you want to do it, you got to try, even if you fail, you gotta try.  But that's not--that didn't convince me either.  I mean, I still thought I was going to be in print.  I was working towards being in print.  And then after my junior year in college is when I decided, you know what, I'd rather be in broadcast.  So I changed my major.
Story_ID: 54610
Speaker 1: Let me crank back to high school for a second--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --Were there any major mentors in high school?
Speaker 2: The only one I could think of off the top of my head was Mrs. Hines, who was the journalism teacher.  And she ran the school newspaper.  And so she helped me, you know, she helped me learn my first rudimentary journalistic skills in terms of what was--what's a lead and how do you write it and what, you know, who, what, how, where, when kind of a thing, you know, and so that was--that was her role.  Mrs. Hines, I remember her well.
Speaker 1: Now did you graduate with any special honors?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  I'm sure I probably had about a you know a 3.2 grade average, which is not anything spectacular, cause my mother [Doris McGinty] always accused me, she said, you always take the easy "B", and she was right.  I mean, if I could get a "B" without working that hard or "B" plus, I was probably happy.  If I get the "A" that's good, but I wasn't killing myself for the "A" cause I just didn't feel like I needed it, you know, so.  I didn't care that much.  And I knew--I went to AU [American University, Washington, D.C.] and I knew was--I got in and then once I got in, I really was like, you know, "I ain't gotta work too hard".  So, no, no special honors or anything like that when I came out of high school.
Story_ID: 54611
Speaker 1: What was your counseling like about college?  Did you have any?
Speaker 2: What was my what?
Speaker 1: Counseling?  Was there any counseling (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, counseling.
Speaker 1: --About college?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  You know, I don't recall much, because my parents were both educated people and there was never any doubt that we were going to college.  And so they just kind of you know, my father [Milton McGinty] wanted me to go to AU [American University, Washington, D.C.] cause he heard Willard Scott went there and he went there and so he thought--he knew I wanted to be in journalism so he thought I'd be good so he said, you should go to AU.
Speaker 1: That's American University?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I said, "Okay".  I didn't really have a bit preference at the time, you know.  I didn't know you know, I had no idea about college.  It's not like it is now where it's so competitive and everybody applies to ten places and all.
Speaker 1: Did you consider leaving D.C.?
Speaker 2: No, not really, 'cause--see and I kind of regret that, but at the time, I mean life was good, right.  I mean, I was a seventeen year old dude, living at home, eating home-cooked meals, you know, getting clothes washed and without a lot of restrictions.  I didn't have any curfews, I didn't have, you know--because my parents kind of trusted us.  So, they didn't really--they weren't really strict.  So it was not like--I didn't have like--a lot of people want to leave home so they can do whatever they want.  I was kind of doing whatever I wanted, as long as I kept going to school and doing whatever I was supposed to do and not staying out too late, they didn't care.  So I didn't have a lot of incentive to get out of the house like a lot of kids do.  So I was like, naw, I'll stay here, it's more comfortable.  And, excuse me (yawning) I think that was probably a mistake.  I think getting a little uncomfortable would have been better for me.  But I did not do it.
Story_ID: 54612
Speaker 1: So American University [Washington, D.C.].  Was that the only school you applied for--to?
Speaker 2: Yep.  Only place I applied, kind of thought I would get in, I did.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  So, what was it like?  Did you like it?
Speaker 2: Different, you know, very different.  Very few black folks, which, you know, took some getting used to.  And even though I had been to--in integrated places, everywhere I had been and up to that point, black folks were at least a significant portion of the people.  AU [American University] was like seven or eight percent or something, I mean, it really wasn't very many of us, and all that, especially not doing what I was doing, which was being in journalism and working for the school newspaper and that kind of thing.  So, I was the only black guy on the school news paper, you know.  And you know, so I had some good friends on there and stuff, but, you know, we didn't really party together, you know, so.  And because I didn't live on campus, I found it very difficult to get to know people.  So, it was hard, I mean it was a little bit lonely those years, I mean I had fun and I did some stuff, you know, I learned and advanced and grew, but I was a little lonely because it wasn't--there weren't--I didn't get to meet people.  The only thing that really helped me was pledging a fraternity my senior year, that helped me a lot.  Then next thing I knew, I knew everybody after that.
Speaker 1: So you started in 1977?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, finished in '81' (1981).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what frat was it?
Speaker 2: Kappa Alpha Psi [Fraternity, Incorporated].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know.  And so pledging--pledging that as a senior, it was supposed to happen in our junior year but--cause there were no Kappas on campus at first and then they wanted to have some and so these guys came and they sort of whipped us together and then they didn't get it going--they didn't get it going--they were supposed to get it going in spring of '80 (1980), but they couldn't make it happened till fall '80 (1980), so then I was a senior, but I said, "I'm doing this."  So, I pledged and I had a lot of fun, and I met everybody, I mean, that year made my whole college career better because I got to know so many people.
Story_ID: 54613
Speaker 1: Now was there a black student organization?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  There was.  It was called "Osatu"(ph) which was the Organization of African Students at the American University [American University, Washington, D.C.] or some such thing.  But see, it was kind of funny cause at the time, I mean, I was kind of--I wasn't into that.  I felt like I wanted to be a mainstream guy, and they were kind of the radicals.  They were the guys who would come into the meeting with the student government and throw the tables over and you know, demand their rights and this kind of thing.  And I was like, "I'm not being a part of this."  So, I wanted to, you know, like I say, I wanted to fit in, you know, so I wanted to--I knew where I was going, I knew what I wanted to do, and that really wasn't my thing, you know, and I was like, what rights is it that you don't have, you know, I mean, I didn't get it.  If I had thought that there were some inalienable rights that they were being denied, I'd a been all about that, but all I could think is, we're at the American University, we could do whatever we want, what are you complaining about.  I just didn't get it, you know.  I mean to the point--I mean look, I remember just to show you--just to--that there was one time when there was--I was walking through the Mary Graydon Center, which is sort of the student union building, whatever you want to call it, and there was this--I used to always get into arguments with this little communist guy who worked at the school paper, cause he--I thought he was being crazy.  And what did I know, I was 19, you know, but what did he know either.  So we would argue and stuff and then I come by his little table and he's passing out his pamphlets, his leaflets, or whatever.  And these Iranian dudes--now there were a lot of Iranians at American University at the time.  And you remember at the time in '70s [1970s], it was all--the Shah [Mohammed Reza Pahlavi] was very controversial, now this was before the hostage thing [Iranian Hostage Crisis, 1979] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now this was just before--
Speaker 2: --This is just before that right.  So there's no, that hadn't happened yet, but it's very hot, you know, and the Iranians are in a bad mood, right, you know.  So they come, and they start throwing my communist buddy's papers on the floor.  And I was like--I'm watching this happen and I'm thinking to myself, we can't let this go on, I mean, this is America, you know, we're free speech, you know, he can do his thing.  So I kind of screwed up my courage and I stepped in between the table and those guys and there was three or four of them and only one of me and I just said, "You guys can't do this.  This is the First Amendment, freedom of speech, he could pass out his things if he wants to," you know, then they got in my face.  He's favoring the shah and da, da, da, da, and I was thinking to myself, oh, my goodness, this is not good at all, right.  So, I'm standing there and two or three other guys came in and said, that's right, that's right, and they backed me up, you know.  I said "whew" it was getting bad, you know, I was scared, you know, but these guys, you know--what I learned was sometimes if you do the right thing, people will--everybody probably wanted to stop this from happening, but nobody was willing to take the risk to do it, you know.  And so I thought that was an important lesson, and I always tell that story, not because I felt like I was particularly brave, although I guess I was somewhat courageous, I always felt like I was just so offended that this guy's freedom of speech was being violated that I--somebody had to say something, you know.  And that's sort of how, I guess sort of how I like to think that I sort of I live my life that way, that there are times when you have to say something, right.  And I just felt like I had to say something.  That was a defining thing for me.  I never forgot that, but I just know--because I was a kid, I wasn't thinking anything but right in that moment, that I didn't give any thought to you know the bigger questions involved.  All I was thinking was this isn't right, somebody's got to say something, you know.  And so, you know, but what I'm saying that to say is it's not that I wasn't willing to get involved and do things if I thought something was important, but I didn't think what the Osatu people were doing was important.  You know, I didn't know what they were mad about, you know.  So I wanted to--I thought you know, I don't know, I wanted to take it and take my talents and go as far as I could with them.  That was my priority.
Story_ID: 54614
Speaker 1: Where do you think you got your core values from?
Speaker 2: My father [Milton McGinty].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father.  He was--
Speaker 1: Your father wasn't going to church?
Speaker 2: No, no.  But he was--he was a stickler for honesty and integrity, you know.  He was a stickler for that, you know, he just didn't play.  I mean the greatest thing you could do--the worst thing you could do was lie, you know.  And--I remember when I was in elementary school, I told some big lie, man I could tell you the whole story if you want, but--and I went home and he was just--that's the maddest I'd seen him.  You know, he just didn't tolerate lying or making excuses, you know, for poor performance, because you gotta perform.  Talk is cheap, you gotta perform, you gotta get it done, and that was his, you know--and integrity, and doing the right thing and following the rules, that was my father, you know.  And I think that's--part of because he was like that, it made him especially bitter when he thought something wasn't fair, which is why the racism ate at him so deeply, you know, because it wasn't fair and he just--he couldn't stomach it.  And so to me that sort of been my guiding principle is fairness.  As I like to say, fairness is a family value, right, you know.  Things should be--things are going to be unfair, right, I mean that's life.  Life is unfair, everything can't be fair.  But stuff that we can control should be fair, you know, it should be fair.  And so if it's unfair then that's when, I guess, you know, you feel you--like somebody's gotta say something, you know.
Story_ID: 54615
Speaker 1: Now how were you treated as a minority student at American University [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: I was treated good, I was treated well.  I never felt--I mean, there were those, do this and all this racism, this is that, it wasn't my experience, you know, it just wasn't, you know.  I didn't feel--like I said, I was the only black person working at the school newspaper, but I became editorial page editor, I became, what was the other, a different editor, some other editor, I don't remember now, it's been 30 years.  But you know, I became one of the editors, I got school credit, I worked there, I had a great time, the people treated me well, you know, I'm sure there were some, you know, people who were racist or whatever, but I didn't really run into much of it, you know.  So I didn't feel as though being black was a big disadvantage at American U.  In fact, I felt like it was good because I stood out, you know, it was a chance, you know--I could--I wasn't just another student there, in a lot of classes, I was the only black student, so whatever I did, you know, was more noticed sometimes.  So if I did well that was noticed too.
Story_ID: 54616
Speaker 1: Now did you make a special effort because you knew you were going into the news field to keep up with the news?
Speaker 2: Not as much.  I mean I should have at the time, but I just wasn't that interested.  You know I was interested in the craft of it, but the news stories at the time, I was young, you know and so young people don't--tend not to watch news and stuff that much.  And it wasn't like now where you can just look at your iPad and you know.  I didn't follow it that much at the time.  I didn't start following news until I got out and started working in news.  And then I began to really care and watch and learn and get into it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were concerned with how to deal with it more so than watching it?
Speaker 2: Right.  Cause my joy came from the crafting of stories and writing them.  I guess as I was working for the school newspaper, I'm sure I looked at stuff and followed things more and I worked for the Washington Post in the sports department for a couple of years doing part time stuff and so I had to--but you know--
Speaker 1: Did you work in the summers for the papers in town [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: No, I'm trying to--see this is where it gets cloudy, 'cause I don't remember.  That Washington Post gig, I remember having that and I remember doing, you know doing that little part time news aide job.  I'm not sure exactly when that was.  Over the summers, a couple of times, I was a bank teller.  At least summer of my--was it my freshman year, sophomore year, a couple of summers I was a bank teller, which is an interesting job to have.  But it was good steady work and you know, paid decently, so.  But, no, I didn't work for any--I worked for the Post you know like I say part time somewhere in through there, but I just don't remember exactly when.
Speaker 1: Now what happened in college [American University, Washington, D.C.] that made you switch focus to (unclear)--
Speaker 2: You know, I always tell people that it was people telling me, you talk better than you write.  But that's not entirely true.  A couple of--one of my friends did say that, but I just really did begin to see that my ability to express myself that way, verbally and was--was a part it, you know, was a part of what I wanted to do and so I realized that I needed to focus on that too, you know, it wasn't just writing, I could also talk and explain things and do--and so I wanted to get that going.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 54617
Speaker 1: Did you have any role models in this regard on television or radio?
Speaker 2: Not so much at the time.  You know, maybe--I mean, as I grew up and watched, Bryant Gumbel became one of the people I really admired and wanted to emulate.  In fact, I got to know him when I was at CBS, but that's a whole different story.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Any teachers--special teachers or mentors at American University [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had one professor.  My first--well, a couple of professors, one was Joe Tinkelman, who taught me "Reporting One" as a, I guess, sophomore or junior.  Joe Tinkelman was a great guy and a good professor and he was funny and we had a good time.  But a guy named Professor Doolittle, what was Professor Doolittle's--John Doolittle, was kind of a funny name, but he was a really good broadcast professor, and he was the one who taught me how to write for broadcast, because I learned to write for print in my fourth year.  I'm trying to learn to write for broadcast and the transition was hard.
Speaker 1: What's the difference?
Speaker 2: Shorter sentences, you don't write--you write out numbers rather than, you know, writing them as like a 48.  The number 48, you write out the word 48 so people can read it more easily.  It just--It's conversational, it's no--you know, it's just a very different style.  I had no idea how to do it, you know.  And it took me a whole semester to really kind of figure it out.  In fact, in Professor Doolittle's class I remember I was to the point where I needed an "A" to get a good grade in his class on the final.  I needed an "A" on the final, and I got an "A" on the final, cause I had finally figured it out.  I didn't even know I had figured it out until I got the paper back, I was like oh, ah, but so.  But Professor Doolittle was one of the people, and he and I stayed in contact over the years.  I haven't talked to him in recent times, but we stayed in contact over the years.
Story_ID: 54618
Speaker 1: So, you didn't do any summer internships at all?
Speaker 2: I did.  I didn't do any summer internships, I did internships during the year, you know, for school [American University, Washington, D.C.].  And I had an internship at ABC News when I worked for a woman name Oleta Crawford at the time.  She was the booker, talent booker for Good Morning America, and I was helping her do that and I was working with her and stuff like that, and I was trying to, you know, make the most out of that internship, but I don't know that I really, you know, did that much to help, but that internship allowed me to get my first job, because I was just there, and I saw a posting for a PA--a DA job, desk assistant job on the wall and I went into the guy's office.  My memory is kind of cloudy again, but I think he might have hired me that day, "yeah, okay, we'll hire you", you know, cause I was there.  That was the only reason.  I always tell kids, "Man, the greatest thing about an internship is just being there", you know, you don't know what could happen or who you could meet just by being in the building, you know, so.  That internship is what got me my first job in the business.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  So this is--you graduated '81 (1981), so is this (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Right.  Yeah, when I graduated in '81 (1981), that was when I got the job.  So I went right from school to working at ABC News.  That summer I was working as a desk assistant part time at ABC News, and then by the fall, I ended up full time and I stayed there a year, you know as a desk assistant, which is, you know, that's the low end of the low job.  That's ripping the wire copy and the getting coffee for everybody, going out and getting lunch for everybody kind of a job, but I didn't mind, I mean, I was glad to have it.
Speaker 1: --Okay.  So this is the local ABC--
Speaker 2: No.  This is the network.
Speaker 1: --Network, okay?
Speaker 2: Network, ABC radio.
Speaker 1: ABC radio, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the network, down on Desales Street [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Down on Desales Street.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 54619
Speaker 1: So what happened after a year?
Speaker 2: I wanted to get out of there, like all desk assistants do.  And so there was a job opened--somebody told me that there was a job opened at WTOP Radio, the all news station, which at the time had news writers.  There were no--we did not even--they had--and they were looking for a part time and a full time news writer, and I think it was my boss, at the time at ABC, whose name was Robin Sproul)--Robin Sproul who has been a real mentor to me.  Her name was--she's Robin--she was Robin Verbruiken then, she was not married, then she got married and she became Robin Sproul.  And we're still friends, although I haven't talked to Robin in a while, I need to call her.  Robin, she said you should apply for this, and I did.  And they said, well, we're not taking applications anymore, it's closed.  And she knew the assistant news director over there and called him and got my application in.  Once again, showing that you know who I knew mattered, you know the fact that she was able to make that call.  Now, I went in there and I took the writing test and they ended up hiring me as the part-time news writer.  Now the fact is if I hadn't been able to write anything and couldn't do it, they wouldn't have hired me, but they wouldn't even have know if Robin hadn't gotten them to take my application.  So, you know, once again, you know a connection really mattered.  So I went to WTOP as a news writer.  Back then there were manual type writers, there was carbon papers, you know we had to type on three triple carbon scripts, you know, so you could have different copies to give out.  It was not an easy job, and I didn't know how to do it.  I had to learn on the fly and it was difficult, but--and it was part time, but I was glad--again, I was glad to have it.  At least I was glad to have it for a year or so, and then I really got sick of it.  And I thought that-'cause it was just not fun.  I always said that you come in, they chain you to a typewriter for seven hours, you go home, you know.  And I didn't like it, and I wanted out and so I decided that maybe news wasn't for me.  Maybe I should be a disc jockey, 'cause I really like music, and so maybe I should be a DJ.  So I started making these DJ tapes, I started going in the studio after everybody was gone, you know, and spinning the records and making these DJ tapes and trying to send them out, and I was terrible and nobody would hire me.  And--
Speaker 1: What genre of music did you focus on?
Speaker 2: --I was focused on just regular soul, R&B, funk, whatever stuff I, you know, knew and liked, you know, knew about, liked to play.
Speaker 1: You sound like you have a pretty smooth delivery, what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, cause there's a whole different vibe to being a DJ, I mean, it's a--you know to be able to just talk extemporaneously like that and sound smooth and make sense, going in and out of records and so forth, that takes--you know, I was terrible.  So, nobody hired me.  I was sending tapes to these little towns like, you know, Salisbury, Maryland and then places trying to get jobs, and so I wasn't getting any jobs.  And it turned out that I wasn't sick of news, I just didn't want to be a news writer.
Story_ID: 54620
Speaker 1: So one day I'm doing the news writing job and I look on a piece of wire copy and I see it's from United Press International, which is UPI, which no longer exists.  And when they would they would print out their little news minutes, they would print the phone number of the bureau.  They'd say, you know, and the name of the person who was running the bureau.  You can call this guy if you got any questions.  Well the name I saw on there was Jay Handelman.  Jay Handelman had been the editor and chief of the school newspaper at American U [University].  I knew Jay Handelman.  Now I called him just cause it's my tendency to call people, you know and talk.  I said I hadn't talked to you in a long time.  I had called him up.  "Jay, hey, it's Derek McGinty, hey, hey", you know.  So we chatted and stuff and kind of reacquainted.  He was the desk manager or whatever at the metro desk at UPI and that was the end of it.  Well, a couple of weeks later, Jay calls me up and says look, we're looking for a new reporter down here, you should apply.  I did, he hired me.  Now, it's another one of those cases, where again, if I don't see his name and just call him up, just cause I tend to do that, that doesn't happen, right, but--and if I don't--if he doesn't call me and get me to apply, I don't even know about the job, you know.  So again a connection comes through and I end up with United Press International as a reporter on the metro desk.  And so, you know, it's amazing to me how serendipitous these things can be.  So I take that job and get the heck out of WTOP, which I really hated at the time.  I mean no slam on [W]TOP, it's a great place but being a news writer was just--that's just the worst job they had there.  So, so I go down to UPI [United Press International] and of course right after I get there, UPI is having major financial troubles, so they--so everybody has to take a 25 percent pay cut.  I was like, oh, good Lord.  So I was only making like $19,000.  So I go from making $19,000, which is not a whole lot of money to making fourteen [$14,000], you know.  So now I'm really broke.  And by this time though, I have moved out of my parents' house because I got this new great job at UPI.  And I'm (unclear) in an apartment and so--you know, I used to always joke that Master Card never recovered from that 25 percent pay cut, you know, 'cause--oh, man, it was a little rough for a minute there.  But you know I stayed there for a year.
Story_ID: 54621
Speaker 1: UPI [United Press International] continued to struggle and then I got a call from a friend of mine at WHUR [Howard University Radio].  Her name is Enid Doggin.  Enid said, "Hey, I'm a reporter her, but I'm leaving to take another job.  You ought to apply."  Once again, a connection comes through.  Now I knew Enid well just 'cause we were friends from years.  We had worked together at WTOP [Washington, D.C.] years ago.  She had been an editor there.  And so we knew each other.  And she, you know, thought of me when she was leaving.  And so I applied for that job and I went in and interviewed and I put the tape together and so and so forth and I got the job.  That was my first on-air job.  So now I'm three jobs in.  I'm on job number four and I've got my first on-air job.  And that was a very important gig, that [W]HUR job.  WHUR at the time was something that doesn't exist anymore, an urban station with a huge news commitment.  We had like eleven people in the news room, including Kojo N'namdi.  And he was the international editor at the time.  We had two, three people covering [Washington, D.C.] metro, we had, you know, Capitol Hill reporter, we had all kind of stuff that you would never have now.  You would never have this for an urban station, cause it would be too expensive, you would never do it, but at the time Howard was spending the money to do it, so I was really lucky to be there at that time and you know, we covered a whole bunch of great stuff, the protest at the South African Embassy, they had the--WHUR had the nerve to send us to the conventions in '88 (1988).  We went to Atlanta [Georgia] and New Orleans [Louisiana] in 1988 to cover the political convention, you know.  Who does that, we did, sent a whole group of people down there.  You know it was great.  I mean invaluable experience, and they moved me to--I was covering metro and Marion Barry--covered Marion Barry during some of the wildest times of his administration.  Then they sent me to Capitol Hill.  I'm on the Capitol Hill for the Iran contra hearing [1987], you know, I'm just doing all these things.
Speaker 2: Super Bowl was around that time too, right, here in D.C.?
Speaker 1: Super Bowl has never been in D.C., oh, you mean the Redskin's going to Super bowl?
Speaker 2: Going to the Super Bowl, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, in '83 (1983).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It wasn't '83 (1983), it was '88 (1988), I believe.
Speaker 1: They won three of them.  They won one in '83 (1983)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: --They won one in '88 (1988) and then on in '92 (1992).
Speaker 2: I'm talking about the one with Doug Williams?
Speaker 1: Oh, that was '90 [1990], that was '83 (1983), that was '88 (1988), right, right, right.  That was a big deal too, so I covered the parade when they came to town for that, you know, after they won that.  So it was just all kind of stuff was happening, and I--
Story_ID: 54622
Speaker 1: Then they put me anchoring "The Daily Drum" [WHUR-FM].  So I anchored "The Daily Drum" for a couple of years.  Then--that was a great gig I mean a tremendous learning experience for me--I get a call from a friend of mine, a guy name Richard Paul, who had gone to school with me at AU [American University] and he says, WAMU [FM] is looking for a talk show host, you ought to apply.  Here we go again.  But this was a whole different thing, so I--I almost didn't send in the tape, right.  I waited a week or two, you know, it's gonna be a pain to get it together, I don't know, but then I said, no, you have to do this.  So I got it together, got it in there and they called me in for an interview and then they said, you have to audition.  So the audition was I had to do the show for three hours, one Friday night.  I said, okay.  So I went and did it.  It was the hardest thing I've ever done.  Three hours on the air.  I had never done anything like that.  It was really difficult and, you know, taking phone calls for that long.  I had done a little bit of that at the Daily Drum, we had a little 20 minute show, but nothing like three hours, that's a whole different creature.  But I made it through, and I remember at the end of it, I thought to myself, man I don't even want this job, it's too hard, you know, and you know long story short, they called me up a few months later after lots of controversy to say that they really liked me, but they were going to hire this other guy.  And I said, okay.  I was just glad to really be considered, you know, I came in second, maybe this could lead to something else you know whatever.  They said, we're ninety something percent sure that we're going to sign him but if we don't we'll call you back.  That was like a Friday.  Tuesday, he called me back.  We couldn't sign him up, we had--are you still interested?  I'm thinking part of me say, oh, I'm the second choice, the other part of me says, who cares, you know.  So I take the job.  And that job, of course, you know, lead to everything that I'd been able, to a great deal, of what I've been able to accomplished, because I was good at that job, you know.  And my father had always said, you know, you're a natural conversationalist, you're a natural interviewer, you should-- this is what you should be doing.  And I think he was right, I mean, I think, you know, I was able to really get people to talk and I enjoyed the heck out of it and I had a good time with it, and you know, they moved it, it was night time at the time.  When I first got there, it was eight to eleven week nights and then it became--they changed it from noon to two, which was a great thing, because being on eight to eleven was tough on the social life.  It became noon to two and you know sort of the sky was the limit.  They syndicated it.  I mean it was a great gig.  It really was the best job I've ever had.
Speaker 2: Well what was the name of it in the beginning?
Speaker 1: It was called, I think it was--they made it the Derek McGinty Show when I first came on board, because it had been the Mike Cuspard Show, when I first came on board and then Mike left to go to some big job up in Boston or whatever, and then it became the Derek McGinty Show.  So it was always the Derek McGinty Show, as far as I can recall.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this starts in 1991?
Speaker 1: Yes.  And went to '98' (1998).  And over that time, I mean, it was a great ride, it was great ride.  I didn't even know how good I had it working at that station.
Story_ID: 54623
Speaker 1: Now, what, bouncing off of what Kojo N'namdi said, when we interviewed him, he said that after years and years here at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] at WHUT [Howard University Television] and on WHUR [Howard University Radio], he said a tremendous follower ship, you know, people listened to him, they recognized him in the community and you go out in the community, he said, when he went over to American University [Washington, D.C.], Gerald Bander(ph) never heard of him.  He said, and so it is, he says that in America, you know, other than church, radio is the most segregated segment of the society, right, where white people just don't listen to black radio and vise versa?
Speaker 2: I think that used to be true.  I think it's more integrated now than it used to be cause the music is so integrated, people, you know, white folks listen to rap, black people listen to rock, I think it's changed somewhat, but I think he's got a point, you know, to an extent, cause I found that to be true too, you know, in terms of you know people--my radio job was a more significant job at [W]AMU [American University Radio], but the black people didn't listen to it and didn't know anything about it and when I would talk, you know, meet people, they would be, who, what, what do you do, you know, I don't listen to that, you know.  That used to really be the case.  It might be a little bit less the case now.  So he has a point.  I do understand what he's talking about.  I think there's something to that.
Speaker 1: People in the black community thought he was dead.
Speaker 2: Right.  Because he--where did he go, right.  WAMU, what is that?  That's public radio, I don't listen nothing down that end of the dial, right.  You know, so, yes, I think there is something to that.  I think there's something to that.  Like I said, I think it's probably changed to some extent now, but you know, I still get a lot of people--(unclear) most of them probably white who say, I remember your radio show.  I haven't been on there since '98 (1998).  When was that, 16 years ago, you know.  And people still remember that show, you know, so, who don't watch channel 9 you know.  "What are you doing now?" they might say.  I'm like I'm on TV every day.  So, that's, that's--so he's got a point.
Story_ID: 54624
Speaker 1: What are some of your memorable shows?
Speaker 2: Oh, there's so many.
Speaker 1: Did you have like guests--
Speaker 2: Every day, guests every day.  I mean, you know, I got to talk to people that I had already wanted to talk to, like Leonard Nimoy, for example.  You know, I did an interview with him.  I did a couple of interviews with William Shatner, you know. I got to talk to Senators and you know Congressman, but that was not--so those people were not as interesting to me as some of the authors.  I actually interviewed Barack Obama, though I don't remember this.  He remembered it, and I met him before he was president, as a senator [Illinois].  We were at an event and he said to me, I was on your radio show.  He said, it was for my book, Dreams of My Father [Dreams from My Father, 1995] and I kind of vaguely remembered, you know, doing it.  But he was--he was just an Illinois State Senator back then.  Who knew--and he said, we hoped it would improve sales; didn't help.  So, I was try--I had to laugh, I said, oh, my goodness, Barack Obama is busting on me, right.  But it's okay.  I mean I got--it was so many interesting people that I got to interview.  In fact when I left the show, part of the reason I left was I felt like I had interviewed most of the people I wanted to talk to.  You know, I felt like, the president's not coming, right.  At the time the president was Bill Clinton.  I was like, Bill Clinton is not coming.  I think we had to establish that.  So who else do I really want to talk to that I haven't gotten to yet?  You know most of it had been done.  Now, of course, later on the more people came along and you think, oh, I would have liked to have interviewed him or her or that or what--there were always people, but I interviewed most of the people that I wanted to talk to, I got a chance to talk to, musicians, you know, not so many actors, but one or two.  Burt Reynolds, people like that came on, you know, I mean, just people who I thought were interesting, but tons of authors.  I interviewed three--at least three book authors a week, and I tried to read as much of their books as I could.  And so, I interviewed a lot of real interesting authors, fascinating people, you know.  And some of them came back a lot of times, Cornell West, I interviewed several times, you know, Michael Eric Dyson came on, you know, just various, really interesting people and that's--was the great thing about that show.  Man, I just, you know, I do kind of miss that, you know, just the chance to sit down with folks, have an hour.  Now when I interview somebody, I've got four minutes, you know, or two minutes, it's not the same.  Now you're just trying to get to two or three things and get out.
Story_ID: 54625
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite show (unclear)?
Speaker 2: People always ask me that, and I don't know that I had a favorite show.  I mean, I'm sure there was some show--I'm a tell you what my favorite shows were--were the ones that I interviewed my mom [Doris McGinty] and my dad [Milton McGinty].  I interviewed Mom once on Mother's Day and people just loved that.  So the next year, I did my dad for Father's Day.  And you know people just--they just loved it, they just loved it.  So those were--those are nice, especially now that they are both gone, you know, I look back on those shows and I wish--I had the one that I did with my dad.  I don't think I have the one that I did with my mom, but I have the one that I did with my dad, I should listen back to it, but.  So, yeah, those were tremendous.  I had a great time with those.  I found out a lot about them that I didn't know, you know, so.  That was great stuff.
Story_ID: 54626
Speaker 1: So you left WAMU [American University Radio] in '98 (1998)?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  At that point--for the past few--a couple of years at that point, a lot of stuff had been happening, I was doing work for PBS, doing television for them for a couple of years, so.  I was doing, you know, I was starting--the CBS had come and I was working part time for CBS and flying up there and doing stuff for this--those back-- that was when, what do they call, those long form news shows--news magazines were big, you know, for a minute.  So they were looking for correspondents and they--by this time I had found an agent and he was pitching me to them and CBS and ABC both wanted me to come there and I ended up choosing CBS and I went--worked for them part time for a year.  And then Bryant Gumbel--that's where I met Bryant Gumbel, and he was getting his own show.  They had signed him to a big deal to work at CBS to have his own news magazine called "Public Eye".  And so I went in to meet with him, and I was trying--gonna try to sell him on letting me be a part of his show.  He had seen some of my work on one of the other shows, and about half way through the meeting, I realized that he was trying to sell me on coming to his show.  So here's Bryant Gumbel, now here's a guy, I mean, I used to just look at him on "Today" and go, "man I want to be like this guy."  I want to be like him, I want to interview like him, I want to ask questions like him, you know, I want to be like this guy.  And I'm sitting in the office with him, and I'm meeting him and I'm--and I'm going to be on his show, you know, I was like a fantasy come--it was a fantasy come true for me.  So, at that point I worked for them part time for a year and then I decide I'll leave [W]AMU and go to work full time for CBS.  So I do it, you know, I leave [W]AMU.  It was a very difficult decision.  I remember thinking about it all through November and December and then deciding, you know, I got to do this.  So I left in January, the end of January, I was done.  And at the time when I left, I had no doubt I had made the right decision, I had no doubt in my mind.  I was so relieved 'cause it was just time to do something else, you know. I was--you know I'm the kind of person I think that gets tired of doing the same thing after a period of years.  I had been there seven years, that was longer than I'd been anywhere at the time.  And I think, you know, I always said, I was tired of having homework every night, you know, which is what you do when you have that job.  You have to take books home to do--I was tired it.  So, I take this gig, go to "Public Eye" and of course nothing works out like you hope, right.  It doesn't--the show gets cancelled after half a season and CBS is not really, apparently, is not really impressed with me as I am impressed with me, cause they are not really trying to keep me, you know, and they didn't.  And so after a year, I've left the greatest job ever and I have no job.  But the good news about that is I think Bryant Gumbel still thought much of me and he got me on as a correspondent on his HBO show, "Real Sports" [Real Sports with Bryant Gumbel] and it was because of him that it was the only reason I was there.  You know, he did that for me, you know.  So I will always owe him that, you know.  Bryant--As one person said Bryant--"Bryant is the kind of guy if he's your friend, you got a friend forever but if he doesn't like you, you got to join the witness protection program", you know.  He could be tough, but he was nothing but good to me, you know.  And he took care of me and so I was over there for four years.  That was a part time job, but I was glad to have it.  And, and I--and then--but the good news is when I left CBS there was a landing place for me at Channel Seven [WJLA-TV] in Washington [D.C.].  The news director there really liked my work and so I became a reporter and anchor at Channel Seven.  And I started there, you know, in November of '99 (1999).  And so--
Speaker 1: So are you doing them both simultaneously, the "Real Sports" and--?
Speaker 2: --Yeah, the HBO, yeah, I'm doing it simultan-I'm taking vacation time from the Channel Seven gig to go cover stories for Real Sports.  So, in fact, that next year I did like seven stories for them out of the twelve shows.  So I was on a lot.  So it was great, it was great, man.  And I'm working hard, I'm doing that and I'm at Channel Seven, learning more about being a real reporter and anchor and that kind of thing.  So I pulled that off for a couple of years and then, and that was fine, that was good, I was here back--I was here at home, I was doing my thing, I  was--it was a good time.  I had fun.
Story_ID: 54627
Speaker 1: Well, what were some of the stories you covered for Real Sports?
Speaker 2: Oh, for Real Sports? There were a lot of--there were many.  I covered a story about parents--it was about the idea that pole vaulters in high school out to be made to wear helmets.  Kids had died, you know, falling in the pit and hitting their heads, and there were some parents who had lost their kids who were fighting to get helmets to be mandatory. And so I interviewed you know these parents and that was not the easiest interview, you know, when parents have lost children, but it was--you know, it was good stuff.  The best story--well the two most memorable stories, one was one of my first stories, which I refer to as--it was about black drivers in NASCAR [National Association of Stock Car Auto Racing], or the lack thereof.  I refer to it as "Negroes in NASCAR".  The Negroes in NASCAR story, I interviewed Richard Petty.  I interviewed all these, you know, big NASCAR guys and we would--it was just really, really interesting.  It was different, it was fun and I always tell the story about Richard Petty because he referred to--there's one like one major black guy, like back in the day, the first black NASCAR driver [Wendell Scott, 1921-1990] was way a long time ago, Richard drove with him, and I was asking about him.  And at one point, Richard said something along the lines, well, you know, back in my day, the colored guys--we--colored fellows did this and we did this over here.  And I said, well, Richard, you know, we don't really call ourselves colored anymore, you know, and he got all flustered and upset.  And we used it in the story.  And the point, we made the point, not to say that Richard was racist, because that's not--wasn't the point.  It's just that he's completely out of touch, right, he's still using colored, right.  No one says that.  You know he's like my grand--my poor father [Milton McGinty] calling Asian people "Orientals."  Dad, Dad, no, no, you know, so.  He didn't mean anything by it, but just--just not, you know, that's not what you do anymore.  So apparently Richard didn't like this.  He was upset, but too bad.   So I remember that very well though.  That was--I thought that was one of some more interesting moments.
Story_ID: 54628
Speaker 1: But the great--the best story I ever did, the most memorable story I ever did for HBO ["Real Sports"] was a piece on this kid who had been a football player.  His name--oh, what was his name, oh, come on.  His brother's name was David.  What was his name.  Oh, come on, I can't believe I can't remember his name.  Getting old.  This kid had played college football and had gotten paralyzed from the neck down in a play.
Speaker 2: Was this Darryl Stingley?
Speaker 1: No, no.  Darryl Stingley was a pro and played for the Raiders back in the '70s (1970s).  No this is--
Speaker 2: This is a kid?
Speaker 1: --Yeah, this is a kid.  He got hurt in this century, right, I mean you know.  And, you know, cause this happens every so often, you know, and he was paralyzed and his brother wanted--who was married and had kids of his own, but he kind of raised him, was a big, like a significantly older brother, but he kind of raised him.  He wanted to care for him at his house.  But the NCAA's [National Collegiate Athletic Association] insurance didn't want to pay for that.  They would rather pay for him to be in an institution.  And so he was fighting a battle to say, look my brother's better off here at (unclear) people who love him rather than in a place where he not gon' know nobody.  So he was fighting this battle.  This was a great story.  So we go to the house and interviewed this guy, you know, and David's big brother is what you'd expect, I mean, he's a freaking saint, you know.  And he's taking care of his brother, you know, and his family, you know.  And he shows us all the stuff he's got to do every day, you know, to deal with, you know, the  guy--this guy can't move a muscle, you know, he can't even breathe without a respirator, and he's doing all this.  He shows--takes us through it.  And I remember a couple of things.  We were-did--we wanted to do a shoot where he would take us through all the stuff he has to do, so we do it.  He says, gotta do this in the morning, I got to do that, I go over here and he'd walk us all around and shows us all this stuff.  The camera man wasn't rolling, something went wrong, it wasn't rolling.  I'm like, can you do it again, and he said, no problem, you know, just nice as he could be, yeah, I can.  Some people might have been "really, come on what kind of operation is this?"  I know that's what I might have said.  But he didn't say that.  And he did it all again, you know, no problem.  And then we did the story, and the NCAA said well, we--they weren't sure what they were gonna do, but a few months later that young man died.  And I'll never forget.  I got the call from the guy who produced the story, and he said to me that the brother had told him at least now my brother has his legs back.  I'll never forget that, you know.  And it was very, very moving, you know, kind of a thing.  It just--you know I was, you know, wow.  I was kind of blown away by that time, you know.  At least he has his legs back, you know.  Who's to say what the deal is with him now, he's dead, he's gone and wherever he is but, Lord, that was something.  So that was the most emotional story, you know that I can remember doing for them.  I did a bunch of stuff.  I did a you know a story about women's sports and how a lot of colleges are having--feel like they have to drop male sports cause they can't get enough women to join so they have to have equal numbers.  So if they can't get enough women to play then they got to drop male sports so that it evens up.  And the women--the women--the advocate for women would not admit that that was a problem.  They were like, no, we--I was like, but, come on now, you see these--they don't have to do that.  They're just not doing their jobs.  But they do, why would they do it.  They wouldn't acknowledge that it was a problem.  I think they just didn't want to admit--they could not admit that maybe between the genders there was a different level of interest in sports.  I was like no one wants to go back to the bad old days days of women not getting a fair shot at gym time and all that, but we could admit that if you have a hundred guys and you have a hundred women, maybe 50 women want to play sports and 65 of the men want to play.  Well, cause that's just how it is, no, no, no, no, well, anyway.  But I mean that's just neither here nor there.  But--that nothing affected me really like that except that story about David and--oh, I can't remember their names.  I can find out, but.
Story_ID: 54629
Speaker 1: World News Now, overnight?
Speaker 2: Yes, I left ABC in 2000--March, 2001, to go to New York and do the overnight show, World News Now.  Frankly, this is one of those kind of jobs where I was almost hoping it didn't come through.  (laughing)  Because I was thinking, man, working overnights, moving to New York, I don't know if I want to do that, you know.  But it came through, I kind of had to take it, cause you know, this kind of opportunities don't come, so I took it.  Moved to New York and it was as difficult and as painful as I thought it would be.  But it was all worth it.
Speaker 1: Now, this is, you know, the overnight show, I used to watch it because I stay up late at night.  I used to see it is more discussion, but it's not like the early morning discussion.  What was--was there a format?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, there was a format.  I mean, we did the news, we had fun, you know.  I mean as somebody said, we do the news like nobody's watching it, you know, which was kind of true, but we did have a couple of million people watching it, you know, we had fun with it.  And we had a lot of room to have fun because you know it was at two o'clock in the morning, so we could do--and no one would ever leave that job if--'cause it was so much fun to do, the people were great.  No one would ever leave if the hours were decent, you know, but you can only do that job for a couple of years before you go, oh, I gotta get out of here, you know.  But it was a great--it was a fun job, you know.  But moving to New York was hard.  New York's a big old lonely town, as I found it to be.  I'm working overnights, you know, I'm trying to figure out how to get sleep, you know.  I'm living in this new apartment.  I used to have a house, now I have an apartment you know I'm living in.  And I don't know that many people.  It was hard, it was a hard transition, you know.
Speaker 1: Who was your co-anchor?
Speaker 2: I had two.  I had Alison Stewart and then I had Liz Cho.  Liz Cho and I became--Alison and I were fine, I mean, you know, but Liz and I became good friends, you know, and I still call her every once and a while, she's an anchor in New York at the ABC [WABC-TV News Channel 7] station up there now.  Liz was--Liz was beautiful.  I mean, she was gorgeous and while we were doing it, she got to be one of the People's [People Magazine] "50 Most Beautiful People," you know.  She was--that just kind of tells you.  And so, I kept saying, I don't know why I didn't get in there.  But as pretty as she was, that's how nice she was, you know.  We just had a great time together, we were really good friends.  I really liked her, you know, as a person, you know and so.  "The Lizard," as I used to call her.  Like I said she's still in New York anchoring at Channel Seven.  I need to give her a call, see how she's doing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, it's interesting, a little back and forth--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had a good time.  That was a great job, but like I said, man, you just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --And the news coverage was actually good.
Speaker 2: --But it was just the hours, you know, working overnights, that's--whew, it's tough, it's tough.
Speaker 1: So you were there like for how long?
Speaker 2: I was there for two years.
Speaker 1: Two years, okay.
Speaker 2: And then Channel Nine [WUSA-TV, Washington, D.C.] called and wanted me to do their seven o'clock news and so I said, yes, although I still had a year left on my contract at ABC.  So I had to get them to let me out of the contract, which they did, which tells me they weren't that interested in keeping me.  But, cause if they had really wanted me, they would have said, no.  But they did, they were very nice about it, they let me out of my contract so I could come to Washington [D.C.] and do this and where I've been ever since.
Speaker 1: Well it seems as though the philosophy of World News Now is to bring in somebody new every couple of years anyway--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --I don't know.
Speaker 2: I think you're right.  They do cycle anchors through there because you either, you know, become a correspondent or you're kind of out of there.  So, that's kind of what happens cause there's no more anchoring job that you're gonna get right at the network, you're either on--there's only two shows, the morning show and the night and the evening news and those jobs are taken, right, so if you want to be in anchor, you kind of got to leave the network, you know.  And so that's what happens, you do that so for a couple of years and then you go on off and do something else.  So, you're right, they do seem to do that.
Speaker 1: It seems that the roles seem to be cast appeal to the younger audience than the regular news.
Speaker 2: What, on World News Now?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I don't know about now.  I haven't seen it, you know, since I left practically, but--
Speaker 1: Over the years you see like there are younger people sitting there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --Seem to know more contemporary stuff than (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, it's a hipper--it considers itself more of a hipper show, and that might be what you're talking about.  So, yeah, I would say that's true.
Speaker 1: --Right, right.
Story_ID: 54630
Speaker 1: Okay, so, WUSA [WUSA-TV Channel Nine News, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Yes, indeed.
Speaker 1: Channel Nine.
Speaker 2: Eleven years and counting.
Speaker 1: All right.  So this is a place that has a long history of African American participation?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yep, it does, it does, and you know--
Speaker 1: Can you name some of the--
Speaker 2: --JC Hayward, Maureen Bunyan, you know, Max Robinson, the late great, Bruce Johnson, who's still there, you know. It's got an incredible history.
Speaker 1: --Andrea Roane.
Speaker 2: Andrea Roane, how could I forget her and you know, yeah, it does, it has an incredible history.  But I wasn't thinking about that when I took the job, you know. I was thinking, new seven o'clock news show, you know, hopefully, it'll be a big deal, I'll be off over nights, you know, and I'm going home, you know.  And so that was--that was my incentive, you know, I was excited about it.  If I had known then what I know now, of course I'd of done some things differently, I mean I would still taken the job, but I just would have worked it differently, I would have made the news show a little different, and hopefully maybe it would have been a little bit more successful, I mean, because it wasn't horrible, but it wasn't great, you know, in terms of the amount of viewership, and it needed to be better.
Speaker 1: What would you have done?
Speaker 2: Well, at the time, they put a lot of resources into the show for Channel Nine, which I didn't really understand at the time, had two producers, we had two reporters dedicated to making the show good.  I would  have--but we didn't--we didn't cover the news.  I would have made the whole first block like ten or fifteen stories, the top news stories of the day, just really hittin' those news stories hard and fast.  And then the second block might have been a long form piece or two and then the third block, maybe an interview and some other and then the mail bag and stuff like that.  That's how I would have done it.  But we didn't do it that way.  It was--it kinda--I don't know what we were doing.  And because we didn't know what we were doing, the audience didn't either.  So--but I didn't--you know, I just didn't know enough about it at the time, so, you know, that's how it goes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the-so, what are some of, I guess, the features that you developed?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry (yawning), what now?
Speaker 1: What features did you develop for your broadcast?
Speaker 2: Well, the thing I kind of came up with at the time, was, and I'll freely admit I stole this from Bill O'Reilly, was "McGinty's Mailbag", right.  I thought that email was like the big thing at the time.  And I would do McGinty's Mailbag, which would be sort of an opinion thing.  What I would do was, I would read their email, and then I would respond to them, right.  So I would take some of the emails that came in, I would write them up and edit them, and then I would say, hey, you know what, you're right, you're wrong, good points, whatever, making some jokes, I had a good time with the Mailbag, and people liked it.  In recent times though, the last couple of years, the fact is people stopped writing, cause people don't email anymore, right.  So, I only had a few people doing the Mailbag any longer, and we had to kind of come up with something else, and so the Mailbag has died a horrible death.  But for a minute there, it was a really good little feature and I enjoyed doing it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So I think in the beginning you were quoted as saying you were up against Pat Sajak and Tom Brokaw and you know other--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, there were some question as to whether people even wanted news at seven.  I mean, the idea was, the way things are now, who gets home in time for the five or the six, you know.  We wanted it to be the local news for folks who got home later, you know, and I think if we had come at that the right way, maybe we could have built that, but again, you know, I just didn't know, and I guess the people around me didn't either, so we didn't do it how it could have been done, but that was the idea behind the seven o'clock.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 54631
Speaker 1: In the eleven years, I guess, what have been your most memorable moments I guess?
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness.  Well, in recent times, the most memorable things was covering the South African President [Nelson] Mandela's death.  They sent me over there to cover that, and I did not expect it, you know, but they did, and that was--wow, that was quite something.  I mean it's the hardest I've ever worked, cause I was feeding stuff for all the shows, you know, from the morning to the night, you know, but at the same time, I'm in South Africa, man, I'm seeing the people, I'm meeting the people, I'm there for the funeral of maybe one of the greatest human beings that ever walked the face of the earth, you know, and that's a privilege, you know.  So it was amazing.  That was if not the number one thing, that's certainly up there, that's certainly up there.  But you know I've had a chance to do a lot of great stuff, cover inauguration of Barack Obama, you know, here in Washington [D.C.], I've had a chance to, you know, be around for every big story in this town for the last eleven years and have been, you know, in recent years was kind of the face of the coverage, you know, so.  It's been a good ride, you know, it's been a good ride, you know.
Speaker 1: There's a story, a [Washington] D.C. story, that's popped up a few times on the interviews here that I think it's very bizarre and I just like your take on this?
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: The tenants' story, Marion Barry's ex-wife--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.  You know, I don't--I'm trying to remember about that story.  What about that story was interesting to you?
Speaker 1: Well, the mayor, Fenty, at the time, was trying to take the facility from them, I believe, (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Everybody from Dorothy Height to Maya Angelou got involved in it, and he still couldn't figure out that he should leave them alone?
Speaker 2: Right, right.  You know, I just didn't follow that closely enough.  I don't have any comment on that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 54632
Speaker 1: What's been the biggest local story?
Speaker 2: Biggest local story, good Lord.
Speaker 1: Well one of the--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I want to say, snow, 'cause that's what we go crazy on.  You know, snow, we go on the air for hours and hours for snow, but that wasn't a big story, that's big, but that's not the biggest story.  Let's see, there was, I'm trying to think.  The navy yard, see 'cause my view is always colored by what's more recent, right, you know, you remember the things that just happened.  I'm trying to go back--let me tell you, the death of Ronald Reagan, that was huge, and I say that because we spent a whole week covering that, you know.  We went all out for that.  And you know, I mean, it was just a huge deal, you know.  We just really spent a lot of energy on that story.   And it was a huge deal, I mean President Reagan, it was who he was and, you know, people really, really cared, you know.  So that might be one of the biggest stories, was the death of Ronald Reagan cause he's the president and then he died and so then the funeral's here.  So, it was huge.  I'm trying to think, what else, what else, what else was really big after I got to Channel Nine, cause there were some big stories, like you know you had the Boston bombing and you had--we've had some big things happening.  I'm trying to think things that happened here, biggest local story.  I'm sure somebody will think of something that you know, oh, yeah, that's it, you know.  Naw, but nothing else comes to mind off the top of my head, the big snow storms in 2010 were huge.  We were on the air, it felt like days.  I'll tell you what was big, Isabel, Hurricane Isabel, huge.  Seventy-five percent of the city in the dark, you know, I mean that was huge.  You know, that was a big story.
Speaker 1: Was that 2000 and--
Speaker 2: That was like 2003 cause I had just gotten there.  It might have been four [2004], but I think it was three [2003].  So that was huge.  Isabel was huge.  I can't think of anything else off the top of my head, but I'm sure there's plenty of other things that were big and made a big deal, but I can't think of anything else.
Story_ID: 54633
Speaker 1: What are the, I guess, for those who want to be television news reporters, what are the key, I guess, things that they need to be mindful of in terms of getting their foot in the door?
Speaker 2: Persistence, right.  Stay with it, you know.  And don't decide to make DJ tapes, you know, unless you're sure that's what you want to do.  You know, but as I tell the young people all the time, you know, everybody I knew who had some talent does end up getting a job.  But it happens when it happens.  And so it might take some time.  You know I worked at three different jobs before I was actually on the air, you know.  So it might take some time for you to get there, you know.  But, and you don't know what the path is going to be.  My path was different than everybody's because I didn't--never went to that small town and did the--I didn't do that, I went radio instead and then sort of built my career from there, but it, you know, your career path could be very different from mine and almost certainly will be but, persistence is the key thing from what I see.
Story_ID: 54634
Speaker 1: It's interesting that you managed to make a career right here in [Washington] DC--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that never happens.
Speaker 1: --But for the most part, except for the two years in New York [City, New York].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  Oh, yeah, I mean, the only time I left here is when I went to a much bigger place.  I mean, you know, that's--that doesn't ever happen--that never happens, you know.  And so, I could only say I've been very, very fortunate, you know, to get the jobs I've gotten, very, very, you know--you know, I had mentors and people who kind of looked out for me as I've showed you know, people you know called me, said apply for this, look at that, that I never would have come up with on my own, so.  I was very fortunate.  That's not to say it couldn't happen again, but I was very lucky not to have to do that. Now did you pattern your on-air personality after any other person or is that something you just had to work out?
Speaker 1: That's something I kind of had to work out for myself.  I had to get comfortable.  I had to lose the fear.  Being a talk show host ["The Derek McGinty Show," WAMU-FM, 1991-1998] really helped me because that's when you have to learn to be yourself.  You know, there's certain things you can't say or do, but you gotta let people see who you are and be comfortable enough with it.  And sometimes they're not going to like it, and be okay with that.  Sometimes they're not going to like it, so what.  The next day they'll still come back and listen if they don't you know despise you.  Today is weird though because you say one thing and people just lose their minds, you know, but--but for the most part you can--once they kind of know who you are, you know, and they will--they mostly will like you if you have a likable personality, so.
Story_ID: 54635
Speaker 1: Do you have a journalistic philosophy?
Speaker 2: Well, that's a good question.  Do I have a basic philosophy that drives my journalism?  Only just you know to try and have as much integrity as possible, accuracy and fairness are paramount and you know I want to do stories that are well--I want to write--I say this.  I always have focused on being a good writer.  I wanted to write things a certain way that they were clever and well done and not cliche' written and that's always been the challenge of it to me.  That's been the most interesting thing about it is the creativity of creating this, you know story, telling a story.  I guess on a lot of levels for me journalism is always about story-telling.  I've always been a person who was a story teller and so if that's not you, then you know to me you're not going to be a good journalist, you know, you have to revel in telling good stories.
Story_ID: 54636
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Man.  I guess the biggest thing to me it seems to me as though we are like the rest of society becoming two separate worlds, you know.  You got one percentage of black people that are successful and doing well and you know, very much feeling a part of things and another group that is not.  And they're almost--and there's less and less commonality between the two groups, you know.  You know I remember there was an episode once at Saturday Night Live when they had, I think Janet Jackson was the guest star and she was playing a character, and they were standing in line and she was playing a woman whose name was Escalade, and she was causing all kind of trouble, and this white guy who was in line, the white guy turns to Keenan Thompson and says, look can you help me out here.  And Keenan Thompson said man, I'm as scared of these people as you are (laughing), you know, and I never forgot that because that's where we kinda are, you know.  I'm a scared of those people as you are, right, I'm not with them either, you know, and that is where we're headed.  That is a real troublesome situation, you know, and black people talk about that.  We talk about that among ourselves all the time, you know.  Oh, man those guys, you know.  But we don't want anybody to talk about it when we're not--you know if it's not us, you know.  But I mean that's the reality.  And I don't know what to do about that, you know, except to try to bring along who you can, but without stronger families, without more men involved, we're you know, that's my biggest concern.
Story_ID: 54637
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on everything you've done at this point in your career, is there anything major that you would do differently if you could go back and change it or rearrange it?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  What would Derek do differently?  I think I would have had more cognizance of what I didn't know.  When I was going from radio to television, I didn't realize how hard TV was.  I thought I could just do it, you know, I can do radio, why can't I do TV?  TV's hard, man.  TV takes a whole bunch of work to learn how to do.  And the downside of not going to that small market was I didn't get those years of experience doing television in a small place, you know, just making it work and learning it.  I had to learn it kind of on the fly at a big place, you know, and a lot if it at Channel Seven's expense, quite frankly, WJLA.  So you know that--but half of my difficulty was and that I didn't understand this, you know, I didn't know that I didn't know.  So if I had to do over again, I would have come in with a more of a, "I need to learn more about this and, fast.  I need to understand how this works and how it's different" you know.  And so some of the stories I came up with were kind of interesting stories, but they weren't good TV stories, and I didn't understand what the difference was.  Now I do, but back in 2001 or whatever, I didn't.
Story_ID: 54638
Speaker 1: What's the difference between a good TV story and just a radio story?
Speaker 2: Radio is a cool medium, as they say.  I mean a warm medium.  I'm sorry, radio is a warm medium.  So radio allows you to make just ideas interesting.  All you need in a radio to do a radio story is the idea of it, right.  I do--you could do a story about you know love songs, or you could do a story about how come, you know, the fact the seat--I mean there's just anything--anything you could think of in radio, you can do it, right.  You can do a story about liars.  You can do a story about anything you could think of, because you can think of it and you can find somebody to talk about it, you can do the story.  TV's not like that.  TV is, I need emotion, cause it's a cool medium, so I need things to be more emotional to get it--to jump out the screen at you.  And you also need video, right.  So something that's video poor, if it's just one guy talking, that's not a good TV story, right.  And I used to kind look down on TV because people say, ah, you know, it doesn't have video, it's not good, (mumbling), you know.  But the reality is you--video is what we live and die by.  Good video is, you know, that's you know--and if you don't have that, it's not a story.  And that's, you know, the reality of that.  So it took me a long time to learn that and understand that.  And now I do.
Story_ID: 54639
Speaker 1: Now what would I have done differently?  Well you know I said to know what I didn't know.  Man and maybe I would have gone away to school, you know, but if I'm not here in Washington [D.C.] then maybe I don't get the Washington job, you know.  Maybe I don't end up getting--cause I tend to feel things sort of unfolded as they should have, you know.  So, yeah, I don't have any regrets or no major ones, we all have regrets.
Story_ID: 54640
Speaker 1: Now likewise, when you look back over everything, the course of everything you've done, what today would consider--I know this is early, but your legacy?
Speaker 2: Oh, God.  You know.  I don't--you know, I'm gonna let other people decide what that is.  I don't think of myself as having a legacy.  I'm not a president, you know.  I know it ain't on my job was to--my whole goal in life was--has been to sort of use my gifts as best I could and, you know, to go where interesting things were going on.  You know, so, I never chase money, I never thought, oh, I want to get rich.  I always was like, "where is there an interesting job?"  You know, where is there, you know, something that I feel like that I want to get out in the morning and do--get up in the morning and do, you know, so.  Legacy, I don't know what that lends itself to leaving a legacy.  I'm not a teacher.  I can't say that I have, you know, set hundreds of young people on the right path.  Although I've had a great time in my later years in helping young people and talking to young people and passing on whatever I could to them.  That's been one of my great pleasures.  But, you know, legacy, I don't know.  I don't know, I don't know, do I have a legacy?  I don't know if I got a legacy as such.
Story_ID: 54641
Speaker 1: Now, are you a member of the National Association of Black Journalists?
Speaker 2: I have been on and off.  I don't know if I'm one right now, but I have been.  I've done a bunch of events with them, and you know, they invite me to stuff and I go show up, but am I currently a member, I don't know, probably not right now.  Not because I don't want to be, just, cause it just elapsed and I didn't get it--renew it.
Speaker 1: Do you get invited to speak in public schools and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yep.  I did, you know I did--one of the things I really enjoyed doing, although it's a heck of a lot of work is graduation speeches at high schools, and I've done a few.  I did one at Montgomery Blair [High School, Silver Spring, Maryland] last Spring.  I really enjoyed that.  It's always a lot of fun.  I think it's--it takes me a couple of weeks to write those speeches, which is why people ask me to give a speech, I go, oh, no, I can't do it, cause it's just too much time.  I've got time to give the speech, I don't have time to write it, you know.  But that's one of the more enjoyable things that I do, and so I do get invited to do that sort of thing.  I get invited to MC events and do stuff like that.  So if I can, I do, you know.
Story_ID: 54642
Speaker 1: Tell us something about your family.  Now are you married?
Speaker 2: No.  I'm still single.  Never been married.  I was engaged once in my mid thirties and I broke that off and didn't do it.  I wasn't ready to do it, and although she and I are still friends.  And now, I have a girlfriend and we've been together for four years, and so this is about as close as I've come at this point to being married.  I don't know, maybe it's not for everybody, maybe it's not for me.  I'm not gonna have children at this point.  I'm 55--I'll be 55 in August, so I think it's a little late for that.  But so, you know, but I have a great relationship with a wonderful lady and you know we have a good time and it's been--it's been good.  So that's about it.
Speaker 1: Your brother [Dana McGinty] and sister [Lisa Toppin] are still--
Speaker 2: My brother and sister are still here.  My brother is--he's here in [Washington] D.C. and my sister's married.  She lives with her husband and her couple of kids in North Carolina.  In fact we're going down there for Easter.
Speaker 1: --Okay.  Okay, now--
Speaker 2: My brother has three kids.  He's divorced.  He's got three kids.  All but one who are grown.
Speaker 1: --Is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so. I think you've asked a lot of stuff.
Story_ID: 54643
Speaker 1: I kind of thought about this.  Maybe I'll ask this anyway.  Have you ever had a hostile guest on the radio or television that you had to deal with for more than a few minutes?
Speaker 2: I've never had a hostile guest.  I've had some bad guests.  I think I had a guest who was like didn't want to be there or you know, was--cause why are you coming, why are you here?  But I've had some really--I have a--
Speaker 1: That's an interesting phenomenon, because I've heard shows where there is a guest on it appears that doesn't want to be on the show.
Speaker 2: --Right, right.  I've been fortunate enough not to experience that, at least not that I can remember.  I could remember guests who were really bad guests.  Well, I take that back, I've had--you know when you have political types on sometimes they want to talk too much and stuff and you have to cut the microphones off and try to get them to shut up and I've had that happen a couple of times.  But the worst guest I've ever had was a really nice guy, he was just a really bad guest.  He was this author who came on, had written some book, and I read the whole book over the weekend, I had him on and he had this really, really, thick Scottish brogue, I could barely understand him and he was talking and--I always used to say on my talk show, you know I'm starting to run out of questions if I start asking like who are your influences.  That means I'm down to the nub here, right.  And so when I used to do interviews, I'd write out 14 or your know, 15 or 20 questions.  But if it's going well, hopefully, after a while, I'm not looking at em anymore, cause we're having such a good conversation.  I went through all my questions with this guy, and he was just terrible.  I was getting no phone calls, I was giving out the number and then about 25 after the hour, I started realizing, we're not going to make it through the whole hour, just now going to make it, can't make it work.  And so I said, okay, thanks for being here.  When we come back, we're going to go open phones.  And he was grateful, oh, thank you for having me, you know.  And he went on off.  And when I came back on, you know, and we played some music, came back on, open phones, people called right in and we talked about something else entirely.  So they were still there, they just had no questions for this guy, you know.  Well I was like, wow.  That's the first, just the one and only time where I could not make it through the hour with a guest.  He was just terrible.
Speaker 1: I'm glad I asked that question.  All right.
Story_ID: 54644
Speaker 1: Our last question, it's similar to legacy.  In fact it's so similar it's almost redundant.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, God.  That's a good question, too.  How would I like to be remembered?  I would like to be remembered as a loyal friend and a compassionate and competent colleague and somebody who was pretty good at this, pretty good at this.  And somebody who got the most he could out of everything he did.  That's about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.  I enjoyed it.  Will I have any voice left for the radio, I mean for the TV tonight?  I don't know.
